THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE SIXTEEN STATES WHICH COMPOSE THE CONFEDERATED
REPUBLIC OF AMERICA, ACCORDING TO THE LATEST AMENDMENTS.

TO WHICH ARE PREFIXED, THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE; ARTICLES OF
CONFEDERATION; THE DEFINITIVE TREATY OF PEACE WITH GREAT BRITAIN; AND THE
CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES, with all the Amendments.

Boston: Printed by MANNING and LORING, For S. HALL, W. SPOTSWOOD, J. WHITE,
THOMAS and ANDREWS, D. WEST, E. LARKIN, W P. and L. BLAKE, and J. WEST. 1797.

CONTENTS.
DECLARATION of Independence, Page 5 Articles of Confederation, Page 13
Definitive Treaty of Peace with Great Britain, Page 22 Constitution of the
United States, Page 30 Amendments to ditto, Page 47 Constitution of
New Hampshire, Page 50 Massachusetts, Page 79 Charter of Rhode Island, Page 113
Constitution of Connecticut, Page 130 New York, Page 134 New Jersey, Page 148
Pennsylvania, Page 155 Delaware, Page 173 Maryland, Page 185 Virginia, Page 209
North Carolina, Page 215 South Carolina, Page 227 Georgia, Page 239 Vermont,
Page 246 Tennessee, Page 265 Kentuckey, Page 283
IN CONGRESS, JULY 4, 1776. A DECLARATION BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA, IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED.
WHEN in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles,
and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate, that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes; and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is
now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of
government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of
repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the
establishment of an absolute tyranny over these States. To prove this, let
facts be submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

He has forbidden his Governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the danger of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose
obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made Judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these States:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses:

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring Province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies:

For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection, and
waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He is at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy, scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow citizens, taken captive on the high seas, to
bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends
and brethren, or to tall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and
conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress, in the
most humble terms: Our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a f^^e people.

Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned
them from time to time, of attempts by their legislature to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances
of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred,
to disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connexions
and correspondence. They, too, have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity which denounces
our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war;
in peace, friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, in GENERAL
CONGRESS assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the
rectitude of our intentions, Do, in the name, and by the authority of the good
People of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United
Colonies are, and of right ought to be, Free and Independent States; that they
are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political
connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is, and ought to be
totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and
to do all other acts and things which Independent States may of right do. And
for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other, our lives, our fortunes,
and our sacred honor.

Signed by order and in behalf of the CONGRESS. JOHN HANCOCK, President.
Attested. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary. New Hampshire, Josiah Bartlett, William
Whipple, Matthew Thornton.
Massachusetts Bay, Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat Pain, Elbridge
Gerry.
Rhode Island, etc. Stephen Hopkins, William Ellery.
Connecticut, Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, William Williams, Oliver
Wolcott.
New York, William Floyd, Philip Livingston, Francis Lewis, Lewis Morris.
New Jersey, Richard Stockton, John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson, John Heart,
Abraham Clark.
Pennsylvania, Robert Morris, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, John Morton,
George Clymer, James Smith, George Tailor, James Wilson, George Ross.
Delaware, Caesar Rodney, George Read.
Maryland, Samuel Chase, William Paca, Thomas Stone, Charles Carroll, of
Carrollton.
Virginia, George With, Richard Henry Lee, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin
Harrison, Thomas Nelson, jun. Francis Lightfoot Lee, Carter Braxton.
North Carolina, William Hooper, Joseph Hewes, John Peen.
South Carolina, Edward Rutledge, Thomas Heyward, jun. Thomas Lynch, jun.
Arthur Middleton.
Georgia, Button Gwinnett, Lyman Hall, George Walton.



ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION AND PERPETUAL. UNION, Between the States of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
ARTICLE I.

THE style of this confederacy shall be, "THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA."

ART. II. Each State retains its sovereignty, freedom and independence, and
every power, jurisdiction and right, which is not by this confederation
expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.

ART. III. The said States hereby severally enter into a firm league of
friendship with each other for their common defense, the security of their
liberties and their mutual and general welfare; binding themselves to assist
each other against all force offered to or attacks made upon them or any of
them on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or any other pretense whatever.

ART. IV. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercouse
among the people of the different States in this union, the free inhabitants of
each of these States, (paupers, vagabonds and fugitives from justice excepted,)
shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens in the
several States; and the people of each State shall have free ingress and
regress to and from any other State, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges
of trade and commerce, subject to the same duties, impositions and restrictions
as the inhabitants thereof respectively, provided that such restriction shall
not extend so far as to prevent the removal of property imported into any State
to any other State, of which the owner is an inhabitant; provided also, that no
imposition, duties or restriction shall be laid by any State on the property of
the United States, or either of them.

If any person guilty of or charged with treason, felony or other high
misdemeanor in any State, shall flee from justice and be found in any of the
United States, he shall, upon demand of the Governor or executive power of the
State from which he fled, be delivered up and removed to the State having
jurisdiction of his offense.

Full faith and credit shall be given in each of these States to the records,
acts and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of every other
State.

ART. V. For the more convenient management of the general interests of the
United States, delegates shall be annually appointed, in such manner as the
legislature of each State shall direct, to meet in Congress on the first Monday
in November, in every year, with a power reserved to each State to recall its
delegates or any of them, at any time within the year, and to send others in
their stead, for the remainder of the year.

No State shall be represented in Congress by less than two, nor by more than
seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a delegate for more than
three years in any term of six years; nor shall any person, being a delegate,
be capable of holding any office under the United States, for which he, or any
other for his benefit, receives any salary, fees or emolument of any kind.

Each State shall maintain its own delegates in any meeting of the States, and
while they act as members of the committee of the States.

In determining questions in the United States in Congress assembled, each
State shall have one vote.

Freedom of speech and debate in Congress shall not be impeached or questioned
in any court or place out of Congress; and the members of Congress shall be
protected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments, during the time of
their going to and from, and attendance on Congress, except for treason, felony
or breach of the peace.

ART. VI. No State, without the consent of the United States in Congress
assembled, shall send any embassy to, or receive any embassy from, or enter
into any conference, agreement, alliance or treaty with any King. Prince or
State; nor shall any person holding any office of profit or trust under the
United States, or any of them, accept of any present, emolument, office or
title of any kind whatever from any King, Prince or foreign State; nor shall
the United States in Congress assembled, or any of them, grant any title of
nobility.

No two or more States shall enter into any treaty, confederation or alliance
whatever between them, without the consent of the United States in Congress
assembled, specifying accurately the purpose for which the same is to be
entered into, and how long it shall continue.

No State shall lay ^^y imposts or duties, which may interfere with any
stipu^^tions in treaties entered into by the United States in Congress
assembled, with any King, Prince or State, in pursuance of any treaties already
proposed by Congress to the Courts of France and Spain.

No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any State, except such
number only as shall be deemed necessary by the United States in Congress
assembled, for the defense of such State or its trade; nor shall any body of
forces be kept up by any State in time of peace, except such number only as, in
the judgment of the United States in Congress assembled, shall be deemed
requisite to garrison the forts necessary for the defense of such State; but
every State shall always keep up a well regulated and disciplined militia,
sufficiently armed and accoutred, and shall provide and have constantly ready
for use, in public stores, a due number of field pieces and tents, and a proper
quantity of arms, ammunition and camp equipage.

No State shall engage in any war without the consent of the United States in
Congress assembled, unless such State be actually invaded by enemies, or shall
have certain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of Indians to
invade such State, and the danger is so imminent as not to admit of a delay,
till the United States in Congress assembled can be consulted; nor shall any
State grant commissions to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters of marque
or reprisal, except it be after a declaration of war by the United States in
Congress assembled, and then only against the kingdom or State and the subjects
thereof against which war has been so declared, and under such regulations as
shall be established by the United States in Congress assembled, unless such
State be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of war may be sitted out
for that occasion and kept so long as the danger shall continue, or until the
United States in Congress assembled shall determine otherwise.

ART. VII. When land forces are raised by any State for the common defense, all
officers of or under the rank of Colonel shall be appointed by the legislature
of each State respectively, by whom such forces shall be raised, or in such
manner as such State shall direct; and all vacancies shall be filled up by the
State which first made the appointment.

ART. VIII. All charges of war and all other expenses that shall be incurred
for the common defense or general welfare, and allowed by the United States in
Congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury, which shall be
supplied by the several States in proportion to the value of all land within
each State, granted to or surveyed for any person, as such land and the
buildings and improvements thereon shall be estimated, according to such mode
as the United States in Congress assembled shall from time to time direct and
appoint.

The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the authority
and direction of the legislatures of the several States, within the time agreed
upon by the United States in Congress assembled.

ART. IX. The United States in Congress assembled shall have the sole and
exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war, except in the cases
mentioned in the sixth article -- of sending and receiving ambassadors --
entering into treaties and alliances, provided, that no treaty of commerce
shall be made, whereby the legislative power of the respective States shall be
restrained from imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners, as their own
people are subjected to, or from prohibiting the exportation or importation of
any species of goods or commodities whatsoever -- of establishing rules for
deciding, in all cases, what captures on land or water shall be legal, and in
what manner prizes taken by land or naval forces in the service of the United
States shall be divided (...) ^^^ropriated -- (...) granting letters of marque
and reprisal in time of peace -- appointing courts for the trial of piracies
and felonies committed on the high seas, and establishing courts for receiving
and determining finally appeals in all cases of captures; provided, that no
member of Congress shall be appointed judge of any of the said courts.

The United States in Congress assembled shall also be the last resort on
appeal in all disputes and differences now subsisting, or that hereafter may
arise between two or more States concerning boundary, jurisdiction, or any
other cause whatever; which authority shall always be exercised in the manner
following: -- Whenever the legislative or executive authority or lawful agent
of any State in controversy with another shall present a petition to Congress,
stating the matter in question and praying for a hearing, notice thereof shall
be given by order of Congress to the legislative or executive authority of the
other State in controversy, and a day assigned for the appearance of the
parties by their lawful agents, who shall then be directed to appoint by joint
consent commissioners or judges to constitute a court for hearing and
determining the matter in question: but if they cannot agree, Congress shall
name three persons out of each of the United States, and from the lift of such
persons each party shall alternately strike out one, the petioners beginning,
until the number shall be reduced to thirteen; and from that number not less
than seven nor more than nine names, as Congress shall direct, shall in the
presence of Congress be drawn out by lot; and the persons whose names shall be
so drawn, or any five of them, shall be commissioners or judges to hear and
finally determine the controversy, so always as a major part of the judges, who
shall hear the cause, shall agree in the determination; and if either party
shall neglect to attend at the day appointed, without showing reasons which
Congress shall judge sufficient, or being present shall refuse to strike, the
Congress shall proceed to nominate three persons out of each State, and the
Secretary of Congress shall strike in behalf of such party absent or refusing;
and the judgment and sentence of the court to be appointed in the manner before
prescribed, shall be final and conclusive; and if any of the parties shall
refuse to submit to the authority of such court, or to appear or defend their
claim o^ cause, the court shall nevertheless proceed to pronounce sentence or
judgment, which shall in like manner be final and decisive, the judgment or
sentence and other proceedings being in either case transmitted to Congress,
and lodged among the acts of Congress for the security of the parties
concerned: Provided, That every commissioner, before he sits in judgment, shall
take an oath, to be administered by one of the judges of the supreme or
superior court of the State where the cause shall be tried, "well and truly to
hear and determine the matter in question, according to the best of his
judgment, without favor, affection or hope of reward:" Provided also, That no
State shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United States.

All controversies concerning the private right of soil, claimed under
different grants of two or more States, whose jurisdictions as they may respect
such lands and the States which passed such grants are adjusted, the said
grants or either of them being at the same time claimed to have originated
antecedent to such settlement or jurisdiction, shall, on the petition of either
party to the Congress of the United States, be finally determined as near as
may be, in the same manner as is before prescribed for deciding disputes
respecting territorial jurisdiction between different States.

The United States in Congress assembled shall also have the sole and exclusive
right and power of regulating the alloy and value of coin struck by their own
authority, or by that of the respective States -- fixing the standard of
weights and measures throughout the United States -- regulating the trade and
managing all affairs with the Indians not members of any of the States;
provided, that the legislative right of any State within its own limits be not
infringed or violated -- establishing and regulating post-offices from one
State to another throughout all the United States, and exacting such postage on
the papers passing through the same as may be requisite to defray the expens^s
of the said office -- appointing all officers of the land forces in the service
of the United States, excepting regimental officers -- appointing all the
officers of the naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in the
service of the United States -- making rules for the government and regulation
of the said land and naval forces, and directing their operations.

The United States in Congress assembled shall have authority to appoint a
committee to fit in the recess of Congress, to be denominated "a committee of
the States," and to consist of one delegate from each State, and to appoint
such other committees and civil officers as may be necessary for managing the
general affairs of the United States, under their direction -- to appoint one
of their number to preside, provided that no person be allowed to serve in the
office of president more than one year in any term of three years -- to
ascertain the necessary sums of money to be raised for the service of the
United States, and to appropriate and apply the same for defraying the public
expenses -- to borrow money or emit bills on the credit of the United States,
transmitting every half year to the respective States an account of the sums of
money so borrowed or emitted -- to build and equip a navy -- to agree upon the
number of land forces, and to make requisitions from each State for its quota,
in proportion to the number of white inhabitants in such State; which
requisition shall be binding, and thereupon the legislature of each State shall
appoint the regimental officers, raise the men, and clothe, arm and equip them
in a soldier-like manner, at the expense of the United States; and the officers
and men so clothed, armed and equipped, shall march to the place appointed, and
within the time agreed on by the United States in Congress assembled: But if
the United States in Congress assembled shall, on consideration of
circumstances, judge proper that any State should not raise men, or should
raise a smaller number than its quota, and that any other State should raise a
greater number of men than the quota thereof, such extra number shall be
raised, officered, clothed, armed and equipped in the same manner as the quota
of such State, unless the legislature of such State shall judge that such extra
number cannot be safely spared out of the same; in which case they shall raise,
officer, clothe, arm and equip as many of such extra number as they judge can
be safely spared. And the officers and men so clothed, armed and equipped shall
march to the place appointed and within the time agreed on by the United States
in Congress assembled.

The United States in Congress assembled shall never engage in a war nor grant
letters of marque and reprisal in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties or
alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascertain the
sums and expenses necessary for the defense and welfare of the United States,
or any of them; nor emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the United
States, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number of vessels of war to
be built or purchased, or the number of land or sea forces to be raised, nor
appoint a commander in chief of the army or navy, unless nine States assent to
the same; nor shall a question on any other point, except for adjourning from
day to day, be determined, unless by the votes of a majority of the United
States in Congress assembled.

The Congress of the United States shall have power to adjourn to any time
within the year, and to any place within the United States, so that no period
of adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six months, and shall
publish the journal of their proceedings monthly, except such parts thereof
relating to treaties, alliances or military operations, as in their judgment
require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the delegates of each State on any
question shall be entered on the journal, when it is desired by any delegate;
and the delegates of a State, or any of them, at his or their request, shall be
furnished with a transcript of the said journal, except such parts as are above
excepted, to lay before the Legislatures of the several States.

ART. X. The committee of the States, or any nine of them, shall be authorized
to execute, in the recess of Congress, such of the powers of Congress as the
United States in Congress assembled by the consent of nine States shall from
time to time think expedient to vest them with; provided, that no power be
delegated to the said committee, for the exercise of which, by the articles of
confederation, the voice of nine States in the Congress of the United States
assembled is requisite.

ART. XI. Canada acceding to this confederation, and joining in the measures of
the United States, shall be admi^ted into and entitled to all the advantages of
this Union: But no other colony shall be admitted into the same unless such
admission be agreed to by nine States.

ART. XII. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed, and debts contracted
by or under the authority of Congress, before the assembling of the United
States, in pursuance of the present confederation, shall be deemed and
considered as a charge against the United States, for payment and satisfaction
whereof the said United States and the public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.

ART. XIII. Every State shall abide by the determinations of the United States
in Congress assembled on all questions which by this confederation are
submitted to them. And the articles of this confederation shall be inviolably
observed by every State, and the Union shall be perpetual; nor shall any
alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration
be agreed to in a Congress of the United States, and be afterward confirmed by
the legislatures of every State.

THESE articles shall be proposed to the Legislatures of all the United States,
to be considered, and if approved of by them, they are advised to authorize
their Delegates to ratify the same in the Congress of the United States; which
being done, the same shall become conclusive.

By order of Congress. HENRY LAURENS, President.

THE DEFINITIVE TREATY BETWEEN GREAT BRITAIN AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
Signed at Paris, the 3d day of September, 1783.
BY THE UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS Definitive Articles of Peace and Friendship, between the United States
of America, and his Britannic Majesty, were concluded and signed at Paris, on
the 3d day of September, 1783, by the Plenipotentiaries of the said United
States, and of his said Britannic Majesty, duly and respective authorized for
that purpose; which definitive articles are in the words following.

IN THE NAME OF THE MOST HOLY AND UNDIVIDED TRINITY.

IT having pleased the Divine Providence to dispose the hearts of the Most
Serene and Most Potent Prince GEORGE the Third, by the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick,
and Lunenbourg, Arch-Treasurer, and Prince Elector of the Holy Roman Empire,
etc. and of the United States of America, to forget all past misunderstandings
and differences that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore, and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as my promote and
secure to both, perpetual peace and harmony; and having, for this desirable
end, already laid the foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the
provisional Articles signed at Paris, on the 30th of November, 1782, by the
Commissioners empowered on each part, which articles were agreed to be inserted
in and to constitute the Treaty of Peace, proposed to be concluded between the
Crown of Great Britain, and the said United States, but which Treaty was not to
be concluded until terms of peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain
and France, and his Britannic Majesty should be ready to conclude such Treaty
accordingly, and the Treaty between Great Britain and France having since been
concluded, his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, in order to
carry into full effect, the Provisional Articles abovementioned, according to
the tenor thereof, have constituted and appointed, that is to say, his
Britannic Majesty on his part, David Hartly, Esquire Member of the Parliament of
Great Britain; and the said United States on their part, John Adams, Esquire late a
Commissioner of the United States of America, at the Court of Versailles, late
Delegate in Congress from the State of Massachusetts, and Chief Justice of the
said State, and Minister Plenipotentiary of the said United States, to their
High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands; Benjamin
Franklin, Esquire late Delegate in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania,
President of the Convention of the said State, and Minister Plenipotentiary,
from the United States of America, at the Court of Versailles; and John Jay,
Esquire late President of Congress, and Chief Justice of the State of New York, and
Minister Plenipotentiary from the said United States at the Court of Madrid; to
be the Plenipotentiaries for the concluding and signing the present Definitive
Treaty; who, after having reciprocally communicated their respective full
powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the following articles.

ARTICLE I. His Britannic Majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be Free, Sovereign, and
Independent States; that he treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, propriety and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

ART. II. And that all disputes, which might arise in future on the subject of
the boundaries of the said United States, may be prevented, it is hereby agreed
and declared, that the following are, and shall be their boundaries, viz. --
From the northwest angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed by a
line drawn due north from the source of St. Croix-River, to the Highlands,
along the said Highlands which divide those Rivers that empty themselves into
the River St. Lawrence, from those which fall into the Atlantic Ocean, to the
north westernmost head of Connecticut-River; thence down along the middle of
that River, to the 45th degree of north latitude; from thence by a line due
west on said latitude, until it strikes the River Iroquois or Cataraquy; thence
along the middle of said River into Lake Ontario; through the middle of said
Lake, until it strikes the communication by water between that Lake and Lake
Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into Lake Erie, through the
middle of said Lake, until it arrives at the water communication between that
Lake and Lake Huron; thence along the middle of said water communication, into
Lake Huron; thence through the middle of said Lake, to the water communication
between that Lake and Lake Superior; thence through Lake Superior northward of
the Isles Royal and and Phelipeaux, to the Long Lake; thence through the middle
of the said Long Lake, and the water communication between it and the Lake of
the Woods, to the said Lake of the Woods; thence through the said Lake, to the
most northwestern point thereof, and from thence on a due west course to the
River Missisippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle of the said
River Missisippi, until it shall intersect the northernmost part of the 31st
degree of north latitude: south, by a line to be drawn due east from the
determination of the line last mentioned, in the latitude of 31 degrees north
of the Equator, to the middle of River Apalachicola, or Catahouche; thence
along the middle thereof to its junction with the Flint-River; thence straight
to the head of St. Mary's-River; and thence down along the middle of St.
Mary's-River, to the Atlantic Ocean; east, by a line to be drawn along the
middle of the River St. Croix, from its mouth in the bay of Funday to its
source, and from its source directly north to the aforesaid Highlands which
divide the Rivers that fall into the Atlantic Ocean, from those which fall into
the River St. Lawrence, comprehending all the islands within twenty leagues of
any part of the shores of the United States, and lying between lines to be
drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid boundaries between
Nova Scotia on the one part, and East-Florida on the other, shall respectively
touch the bay of Funday, and the Atlantic Ocean, excepting such islands as now
are, or heretofore have been within the limits of the said province of
Nova Scotia.

ART. III. It is agreed that the people of the United States shall continue to
enjoy unmolested, the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand-Bank, and
on all the other Banks of Newfoundland; also in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and
at all other places in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries used at
any time heretofore to fish. And also, that the inhabitants of the United
States shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the coast
of Newfoundland, as British fishermen shall use, (but not to dry or cure the
same on that island) and also on the coasts, bays and creeks of all other of
his Britannic Majesty's dominions in America; and that the American fishermen
shall have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors
and creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen-Islands and Labrador, so long as the same
shall remain unsettled; but so soon as the same, or either of them shall be
settled, it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry or cure fish at
such settlement without a previous agreement for that purpose with the
inhabitants, proprietors, or possessors of the ground.

ART. IV. It is agreed that creditors on either side shall meet with no lawful
impediments to the recovery of the full value in sterling money of all bona
fide debts heretofore contracted.

ART. V. It is agreed that the Congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
Legislatures of the respective States, to provide for the restitution of all
estates, rights and properties, which have been confiscated, belonging to real
British subjects, and also of the estates, rights and properties of persons
resident in districts in the possession of his Majesty's arms, and who have not
borne arms against the said United States; and that persons of any other
description shall all have free liberty to go to any part or parts of any of
the Thirteen United States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested in
their endeavors to obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights,
and properties, as may have been confiscated; and that Congress shall also
earnestly recommend to the several States a reconsideration and revision of all
acts or laws regarding the premises, so as to render the said laws or acts
perfectly consistent not only with justice and equity, but with that spirit of
conciliation which, on the return of the blessings of peace, should universally
prevail; and that Congress shall earnestly recommend to the several States,
that the estates, rights and properties of such last mentioned persons shall be
restored to them, they refunding to any persons who may be now in possession
the bona fide price (where any has been given) which such persons may have paid
on purchasing any of the said lands, rights or properties since the
confiscation.

And it is agreed that all persons who have any interest in confiscated lands,
either by debts, marriage settlements, or otherwise, shall meet with no lawful
impediment in the prosecution of their just rights.

ART. VI. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any prosecution
commenced against any person or persons for, or by reason of the part which he
or they may have taken in the present war, and that no person shall on that
account suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person, liberty or
property, and that those who may be in confinement on such charges at the time
of the ratification of the Treaty in America, shall be immediately set at
liberty, and the prosecutions so commenced, be discontinued.

ART. VII. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic
Majesty and the said States, and between the subjects of the one, and the
citizens of the other: wherefore all hostilities both by sea and land, shall
from henceforth cease: all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty, and
his Britannic Majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other property of the American
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and sleets from the said United
States, and from every post, place and harbor within the same; leaving in all
fortifications the American Artillery that may be therein; and shall also order
and cause all Archives, Records, Deeds and Papers belonging to any of the said
States, or their ^^^cens, which in the course of the war may have fallen into
the hands of his officers, to be forthwith restored and delivered to the proper
States and persons to whom they belong.

ART. VIII. The navigation of the River Missisippi, from its source to the
ocean, shall forever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain, and
the United States.

ART. IX. In case it shall so happen, that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain, or to the United States, should have been conquered by the arms
o^ either from the other, before the arrival of the said Provision^* Articles
in America, it is agreed that the same shall be restored without difficulty,
and without requiring any compensation.

ART. X. The solemn ratifications of the pre^^^. Treaty, expedited in good and
due form, shall be exchanged between the contracting parties in the space of
six months, or sooner, if possible, to be computed ^^om the day of the
signature of the present Treaty. In witness whereof we the under-signed, their
Ministers Plenipotentiary, have in their name, and in virtue of o^^ f^ll
powers, signed with our hands the present Definitive Treaty, and caused the
seals of our arms to be affixed thereto.

DONE at Paris, this third day of September, in the year of our LORD, one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-three. (L.S.) DAVID HARTLEY. (L.S.) JOHN
ADAMS. (L.S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L.S.) JOHN JAY.


AND WE the United States in Congress assembled, having seen and duly
considered the Definitive Articles aforesaid, did by a certain act under the
seal of the United States, bearing date this 14th day of January, 1784,
approve, ratify and confirm the same and every part and clause thereof,
engaging and promising, that we would sincerely and faithfully perform and
observe the same, and never suffer them to be violated by any one, or
transgressed in any manner, as far as should be in our power: And being
sincerely disposed to carry the said articles into execution truly, honestly
and with good faith, according to the intent and meaning thereof, We have
thought proper by these presents, to notify the premi^es to all the good
citizens of these United States, hereby requiring and enjoining all bodies of
Magistracy, Legislative, Executive and Judiciary, all persons bearing office,
civil or military, of whatever rank, degree or powers, and all others, the good
citizens of these States of every vocation and condition, that, reverencing
those stipulations entered into on their behalf, under the authority of that
federal bond by which their existence as an independent people is bound up
together, and is known and acknowledged by the nations of the world, and with
that good faith which is every man's surest guide, within their several
offices, jurisdictions and vocations, they carry into effect the said
Definitive Articles, and every clause and sentence thereof, sincerely, strictly
and completely.

GIVEN under the Seal of the UNITED STATES. Witness His Excellency THOMAS
MIFFLIN, our President, at Annapolis, this fourteenth day of January, in the
year of our LORD, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-four, and of the
sovereignty and independence of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA the eighth. THOMAS
MIFFLIN, President.

BY THE UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED, JANUARY 14, 1784.
RESOLVED, unanimously, nine States being present, That it be, and it is hereby
earnestly recommended to the Legislatures of the respective States, to provide
for the restitution of all estates, rights, and properties, which have been
confiscated, belonging to real British subjects, and also of the estates,
rights and properties of persons resident in districts which were in the
possession of his Britannic Majesty's arms, at any time between the thirtieth
day of November, 1782, and the fourteenth day of January, 1784, and who have
not borne arms against the said United States; and that persons of any other
description shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of any of the
thirteen United States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested in their
endeavors to obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights and
properties, as may have been confiscated. And it is also hereby earnestly
recommended to the several States, to re-consider and revise all their acts or
laws regarding the premises, so as to render the said laws or acts perfectly
consistent not only with justice and equity, but with that spirit of
conciliation which, on the return of the blessings of peace, should universally
prevail.

And it is hereby also earnestly recommended to the several States, that the
estates, rights and properties of such last mentioned persons should be
restored to them, they refunding to any persons who may be now in possession,
the bona fide price (where any has been given) which such persons may have paid
on purchasing any of the said lands, rights or properties, since the
confiscation.

CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES.
WE, the People of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union,
establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common
defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to
ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the
United States of America.

ARTICLE I.
SECTION I.
ALL legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

SECT II.
1. The House of Representatives shall consist of members chosen every second
year by the people of the several States, and the Electors in each State shall
have the qualifications requisite for Electors of the most numerous branch of
the State Legislature.

2. No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the age
of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and
who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that State in which he shall
be chosen.

3. Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several
States, which may be included within this Union, according to their respective
numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free
persons, including those bound to serve for a term of years, and excluding
Indians not taxed, three fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration
shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the
United States, and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as
they shall by law direct. The number of Representatives shall not exceed one
for every thirty thousand, but each State shall have at least one
Representative; and, until such enumeration shall be made, the State of
New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three, Massachus^^^s eight,
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations o^^, Connecticut five, New York six,
New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten,
North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.

4. When vacancies happen in the representation from any State, the Executive
authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

5. The House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and other officers;
and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

SECT. III.
1. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each
State, chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall
have one vote.

2. Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. The
seats of the Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year, of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year, and
of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year, so that one third may
be chosen every second year; and of vacancies happen by resignation, or
otherwise, during the recess of the Legislature of any State, the Executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
Legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

3. No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the age of
thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall
not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that State for which he shall be chosen.

4. The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the Senate,
but shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

5. The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President
pro-tempore, in the absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise
the office of President of the United States.

6. The Senate shall have the sol^ power to try all impeachments. When sitting
for that purpose, (...) ^ll be on oath or affirmation. When the President (...)
the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall pre^^^e: And no person
shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.

7. Judg^^^^t in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal
from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust
or profit under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless
be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment, and punishment, according
to law.

SECT. IV.
1. The times, places, and ma^n^y of holding elections for Senators and
Representatives, shall be pr^^^^^^d in each State by the Legislature thereof:
but the Congress may, at any time, by law, make or alter such regulations,
except as to the places of choosing Senators.

2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year; and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a
different day.

SECT. V.
1. Each House shall be the judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications
of its own members: and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do
business: but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be
authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner and under
such penalties as each House may provide.

2. Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings; punish its members
for disorderly behavior; and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a
member.

3. Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings; and, from time to time,
publish the same, excepting such parts as may, in their judgment, require
secrecy: and the yeas and nays, of the members of either House, on any
question, shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be entered on the
journal.

4. Neither House, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent
of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than
that in which the two houses shall be sitting.

SECT. VI.
1. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their
services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the United
States. They shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of the
peace, be privileged from arrest, during their attendance at the session of
their respective houses, and in going to, and returning from the same: and for
any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

2. No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was
elected, be appointed to any civil office, under the authority of the United
States, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have
been increased, during such time: and no person holding any office under the
United States, shall be a member of either House, during his continuance in
office.

SECT. VII.
1. All bills, for raising revenue, shall originate in the House of
Representatives: but the Senate shall propose or concur with amendments, as on
other bills.

2. Every bill, which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the President of the
United States. If he approve, he shall sign it: but if not, he shall return i^,
with his objections, to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall
enter their objections at large on their journal, and proceed to re-consider
it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of that House shall agree to
pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other
House, by which it shall likewise be re-considered: and if approved by two
thirds of that House it shall become a law. But, in all such cases, the votes
of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays: and the names of the
persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each
House respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President, within
ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same
shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress, by
their adjournment, prevent its return; in which case it shall not be a law.

3. Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of the Senate
and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and,
before the same shall take effect, be approved by him; or, being disapproved by
him, shall be repassed by two thirds of both Houses, according to the rules and
limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

SECT. VIII.
The Congress shall have power

1. To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts,
and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States:
but all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United
States.

2. To borrow money on the credit of the United States.

3. To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States,
and with the Indian tribes.

4. To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the
subject of bankruptcies, throughout the United States.

5. To coin money; regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin; and fix the
standard of weights and measures.

6. To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the United States.

7. To establish post-offices and post-roads.

8. To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing, for
limited times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries.

9. To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court.

10. To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and
off (...) against the law of nations.

11. To declare war; grant letters of marque and reprisal; and make rules
concerning captures on land and water.

12. To raise and support armies. But no appropriation of money for that use
shall be for a longer term than two years.

13. To provide and maintain a navy.

14. To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval
forces.

15. To provide for calling forth the militia, to execute the laws of the
union, suppress insurrections, and repel invasions.

16. To provide for organizing, arming and disciplining the militia, and for
governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United
States: reserving to the States respectively, the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline
prescribed by Congress.

17. To exercise exclusive legislation, in all cases whatsoever, over such
district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular
States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of
the United States; and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by
the consent of the Legislature of the State in which the same shall be, for the
erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dock-yards, and other needful
buildings: and

18. To make all laws, which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or
officer thereof.

SECT. IX.
1. The migration or importation of such persons, as any of the States now
existing, shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress,
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight: but a tax or duty may
be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless
when, in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

3. No bill of attainder, or ex post facto law, shall be passed.

4. No capitation or other direct tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to
the census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

5. No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State. No
preference shall be given, by any regulation of commerce or revenue, to the
ports of one State over those of another: nor shall vessels, bound to or from
one state, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

6. No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law: and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.

7. No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States. And no person,
holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of
Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind
whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.

SECT. X.
1. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant
letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any
thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or
grant any title of nobility.

2. No State shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any imposts or duties
on imports or exports. except what may be absolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any
State on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the treasury of the United
States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the
Congress. No State shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty on
tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war, in time of peace, enter into any
agreement or compact with another State, or with a foreign power, or engage in
war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of
delay.

ARTICLE II.
SECT. 1.
1. The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United States of
America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together
with the Vice President, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows:

2. Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the Legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of senators and
representatives, to which the State may be entitled in the Congress. But no
senator, or representative, or person holding any office of trust or profit,
under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.

3. The electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot for
two persons, of whom one, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same
State with themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for,
and of the number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify,
and transmit sealed to the sent of the government of the United States,
directed to the President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in
the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the
certificates, and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the
greatest number of votes shall be the President, if such number be a majority
of the whole number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who
have such majority, and have an equal number of votes, then the House of
Representatives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for President:
and if no person have a majority, then, from the sive highest on the list, the
said House shall in like manner choose the President. But in choosing the
President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from each
State having one vote: a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or
members from two-thirds of the States: and a majority of all the States shall
be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the choice of the President, the
person having the greatest number of votes of the electors, shall be the
Vice President. But if there should remain two or more, who have equal votes,
the Senate shall choose from them, by ballot, the Vice President.

4. The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day
on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout
the United States.

5. No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United
States, at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to
the office of President. Neither shall any person be eligible to that office,
who shall not have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen
years a resident within the United States.

6. In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President; and the Congress may, by
law, provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of
the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as
President: and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected.

7. The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished, during the
period for which he shall have been elected: and he shall not receive, within
that period, any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.

8. Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully
execute the office of President of the United States; and will, to the best of
my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United
States."

SECT. II.
1. The President shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several States, when called into the
actual service of the United States. He may require the opinion, in writing, of
the principal officers in each of the executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices: and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons, for offenses against the United States, except in
cases of impeachment.

2. He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to
make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present concur: and he shall
nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the Congress
may, by law, vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

3. The President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen,
during the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions, which shall expire at
the end of their next session.

SECT. III.
He shall, from time to time, give to the Congress information of the state of
the Union; and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge
necessary and expedient. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both
Houses, or either of them, and, in case of disagreement between them, with
respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he
shall think proper. He shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers. He
shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed; and shall commission all
the officers of the United States.

SECT. IV.
The President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United States,
shall be removed from office, on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason,
bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

ARTICLE III.
SECT. I.
The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one supreme court,
and in such inferior courts, as the Congress may, from time to time, ordain and
establish. The judges, both of the supreme and inferior courts, shall hold
their offices during good behavior; and shall, at stated times, receive for
their services, a compensation, which shall not be diminished during their
continuance in office.

SECT. II.
1. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising
under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or
which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting ambassadors,
other public ministers, and consuls; to all cases of admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to
controversies between two or more States, between a State and citizens of
another State, between citizens of different States, between citizens of the
same State, claiming lands under grants of different States and between a
State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign States, citizens, or subjects.

2. In all cases, affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls,
and those in which a State shall be a party, the supreme court shall have
original jurisdiction. In all the other cases before mentioned, the supreme
court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such
exceptions, and under such regulations, as the Congress shall make.

3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury;
and such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any State, the trial shall be at such
place or places, as the Congress may by law have directed.

SECT. III.
1. Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying war
against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same overt act, or on consession in open court.

2. The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason: but no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV.
SECT. 1.
Full faith and credit shall be given, in each State, to the public acts,
records, and judicial proceedings of every other State. And the Congress may,
by penal laws, prescribe the manner in which such acts, records and proceedings
shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

SECT. II.
1. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all the privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several States.

2. A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime, who
shall flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall, on demand of the
executive authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be
removed to the State having jurisdiction of the crime.

3. No person, held to service or labor in one State, under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor; but shall be delivered up on claim
of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

SECT. III.
1. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no new
State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other State,
nor any State be formed by the junction of two or more States, or parts of
States, without the consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned, as
well as of the Congress.

2. The Congress shall have power to dispose of, and make all needful rules and
regulations, respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United
States: and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed, as to prejudice
any claims of the United States, or of any particular State.

SECT. IV.
The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union, a republican
form of government; and shall protect each of them against invasion, and on
application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legislature
cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

ARTICLE V.
The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary,
shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the application of the
Legislatures of two-thirds of the several States, shall call a Convention for
proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and
purposes, as part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of
three-fourths of the States, or by Conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the
one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress;
provided, that no amendment, which may be made prior to the year one thousand
eight hundred and eight, shall in any manner affect the first and fourth
clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no State, without
its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.

ARTICLE VI.
1. All debts contracted, and engagements entered into before the adoption of
this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this
Constitution as under the Confederation.

2. This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land: and the
judges, in every State, shall be bound thereby, any thing in the Constitution
or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. The senators and representatives before mentioned, and the members of the
several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers both of the
United States and of the several S^^^es, shall be bound by oath or affirmation,
to support this Constitution; but no religions test shall ever be required as a
qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.

ARTICLE VII.
The ratification of the Conventions of nine States shall be sufficient for the
establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the same.

DONE in Convention by the unanimous consent of the States present, the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and eighty seven, and of the independence of the United States of
America the twelfth. In witness whereof, etc. GEO. WASHINGTON, President
New Hampshire -- John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman. Massachusetts -- Nathaniel
Gorham, Rufus King. Connecticut -- Wm. Samuel Johnson, Roger Sherman. New York
-- Alexander Hamilton. New Jersey -- Wm. Livingston, David Brearly, William
Patterson, Jonathan Dayton. Pennsylvania -- Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Mifflin,
Robert Morris, George Clymer, Thomas Fitzsimons, Jared Ingersoll, James Wilson,
Gouverneur Morris. Delaware -- George Reed, Gunning Bedford, jun. John
Dickinson, Richard Basset, Jacob Broom. Maryland -- James M'Henry, Daniel of
St. Thomas Jeniser, Daniel Carrol. Virginia -- John Blair, James Madison, jun.
North Carolina -- William Blount, Richard Dobbs Spaight, Hugh Williamson.
Seath-Carolina -- John Rutledge, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Charles Pinckney,
Pierce Butler. Georgia -- William Few, Abraham Baldwin. Attest. WILLIAM
JACKSON, Sec'y.

In CONVENTION, Monday, Sept. 17, 1787. PRESENT The States of NEW HAMPSHIRE,
MASSACHUSETTS, CONNECTICUT, Mr. HAMILTON from NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY,
PENNSYLVANIA, DELAWARE, MARYLAND, VIRGINIA, NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA, and
GEORGIA:
RESOLVED,
THAT the preceding Constitution be laid before the United States in Congress
assembled, and that it is the opinion of this Convention, that it should
afterward be submitted to a Convention of Delegates, chosen in each State by
the people thereof, under the recommendation of its Legislature, for their
assent and ratification; and that each Convention assenting to, and ratifying
the same, should give notice thereof to the United States, in Congress
assembled.

RESOLVED, That it is the opinion of this Convention, that as soon as the
Conventions of nine States shall have ratified this Constitution, the United
States in Congress assembled should fix a day on which Electors should be
appointed by the States which shall have ratified the same, and a day on which
the Electors should assemble to vote for the President, and the time and place
for commencing proceedings under this Constitution. That after such
publication, the Electors should be appointed, and the Senators and
Representatives elected: That the Electors should meet on the day fixed for the
election of the President, and should transmit their votes certified, signed,
sealed and directed, as the Constitution requires, to the Secretary of the
United States in Congress assembled: That the Senators and Representatives
should convene at the time and place assigned: That the Senators should appoint
a President of the Senate, for the sole purpose of receiving, opening and
counting the votes for President; and, that after he shall be chosen, the
Congress, together with the President, should without delay proceed to execute
this Constitution.

By the unanimous order of the Convention, GEORGE WASHINGTON, President,
WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.

In CONVENTION, September 17, 1787.
SIR,
WE have now the honor to submit to the consideration of the United States in
Congress assembled, that Constitution which has appeared to us the most
advisable. The friends of our Country have long seen and desired, that the
power of making war, peace and treaties, that of levying ^^ney and regulating
commerce, and the correspondent Executive and Judicial authorities, should be
fully and effectually vested in the general government of the Union; but the
impropriety of delegating such extensive trusts to one body of men is evident
-- Hence results the necessity of a different organization.

It is obviously impracticable in the federal government of these States, to
secure all rights of independent sovereignty to each, and yet provide for the
interest and safety of all -- Individuals entering into society, must give up a
share of liberty to preserve the rest. The magnitude of the sacrifice must
depend as well on situation and circumstance, as on the object to be obtained.
It is at all times difficult to draw with precision, the line between those
rights which must be surrendered, and those which may be reserved; and on the
present occasion, this difficulty was increased by a difference among the
several States as to their situation, extent, habits, and particular interests.

In all our deliberations on this subject, we kept steadily in our view, that
which appears to us the greatest interest of every true American, the
consolidation of our Union, in which is involved our prosperity, felicity,
safety, perhaps our national existence. This important consideration, seriously
and deeply impressed on our minds, led each State in the Convention to be less
rigid on points of inferior magnitude than might have been otherwise expected;
and thus the Constitution which we now present, is the result of a spirit of
amity, and of that mutual deference and concession which the peculiarity of our
political situation rendered indispensable.

That it will meet the full and entire approbation of every State is not,
perhaps, to be expected; but each will doubtless consider, that had her
interests been alone consulted, the consequences might have been particularly
disagreeable or injurious to others; that it is liable to as few exceptions as
could reasonably have been expected, we hope and believe; that it may promote
the lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all, and secure her freedom
and happiness, is our most ardent with.

With great respect, we have the honor to be, Sir, your Excellency's most
obedient, and humble servants.

GEORGE WASHINGTON, President. By the unanimous order of the Convention.

His Excellency the President of Congress.
UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED, Friday, September 28, 1787. PRESENT
NEW HAMPSHIRE, MASSACHUSETTS, CONNECTICUT, NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA,
DELAWARE, VIRGINIA, NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA, and GEORGIA, and from
MARYLAND, Mr. Ross.
CONGRESS having received the Report of the Convention lately assembled in
Philadelphia, Resolved, unanimously, That the said Report, with the Resolutions
and Letter accompanying the same, be transmitted to the several Legislatures,
in order to be submitted to a convention of Delegates chosen in each State by
the people thereof, in conformity to the Resolves of the Convention made and
provided in that case.

CHARLES THOMSON. Secretary.

CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES, Begun and held at the city of New York, on
Wednesday, the fourth of March, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine.
The Convention of a number of the States having, at the time of their adopting
the Constitution, expressed a desire, in order to prevent misconstructions or
abuse of its powers, that further declaratory and restrictive clauses should be
added -- and as extending the ground of public confidence in the government
will best insure the beneficent ends of its institution --

RESOLVED, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America, in Congress assembled, two-thirds of both Houses concurring, That the
following Articles be proposed to the Legislatures of the several States, as
Amendments to the Constitution of the United States, all, or any of which
articles, when ratified by three-fourths of the said Legislatures, to be valid,
to all intents and purposes, as part of the said Constitution; viz. ARTICLES,
in addition to, and amendment of the Constitution of the United States of
America, proposed by Congress, and ratified by the Legislatures of the several
States, pursuant to the fifth article of the original Constitution.

I. After the first enumeration, required by the first article of the
Constitution, there shall be one representative for every thirty thousand,
until the number shall amount to one hundred; after which, the proportion shall
be so regulated by congress, that there shall be not less than one hundred
representatives, nor less than one representative for every forty thousand
persons, until the number of representatives shall amount to two hundred; after
which, the proportion shall be so regulated by Congress, that there shall not
be less than two hundred representatives, nor more than one representative for
every fifty thousand persons.

II. No law, varying the compensation for the services of the senators and
representatives, shall take effect, until an election of representatives shall
have intervened.

III. Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof, or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition
the government for a redress of grievances.

IV. A well regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free State,
the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.

V. No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house, without the
consent of the owner; nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by
law.

VI. The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated: and
no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
affirmation -- and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the
persons or things to be seized.

VII. No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous
crime, unless on a presentment or indictment by a grand jury, except in cases
arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service,
in time of war, or public danger: nor shall any person be subject for the same
offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in
any criminal case, to be a witness against himself; nor be deprived of life,
liberty, or property, without due process of law: nor shall private property be
taken for public use, without just compensation.

VIII. In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a
speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury, of the State and District,
wherein the crime shall have been committed; which District shall have been
previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature and cause of
the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the
assistance of counsel for his defense.

IX. In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty
dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved: and no fact tried by a
jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the United States, than
according to the rules of common law.

X. Excessive bail shall not be required; nor excessive fines imposed; nor
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

XI. The enumeration, in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others, retained by the people.

XII. The powers, not delegated to the United States, by the Constitution, nor
prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to
the people.

FREDERICK A. MUHLENBERG, Speaker of the House of Representatives. ^OHN ADAMS,
Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate. Attest. JOHN
BECKLEY, Clerk of the House of Representatives. SAMUEL A. OTIS, Secretary of
the Senate.
N. B. By the returns made into the Secretary of State's office, it appears
that the first article of the above amendments is agreed to by only seven
States -- the second by only four -- and therefore these are not obligatory.
All the remainder, having been ratified by nine States, are of equal obligation
with the Constitution itself.



THE CONSTITUTION OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
PART I. BILL OF RIGHTS.
ARTICLE I.

ALL men are born equally free and independent; therefore all government of
right originates from the people, is founded in consent, and instituted for the
general good.

2. All men have certain natural, essential and inherent rights -- among which
are the enjoying and defending life and liberty, acqui^ing, possessing and
protecting property; and in a word, of seeking and obtaining happiness.

3. When men enter into a state of society, they surrender up some of their
natural rights to that society, in order to insure the protection of others;
and without such an equivalent, the surrender is void.

4. Among the natural rights, some are in their very nature unalienable;
because no equivalent can be given or received for them: Of this kind are the
Rights of Conscience.

5. Every individual has a natural and unalienable right to worship God
according to the dictates of his own conscience and reason; and no subject
shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for
worshipping God in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his
own conscience, or for his religious profession, sentiments, or persuasion;
provided he does not disturb the public peace or disturb others in their
religious worship.

6. As morality and piety, rightly grounded on evangelical principles, will
give the best and greatest security to government, and will lay in the hearts
of men, the strongest obligations to due subjection; and as the knowledge of
these is most likely to be propagated through a society, by the institution of
the public worship of the Deity, and of public instruction in morality and
religion; therefore, to promote those important purposes, the people of this
State have a right to empower, and do hereby fully empower the Legislature, to
authorize, from time to time, the several towns, parishes, bodies corporate or
religious societies, within this State, to make adequate provision, at their
own expense, for the support and maintenance of public Protest^nt teachers of
piety, religion and morality.

Pr^vided notwithstanding, That the several towns, pari^hes, bodies corporate,
or religious societies, shall at all times have the exclusive right of electing
their own public teachers, and of contracting with them for their support and
maintenance. And no person of any one particular religious sect or
denomination, shall ever be compelled to pay toward the support of the teacher
or teachers of another persuasion, sect or denomination.

And every denomination of Christians, demeaning themselves quietly, and as
good subjects of the State, shall be equally under the protection of the law:
And to subordination of any one sect or denomination to another, shall ever be
established by law.

And nothing herein shall be und^^stood to ^^f^ct any former contracts made for
the support of the ministry; but all such contracts shall remain, and be in the
same state as if this Constitution had not been made.

7. The people of this State have the sole and exclusive right of governing
themselves as a free, sovereign and independent State; and do, and forever
hereafter shall exercise and enjoy every power, jurisdiction and right,
pertaining thereto, which is not, or may not hereafter be by them expressly
delegated to the United States of America in Congress assembled.

8. All power residing originally in, and being derived from the people, all
the magistrates and officers of government are their substitutes and agents,
and at all times accountable to them.

9. No office or place whatsoever in government, shall be hereditary -- the
abilities and integrity requisite in all, not being transmissible to posterity
or relations.

10. Government being instituted for the common benefit, protection and
security of the whole community, and not for the private interest or emolument
of any one man, family, or class of men; therefore, whenever the ends of
government are perverted, and public liberty manifestly endang^red, and ^^l
other means of redress are ineffectual, the people may and of right ought to
reform the old, or establish a new government. The doctrine of nonresistance
against arbitrary power and oppression, is absurd, slavish, and destructive of
the good and happiness of mankind.

11. All elections ought to be free, and every inhabitant of the State, having
the proper qu^li^ications, has equal right to elect and be elected into office.

12. Every member of the community has a right to be protected by it, in the
enjoyment of his life, liberty and property; he is therefore bound to
contribute his share in the expense of such protection, and to yield his
personal service when necessary, or an equivalent. But no part of a man's
property shall be taken from him, or applied to public uses, without his own
consent, or that of the representative body of the people. Nor are the
inhabitants of this State controllable by any other laws than those to which
they, or their representative body, have given their consent.

13. No person, who is conscientiously scrupulous about the lawfulness of
bearing arms, shall be compelled thereto, provided he will pay an equivalent.

14. Every subject of this State is entitled to a certain remedy, by having
recourse to the laws, for all injuries he may receive in his person, property,
or character; to obtain right and justice freely, without being obliged to
purchase it; completely and without any denial; promptly and without delay;
conformably to the laws.

15. No subject shall be held to answer for any crime or offense, until the
same is fully and plainly, sabit^^^ly and formally described to him; or be
compelied to acc^se or furnish evidence against himself. And every subject
shall have a right to produce all proofs that may be favorable to himself; to
meet the witnesses against him, face to face; and to be fully heard in his
defense, by himself and counsel. And no subject shall be arrested, imprisoned,
despoiled, or deprived of his property, immunities, or privileges, put out of
the protection of the law, exiled or deprived of his life, liberty, or estate,
but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the land.

16. No subject shall be liable to be tried, after an acquittal, for the same
crime or offense. Nor shall the Legislature make any law that shall subject any
person to a capital punishment (excepting for the government of the army and
navy, and the militia in actual service) without trial by Jury.

17. In criminal prosecutions, the trial of facts, in the vicinity where they
happen, is so essential to the security of the life, liberty, and estate of the
citizen, that no crime or offense ought to be tried in any other county than
that in which it is committed: except in cases of general insurrection in any
particular county, when it shall appear to the Judges of the Superior Court,
that an impartial trial cannot be had in the county where the offense may be
committed, and upon their report, the Legislature shall think proper to direct
the trial in the nearest county in which an impartial trial can be obtained.

18. All penalties ought to be proportioned to the nature of the offense. No
wise Legislature will affix the same punishment to the crimes of theft, forgery
and the like, which they do to those of murder and treason; where the same
undistinguishing severity is exerted against all offenses, the people are led
to forget the real distinction in the crimes themselves, and to commit the most
flagrant with as little compunction as they do the lightest offenses: For the
same reason a multitude of sanguinary laws is both impolitic and unjust; the
true design of all punishments being to reform, not to exterminate mankind

19. Every subject has a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches and
seizures of his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.
Therefore, all warrants to search suspected places, or arrest a person for
examination or trial, in prosecutions for criminal matters, are contrary to
this right, if the cause or foundation of them be not previously supported by
oath or affirmation; and if the order, in a warrant to a civil officer, to make
search in suspected places, or to arrest one or more suspected persons, or to
seize their property, be not accompanied with a special designation of the
persons or objects of search, arrest, or seizure; and no warrant ought to be
issued, but in cases, and with the formalities, prescribed by law.

20. In all controversies concerning property, and in all suits between two or
more persons, except in cases in which it has been heretofore otherwise used
and practiced, the parties have a right to a trial by Jury, and this method of
procedure shall be held sacred, unless in cases arising on the high seas and
such as relate to mariners' wages, the Legislature shall think it necessary
hereafter to alter it.

21. In order to reap the fullest advantage of the inestimable privilege of the
trial by Jury, great care ought to be taken, that none but qualified persons
should be appointed to serve; and such ought to be fully compensated for their
travel, time and attendance.

22. The LIBERTY OF THE PRESS is essential to the security of freedom in a
State: It ought therefore to be inviolably preserved.

23. Retrospective laws are highly injurious, oppressive and unjust. No such
laws therefore should be made, either for the decision of civil causes, or the
punishment of offenses.

24. A well regulated militia is the proper, natural and sure defense of a
State.

25. Standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised, or
kept up without consent of the Legislature.

26. In all cases and at all times, the military ought to be under strict
subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

27. No soldier in time of peace, shall be quartered in any house, without the
consent of the owner; and in time of war, such qua^^^^s ought not to be made
but by the civil magistrate, in a (...) ordained by the Legislature.

28. No subsidy, charge, tax, impost, or duty, shall be established, fixed,
laid, or levied, under any pretext whatsoever, without the consent of the
people, or their Representatives in the Legislature, or authority derived from
that body.

29. The power of suspending the laws, or the execution of th^^, ought never to
be exercised but by the Legislature, or by authority derived therefrom, to be
exercised in such particular cases only as the Legislature shall expressly
provide for.

30. The fr^edom of deliberation, speech and debate, in either House of the
Legislature, is so essential to the rights of the people, that it cannot be the
foundation of any action, complaint, or prosecution, in any other court or
place whatsoever.

31. The Legislature shall assemble for the redress of public grievances, and
for making such laws as the public good may require.

32. The people have a right in an orderly and peaceable manner, to assemble
and consult upon the common good, give instructions to their Representatives,
and to request of the legislative body, by way of petition or remonstrance,
redress of the wrongs done them, and of the grievances they suffer.

33. No magistrate, or court of law, shall demand excessive bail or sureties,
impose excessive fines, or inflict cruel or unusal punishments.

34. No person can in any case be subjected to law-marshal, or to any pains or
penalties by virtue of that law, except those employed in the army or navy, and
except the militia in actual service, but by authority of the Legislature.

35. It is essential to the preservation of the rights of every individual, his
life, liberty, property, and character, that there be an impartial
interpretation of the laws and administration of justice. It is the ^ight of
every citizen to be tried by Judges as impartial as the lot of humanity will
admit. It is therefore not only the best policy, but for the security of the
rights of the people, that the Judges of the Supreme Judicial Court should hold
their offices so long as they behave well; subject however to such limitations
on ^ccount of age, as may be provided by the Constitution of the State; and
that they should have honorable s^laries ascertained and established by
standing laws.

36. Economy being a most essential virtue in all States, especially in a young
one; no pension shall be granted, but in consideration of actual services; and
such pensions ought to be granted with great caution by the Legislature, and
never for more than one year at a time.

37. In the government of this State, the three essential powers thereof, to
wit, the Legislative, Executive and Judicial, ought to be kept as separate
from, and independent of each other, as the nature of a free government will
admit, or as is consistent with that chain of connection that binds the whole
fabric of the Constitution in one indissoluble bond of union and amity.

38. A frequent recurrence to the fundamental principles of the Constitution,
and a constant adherence to justice, moderation, temperance, industry,
frugality and all the social virtues, are indispensably necessary to preserve
the blessings of liberty and good government; the people ought therefore to
have a particular regard to all those principles in the choice of their
officers and representatives: And they have a right to require of their law
givers and magistrates, an exact and constant observance of them, in the
formation and execution of the laws necessary for the good administration of
government.

PART II. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
THE people inhabiting the territory formerly called the Province of
New Hampshire, do hereby solemnly and mutually agree with each other, to form
themselves unto a free, sovereign and independent Body Politic, or State, by
the name of the State of New Hampshire.

GENERAL COURT.
The Supreme Legislative Power, within this State, shall be vested in the
Senate and House of Representatives, each of which shall have a negative on the
other.

The Senate and House shall assemble every year on the first Wednesday of June,
and at such other times as they may judge necessary; and shall dissolve, and be
dissolved seven days next preceding the said first Wednesday of June; and shall
be styled The General Court of New Hampshire.

The General Court shall forever have full power and authority to erect and
constitute Judicatories, and Courts of Record, or other Courts, to be holden in
the name of the State, for the hearing, ^^ying and determining all manner of
crimes, offenses, pleas, processes, plaints, actions, causes, matters and
things whatsoever, arising or happening within this State, or between or
concerning persons i^h^b^t^ng or residing, or brought within the same; whether
the same be criminal or civil, or whether the crimes be capital, or not
capital, and whether the said pleas be r^al, personal, or mixed; and for the
awarding and issuing execution thereon. To which Courts and Judicatories, are
hereby given and granted, full power and authority, from time to time, to
administer oaths or affirmations, for the better discovery of truth in any
matter in controversy, or depending before them.

And further, full power and authority are hereby given and granted to the said
General Court, from time to time to make, ordain and establish, all manner of
wholesome and reasonable orders, laws, statutes, ordinances, directions and
instructions, either with penalties, or without, so as the same be not
repugnant or contrary to this Constitution, as they may judge for the benefit
and welfare of this State, and for the governing and ordering thereof, and of
the subjects of the same, for the necessary support and defense of the
government thereof; and to name and settle annually, or provide by fixed laws
for the naming and settling, all civil officers within this State; such
officers excepted, the election and appointment of whom are hereafter in this
form of government otherwise provided for; and to ^^t forth the several duties,
powers and limits of the several civil and military officers of this State, and
the forms of such oaths or affirmations as shall be respectively administered
unto them, for the execution of their several offices and places, so as the
same be not repugnant or contrary to this Constitution; and also to impose
sines, mulcts, imprisonments and other punishments; and to impose and levy
proportional and reasonable assessments, rates and taxes, upon all the
inhabitants of, and residents within, the said State; and upon all estates
within the same; to be issued and disposed of by warrant, under the hand of the
Governor of this State for the time being, with the advice and consent of the
Council, for the public service, in the necessary defense and support of the
government of this State, and the protection and preservation of the subjects
thereof, according to such acts as are, or shall be in force within the same.

And while the public charges of government, or any part thereof, shall be
assessed on polls and estates in the manner that has heretofore been practiced;
in order that such assessments may be made with equality, there shall be a
valuation of the estates within the State taken anew once in every five years
at least, and as much oftener as the General Court shall order.

No member of the General Court shall take fees, be of counsel, or act as
advocate, in any cause before either branch of the Legislature; and upon due
proof thereof, such member shall forfeit his seat in the Legislature.

The doors of the galleries, of each House of the Legislature, shall be kept
open to all persons who behave decently, except when the welfare of the State,
in the opinion of either branch, shall require secrecy.

HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES.
There shall be, in the Legislature of this State, a representation of the
people, annually elected and founded upon principles of equality: And in order
that such representation may be as equal as circumstances will admit, every
town, pari^h, or place entitled to town privileges, having one hundred and
fifty rateable male polls, of twenty-one years of age and upwards, may elect
one Representative; if four hundred and fifty rateable polls, may elect two
Representatives; and so proceeding in that proportion, making three hundred
such rateable polls the mean increasing number, for every additional
Representative.

Such towns, parishes, or places, as have less than one hundred and fifty
rateable polls, shall be classed by the General Court for the purpose of
choosing a Representative, and seasonably notified thereof. And in every class,
formed for the abovementioned purpose, the first annual meeeting shall be held
in the town, parish, or place, wherein most of the rateable polls reside; and
afterward in that which has the next highest number; and so on annually by
rotation, through the several towns, parishes, or places, forming the district.

Whenever any town, parish, or place, entitled to town privileges as aforesaid,
shall not have one hundred and fifty rateable polls, and be so situated as to
render the classing thereof with any other town, parish, or place, very
inconvenient, the General Court may, upon application of a majority of the
voters in such town, parish, or place, issue a writ for their electing and
sending a Representative to the General Court.

The members of the House of Representatives shall be chosen annually in the
month of March, and shall be the second branch of the Legislature.

All persons qualified to vote in the election of Senators, shall be entitled
to vote within the district where they dwell, in the choice of Representatives.
Every member of the House of Representatives shall be chosen by ballot; and for
two years at least, next preceding his election, shall have been an inhabitant
of this State; shall have an estate within the district which he may be chosen
to represent, of the value of one hundred pounds, one half of which to be a
freehold, whereof he is seized in his own right; shall be at the time of his
election an inhabitant of the town, parish or place he may be chosen to
represent; shall be of the Protestant religion, and shall cease to represent
such town, parish or place, immediately on his ceasing to be qualified as
aforesaid.

The members of both Houses of the Legislature shall be compensated for their
services out of the treasury of the State, by a law made for that purpose; such
members attending seasonably, and not departing without license. All
intermediate vacancies in the House of Representatives, may be filled up from
time to time in the same manner as annual elections are made.

The House of Representatives shall be the Grand Inquest of the State; and all
impeachments made by them shall be heard and tried by the Senate.

All money bills shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the
Senate may propose, or concur with amendments, as on other bills.

The House of Representatives shall have power to adjourn themselves, but no
longer than two days at a time.

A majority of the members of the House of Representatives shall be a quorum
for doing business; but when less than two thirds of the Representatives
elected shall be present, the assent of two thirds of those members shall be
necessary to render their acts and proceedings valid.

No member of the House of Representatives or Senate, shall be arrested or held
to bail on mean process, during his going to, returning from, or attendance
upon the Court.

The House of Representatives shall choose their own Speaker, appoint their own
officers, and settle the rules of proceedings in their own House; and shall be
judge of the returns, elections and qualifications of its members, as pointed
out in this Constitution. They shall have authority to punish by imprisonment,
every person who shall be guilty of disrespect to the House in its presence, by
any disorderly and contemptuous behavior, or by threatening or ill treating
any of its members; or by obstructing its deliberations; every person guilty of
a breach of its privileges, in making arrests for debt, or by assaulting any
member during his attendance at any session; in assaulting or disturbing any
one of its officers in the execution of any order or procedure of the House; in
assaulting any witness or other person, ordered to attend, by, and during his
attendance upon the House; or in rescuing any person arrested by order of the
House, knowing them to be such. The Senate, Governor and Council, shall have
the same powers in like cases: provided, that no imprisonment by either, for
any offense, exceed ten days.

The journals of the proceedings, and all public acts of both Houses of the
Legislature, shall be printed and published immediately after every adjournment
or prorogation; and upon motion made by any one member, the yeas and nays upon
any question shall be entered in the journals: And any member of the Senate or
House of Representatives, shall have a right on motion made at the time for
that purpose, to have his protest or dissent, with the reasons, against any
vote, resolve, or bill passed, entered on the journal.

SENATE.
The Senate shall consist of twelve members, who shall hold their office for
one year from the first Wednesday of June next ensuing their election.

And that the State may be equally represented in the Senate, the Legislature
shall, from time to time, divide the State into twelve districts, as nearly
equal as may be without dividing towns and unincorporated places; and in making
this division, they shall govern themselves by the proportion of direct taxes
paid by the said districts, and timely make known to the inhabitants of the
State the limits of each district.

The freeholders and other inhabitants of each district, qualified as in this
Constitution is provided, shall annually give in their votes for a Senator, at
some meeting holden in the month of March.

The Senate shall be the first branch of the Legislature; and the Senators
shall be chosen in the following manner, viz. Every male inhabitant of each
town, and parish with town privileges, and places unincorporated, in this
State, of twenty-one years of age and upwards, excepting paupers, and persons
excused from paying taxes at their own request, shall have a right, at the
annual or other meetings of the inhabitants of said towns and parishes, to be
duly warned and holden annually forever in the month of March, to vote in the
town or parish wherein he dwells, for the Senator in the district whereof he is
a member.

Provided nevertheless, That no person shall be capable of being elected a
Senator, who is not of the Protestant religion, and seized of a freehold estate
in his own right, of the value of two hundred pounds, lying within this State,
who is not of the age of thirty years, and who shall not have been an
inhabitant of this State for seven years immediately preceding his election,
and at the time thereof he shall be an inhabitant of the district for which he
shall be chosen.

And every person, qualified as the Constitution provides, shall be considered
an inhabitant for the purpose of electing and being elected into any office or
place within this State, in the town, parish and plantation, where he dwells
and has his home.

And the inhabitants of plantations and places unincorporated, qualified as
this Constitution provides, who are or shall be required to assess taxes upon
themselves toward the support of government, or shall be taxed therefore, shall
have the same privilege of voting for Senators, in the plantations and places
wherein they reside, as the inhabitants of the respective towns and parishes
aforesaid have. And the meetings of such plantations and places for that
purpose shall be holden annually in the month of March, at such places
respectively therein as the Assessors thereof shall direct; which Assessors
shall have like authority for notifying the Electors, collecting and returning
the votes, as the Selectment and Town Clerks have in their several towns by
this Constitution.

The meetings for the choice of Governor, Council, and Senators, shall be
warned by warrant from the Selectmen, and governed by a Moderator, who shall in
the presence of the Selectmen (whose duty it shall be to attend) in open
meeting, receive the votes of all the inhabitants of such towns and parishes
present, and qualified to vote for Senators; and shall, in said meetings, in
presence of the said Selectmen, and of the Town Clerk in said meeting, sort and
count the said votes, and make a public declaration thereof, with the name of
every person voted for, and the number of votes for each person; and the Town
Clerk shall make a fair record of the same at large, in the town book, and
shall make out a fair attested copy thereof, to be by him sealed up and
directed to the Secretary of the State, with a superscription expressing the
purport thereof: And the said Town Clerk shall cause such attested copy to be
delivered to the Sheriff of the county in which such town (...) parish shall
lie, thirty days at least before the first Wednesday of June, or to the
S^^retary of State at least twenty days before the said su^^ Wednesday of June:
And the Sheriff of each county, or his Deputy, shall deliver all such
certificates, by him received, into the Secretary's office, at least twenty
days before the first Wednesday of June.

And that there may be a due meeting of Senato^s on the first Wednesday of June
annually, the Governor, and a majority of the Council for the time being,
shall, as soon as: may be, examine the returned copies of such records, and
fourteen days before the first Wednesday of June, he shall issue his summons to
such persons as appear to be chosen Senators, by a majority of votes, to attend
and take their seats on that day.

Provided neverthel^ss, That for the first year the said returned copies shall
be examined by the President, and a majority of the council then in office; and
the said President shall in like manner notify the persons elected, to attend
and take their seats accordingly.

And in case there shall not appear to be a Senator elected by a majority of
votes, for any district, the deficiency shall be supplied in the following
manner, viz. The members of the House of Representatives, and such Senators as
shall be declared elected, shall take the names of the two persons having the
highest number of votes in the district, and out of them shall elect, by joint
ballot, the Senator wanted for such district; and in this manner all such
vacancies shall be filled up in every district of the State, and in like manner
all vacancies in the Senate, arising by death, removal out of the State, or
otherwise, shall be supplied as soon as may be after such vacancies happen.

The Senate shall be final judges of the elections, returns and qualifications
of their own members, as pointed out in this Constitution.

The Senate shall have power to adjourn themselves, provided such adjournment
do not exceed two days at a time.

Provided nevertheless, That whenever they shall sit on the trial of any
impeachment, they may adjourn to such time and place as they may think proper,
although the Legislature be not assembled on such day, or at such place.

The Senate shall appoint their President and other officers, and determine
their own rules of proceedings: And not less than seven members of the Senate
shall make a quorum for doing business; and when less than eight Senators shall
be present, the assent of five at least, shall be necessary to render their
acts and proceedings valid.

The Senate shall be a Court, with full power and authority to hear, try and
determine, all impeachments made by the House of Representatives against any
officer or officers of the State, for ^^^bery, corruption, mal-practice, or
maladministration, in office; with full power to issue summons, or compulsory
process, for convening witnesses before them: But previous to the trial of any
such impeachment, the members of the Senate shall respectively be sworn truly
and impartially to try and determine the charge in question, according to
evidence. And every officer, impeached for bribery, corruption, mal-practice or
mal-administration in office, shall be served with an attested copy of the
impeachment, and order of Senate thereon, with such citation as the Senate may
direct, setting forth the time and place of their sitting to try the
impeachment; which service shall be made by the Sheriff, or such other sworn
officer as the Senate may appoint, at least fourteen days previous to the time
of trial; and such citation being duly served and returned, the Senate may
proceed in the hearing of the impeachment, giving the person impeached (if he
shall appear) full liberty of producing witnesses and proofs, and of making his
defense, by himself and counsel, and may also, upon his refusing or neglecting
to appear, hear the proofs in support of the impeachment, and render judgment
thereon, his nonappearance notwithstanding; and such judgment shall have the
same force and effect, as if the person impeached had appeared and pleaded in
the trial. Their judgment, however, shall not extend further than removal from
office, disqualification to hold or enjoy any place of honor, trust, or
profit, under this State; but the party so convicted, shall nevertheless be
liable to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to the laws of
the land.

Whenever the Governor shall be impeached, the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Judicial Court shall, during the trial, preside in the Senate, but have no vote
therein.

EXECUTIVE POWER GOVERNOR.
There shall be a Supreme Executive Magistrate, who shall be styled the
Governor of the State of New Hampshire, and whose title shall be His Excell^ncy.

The Governor shall be chosen annually in the month of March; and the votes for
Governor shall be received, sorted, counted, certified and returned, in the
same manner as the voters for Senators; and the Secretary shall lay the same
before the Senate and House of Representatives, on the first Wednesday of June,
to be by them examined, and in case of an election by a majority of votes
through the State, the choice shall be by them declared and published.

And the qualifications of electors of the Governor shall be the sa^^ as those
for Senators; and if no person shall have a m^^^rity of votes, the Senate and
House of Representatives shall by joint ballot elect one of the two persons
having the highest number of votes, who shall be d^^lared Governor.

And no person shall be eligible to this office, unless at the time of his
election he shall have been an inhabitant of this State for seven years next
preceding, and unless he shall be of the age of thirty year, and unless he
shall at the same time have an estate of the value of five hundred pounds, one
half of which shall consist of a freehold in his own right within this State,
and unless he shall be of the Protestant religion.

In cases of disagreement between the two Houses with regard to the time or
place of adjournment or prorogation, the Governor, with advice of Council,
shall have a right to adjourn or prorogue the General Court, not exceeding
ninety days at any one time, as he may determine the public good may require,
and he shall dissolve the same seven days before the said first Wednesday of
June.

And in case of any infectious distemper prevailing in the place where the said
Court at any time is to convene, or any other cause, whereby dangers may arise
to the health or lives of the members from their attendance, the Governor may
direct the session to be holden at some other the most convenient place within
the State.

Every bill which shall have passed both Houses of the General Court, shall,
before it become a law, be presented to the Governor; if he approve, he shall
sign it, but if not, he shall return it with his objections, to that House in
which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on
their journal, and proceed to reconsider it; if after such reconsideration, two
thirds of that House shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together
with such objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be
reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that House, it shall become a
law. But in all such cases the votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas
and nays, and the names of the persons, voting for or against the bill, shall
be entered on the journal of each House respectively. If any bill shall not be
returned by the Governor, within five days (Sundays excepted) after it shall
have been presented to him, the same shall be a law in like manner as if he had
signed it, unless the Legislature, by their adjournment, prevent its return, in
which case it shall not be a law.

Every resolve shall be presented to the Governor, and before the same shall
take effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be
repassed by the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and
limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

All judicial officers, the Attorney General, Solicitors, all Sheriffs,
Coroners, Registers of Probate, and all officers of the navy, and General and
Field officers of the militia, shall be nominated and appointed by the Governor
and Council; and every such nomination shall be made at least three days prior
to such appointment; and no appointment shall take place, unless a majority of
the Council agree thereto. The Governor and Council shall have a negative on
each other, both in the nominations and appointments. Every nomination and
appointment shall be signed by the Governor and Council, and every negative
shall be also signed by the Governor or Council who made the same.

The Captains and Subalterns in the respective regiments, shall be nominated
and recommended by the field officers to the Governor, who is to issue their
commissions immediately on receipt of such recommendation.

Whenever the chair of the Governor shall become vacant, by reason of his
death, absence from the State, or otherwise, the President of the Senate shall,
during such vacancy, have and exercise all the power and authorities which, by
this Constitution, the Governor is vested with, when personally present; but
when the President of the Senate shall exercise the office of Governor, he
shall not hold his office in the Senate.

The Governor, with advice of Council, shall have full power and authority in
the recess of the General Court, to prorogue the same from time to time, not
exceeding ninety days in any one recess of said Court; and during the sessions
of said Court, to adjourn or prorogue it to any time the two Houses may desire,
and to call it together sooner than the time to which it may be adjourned or
prorogued, if the welfare of the State should require the same.

The Governor of this State for the time being, shall be commander in chief of
the army and navy, and all the military forces of the State, by sea and land;
and shall have full power by himself, or by any chief commander* or other full
power by himself, or by any chief commander* or other officer or officers, from
time to time, to train, instruct, exercise and govern the militia and navy; and
for the special defense and safety of this State, to assemble in martial array,
and put in warlike posture the inhabitants thereof, and to lead and conduct
them, and with them to encounter, repulse, repel, resist and pursue by force of
arms, as well by sea as by land, within and without the limits of this State;
and also to kill, slay, destroy if necessary, and conquer by all sitting ways,
enterprise and means, all and every such person and persons as shall at any
time hereafter, in a hostile manner, attempt or enterprise the destruction,
invasion, detriment or anno^ance of this State; and to use and exercise over
the army and navy, and over the militia in actual service, the law martial in
time of war, invasion, and also in rebellion, declared by the Legislature to
exist as occasion shall necessarily require: And surprise by all ways and means
whatsoever, all and every such person or persons, with their ships, arms,
ammunition, and other goods, as shall in a hostile manner invade* or attempt
the invading, conquering or annoying this State; and in ^ine, the Governor
hereby is entrusted with all other powers incident to the office of captain
general and commander in chief and admiral, to be exercised agreeably to the
rules and regulations of the Constitution and the laws of the land: Provided,
that the Governor shall not at any time hereafter, by virtue of any power by
this Constitution granted, or hereafter to be granted to him by the
Legislature, transport any of the inhabitants of this State, or oblige them to
march out of the limits of the same, without their free and voluntary consent,
or the consent of the General Court, nor grant commissions for exercising the
law martial in any case, without the advice and consent of the Council.

The power of pardoning of offenses, except such as persons may be convicted of
before the Senate by impeachment of the House, shall be in the Governor, by and
with the advice of the Council: But no charter of pardon granted by the
Governor with advice of Council, before conviction, shall avail the party
pleading the same, notwithstanding any general or particular expressions
contained therein, descriptive of the offense or offenses intended to be
pardoned.

No officer duly commissioned to command in the militia shall be removed from
his office, but by the address of both Houses to the Governor, or by fair trial
in Court Martial, pursuant to the laws of the State for the time being.

The commanding officers of the regiments shall appoint their Adjutants and
Quarter Masters; the Brigadiers, their Brigade-Majors; the Major-Generals,
their Aids; the Captains and Subalterns, their non commissioned officers.

The division of the militia into brigades, regiments and companies, made in
pursuance of the militia laws now in force, shall be consid^red as the proper
division of the militia of this State, until the same shall be altered by some
future law.

No moneys shall be iss^^d out of the treasury of this State and disposed of
(except such sums as may be appropriated for the redemption of bills of credit,
or Treasurer's notes, or for the payment of interest arising thereon) but by
warrant under the hand of the Governor for the time being, by and with the
advice and consent of the Council, for the necessary support and defense of
this State, and for the necessary protection and preservation of the
inhabitants thereof, agreeably to the acts and resolves of the General Court.

All public boards, the Commissary-General, all superintending officers of
public magazines and stores belonging to this State, and all commanding
officers of forts and garrisons within the same, shall once in every three
months, officially and without requisition, and at other times when required by
the Governor, deliver to him an account of all goods, stores, provisions,
ammunition, cannon, with their appendages, and all small arms with their
accoutrements, and of all other public property under their care respectively;
distingushing the quantity and kind of each, as particularly as may be;
together with the condition of such forts and garrisons; and the commanding
officer shall exhibit to the Governor, when required by him, true and exact
plans of such forts, and of the land and sea, or harbor or harbors adjacent.

The Governor and Council shall be compensated for their services, from time to
time, by such grants as the General Court shall think reasonable.

Permanent and honorable salaries shall be established by law, for the
Justices of the Superior Court.

COUNCIL.
There shall be annually elected by ballot five Counselors, for advising the
Governor in the executive part of government. The freeholders and other
inhabitants in each county, qualified to vote for Senators, shall some time in
the month of March, give in their votes for one Counselor; which votes shall
be received, sorted, counted, certified and returned to the Secretary's office,
in the same manner as the votes for Senators, to be by the Secretary laid
before the Senate and House of Representatives on the first Wednesday of June.

And the person having a majority of votes in any county, shall be considered
as duly elected a Counselor: But if no person shall have a majority of votes
in any county, the Senate and House of Representatives shall take the names of
the two persons who have the highest number of votes in each county, and not
elected, and out of those two, shall elect by joint ballot, the Counselor
wanted for such county, and the qualifications for Counselors shall be the
same as for Senators.

If any person thus chosen a Counselor, shall be elected Governor of member of
either branch of the Legislature, and shall accept the trust; or if any person
elected a Counselor, shall refuse to accept the office; or in case of the
death, or resignation, or removal of any Counselor out of the State; the
Governor may issue a precept for the election of a new Counselor in that
county where such vacancy shall happen; and the choice shall be in the same
manner as before directed: And the Governor shall have fall power and authority
to convene the Council, from time to time, at his discretion; and with them, or
the majority of them, may and shall from time to time hold a Council for
ordering and directing the affairs of the State according to the laws of the
land.

The members of the Council may be impeached by the House and tried by the
Senate, for bribery, corruption, mal-practice, or mal-administration.

The resolutions and advice of the Council shall be recorded by the Secretary
in a register, and signed by all the members present agreeing thereto; and this
record may be called for at any time by either House of the Legislature; and
any member of the Council may enter his opinion contrary to the resolution of
the majority, with the reasons for such opinion.

The Legislature may, if the public good shall hereafter require (...), divide
the State into five districts, as nearly equal as may be, governing themselves
by the number of rate^ble polls, and proportion of public taxes; each district
to elect a Counselor: And in case of such division, the manner of the choice
shall be conformable to the present mode of election in counties.

And whereas the elections appointed to be made by this Constitution on the
first Wednesday of June annually by the two Houses of the Legislature, may not
be completed on that day, the said elections may be adjourned from day to day,
until the same be completed; and the order of the elections shall be as
fol^ows: The vacancies in the Senate (if any) shall be first filled up: The
Governor shall then be elected, provided there shall be no choice of him by the
people: And afterward the two Houses shall proceed to fill up the vacancy (if
any) in the Council.

SECRETARY, TREASURER, COMMISSARY-GENERAL, etc.
The Secretary, Treasurer, and Commissary-General, shall be chosen by joint
ballot of the Senators and Representatives assembled in one room.

The records of the State shall be kept in the office of the Secretary, and he
shall attend the Governor and Council, the Senate, and Representatives, in
person or by Deputy, as they may require.

The Secretary, of the State shall at all times have a Deputy, to be by him
appointed; for whose conduct in office he shall be responsible: And in case of
the death, removal, or inability, of the Secretary, his Deputy shall exercise
all the duties of the office of Secretary of this State, until another shall be
appointed.

The Secretary, before he enters upon the business of his office, shall give
bond with sufficient sureties, in a reasonable sum, for the use of the State,
for the punctual performance of his trust.

COUNTY TREASURER, etc.
The County Treasurers and Registers of Deeds, shall be elected by the
inhabitants of the several towns, in the several counties in the State,
according to the method now practiced, and the laws of the State.

Prov^ded nevertheless, The Legislature shall have authority to alter the
manner of certifying the votes and the mode of electing those officers; but not
so as to deprive the people of the right they now have of electing them.

And the Legislature, on the application of the major part of the inhabitants
of any (...), shall have authority to divide the same into two districts for
registering deeds, if to them it shall appear necessary; each district to elect
a Register of Deeds: And before they enter upon the business of their offices,
shall be respectively sworn faithfully to discharge the duties thereof, and
shall severally give bond, with sufficient sureties, in a reasonable sum, for
the use of the county, for the punctual performance of their respective trusts.

JUDICIARY POWER.
The tenure that all commissioned officers shall have by law in their offices,
shall be expressed in their respective commissions -- all judicial officers,
duly appointed, commissioned and sworn, shall hold their offices during good
behavior, excepting those concerning whom there is a different provision made
in this Constitution: Provided nevertheless, the Governor, with consent of
Council, may remove them upon the address of both Houses of the Legislature.

Each branch of the Legislature, as well as the Governor and Council, shall
have authority to require the opinions of the Justices of the Superior Court,
upon important questions of law and upon solemn occasions.

In order that the people may not suffer from the long continuance in place of
any Justice of the Peace, who shall fail in discharging the important duties of
his office with ability and fidelity, all commissions of Justices of the Peace
shall become void at the expiration of five years from their respective dates,
and upon the expiration of any commission, the same may if necessary be
renewed, or another person appointed, as shall most conduce to the well being
of the State.

All causes of marriage, divorce and alimony, and all appeals from the
respective Judges of Probate, shall be heard and tried by the Superior Court
until the Legislature shall by law make other provision.

The General Court are empowered to give to Justices of the Peace, jurisdiction
in civil causes, when the damages demanded shall not exceed four pounds, and
title of real estate is not concerned; but with right of appeal to either
party, to some other Court, so that a trial by Jury in the last resort may be
had.

No person shall hold the office of Judge of any Court, or Judge of Probate, or
Sheriff of any county, after he has attained the age of seventy years.

No Judge of any Court, or Justice of the Peace, shall act as an Attorney, or
be of counsel to any party, or originate any civil suit, in matters which shall
come or be brought before him as Judge, or Justice of the Peace.

All matters relating to the Probate of Wills and granting letters of
administration, shall be exercised by the Judges of Probate, in such manner as
the Legislature have directed, or may hereafter direct: and the Judges of
Probate shall hold their Courts at such place or places, on such sixed days, as
the convenience of the people may require and the Legislature from time to time
appoint.

No Judge, or Register of Probate, shall be of counsel, act as advocate, or
receive any sees as advocate or counsel, in any probate business which is
pending, or may be brought into any Court of Probate in the county of which he
is Judge or Register.

CLERKS OF COURT.
The Judges of the Courts (those of Probate excepted) shall appoint their
respective Clerks, to hold their office during pleasure: And no such Clerk
shall act as an Attorney, or be of counsel in any cause in the Court of which
he is Clerk, nor shall be draw any writ originating a civil action.

Encouragement of Literature, etc.
Knowledge and learning, generally diffused through a community, being
essential to the preservation of a free government; and spreading the
opportunities and advantages of education through the various parts of the
country, being highly conducive to promote this end; it shall be the duty of
the legislators and magistrates, in all future periods of this government, to
cherish the interest of literature and the s^^ences, and all seminaries and
public schools, to encourage private and public institutions, rewards and
immunities for the promotion of agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades,
manufactures, and natural history of the country; to countenance and inculcate
the principles of humanity and general benevolence, public and private charity,
industry and economy, honesty and punctuality, sincerity, sobriety, and all
social affections, and generous sentiments, among the people.

Oaths and Subscriptions, Exclusion from Offices, Commissions, Writs, etc. etc.
etc.
Any person chosen Governor, Counselor, Senator, or Representative, military
or civil officer, (town officers excepted) accepting the trust, shall, before
he proceeds to execute the duties of his office, make and subscribe the
following declaration, viz.

I, A. B. do solemnly swear, that I will bear faith and true allegiance to the
State of New Hampshire, and will support the Constitution thereof. So help me
God.

I, A. B. do solemnly and sincerely swear and affirm, that I will faithfully
and impartially discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as
according to the best of my abilities, agreeably to the rules and regulations
of this Constitution, and the laws of the State of New Hampshire. So help me
God.

Any person having taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance, and the same
being filed in the Secretary's office, shall not be obliged to take said oath
again.

Provided always, When any person chosen or appointed as aforesaid, shall be of
the denomination called Quakers, or shall be scrupulous of swearing, and shall
decline taking the said oaths, such person shall take and subscribe them,
omitting the word swear, and likewise the words So help me God, subjoining
instead thereof, This I do under the pains and penalties of perjury.

And the oaths or affirmations shall be taken and subscribed by the Governor,
before the President of the Senate, in presence of both Houses of the
Legislature, and by the Senators and Representatives first elected under this
Constitution, as altered and amended, before the President of the State, and a
majority of the Council then in office, and forever afterward before the
Governor and Council for the time being; and by all other officers, before such
persons and in such manner as the Legislature shall from time to time appoint.

All commissions shall be in the name of the State of New Hampshire, signed by
the Governor and attested by the Secretary, or his Deputy, and shall have the
Great Seal of the State affixed thereto.

All writs issuing out of the Clerk's office in any of the Courts of Law, shall
be in the name of the State of New Hampshire; shall be under the seal of the
Court whence they issue, and bear test of the chief, first, or senior Justice
of the Court; but when such Justice shall be interested, then the writ shall
bear test of some other Justice of the Court to which the same shall be
returnable; and be signed by the Clerk of such Court.

All indictments, presentiments, and informations, shall conclude, against the
Peace and dignity of the State.

The estates of such persons as may destroy their own lives, shall not for that
offense be forfeited, but descend or ascend in the same manner as if such
persons had died in a natural way. Nor shall any article which shall
accidentally occasion the death of any person, be henceforth deemed a deodand,
or in any wise forfeited on account of such misfortune.

All the laws which have heretofore been adopted, used, and approved, in the
Province, Colony, or State of New Hampshire, and usually practiced on in the
Courts of Law, shall remain and be in full force, until altered and repealed by
the Legislature; such parts thereof only excepted, as are repugnant to the
rights and liberties contained in this Constitution: Provided that nothing
herein contained, when compared with the 23d Article in the Bill of Rights,
shall be construed to affect the laws already made respecting the persons, or
estates, of absentees.

The privilege and benefit of the Habeas Corpus, shall be enjoyed in this
State, in the most free, easy, cheap, expeditious, and ample manner, and shall
not be suspended by the Legislature, except upon the most urgent and pressing
occasions, and for a time not exceeding three months.

The enacting style in making and passing acts, statutes, and laws, shall be --
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives, in General Court
convened.

No Governor, or Judge of the Supreme Judicial Court, shall hold any office or
place under the authority of this State, except such as by this Constitution
they are admitted to hold, saving that the Judges of the said Court may hold
the office of Justice of the Peace throughout the State; nor shall they hold
any place or office, or receive any pension or salary, from any other State,
government, or power, whatever.

No person shall be capable of exercising at the same time, more than one of
the following offices within this State, viz. Judge of Probate, Sheriff,
Register of Deeds; and never more than two offices of profit, which may be held
by appointment of the Governor, or Governor and Council, or Senate and House of
Representatives, or Superior or Inferior Courts; military offices and offices
of Justices of the Peace excepted.

No person holding the office of Judge of any Court (except Special Judges)
Secretary, Treasurer of the State, Attorney General, Commissary-General,
military officers receiving pay from the Continent or this State (excepting
officers of the militia, occasionally called forth on an emergency) Register of
Deeds, Sheriff, or officers of the customs, including naval officers,
Collectors of excise and State and Continental taxes, hereafter appointed and
not having settled their accounts with the respective officers with whom it is
their duty to settle such accounts, members of Congress, or any person holding
any office under the United States, shall at the same time hold the office of
Governor, or have a seat in the Senate, or House of Representatives, or
Council; but his being chosen and appointed to, and accepting the same, shall
operate as a resignation of their seat in the chair, Senate, or House of
Representatives, or Council; and the place so vacated shall be filled up. No
member of the Council shall have a seat in the Senate or House of
Representatives.

No person shall ever be admitted to hold a seat in the Legislature, or any
office of trust or importance, under this government, who in the due course of
^aw has been convicted of bribery or corruption in obtaining an election or
appointment.

In a^l cases where sums of money are mentioned in this Constitution, the value
thereof shall be computed in silver at six shillings and eight pence per ounce.

To the end that there (...) be no failure of justice, or danger to the State,
by the alterations and amendments made in the Constitution, the General Court
is hereby fully authorized and directed to fix the time when the alterations
and amendments shall take effect, and make the necessary arrangements
accordingly.

It shall be the duty of the Selectmen and Assessors, of the several towns and
places in this State, in warning the first annual meeting for the choice of
Senators, after the expiration of seven years from the adoption of this
Constitution as amended, to insert expressly in the warrant, this purpose among
the others for the meeting, to wit, to take the sense of the qualified voters
on the subject of a revision of the Constitution; and the meeting being warned
accordingly (and not otherwise) the Moderator shall take the sense of the
qualified voters present, as to the necessity of a revision; and a return of
the number of votes for and against such necessity, shall be made by the Clerk,
sealed up and directed to the General Court, at their then next session; and if
it shall appear to the General Court by such return, that the sense of the
people of the State has been taken, and that in the opinion of the majority of
the qualified voters in the State, present and voting at said meetings, there
is a necessity for a revision of the Constitution, it shall be the duty of the
General Court to call a Convention for that purpose, otherwise the General
Court shall direct the sense of the people to be taken, and then proceed in the
manner before mentioned. The Delegates to be chosen in the same manner, and
proportioned as the Representatives to the General Court; provided that no
alterations shall be made in this Constitution, before the same shall be laid
before the towns and unincorporated places, and approved by two thirds of the
qualified voters present and voting on the subject.

And the same method of taking the sense of the people, as to a revision of the
Constitution, and calling a Convention for that purpose, shall be observed
afterward, at the expiration of every seven years.

This Form of Government shall be enrolled on parchment, and deposited in the
Secretary's office, and be a part of the laws of the land; and printed copies
thereof shall be prefixed to the books containing the laws of this State, in
all future editions thereof.

In Convention, held at Concord, the fifth day of September, Anno Domini, 1792.
THE returns from the several towns and ^nincorporated places, being examined,
and it appearing that the foregoing Bill of Rights and Form of Government, as
amended by the Convention, were approved by more than two thirds of the
qualified voters present in the meetings, and voting upon the question; the
same are agreed on and established by the Delegates of the people in
Convention, and declared to be the civil Constitution of the State of
New Hampshire.

SAMUEL LIVERMORE, President of the Convention. Attest, JOHN CALFE, Secretary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF MASSACHUSETTS.
A CONSTITUTION, or FRAME of GOVERNMENT, agreed upon by the Delegates of the
People of the State of Massachusetts Bay, in Convention, begun and held at
Cambridge, on the first of September, 1779, and continued by adjournments, to
the second of March, 1780.

PREAMBLE.
THE end of the institution, maintenance, and administration of government, is
to secure the existence of the body polity, to protect it, and to furnish the
individuals, who compose it, with the power of enjoying, in safety and
tranquillity, their natural rights, and the blessings of life: and whenever
these great objects are not obtained, the people have a right to alter the
government, and to take measures, necessary for their safety, prosperity, and
happiness.

The body politic is formed by a voluntary association of individuals. It is a
social compact, by which the whole people covenants with each citizen, and each
citizen with the whole people, that all shall be governed by certain laws for
the common good. It is the duty of the people, therefore, in framing a
Constitution of government, to provide for an equitable mode of making laws, as
well as for an impartial interpretation, and a faithful execution of them; that
every man may, at all times, find his security in them.

We, therefore, the people of Massachusetts, acknowledging, with grateful
hearts, the goodness of the Great Legislator of the Universe, in affording us,
in the course of his providence, an opportunity, deliberately and peaceably,
without fraud, violence, or surprise, of entering into an original, explicit,
and solemn compact with each other -- and of forming a new Constitution of
civil government, for ourselves and posterity; -- and devoutly imploring his
direction in so interesting a design, do agree upon, ordain, and establish, the
following declaration of rights, and frame of government, as the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

PART I. A Declaration of Rights, of the Inhabitants of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
ART. I. All men are born free and equal, and have certain natural, essential,
and unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and
defending their lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing, and
protecting property; in fine, that of seeking and obtaining their safety and
happiness.

II. It is the right, as well as the duty, of all men in society, publicly,
and at stated seasons, to worship the Supreme Being, the great Creator and
Preserver of the Universe. And no subject shall be hurt, molested, or
restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping God in the
manner and season, most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience; or for
his religious profession or sentiments -- provided he does not disturb the
public peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship.

III. As the happiness of a people, and the good order and preservation of
civil government, essentially depend upon piety, religion, and morality; and as
those cannot be generally diffused through a community, but by the institution
of the public worship of God, and of public instructions in piety, religion,
and morality: -- Therefore, to promote their happiness, and to secure the good
order and preservation of their government, the people of this Commonwealth
have a right to invest their Legislature with power to authorize and require,
and the Legislature shall, from time to time, authorize and require, the
several towns, parishes, precincts, and other bodies-politic, or religious
societies, to make suitable provision, at their own expense, for the
institution of the public worship of God, and for the support and maintenance
of public Protestant teachers of piety, religion, and morality, in all cases,
where such provision shall not be made voluntarily.

And the people of this Commonwealth have also a right to, and do, invest their
Legislature with authority, to enjoin, upon all the subjects, an attendance
upon the instructions of the public teachers, as aforesaid, at stated times and
seasons, if there be any, on whose instructions they can conscientiously and
conveniently attend: --

Provided, notwithstanding, that the several towns, parishes, precincts, and
other bodies-politic, or religious societies, shall, at all times, have the
exclusive right of electing their public teachers, and of contracting with
them, for their support and maintenance.

And all moneys, paid by the subject, to the support of public worship, and of
the public teachers aforesaid, shall, if he require it, be uniformly applied to
the support of the public teacher, or teachers, of his own religious sect or
denomination, provided there be any, on whose instructions he attends:
otherwise it may be paid toward the support of the teacher, or teachers, of
the parish, or precinct, in which the said moneys are raised.

And every denomination of Christians, demeaning themselves peaceably, and as
good subjects of the Commonwealth. shall be equally under the protection of the
law: and no subordination of any one sect or denomination to another, shall
ever be established by law.

IV. The people of this Commonwealth have the sole and exclusive right of
governing themselves, as a free, sovereign, and independent State; and do, and
forever hereafter shall, exercise and enjoy every power, jurisdiction, and
right, which is not, or may not hereafter, be by them expressly delegated to
the United States of America, in Congress assembled.

V. All power residing originally in the people, and being derived from them,
the several magistrates, and officers of government, vested with authority,
whether legislative, executive, or judicial, are their substitutes and agents,
and are at all times accountable to them.

VI. No man, or corporation, or association of men, have any other title, to
obtain advantages, or particular and exclusive privileges, distinct from those
of the community, than what arises from the consideration of services, rendered
to the public. And this title being, in nature, neither hereditary, nor
transmissible to children, or descendants, or relations by blood, -- the idea
of a man, born a magistrate, lawgiver, or judge, is absurd and unnatural.

VII. Government is instituted for the common good; for the protection, safety,
prosperity, and happiness of the people; and not for the profit, honor, or
private interest of any one man, family, or class of men. Therefore, the people
alone have an incontestable, unalienable, and indefeasible right, to institute
government; and to reform, alter, or totally change the same, when their
protection, safety, prosperity, and happiness, require it.

VIII. In order to prevent those, who are vested with authority, from becoming
oppressors, the people have a right, at such periods, and in such manner, as
they shall establish by their frame of government, to ca^^^ their public
officers to return to private life; and to fill up vacant places, by certain
and regular elections and appointments.

IX. All elections ought to be free; and all the inhabitants of this
Commonwealth, having such qualifications, as they shall establish by their
frame of government, have an equal right to elect officers, and to be elected
for public employments.

X. Each individual of the society has a right to be protected by it, in the
enjoyment of his life, liberty, and property, according to standing laws. He is
obliged, consequently, to contribute his share to the expense of this
protection; to give his personal service, or an equivalent, when necessary. But
no part of the property of any individual can, with justice, be taken from him,
or applied to public uses, without his own consent, or that of the
representative body of the people. In fine, the people of this Commonwealth are
not controllable by any other laws, than those, to which their constitutional
representative body have given their consent. And whenever the public
exigencies require, that the property of any individual should be appropriated
to public uses, he shall receive a reasonable compensation therefore.

XI. Every subject of the Commonwealth ought to find a certain remedy, by
having recourse to ^^e laws, for all injuries or wrongs, which he may receive,
in his person, property, or character. He ought to obtain right and justice
freely, and without being obliged to purchase it -- completely, and without any
denial -- promptly, and without delay -- conformably to the laws.

XII. No subject shall be held to answer for any crime or offense, until the
same is fully and plainly, substantially and formally, described to him; or be
compelled to accuse, or furnish evidence against himself. And every subject
shall have a right to produce all proofs, that may be favorable to him; to
meet the witnesses against him, face to face; and to be fully heard in his
defense, by himself, or his counsel, at his election. And no subject shall be
arrested, imprisoned, despoiled, or deprived of his property, immunities, or
privileges, put out of the protection of the law, exiled, or deprived of his
life, liberty, or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the
land.

And the Legislature shall not make any law, that shall subject any person to a
capital or infamous punishment, (excepting for the government of the army and
navy) without trial by jury.

XIII. In criminal prosecutions, the verification of facts, in the vicinity
where they happen, is one of the greatest securities of the life, liberty and
property of the citizen.

XIV. Every subject has a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches,
and seizures, of his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.
All warrants, therefore, are contrary to this right, if the cause or foundation
of them be not previously supported by oath or affirmation; and if the order,
in a warrant, to a civil officer, to make search in all suspected places, or to
arrest one or more suspected persons, or to seize their property, be not
accompanied with a special designation of the persons or objects of search,
arrest, or seizure. And ^o warrant ought to be issued, but in cases, and with
the formalities, prescribed by the laws.

XV. In all controversies concerning property, and in all suits between two or
more persons, (except in cases, in which it has heretofore been otherwise used
and practiced) the parties have a right to a trial by a jury; and this method
of procedure shall be held sacred; unless, in causes arising on the high seas,
and such as relate to mariners' wages, the Legislature shall hereafter find it
necessary to alter it.

XVI. The liberty of the press is essential to the security of freedom in a
State; it ought not, therefore, to be restrained in this Commonwealth.

XVII. The people have a right to keep and to bear arms for the common defense.
And as, in time of peace, armies are dangerous to liberty, they ought not to be
maintained, without the consent of the Legislature; and the military power
shall always be held in exact subordination to the civil authority, and be
governed by it.

XVIII. A frequent recurrence to the fundamental principles of the
Constitution, and a constant adherence to those of piety, justice, moderation,
temperance, industry, and frugality, are absolutely necessary, to preserve the
advantages of liberty, and to maintain a free government. The people ought,
consequently, to have a particular attention to all those principles, in the
choice of their officers and representatives: and they have a right to require
of their lawgivers and magistrates, an exact and constant observance of them,
in the formation and execution of all laws, necessary for the good
administration of the Commonwealth.

XIX. The people have a right, in an orderly and peaceable manner, to assemble
to consult upon the common good; give instructions to their representatives;
and to request of the legislative body, by the way of addresses, petitions, or
remonstrances, redress of the wrongs done them, and of the grievances they
suffer.

XX. The power of suspending the laws, or the execution of the laws, ought
never to be exercised, but by the Legislature; or, by authority derived from
it, to be exercised in such particular cases only, as the Legislature shall
expressly provide for.

XXI. The freedom of deliberation, speech, and debate, in either House of the
Legislature, is so essential to the rights of the people, that it cannot be the
foundation of any accusation or prosecution, action, or complaint, in any other
court or place whatsoever.

XXII. The Legislature ought frequently to assemble, for the redress of
grievances, for correcting, strengthening, and confirming the laws, and for
making new laws, as the common good may require.

XXIII. No subsidy, charge, tax, impost, or duties, ought to be established,
fixed, laid, or levied, under any pretext whatsoever, without the consent of
the people, or their Representatives in the Legislature.

XXIV. Laws, made to punish for actions done before the existence of such laws,
and which have not been declared crimes by preceding laws, are unjust,
oppressive, and inconsistent with the fundamental principles of a free
government.

XXV. No subject ought, in any case, or in any time, to be declared guilty of
treason or felony by the Legislature.

XXVI. No magistrate, or court of law, shall demand excessive bail or sureties,
impose excessive fines, or inflict cruel or unusual punishments.

XXVII. In time of peace, no soldier ought to be quartered in any house,
without the consent of the owner; and in time of war, such quarters ought not
to be made, but by the civil magistrate, in a manner ordained by the
Legislature.

XXVIII. No person can, in any case, be subjected to law martial, or to any
penalties or pains, by virtue of that law, (except those employed in the army
or navy, and except the militia in actual service) but by authority of the
Legislature.

XXIX. It is essential to the preservation of the rights of every individual,
his life, liberty, property, and character, that there be an impartial
interpretation of the laws, and administration of justice. It is the right of
every citizen, to be tried by judges, as free, impartial, and independent, as
the lot of humanity will admit. It is, therefore, not only the best policy, but
for the security of the rights of the people, and of every citizen, that the
Judges of the Supreme Judicial Court should hold their offices as long as they
behave themselves well; and that they should have honorable salaries,
ascertained and established by standing laws.

XXX. In the government of this Commonwealth, the legislative department shall
never exercise the executive and judicial powers, or either of them: the
executive shall never exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either
of them: the judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive
powers, or either of them: to the end, it may be a government of laws, and not
of men.

PART II. THE FRAME OF GOVERNMENT.
The people, inhabiting the territory, formerly called the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, do hereby solemnly and mutually agree with each other, to
form themselves into a free, sovereign and independent body-politic or State,
by the name of, The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

CHAP. I. THE LEGISLATIVE POWER.
SECTION 1. THE GENERAL COURT.
ART. I. The department of legislation shall be formed by two branches, a
Senate and House of Representatives: each of which shall have a negative on the
other.

The legislative body shall assemble every year, on the last Wednesday in May,
and at such other times, as they shall judge necessary; and shall dissolve and
be dissolved, on the day next preceding the said last Wednesday in May; and
shall be styled, The General Court of Massachusetts.

II. No bill or resolve, of the Senate, or House of Representatives, shall
become a law, and have force as such, until it shall have been laid before the
Governor for his revisal: and if he, upon such revision, approve thereof, he
shall signify his approbation, by signing the same. But if he have any
objection to the passing of such bill or resolve, he shall return the same,
together with his objections thereto, in writing, to the Senate or House of
Representatives, in whichsoever the same shall have originated; who shall enter
the objections, sent down by the Governor, at large, on their records, and
proceed to re-consider the said bill or resolve. But if, after such
re-consideration, two-thirds of the said Senate or House of Representatives
shall, notwithstanding the said objections, agree to pass the same, it shall,
together with the objections, be sent to the other branch of the Legislature,
where it shall also be re-considered; and if approved by two-thirds of the
members present, it shall have the force of a law. But in all such cases, the
votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas and nays; and the names of the
persons voting for, or against, the said bill or resolve, shall be entered upon
the public records of the Commonwealth.

And in order to prevent unnecessary delays, if any bill or resolve shall not
be returned by the Governor within five days after it shall have been
presented, the same shall have the force of a law.

III. The General Court shall forever have full power and authority to erect
and constitute judicatories, and courts of record, or other courts, to be held
in the name of the Commonwealth, for the hearing, trying, and determining of
all manner of crimes, offenses, pleas, processes, plaints, actions, matters,
causes, and things whatsoever, arising or happening within the Commonwealth, or
between or concerning persons inhabiting or residing, or brought within the
same; whether the same be criminal or civil, or whether the said crimes be
capital or not capital, and whether the said pleas be real, personal, or mixed;
and for the awarding and making out of execution thereupon: -- to which courts
and judicatories, are hereby given and granted full power and authority, from
time to time, to administer oaths or affirmations, for the better discovery of
truth in any matter in controversy or depending before them.

IV. And further, full power and authority are hereby given and granted to the
said General Court, from time to time, to make, ordain and establish all manner
of who^^ some, and reasonable orders, laws, statutes, and ordinances,
directions and instructions, either with penalties, or without; (so as the same
be not repugnant or contrary to this Constitution) as they shall judge to be
for the good and welfare of this Commonwealth, and for the government and
ordering thereof, and of the subjects of the same, and for the necessary
support and defense of the government thereof; and to name and settle annually,
or provide by fixed laws, for the naming and settling all civil officers,
within the said Commonwealth, the election and constitution of whom are not
hereafter, in this form of government, otherwise provided for; and to set forth
the several duties, powers and limits, of the several civil and military
officers of this Commonwealth, and the forms of such oaths or affirmations, as
shall be respectively administered unto them, for the execution of their
several offices and places, so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to this
Constitution; and to impose and levy proportional and reasonable assessments,
rates, and taxes, upon all the inhabitants of, and persons resident, and
estates lying within the said Commonwealth; and also to impose, and levy,
reasonable duties and excises, upon any produce, goods, wares, merchandises,
and commodities whatsoever, brought into, produced, manufactured, or being
within the same; to be issued and disposed of by warrant, under the hand of the
Governor of this Commonwealth for the time being, with the advice and consent
of the Council, for the public service, in the necessary defense and support of
the government of the said Commonwealth, and the protection and preservation of
the subjects thereof, according to such acts, as are or shall be in force
within the same.

And while the public charges of government, or any part thereof, shall be
assessed on polls and estates, in the manner, that has hitherto been practiced;
-- in order that such assessments may be made with equality, there shall be a
valuation of estates, within the Commonwealth, taken anew, once in every ten
years at the least, and as much oftener as the General Court shall order.

CHAP. I. SECTION II. SENATE.
ART. I. There shall be annually elected by the freeholders and other
inhabitants of this Commonwealth, qualified as in this Constitution is
provided, forty persons, to be Counselors and Senators, for the year ensuing
their election; to be chosen by the inhabitants of the Districts, into which
the Commonwealth may, from time to time, be divided by the General Court, for
that purpose. And the General Court, in assigning the numbers to be elected by
the respective Districts, shall govern themselves by the proportion of the
public taxes paid by the said Districts; and timely make known to the
inhabitants of the Commonwealth, the limits of each District, and the number of
Counselors and Senators to be chosen therein; provided that the number of such
Districts shall be never less than thirteen; and that no District be so large
as to entitle the same to choose more than six Senators. And the several
Counties, in this Commonwealth, shall (until the General Court shall determine
it necessary to alter the said Districts) be Districts for choice of
Counselors and Senators (except that the Counties of Duke's-County and
Nantucket shall form one District for that purpose) and shall elect the
following number for Counselors and Senators, viz.

Suffolk Six Essex Six Middlesex Five Hampshire Four Cumberland One Lincoln One
York Two Duke's County and Nantucket One Worcester Five Berkshire Two
II. The Senate shall be the first branch of the Legislature; and the Senators
shall be chosen in the following manner, viz. There shall be a meeting, on the
first Monday in April, annually, forever, of the inhabitants of each town in
the several Counties of this Commonwealth; to be called by the Selectmen, and
warned in due course of law, at least seven days before the first Monday in
April, for the purpose of electing persons to be Senators and Counselors. And
at such meetings, every male inhabitant, of twenty-one years of age and
upwards, having a freehold estate, within the Commonwealth, of the annual
income of three pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds, shall have
a right to give in his vote, for the Senators, for the District, of which he is
an inhabitant. And to remove all doubts, concerning the word "inhabitant," in
this Constitution, every person shall be considered as an inhabitant, (for the
purpose of electing and being elected into any office or place within this
State) in that town, district or plantation, where he dwells or has his home.

The Selectmen of the several towns shall preside at such meetings impartially;
and shall receive the votes of all the inhabitants of such towns, present and
qualified to vote for Senators: and shall sort and count them in open town
meeting, and in presence of the Town Clerk, who shall make a fair record, in
presence of the Selectmen, and in open town meeting, of the name of every
person voted for, and of the number of votes against his name; and a fair copy
of this record shall be attested by the Selectmen and the Town Clerk, and shall
be sealed up, directed to the Secretary of the Commonwealth for the time being,
with a superscription, expressing the purport of the contents thereof, and
delivered, by the Town Clerk of such town, to the Sheriff of the county, in
which such town lies, thirty days at least before the last Wednesday in May,
annually; or it shall be delivered into the Secretary's office, seventeen days,
at least, before the said last Wednesday in May; and the Sheriff of each county
shall deliver all such certificates, by him received, into the Secretary's
office, seventeen days before the said last Wednesday in May.

And the inhabitants of plantations unincorporated (qualified as this
Constitution provides) who are or shall be empowered and required to assess
taxes upon themselves, toward the support of government, shall have the same
privilege of voting for Counselors and Senators in the plantations where they
reside, as town inhabitants have in their respective towns; and the
plantation-meetings, for that purpose, shall be held annually on the same first
Monday in April, at such place in the plantations respectively, as the
Assessors thereof shall direct; which Assessors shall have like authority, for
notifying the electors, collecting and returning the votes, as the Selectmen
and Town Clerks have in their several towns, by this Constitution. And all
other persons, living in places unincorporated (qualified as aforesaid) who
shall be assessed to the support of government by the Assessors of an adjacent
town, shall have the privilege of giving in their votes for Counselors and
Senators, in the town where they shall be assessed, and be notified of the
place of meeting, by the Selectmen of the town, where they shall be assessed,
for that purpose accordingly.

III. And that there may be a due convention of Senators on the last Wednesday
in May annually, the Governor, and five of the Council, for the time being,
shall, as soon as may be, examine the returned copies of such records; and
fourteen days before the said day, he shall issue his summons to such persons,
as shall appear to be chosen by the majority of voters, to attend on that day,
and take their seats accordingly; -- provided, nevertheless, that for ^^e first
year, the said returned copies shall be examined b^ the President and five of
the Council of the former Constitution of government; and the said President
shall, in like manner, issue his summons to the persons so elected* that they
may take their seats as aforesaid.

IV. The Senate shall be the final judge of the elections, returns and
qualifications of their own members, as pointed out in the Constitution; and
shall, on the said last Wednesday in May, annually, determine and declare, who
are elected by each District, to be Senators, by a majority of votes: and in
case there shall not appear to be the full number of Senators returned, elected
by a majority of votes for any District, the deficiency shall be supplied in
the following manner, viz. The members of the House of Representatives, and
such Senators as shall be declared elected, shall take the names of such
persons, as shall be found to have the highest number of votes in such
District, and not elected, amounting to twice the number of Senators wanting,
if there be so many voted for; and out of these, shall elect, by ballot, a
number of Senators, sufficient to fill up the vacancies in such District; and
in this manner, all such vacancies shall be filled in every District of the
Commonwealth: and in like manner, all vacancies in the Senate, arising by
death, removal out of the State, or otherwise, shall be supplied as soon as may
be, after such vacancies shall happen:

V. Provided, nevertheless, that no person shall be capable of being elected as
a Senator, who is not seized in his own right, of a freehold within this
Commonwealth, of the value of three hundred pounds at least, or possessed of
personal estate to the value of six hundred pounds at least, or of both to the
amount of the same sum; and who has not been an inhabitant of this Commonwealth
for the space of five years immediately preceding his election; and at the time
of his election he shall be an inhabitant in the Distri^^ for which he shall be
chosen.

VI. The Senate shall have power to adjourn themselves, provided such
adjournments do not exceed two days at a time.

VII. The Senate shall choose its own President, appoint its own officers, and
determine its own rules of proceedings.

VIII. The Senate shall be a court, with full authority, to hear and determine
all impeachments, made by the House of Representatives, against any officer or
officers of the Commonwealth, for misconduct and mal-administration in their
offices. But previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of the
Senate shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and determine
the charge in question, according to evidence. Their judgment, however, shall
not extend further, than to removal from office, and disqualification to hold
or enjoy any place of honor, trust or profit, under this Commonwealth: but the
party so convicted, shall be, nevertheless, liable to indictment, trial,
judgment, and punishment, according to the laws of the land.

IX. Not less than sixteen members of the Senate shall constitute a quorum for
doing business.

CHAP. I. SECT. III. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
ART. I. There shall be, in the Legislature of this Commonwealth, a
representation of the people, annually elected, and founded upon the principle
of equality.

II. And in order to provide for a representation of the citizens of this
Commonwealth, founded on the principle of equality, every corporate town,
containing one hundred and fifty rateable polls, may elect one Representative:
-- every corporate town, containing three hundred and seventy-five rateable
polls, may elect two Representatives: every corporate town, containing six
hundred rateable polls, may elect three Representatives; -- and proceeding in
that manner, making two hundred and twenty-five reateable polls the mean
increasing number, for every additional Representative: --

Provided nevertheless, that each town now incorporated, not having one hundred
and fifty rateable polls, may elect one Representative. But no place shall
hereafter be incorporated with the privilege of electing a Representative,
unless there are, within the same, one hundred and fifty rateable polls.

And the House of Representatives shall have power, from time to time, to
impose ^ines upon such towns, as shall neglect to choose and return members to
the same, agreeably to this Constitution.

The expenses of traveling to the General Assembly, and returning home, once
in every session and no more, shall be paid by the government, out of the
public treasury, to every member who shall attend as seasonably as he can, in
the judgment of the House, and does not depart without leave.

III. Every member of the House of Representatives shall be chosen by written
votes; and for one year at least, next preceding his election, shall have been
an inhabitant of, and have been seized, in his own right, of a freehold of the
value of one hundred pounds, within the town he shall be chosen to represent,
or any rateable estate, to the value of two hundred pounds; and he shall cease
to represent the said town, immediately on his ceasing to be qualified as
aforesaid.

IV. Every male person (being twenty-one years of age, and resident in any
particular town in this Commonwealth, for the space of one year next preceding)
having a freehold estate within the same town, of the annual income of three
pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds, shall have a right to vote
in the choice of a Representative, or Representatives, for the said town.

V. The members of the House of Representatives shall be chosen annually, in
the month of May, ten days, at least, before the last Wednesday of that month.

VI. The House of Representatives shall be the grand inquest of this
Commonwealth; and all impeachments, made by them, shall be heard and tried by
the Senate.

VII. All money bills shall originate in the House of Representatives: but the
Senate may propose or concur with amendments, as on other bills.

VIII. The House of Representatives shall have power to adjourn themselves;
provided such adjournment shall not exceed two days at a time.

IX. Not less than sixty members of the House of Representatives shall
constitute a quorum for doing business.

X. The House of Representatives shall be the judge of the returns, elections,
and qualifications of its own members, as pointed out in the Constitution;
shall choose their own speaker; appoint their own officers, and settle their
rules' and orders of proceeding in their own House. They shall have authority
to punish, by imprisonment, every person, (not a member) who shall be guilty of
disrespect to the House, by any disorderly or contemptuous behavior in its
presence; or who, in the town where the General Court is sitting, and during
the time of its sitting, shall threaten harm to the body or estate of any of
its members, for any thing said or done in the House; or who shall assault any
of them therefore; or who shall assault, or arrest any witness, or other person,
ordered to attend the House, in his way in going, or returning; or who shall
rescue any person arrested by the order of the House.

And no member of the House of Representatives shall be arrested, or held to
bail on mes^e process, during his going unto, returning from, or his attending
the General Assembly.

XI. The Senate shall have the same powers in the like cases; and the Governor
and Council shall have the same authority to punish in like cases: -- provided
that no imprisonment, on the warrant or order of the Governor, Council, Senate,
or House of Representatives, for either of the above described offenses, be for
a term exceeding thirty days.

And the Senate and House of Representatives may try, and determine, all cases
where their rights and privileges are concerned, and which, by the
Constitution, they have authority to try and determine, by committees of their
own members, or in such other way as they may respectively think best.

CHAP. II. EXECUTIVE POWER.
SECTION I. GOVERNOR.
ART. I. There shall be a supreme executive magistrate, who shall be styled,
The Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts; and whose title shall be,
His Excellency.

II. The Governor shall be chosen annually: and no person shall be eligible to
this office, unless, at the time of his election, he shall have been an
inhabitant of this Commonwealth, for seven years next preceding; and unless he
shall, at the same time, be seized, in his own right, of a freehold within the
Commonwealth, of the value of one thousand pounds; and unless he shall declare
himself to be of the Christian religion.

III. Those persons, who shall be qualified to vote for Senators and
Representatives, within the several towns of this Commonwealth, shall, at a
meeting, to be called for that purpose, on the first Monday of April annually,
give in their votes for a Governor, to the Selectmen, who shall preside at such
meetings; and the Town Clerk, in the presence and with the assistance of the
Selectmen, shall, in open town-meeting, sort and count the votes, and form a
list of the persons voted for, with the number of votes for each person,
against his name; and shall make a fair record of the same in the town books,
and a public declaration thereof in the said meeting; and shall, in the
presence of the inhabitants, seal up copies of the said list, attested by him
and the Selectmen, and transmit the same to the Sheriff of the county, thirty
days at least before the last Wednesday in May; and the Sheriff shall transmit
the same to the Secretary's office, seventeen days at least before the said
last Wednesday in May; or the Selectmen may cause returns of the same to be
made to the office of the Secretary of the Commonwealth, seventeen days at
least before the said day; and the Secretary shall lay the same before the
Senate, and the House of Representatives, on the last Wednesday in May, to be
by them examined: and in case of an election, by a majority of all the votes
returned, the choice shall be by them declared and published. But if no person
shall have a majority of votes, the House of Representatives shall, by ballot,
elect two out of four persons, who had the highest number of votes, if so many
shall have been voted for; but if otherwise, out of the number voted for; and
make return to the Senate, of the two persons so elected; on which the Senate
shall proceed, by ballot, to elect one, who shall be declared Governor.

IV. The Governor shall have authority, from time to time, at his discretion,
to assemble and call together the Counselors of this Commonwealth for the time
being; and the Governor, with the said Counselors, or five of them at least,
shall, and may, from time to time, hold and keep a Council, for the ordering
and directing the affairs of the Commonwealth, agreeably to the Constitution,
and the laws of the land.

V. The Governor, with advice of Council, shall have full power and authority,
during the session of the General Court, to adjourn or prorogue the same, to
any time the two Houses shall desire; and to dissolve the same, on the day next
preceding the last Wednesday in May; and, in the recess of the said Court, to
prorogue the same, from time to time, not exceeding ninety days in any one
recess; and to call it together sooner than the time to which it may be
adjourned or prorogued, if the welfare of the Commonwealth shall require the
same. And in case of any infectious distemper prevailing in the place, where
the said Court is next at any time to convene, or any other cause happening,
whereby dang^r may arise to the health or lives of the members from their
attendance, he may direct the session to be held at some other the most
convenient place within the State.

And the Governor shall dissolve the said General Court, on the day next
preceding the last Wednesday in May.

VI. In cases of disagreement between the two Houses, with regard to the
necessity, expediency, or time of adjournment, or prorogation, the Governor,
with advice of the Council, shall have a right to adjourn or prorogue the
General Court, not exceeding ninety days, as he shall determine the public good
shall require.

VII. The Governor of this Commonwealth, for the time being, shall be the
commander in chief of the army and navy, and of all the military forces of the
State, by sea and land; and shall have fall power, by himself, or by any
commander, or other officer or officers, from time to time, to train, instruct,
exercise and govern the militia and navy; and for the special defense and
safety of the Commonwealth, to assemble in martial ar^y, and put in warlike
posture, the inhabitants thereof; and to lead and conduct them, and with them
to ^ncounter, rep^l, resist, expel, and pursue, by force of arms, as well by
set as by land, within or without the limits of this Commonwealth, and also to
kill, slay, and destroy, if necessary, and conquer, by all sitting ways,
enterprises, and means whatsoever, all and every such person and persons, as
shall, at any time hereafter, in a hostile manner, attempt or enterprise the
destruction, invasion, detriment or annoyance of this Commonwealth; and to use
and exercise, over the army and navy, and over the militia in actual service,
the law-martial, in time of war or invasion, and also in time of reb^llion
(declared by the Legislature to ex^^t) as occasion shall necessarily require;
and to take and (...), b^ a^l ways and mean, whatsoever, all and every such
person or persons (with their ships, arms, ammunition, and other goods) as
shall, in a hostile manner, invade, or attempt the invading, conquering, or
annoying this Commonwealth; and that the Governor be entrusted with all these
and other powers, incident to the offices of captain general, and commander in
chief, and admiral, to be exercised agreeably to the rules and regulations of
the Constitution, and the laws of the land, and not otherwise.

Provided, that the said Governor shall not, at any time hereafter, by virtue
of any power, by this Constitution granted, or hereafter to be granted to him
by the Legislature, transport any of the inhabitants of this Commonwealth, or
oblige them to march out of the limits of the same, without their free and
voluntary consent, or the consent of the General Court; except so far as may be
necessary to march or transport them by land or water, for the defense of such
part of the State, to which they cannot otherwise conveniently have access.

VIII. The power of pardoning offenses, except such as persons may be convicted
of before the Senate by an impeachment of the House, shall be in the Governor,
by and with the advice of Council: but no charter of pardon, granted by the
Governor, with advice of the Council, before conviction, shall avail the party
pleading the same, notwithstanding any general or particular expressions
contained therein, descriptive of the offense or offenses intended to be
pardoned.

IX. All judicial officers, the Attorney General, the Solicitor General, all
Sheriffs, Coroners, and Registers of Probate, shall be nominated and appointed
by the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Council; and every
such nomination shall be made by the Governor, and made at least seven days
prior to such appointment.

X. The captains and subalterns of the militia shall be elected by the written
votes of the train band and alarm list of their respective companies, of twenty
one years of age and upwards. The field officers of regiments shall be elected
by the written votes of the captains and subalterns of their respective
regiments. The brigadiers shall be elected in like manner, by the field
officers of their respective brigades. And such officers, so elected, shall be
commissioned by the Governor, who shall determine their rank.

The Legislature shall, by standing laws, direct the time and manner of
convening the electors, and of collecting votes, and of certifying to the
Governor the officers elected.

The major generals shall be appointed by the Senate and House of
Representatives, each having a negative upon the other; and be commissioned by
the Governor.

And if the electors of brigadiers, field officers, captains, or subalterns,
shall neglect or refuse to make such elections, after being duly notified,
according to the laws for the time being, then the Governor, with advice of
Council, shall appoint suitable persons to sill such offices.

And no officer, duly commissioned to command in the militia, shall be removed
from his office, but by the address of both Houses to the Governor, or by fair
trial in court martial, pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth for the time
being.

The commanding officers of regiments shall appoint their adjutants and
quartermasters; the brigadiers their brigade majors; and the major generals
their aides; and the Governor shall appoint the adjutant general.

The Governor, with advice of Council, shall appoint all officers of the
Continential army, whom (by the Confederation of the United States) it is
provided that this Commonwealth shall appoint, as also all officers of forts
and garrisons.

The divisions of the militia, into brigades, regiments and companies, made in
pursuance of the militia laws now in force, shall be considered as the proper
divisions of the militia of this Commonwealth, until the same shall be altered
in pursuance of some future law.

XI. No moneys shall be issued out of the treasury of this Commonwealth, and
disposed of (except such sums, as may be appropriated for the redemption of
bills of credit or Treasurer's notes, or for the payment of interest arising
thereon) but by warrant, under the hand of the Governor for the time being,
with the advice and consent of the Council, for the necessary defense and
support of the Commonwealth -- and for the protection and preservation of the
inhabitants thereof, agreeably to the acts and resolves of the General Court.

XII. All public boards, the commissary-general, all superintending officers of
public magazines and stores, belonging to this Commonwealth, and all commanding
officers of forts and garrisons within the same, shall, once in every three
months, officially, and without requisition, and at other times, when required
by the Governor, deliver to him an account of all goods, stores, provisions,
ammunition, cannon with their appendages, and small arms with their
accoutrements, and of all other public property whatever under their care
respectively; distinguishing the quantity, number, quality and kind of each, as
particularly as may be; together with the condition of such forts and
garrisons. And the said commanding officer shall exhibit to the Governor, when
required by him, true and exact plans of such forts, and of the land and sea,
or harbor or harbors adjacent.

And the said boards, and all public officers, shall communicate to the
Governor, as soon as may be, after receiving the same, all letters, dispatches,
and intelligences of a public nature, which shall be directed to them
respectively.

XIII. As the public good requires, that the Governor should not be under the
undue influence of any of the members of the General Court -- by a dependence
on them for his support -- that be should, in all cases, act with freedom for
the benefit of the public -- that he should not have his attention necessarily
diverted from that object, to his private concerns -- and that he should
maintain the dignity of the Commonwealth, in the character of its chief
magistrate, it is necessary that he should have an honorable stated salary, of
a sixed and permanent value, amply sufficient for those purposes, and
established by standing laws: and it shall be among the first ^cts of the
General Court, after the commencement of this Constitution, to establish such
salary by law accordingly.

Permanent and honorable salaries shall also be established by law, for the
Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court.

And if it shall be found, that any of the salaries aforesaid, so established,
are insufficient, they shall, from time to time, be enlarged, as the General
Court shall judge proper.

CHAP. II. SECT. II. LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR.
ART. I. There shall be annually elected a Lieutenant Governor of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whose title shall be, His Honor; and who shall
be qualified, in point of religion, property, and residence in the
Commonwealth, in the same manner with the Governor: and the day and manner of
his election, and the qualifications of the electors, shall be the same as are
required in the election of a Governor. The return of the votes for this
officer, and the declaration of his election shall be in the same manner: and
if no one person shall be found to have a majority of all the votes returned,
the vacancy shall be silled by the Senate and House of Representatives, in the
same manner as the Governor is to be elected in case no one person shall have a
majority of the votes of the people to be Governor.

II. The Governor, and, in his absence, the Lieutenant Governor, shall be
President of the Council; but shall have no vote in Council: and the
Lieutenant Governor shall always be a member of the Council, except when the
chair of the Governor shall be vacant.

III. Whenever the chair of the Governor shall be vacant, by reason of his
death, or absence from the Commonwealth, or otherwise, the Lieutenant Governor
for the time being, shall, during such vacancy, perform all the duties
incumbent upon the Governor, and shall have and exercise all the powers and
authorities, which, by this Constitution, the Governor is vested with, when
personally present.

CHAP. II. SECT. III. Souncil, and the Manner of settling Elections by the
Legislature.
ART. I. There shall be a Council, for advising the Governor in the executive
part of government, to consist of nine persons, besides the
Lieutenant Governor, whom the Governor for the time being, shall have full
power and authority, from time to time, at his discretion, to assemble and call
together. And the Governor, with the said Counselors, or five of them at
least, shall and may, from time to time, hold and keep a Council, for the
ordering and directing the affairs of the Commonwealth, according to the laws
of the land.

II. Nine Counselors shall be annually chosen, from among the persons returned
for Counselors and Senators, on the last Wednesday in May, by the joint ballot
of the Senators and Representatives assembled in one room. And in case there
shall not be found, upon the first choice, the whole number of nine persons,
who will accept a feat in the Council, the deficiency shall be made up by the
electors aforesaid, from among the people at large; and the number of Senators
left, shall constitute the Senate for the year. The seats of the persons, thus
elected from the Senate, and accepting the trust, shall be vacated in the
Senate.

III. The Counselors, in the civil arrangements of the Commonwealth, shall
have rank next after the Lieutenant Governor.

IV. Not more than two Counselors shall be chosen out of my one district of
this Commonwealth.

V. The resolutions and advice of the Council shall be recorded in a register,
and signed by the members present; and this record may be called for, at any
time, by either House of the Legislature; and any member of the Council may
insert his opinion, contrary to the resolution of the majority.

VI. Whenever the office of the Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall be
vacant, by reason of death, absence, or otherwise, then the Council, or the
major part of them, shall, during such vacancy, have full power and authority
to do and execute all and every such acts, matters, and things, as the Governor
or the Lieutenant Governor might or could, by virtue of this Constitution, do
or execute, if they or either of them were personally present.

VII. And whereas the elections, appointed to be made by this Constitution, on
the last Wednesday in May annually, by the two Houses of the Legislature, may
not be completed on that day, the said elections may be adjourned, from day to
day, until the same shall be completed. And the order of elections shall as be
follows: the vacancies in the Senate, if any, shall first be filled up; the
Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall then be elected, provided there should
be no choice of them by the people: and afterward the two Houses shall proceed
to the election of the Council.

CHAP. II. SECT. IV. SECRETARY, TREASURER, COMMISSARY. etc.
ART.I. The Secretary, Treasurer, and Receiver General, and the Commissary
General, Notaries Public, and Naval Officers, shall be chosen annually, by
joint ballot of the Senators and Representatives in one room. And that the
citizens of this Commonwealth may be assured, from time to time, that the
moneys remaining in the public treasury, upon the settlement and liq^idation of
the public accounts, are their property, no man shall be eligible as Treasurer
and Receiver General, more than five years successively.

II. The records of the Commonwealth shall be kept in the office of the
Secretary, who may appoint his deputies, for whose conduct he shall be
accountable: and he shall attend the Governor and Council, the Senate and House
of Representatives, in person, or by his deputies, as they shall respectively
require.

CHAP. III JUDICIARY POWER.
ART. I. The tenure that all commission officers shall by law have in their
offices shall be expressed in their respective commissions. All judicial
officers, duly appointed, commissioned and sworn, shall hold their offices
during good behavior, excepting such, concerning whom there is different
provision made in this Constitution; provided, neverth^l^ss, the Governor, with
consent of the Council, may remove them upon the address of both Houses of the
Legislature.

II. Each branch of the Legislature, as well as the Governor and Council, shall
have authority to require the opinions of the Justices of the Supreme Judicial
Court upon important questions of law, and upon solemn occasions.

III. In order that the people may not suffer from the long continuance in
place of any Justice of the Peace, who shall fail of discharging the important
duties of his office with ability or fidelity, all commissions of Justices of
the Peace shall expire and become void, in the term of seven years from their
respective dates: and upon the expiration of any commission, the same may, if
necessary, be renewed, or another person appointed, as shall most conduce to
the well-being of the Commonwealth.

IV. The Judges of Probate of Wills, and for granting letters of
administration, shall hold their courts at such place or places, on fixed days,
as the convenience of the people shall require. And the Legislature shall, from
time to time, hereafter appoint such times and places; until which
appointments, the said courts shall be holden at the times and places, which
the respective Judges shall direct.

V. All causes of marriage, divorce, and alimony, and all appeals from Judges
of Probate shall be heard and determined by the Governor and Council, until the
Legislature shall, by law, make other provision.

CHAP. IV. DELEGATES TO CONGRESS.
The Delegates of this Commonwealth to the Congress of the United States,
shall, some time in the month of June annually, be elected by the joint ballot
of the Senate and House of Representatives, assembled together in one room; to
serve in Congress for one year, to commence on the first Monday in November
then next ensuing. They shall have commissions, under the hand of the Governor,
and the Great Seal of the Commonwealth; but may be recalled at a^y time within
the year, and others chosen and comm^ss^^ned in the same manner, in their stead.

CHAP. V. The University at Cambridge, and Encouragement of Literature, etc.
SECT. 1. THE UNIVERSITY.
ART. I. Whereas our wise and pious ancestors, so early as the year one
thousand six hundred and thirty six, laid the foundation of Harvard college; in
which university many persons of great eminence have, by the blessing of God,
been initiated in those arts and sciences, which qualified them for public
employments, both in church and state; and whereas the encouragement of arts
and sciences, and all good literature, tends to the honor of God, the
advantage of the Christian religion, and the great benefit of this and the
other United States of America: It is declared, that the President and Fellows
of Harvard college, in their corporate capacity, and their successors in that
capacity, their officers and servants, shall have, hold, use, exercise and
enjoy all the powers, authorities, rights, liberties, privileges, immunities
and franchises, which they now have, or are entitled to have, hold, use,
exercise and enjoy: and the same are hereby ratified and confirmed unto them,
the said President and Fellows of Harvard college, and to their successors, and
to their officers and servants, respectively, forever.

II. And whereas there have been, at sundry times, by diverse persons, gifts,
grants, devises of houses, lands, tenem^nts, goods, chattels, legacies, and
conveyances, heretofore made, either to Harvard college, in Cambridge, in New
England, or to the President and Fellows of Harvard college, or to the said
college, by some other description, under several charters successively -- it
is declared, that all the said gifts, grants, devises, legacies, and
conveyances, are hereby forever confirmed unto the President and Fellows of
Harvard college, and to their successors in the capacity aforesaid, according
to the true intent and meaning of the donor or donors, grantor or grantors,
devisor or devisors.

III. And whereas, by an act of the General Court of the colony of
Massachusetts Bay, passed in the year one thousand six hundred and forty-two,
the Governor and Deputy governor, for the time being, and all the magistrates
of that jurisdiction, were, with the President, and a number of the Clergy in
the said act described, constituted the overseers of Harvard college -- And it
being necessary, in this new Constitution of government, to ascertain who shall
be deemed successors to the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and magistrates --
it is declared, that the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Senate of
this Commonwealth, are, and shall be deemed their successors; who, with the
President of Harvard college, for the time being, together with the ministers
of the Congregational churches, in the towns of Cambridge, Watertown,
Charlestown, Boston, Roxbury, and Dorchester, mentioned in the said act, shall
be, and hereby are, vested with all the powers and authority belonging, or in
any way appertaining, to the overseers of Harvard college; -- provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Legislature of this
Commonwealth from making such alterations in the government of the said
university, as shall be conducive to its advantage, and the interest of the
republic of letters, in as full a manner as might have been done by the
Legislature of the late Province of the Massachusetts Bay.

CHAP. V. SECTION I. The Encouragement of Literature.
Wisdom and knowledge, as well as virtue, diffused generally among the body of
the people, being necessary for the preservation of their rights and liberties;
and as these depend on spreading the opportunities and advantages of education
in the various parts of the country, and among the different orders of the
people, it shall be the duty of the Legislatures and magistrates, in all future
periods of this Commonwealth, to cherish the interests of literature and the
sciences, and all seminaries of them; especially the university at Cambridge,
public schools and grammar schools in the towns; to encourage private societies
and public institutions, by rewards and immunities, for the promot^on of
agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades, manufac^ures, and a natural
history of the country; to countenance and inculcate the principles of humanity
and general benevolence, public and private charity, industry, and frugality,
honesty and punctuality in their dealings; sincerity, good humor, and all
social affections and generous sentiments among the people.

CHAP. VI. Oaths and Subscriptions; Incompatibility of and Exclusion from
Offices; pecuniary Qualifications; Commissions; Writs; Confirmation of Laws;
Habeas Corpus; the enacting Style; Continuance of Officers; Provision for a
future Revisal ^f the Constitution, etc.
ART. I. Any person, chosen Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Counselor, Senator,
or Representative, and accepting the trust, shall, before he proceed to execute
the duties of his place or office, make and subscribe the following
declaration, viz.

"I, A. B. do declare, that I believe the Christian religion, and have a firm
persuasion of its truth; and that I am seized and possessed, in my own right,
of the property required by the Constitution, as one qualification for the
office or place to which I am elected."

And the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and Counselors, shall make and
subscribe the said declaration, in the presence of the two Houses of Assembly;
and the Senators and Represen^atives first elected under this Constitution,
before the President and five of the Council of the former Constitution; and,
forever afterward, before the Governor and Council for the time being.

And every person, chosen to either of the places or offices afore^^^d, as also
any person, appointed or commissioned to any judicial, executive, military, or
other office under the government, shall, before he enters on the discharge of
the business of his place or office, take and subscribe the following
declaration, and oaths or affirmations, viz.

"I, A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare,
that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is, and of right ought to be, a free,
sovereign and independent State; and I do swear, that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the said Commonwealth, and that I will defend the same,
against traitorous conspiracies, and all hostile attempts whatsoever: And that
I do renounce and abjure all allegiance, subjection, and obedience, to the
King, Queen or government of Great Britain, as the case may be, and every other
foreign power whatsoever: And that no foreign prince, person, prelate, state or
potentate, has, or ought to have, any jurisdiction, superiority, pre-eminence,
authority, dispensing, or other power, in any matter, civil, ecclesiastical, or
spiritual, within this Commonwealth; except the authority and power which is or
may be vested, by their constituents, in the Congress of the United States: And
I do further testify and declare, that no man or body of men has or can have
any right to absolve or discharge me from the obligation of this oath,
declaration or affirmation; and that I do make this acknowledgment, profession,
testimony, declaration, denial, renunciation and abjuration, heartily and
truly, according to the common meaning and acceptance of the foregoing words,
without any equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. So
help me God.

"I, A. B. do solemnly swear and affirm, that I will faithfully and impartially
discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as ^leftblank;, according
to the best of my abilities and understanding, agreeably to the rules and
regulations of the Constitution, and the laws of this Commonwealth. So help me.
God."

Provided always, that when any person chosen or appointed as aforesaid, shall
be of the denomination of the people called Quakers, and shall decline taking
the said oaths, he shall make his affirmation in the foregoing form, and
subscribe the same, omitting the words, "I do swear," "and abjure," "oath,"
"and abjuration," in (...) first oath; and in the second oath, the words,
"swear and;" and in each of them the words, "So help me G^d;" subjoini^g,
instead thereof, "This I ^o under the pains and p^^c^^es of perjury."

And the said oaths or affirmations shall be taken and subscribed, by the
Governor, L^eutenant-Governor, and Counselors, before the President of the
Senate, in the presence of the two Houses of Assembly; and by the Senators and
Representatives first elected under this Constitution, before the President,
and five of the Council, of the former Constitution; and, forever afterward,
before the Governor and Council for the time being: and by the residue of the
officers aforesaid, before such persons and in such manner, as from time to
time shall be prescribed by the Legislature.

II. No Governor, Lieutenant Governor or Judge of the Supreme Judical Court,
shall hold any other office, or place, under the authority of this
Commonwealth, except such as by this Constitution they are admitted to hold,
saying that the Judges of the said Court may hold the offices of Justices of
the Peace through the State; nor shall they hold any other place or office, or
receive any pension or salary, from any other State, or government, or power,
whatever.

No person shall be capable of holding or exercising, at the same time, more
than one of the following offices within this State, viz. Judge of Probate,
Sheriff, Register of Probate, or Register of Deeds: and never more than any two
offices, which are to be held by appointment of the Governor, or the Governor
and Council, or the Senate, or the House of Representatives, or by the election
of the people of the State at large, or of the people of any county, (military
offices, and the office of Justice of the Peace excepted) shall be held by one
person.

No person, holding the office of Judge of the Supreme Judicial Court,
Secretary, Atrorney-General, Solicitor-General, Treasurer or Receiver-General,
Judge of Probate, Commissary-General; President, Professor, or Instructor of
Harvard college; Sheriff, Clerk of the House of Representatives, Register of
Probate, Register of Deeds, Clerk of the Supreme Judicial Court, Clerk of the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas, or Officer of the Customs, (including in this
description naval officers) shall at the same time have a seat in the Senate or
House of Representatives: but their being chosen or appointed to, and accepting
the same, shall operate as a resignation (...) ^^^ir seat in the Senate or
House of R^presentatives; and the place so vacated shall be filled up.

And the same rule shall take place, in case any Judge of the said Supreme
Judicial Court, or Judge of Probate. shall accept a sent in Council; or any
Counselor shall accept of either of those offices or places.

And no person shall ever be admitted to hold a seat in the Legislature, or any
office of trust or importance under the government of this Commonwealth, who
shall, in the due course of law, have been convicted of bribery, or corruption,
in obtaining an election or appointment.

III. In all cases, where sums of money are mentioned in this Constitution, the
value thereof shall be computed in silver, at six shillings and eight pence per
ounce; and it shall be in the power of the Legislature, from time to time, to
increase such qualifications, as to property, of the persons to be elected to
offices, as the circumstances of the Commonwealth shall require.

IV. All commissions shall be in the name of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
signed by the Governor, and attested by the Secretary or his Deputy, and have
the Great Seal of the Commonwealth affixed thereto.

V. All writs, issuing out of the Clerk's office, in any of the Courts of law,
shall be in the name of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: they shall be under
the seal of the Court from whence they issue: they shall bear test of the first
Justice of the Court, to which they shall be returnable, (who is not a party)
and be signed by the Clerk of such Court.

VI. All the laws, which have heretofore been adopted, used and approved in the
Province, Colony, or State of Massachusetts Bay, and usually practiced on in
the Courts of law, shall still remain and be in full force, until altered or
repealed by the Legislature: such parts only excepted as are repugnant to the
rights and liberties contained in this Constitution.

VII. The privilege and benefit of (...) writ of Habeas Corpus shall be enjoyed
in this Commonwealth, in the most free, easy, cheap, expeditious and ample
manner; and shall not be suspended by the Legislature, except upon the most
urgent and pressing occasions, and for a limited time, not exceeding twelve
months.

VIII. The enacting style, in making and passing all acts, statutes, and laws,
shall be, "Be it enacted by the Senate, and House of Representatives, in
General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same."

IX. To the end there may be no failure of justice, or danger arise to the
Commonwealth, from a^change of the form of government, -- all officers, civil
and military, holding commissions under the government and people of
Massachusetts Bay in New England, and all other officers of the said government
and people, at the time this Constitution shall take effect, shall have, hold,
use, exercise, and enjoy, all the powers and authority to them granted or
committed, until other persons shall be appointed in their stead; and all
Courts of law shall proceed in the execution of the business of their
respective departments; and all the executive and legislative officers, bodies
and powers shall continue in full force in the enjoyment and exercise of all
their trusts, employments, and authority; until the General Court, and the
supreme and executive officers, under this Constitution, are designated and
invested with their respective trusts, powers, and authority.

X. In order the more effectually to adhere to the principles of the
Constitution, and to correct those violations when by any means may be made
therein, as well as to form such alterations as from experience shall be found
necessary, the General Court, which shall be of ^^e year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, shall issue precepts to the Selectmen
of the several towns and to the Assessors of the ^^incorporated plantations,
directing them to convene the qualified voters of their respective towns and
plantations, for the purpose of collecting their sentiments, on the necessity
or expediency of revising the Constitution in order to amendments.

And if it shall appear, by the returns made, that two thirds of the qualified
voters throughout the State, who shall assemble and vote in consequence of the
said precepts, are in favor of such revision or amendment, the General Court
shall issue precepts, or direct them to be issued from the Secretary's office,
to the several towns, to elect Desegates to meet in Convention, for the purpose
aforesaid.

The said Delegates to be chosen in the same manner and proportion as their
Representatives, in the second branch of the Legislature, are by this
Constitution to be chosen.

XI. This form of government shall be enrolled on parchment, and deposited in
the Secretary's office, and be a part of the laws of the land; and printed
copies thereof shall be prefixed to the book containing the laws of this
Commonwealth, in all future editions of the said laws.

The foregoing is the Constitution or Form of Government for the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, as agreed upon by the Delegates of the People in Convention,
after it had been approved by the People; whose approbation appeared by the
returns from the several towns and plantations, received and examined in the
Convention, previously to its dissolution, on the sixteenth day of June, at the
year of our LORD One thousand seven hundred and eighty. JAMES BOWDOIN,
President of the Convention. Attest. SAMUEL BARRETT, Secretary.
N. B. By virtue of a Resolve of the Convention, June ^5, 1780, the
administration of government, agreeably to this Constitution, commenced the
twenty-fifth day of October, 1780; the necessary elections being previously
made by the People of the Commonwealth, pursuant to the said Resolve.



THE CHARTER OF RHODE ISLAND.
RHODE ISLAND CHARTER, granted by King CHARLES II. in the fourteenth Year of
his Reign.
Quintadecima pars patentium, Anno regni regis Caroli secundi quintodecimo.
CHARLES the Second, by the grace of God, etc.
to all to whom these Presents shall come, greeting.
Whereas we have been informed, by the petition of our trusty and well beloved
subjects, John Clarke, on the behalf of Benedict Arnold, William Brenton,
William Codington, Nicholas Easton, William Boulston, John Porter, John Smith,
Samuel Gorton, John Weeks, Roger Williams, Thomas Olney, Gregory Dexter, John
Cogeshall, Joseph Clarke, Randall Houlden, John Green, John Room, Samuel
Wildbore, William Field, James Barker, Richard Tew, Thomas Harris, and William
Dyre, and the rest of the purchasers, and free inhabitants of our island called
Rhode Island, and the rest of the Colony of Providence Plantations, in the
Narraganset bay, in New England in America -- That they, pursuing with peace
and loyal minds their sober, serious, and religious intentions, of godly
edifying themselves, and one another, in the holy Christian faith and worship
as they were persuaded together with the gaining over and conversion of the
poor ignorant Indian natives, in those parts of America, to the sincere
profession and obedience of the same faith and worship, did not only, by the
consent and good encouragement of our royal progenitors, transport themselves,
out of this kingdom of England, into America: but also since their arrival
there after their first settlement amongst other of our subjects in those
parts, for the avoiding of discord, and those many evils which were likely to
ens^e upon those our subjects, not being able to bear, in those remote parts,
their different apprehensions in religions concernments; and in pursuance of
the aforesaid ends, did once again leave their desirable stations and
habitations, and with excessive labor and travel, hazard and charge, did
transplant themselves into the midst of the Indian natives. who, as (...) are
informed, are the most potent princes and people of (...) that country; where,
by the good providence of God, (from whom the Plantations have taken their
name) upon their labor and industry, they have not only been preserved to
admiration, but have increased and prospered, and are seized and possessed, by
purchase and consent of the said natives, to their full content, of such lands,
islands, rivers, harbors, and roads, as are very convenient both for
plantations, and also for building of ships, supply of pipe-staves, and other
merchandise, which lie very commodious in many respects for commerce, and to
accommodate our southern plantations, and may much advance the trade of this
our realm, and greatly enlarge the territories thereof; they having, by near
neighborhood to, and friendly society with, the great body of Narraganset
Indians, given them encouragement, of their own accord, to subject themselves,
their people and lands unto us; whereby, as is hoped, there may, in time, by
the blessing of God upon their endeavors, be laid a sure foundation of
happiness to all America: --

And whereas, in their humble address, they have freely declared, that it is
much on their hearts (if they be permitted) to hold forth a lively experiment,
that a most flourishing civil State may stand, and best be maintained, and that
among our English subjects, with a full liberty in religious concernments; and
that true piety, rightly grounded upon gospel principles, will give the best
and greatest security to sovereignty, and will lay in the hearts of men the
strongest obligations to true loyalty: --

Now, know ye, that we -- (being willing to encourage the hopeful undertaking
of our said loyal and loving subjects, and to secure them in the free exercise
and enjoyment of all their civil and religious rights appertaining to them, as
our loving subjects; and to preserve unto them that liberty, in the true
Christian faith, and worship of God, which they have sought (with so much
travel, and with peaceable minds and loyal subjection to our royal progenitors
and ourselves) to enjoy; and because some of the people and inhabitants of the
same Colony cannot, in their private opinion, conform to the public exercise of
religion, according to the liturgy, form, and ceremonies of the Church of
England, or take or subscribe the oaths and articles, made and established in
that behalf: and for that the same, by reason of the remote distances of those
places, will, as we hope, be no breach of the unity and uniformity established
in this nation --) have therefore thought fit, and do hereby publish, grant,
ordain and declare that our royal will and pleasure is --

That no person within the said Colony, at any time hereafter, shall be anywise
molested, punished, disquieted, or called in question, for any differences in
opinion in matters of religion, who do not actually disturb the civil peace of
our said Colony; but that all and every person and persons may, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, freely and fully have and enjoy his and their
own judgments and consciences, in matters of religious concernment, throughout
the tract of land hereafter mentioned; they behaving themselves peaceably and
quietly, and not using this liberty to licentiousness and profaneness, nor to
the civil injury or outward disturbance of others; -- any law, statute or
clause therein contained, or to be contained, usage or custom of this realm, to
the contrary hereof in anywise notwithstanding.

And that they may be in the better capacity to defend themselves, in their
just rights and liberties, against all the enemies of the Christian faith, and
others, in all respects -- we have further thought fit, and at the humble
petition of the persons aforesaid, are graciously pleased to declare,

That they shall have and enjoy the benefit of our late act of indemnity, and
free pardon, as the rest of our subjects in other (...) dominions and
territories have; and to create and make them a body politic or corporate, with
the powers or privileges herein after mentioned. And accordingly, our will and
pleasure is, and of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, we
have ordained, constituted and declared, and by these presents, for us, our
heirs and successors, do ordain, constitute, and declare, that they the said
William Brenton, William Codington, Nicholas Easton, Benedict Arnold; William
Boulston, John Porter, Samuel Gorton, John Smith, John Weeks, Roger Williams,
Thomas Olney, Gregory Dexter, John Cogeshall, Joseph Clarke, Randall Houlden,
John Green, John Room, William Dyre, Samuel Wildbore, Richard Tew, William
Field, Thomas Harris, James Barker, Rainsborrow, Williams and John Nickson, and
all such others as are now, or hereafter shall be admitted free of the Company
and Society of our Colony of Providence Plantations, in the Narraganset Bay, in
New England, shall be, from time to time, and forever hereafter, a body
corporate and politic, in fact and name, by the name of the Governor and
Company of the English Colony of Rhode Island, and Providence Plantations, in
New England in America; and that by the same name, they and their successors
shall and may have perpetual succession, and shall and may be persons able and
capable in the law to sue and be sued, to plead and be impleaded, to answer and
to be answered unto, to defend and to be defended, in all and singular suits,
causes, quarrels, matters, actions and things, of what kind or nature soever;
and also to have, take, possess, acquire, and purchase lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, or any goods, or chattels, and the same to lease, grant, demise,
alien, bargain, sell, and dispose of, at their own will and pleasure, as other
our liege people of this our realm of England, or any corporation or body
politic within the same, may lawfully do:

And further, that they the said Governor and Company, and their successors,
shall, and may, forever hereafter, have a common seal, to serve and use for all
matters, causes, things, and affairs whatsoever, of them and their successors:
and the same seal to alter, change, break, and make new, from time to time, at
their will and pleasure, as they shall think sit.

And farther, we will and ordain, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, declare and appoint, that, for the better ordering and managing of
the affairs and business of the said Company and their successors, there shall
be one Governor, one Deputy Governor, and ten Assistants, to be from time to
time constituted, elected, and chosen, out of the freem^n of the said Company,
for the time being, in such manner and form as is hereafter in these presents
expressed; which said officers shall apply themselves to take care for the best
disposing and ordering of the general business and affairs of, and concerning
the lands and hereditaments herein after mentioned to be granted, and the
Plantation thereof, and the government of the people there.

And for the better execution of our royal pleasure herein, we do, for us, our
heirs and successors, assign, name, constitute and appoint the aforesaid
Benedict Arnold to be the first and present Governor of the said Company; and
the said William Brenton to be the Deputy Governor; and the said William
Boulston, John Porter, Roger Williams, Thomas Olney, John Smith, John Green,
John Cogeshall, James Barker, William Field, and Joseph Clarke, to be the ten
present Assistants of the said Company, to continue in the said several offices
respectively, until the first Wednesday which shall be in the month of May now
next coming.

And further, we will, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors,
do ordain and grant, that the Governor of the said Company, for the time being,
or in his absence, by occasion of sickness, or otherwise, by his leave or
permission, the Deputy Governor for the time being, shall and may, from time to
time, upon all occasions, give order for the assembling of the said Company,
and calling them together, to consult and advise of the business and affairs of
the said Company; and that sorever hereafter, twice in every year, that is to
say, on every first Wednesday in the month of May, and on every last Wednesday
in October, or oftenor, in ^^se it shall be requisite, the Assistants, and such
of the freem^n of the said Company, not exceeding six persons for N^wp^rt, four
persons for each of the respective town^ of Providence, Portsmouth, and
Warwick, and two persons for each other place, town, or city, who shall be from
time to time thereunto elected or deputed, by the major part of the freemen of
the respective towns or places to which they shall be so elected or deputed,
shall have a general meeting or assembly, then and th^^e to consult, advise and
determine in and about the affa^s and business of the said Company, and
Plantation^^

And further, we do, of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and more motion,
give and grant unto the said Governor and Company of the English Colony of
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, in New England in America, and their
successors, that the Governor, or in his absence, or by his permission, the
Deputy Governor of the said Company for the time being, the Assi^tants, and
such of the freemen of the said Company as shall be so aforesaid elected or
deputed, or so many of them as shall be present at such meeting or assembly, as
aforesaid, shall be called the General Ass^mbly; and that they, or the greatest
part of them then present (whereof the Governor or De^uty-Governor, and six of
the Assistants at least, to be se^en,) shall have, and have hereby given and
granted unto them, full power and authority, from time to time, and ^ll times
hereafter, to appoint, alter and change such days, times and places of meeting,
and general assembly, as they shall think ^^t; and to choose, nominate and
appoint such and so many persons as they shall think fit, and shall be wi^li^^
to accept the same, to be free of the said Company and body p^^ti^ and them
into the same to admit; and to elect and constitute such offices and officers,
and to grant such ne^df^l commissions, as they shall think fit and requis^te
for ordering, managing, and dispatching of the affairs of the s^^d Governor and
Company, and their successors; and from time to time to make, ordain,
constitute and repeal such laws, statutes, orders and ordinances, forms, and
ceremonies of government and magistracy, as to them shall seem meet, for the
good and welfare of the said Company, and for the government and ordering of
the lands and hereditaments herein after mentioned to be granted, and of the
peop^^ that do, or at any time hereafter sh^^l inhabit, o^ b^ within the same;
so as such laws, ordinances and constitutions i^ made, b^ ^ot contrary and
^^p^^pa^t un^o^ but (as near as may be) agreeable to, the laws of this our
realm of England, considering the nature and constitution of the place and
people there; and also to appoint, order and direct, erect and settle such
places and courts of jurisdiction, for hearing and determining of all actions,
cases, matters and things, happening within the said Colony and Plantation, and
which shall be in dispute, and depending there, as they shall think fit; and
also to distinguish and set forth the several names and titles, duties, powers,
and limits of each court, office, and officers, supe^ior and inferior; and
also, to contrive and appoint such forms of oaths and attestations, not
repugnant, but (as near as may be) agreeable, as aforesaid, to the laws and
statutes of this our realm, as are convenient and requisite, with respect to
the due administration of justice, and due execution and discharge of all
offices and places of trust, by the persons that shall be therein concerned;
and also to regulate and order the way and manner of all elections to offices
and places of trust, and to prescribe, limit and distinguish the number and
bounds of all places, towns and cities, within the limits and bounds herein
after mentioned, and not herein particularly named, that have or shall have the
power of electing and sending of freemen to the said General Assembly; and also
to order, direct and authorize the imposing of lawful and reasonable fines,
mulcts, imprisonments, and executing other punishments, pecuniary and corporal,
upon offenders and delinquents, according to the course of other corporations,
within this our kingdom of England; and again, to alter, revoke, annul or
pardon, under their common seal, or otherwise, such fines, mulcts,
imprisonments, sentences, judgments and condemnations, as shall be thought fit;
and to direct, rule, order and dispose of all other matters and things, and
particularly that which relates to the making of purchases of the native
Indians, as to them shall seem meet; wher^by our said people, and inhabitants
in the said Plantations may be so religiously, peaceably, and civilly governed,
as that by their good life and orderly conversation they may win and invite the
native Indians of the country to the knowledge and obed^ence of the only true
God and Savior of mankind; willing, commanding and requiring, and by th^se
presents for us, our heirs, and successors, ordaining and appointing, that all
such laws, statutes, order, and ordinances, instructions, impositions and
directions, as shall be so made by the Governor, Deputy, Assistants, and
Freemen, or such number of them as aforesaid, and published in writing under
their common seal, shall be carefully and duly observed, kept, perfo^med, and
put in execution, according to the true intent and meaning of the same. And
th^^ ou^ letters patent or the duplicate or exemp^^fication thereof, shall be,
to all and every such officers, s^pe^i^r or inferior, from time to time, for
the putting of the same orders, laws, statutes, ordinances, instructions, and
dire^tions, in due execution, against us, our heirs and successors, a
sufficient warrant and discharge.

And further, our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby, for us, our heirs and
successors, establish and ordain, that yearly, once in the year forever
hereafter, namely, the aforesaid Wednesday in May, and at the town of Newport,
or elsewhere, if urgent occasion do require, the Governor, Deputy Governor and
Assistants of the said Company, and other officers of the said Company, or such
of them as the General Assembly shall think fit, shall be, in the said General
Court or Assembly, to be held from that day or time, newly chosen for the year
ensuing, by the greater part of the said Company for the time being, as shall
be then and there present. And if it shall happen, that the present Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assistants, by these presents appointed, or any such as
shall hereafter be newly chosen into their rooms, or any of them, or any other
the officers of the said Company, shall die, or be removed from his or their
several offices or places, before the said general day of election, (whom we do
hereby declare, for any misdemeanor or default, to be removable by the
Governor, Assistants and Company, or such greater part of them, in any of the
said public courts to be assembled, as aforesaid) that then, and in every such
case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Governor, Deputy Governor,
Assistants, and Company aforesaid, or such greater part of them so to be
assembled, as is aforesaid, in any of their assemblies, to proceed (...) a new
election of one or more of their Company, in the ^^om or place, rooms or
places, of such officer or officers so dying, or removed, according to their
directions. And immediately upon and after such election or elections made, of
such Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistant or Assistants, or any other officer
of the said Company, in manner and form aforesaid, the authority, office and
power, before given to the former Governor, Deputy Governor, and other officer
and officers so removed, in whose stead and place new shall be chosen, shall,
as to him and them, and every of them respectively, cease and terminate: --
Provided always, and our will and pleasure is, that as well such as are by
these presents appointed to be the present Governor, Deputy Governor, and
Assistants of the said Company, as those which shall succeed them, and all
other officers, to be appointed and chosen as aforesaid, shall, before the
undertaking the execution of the said offices and places respectively, give
their solemn engagement, by oath or otherwise, for the due and faithful
performance of their duties, in their several offices and places, before such
person or persons as are by these presents hereafter appointed to take and
receive the same; -- that is to say, the said Benedict Arnold, who is herein
before nominated and appointed the present Governor of the said Company, shall
give the aforesaid engagement before William Brenton, or any two of the said
Assistants of the said Company, unto whom we do by these presents give full
power and authority to require and receive the same: and the said Wm. Brenton,
who is hereby before nominated and appointed the present Deputy Governor of the
said Company, shall give the aforesaid engagement before the said Benedict
Arnold or any two of the Assistants of the said Company, unto whom we do, by
these presents, give full power and authority to require and receive the same:
and the said William Boulston, John Porter, Roger Williams, Thomas Olney, John
Smith, John Green, John Cogeshall, James Barker, William Field, and Joseph
Clarke, who are herein before nominated and appointed the present Assistants of
the Company, shall give the said engagement to their offices and places
respectively belonging, before the said Benedict Arnold and William Brenton, or
one of them, to whom respectively we do hereby give full power and authority to
require, administer or receive the same. And further our will and pleasure is,
that all and every other future Governor, or Deputy Governor, to be elected and
chosen by virtue of these presents, shall give the said engagement before two
or more of the said Assistants of the said Company for the time being, unto
whom we do, by these presents, give full power and authority to require,
administer or receive the same; and the said Assistants, and every of them, and
all and every other officer or officers, to be hereafter elected and chosen by
virtue of these presents, from time to time, shall give the like engagement to
their offices and places respectively belonging, before the Governor, or
Deputy Governor, for the time being; unto which said Governor, or
Deputy Governor, we do by these presents give full power and authority to
require, administer or receive the same accordingly.

And we do likewise, for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the
said Governor and Company, and their successors, by these presents, that for
the more peaceable and orderly government of the said Plantations, it shall and
may be lawful for the Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants, and all other
officers and ministers of the said Company, in the administration of justice,
and exercise of government, in the said Plantations, to use, exercise, and put
in execution, such methods, rules, orders and directions, (not being contrary
and repugnant to the laws and statutes of this our realm) as have been
heretofore given, used, and accustomed in such cases respectively, to be put in
practice, until at the next, or some other General Assembly, especial provision
shall be made in the cases aforesaid.

And we do further, for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the
said Governor and Company, and their successors, by these presents, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Governor, or in his absence, the
Deputy Governor, and major part of the said Assistants for the time being, at
any time, when the said General Assembly is not sitting, to nominate, appoint
and constitute such and so many commanders, governors, and military officers,
as to them shall seem requisite, for the leading, conducting, and training up
the inhabitants of the said Plantations in martial affairs, and for the defense
and safeguard of the said Plantations; and that it shall and may be lawful to
and for all and every such commander, governor, and military officer, that
shall be so as aforesaid, or by the Governor, or in his absence the
Deputy-Gov^rnor, and six of the Assistants, and major part of the Freemen of
the said Company, present at any general assemblies, nominated, appointed and
constituted, according to the tenor of his and their respective commissions and
directions, to assemble, exercise in arms, marshal, ^rray, and put in warlike
posture, the inhabitants of the said Colony, for their especial defense and
safety; and to lead and conduct the said inhabitants, and to encounter, repulse
and resist by force of arms, as well by sea as by land, to kill, slay, and
destroy, by all sitting ways, enterprises, and means whatsoever, all and every
such person or persons, as shall at any time hereafter attempt or enterprise
the destruction, invasion, detriment or annoyance of the said inhabitants or
Plantations; and to use and exercise the law martial, in such cases only as
occasion shall necessarily require; and to take and surprise, by all ways and
means whatsoever, all and every such person and persons, with their ship or
suips, armor, ammunition, or other goods of such persons, as shall in hostile
manner invade or attempt the defeating of the said Plantation, or the hurt of
the said Company and inhabitants; and upon just causes to invade and destroy
the natives, Indians, or other enemies of the said Colony.

Nevertheless, our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby declare, to the rest
of our Colonies in New England, that it shall not be lawful for this our said
Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, in America, in New England,
to invade the natives inhabiting within the bounds and limits of their said
Colonies, without the knowledge and consent of the said other Colonies. And it
is hereby declared, that it shall not be lawful to or for the rest of the
Colonies to invade or molest the native Indians, or any other inhabitants,
inhabiting within the bounds or limits hereafter mentioned, (they having
subjected themselves unto us, and being by us taken into our special
protection) without the knowledge and consent of the Governor and Company of
our Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations.

Also our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby declare unto all Christian
kings, princes, and states, that it any person, who shall hereafter b^ of ^he
said Company or Plantation, or any other, by appointment of the said Governor
and Company, for the time being, shall at any time or times hereafter, rob or
spoil, by sea or land, or do any hurt, or unlawful hostility, to any of the
subjects of us, our heirs and successors, or to any of the subjects of any
prince or state, being then in league with us, our heirs and successors; upon
complaint of such injury done to any such prince or state, or their subjects,
we, our heirs and successors, will make open proclamation, within any parts of
our realm of England, sit for that purpose, that the person or persons
committing any such robbery or spoil, shall, within the time limited by such
proclamation, make full restitution or satisfaction for all such injuries done
or committed, so as the said prince, or others so complaining, may be fully
satisfied and contented; and if the said person or persons, who shall commit
any such robbery or spoil, shall not make satisfaction accordingly, within such
time so to be limited, that then we, our heirs and successors, will put such
person or persons out of our allegiance and protection: and that then it shall
and may be lawful and free for all princes or others, to prosecute with
hostility such offenders, and every of them, their and every of their
procurers, aiders, abettors and counselors in that behalf.

Provided also, and our express will and pleasure is, and we do by these
presents, for us, our heirs and successors, ordain and appoint, that these
presents shall not in any manner hinder any of our loving subjects whatsoever,
from using and exercising the trade of fishing upon the coast of New England in
America; but that they, and every or any of them, shall have full and free
power and liberty to continue and use the trade of fishing upon the said coast,
in any of the s^^^ thereunto adjoining, or any arms of the sea, or salt water,
rivers and creeks, where they have been accustomed to fish; and to build and
set upon the waste land, belonging to the said Colony and Plantations, such
wharves, stages, and workhouses, as shall be necessary for the salting, drying
and keeping of their fish, to be taken or gotten upon that coast.

And further, for the encouragement of the inhab^^an^^ of our said Colony of
Providence Plantations to s^t upon the business of taking wh^^ (...) shall b^
l^wf^l for th^^, or any of them, having struck a whale, dubertus, or other
great fish, it or them to pursue unto that coast, and into any bay, river,
cove, creek or shore, belonging thereto, and it or them upon the said coast, or
in the said bay, river, cove, creek, or shore belonging thereto, to kill and
order for the best advantage, without molestation, they making no wilful waste
or spoil; any thing in these presents contained, or any other matter or thing
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further also, we are graciously pleased, and do hereby declare, that if
any of the inhabitants of our said Colony do set upon the plant^^^ (...) and
climate both seeming naturally to (...) production of vines) or be industrious
in the (...) of fishing-banks, in or about the said Colony, we will, from time
to time, give and allow all due and sitting encouragement therein, as to others
in cases of like nature.

And further, of our more ample grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, we
have given and granted, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, do give and grant, unto the said Governor and Company of the
English Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantation, in the Narraganset
bay, in New England, in America, and to every inhabitant there, and to every
person and persons trading thither, and to every such person or persons as are
or shall be free of the said Colony, full power and authority, from time to
time, and all times hereafter, to take, ship, transport, and carry away, out of
any of our realms and dominions, for, and toward the plantation and defense of
the said Colony, such and so many of our loving subjects, and strangers, as
shall or will willingly accompany them in and to their said Colony and
Plantation, except such person or persons as are or shall be therein restrained
by us, our heirs and successors, or any law or statute of this realm; and also
to ship and transport all and all manner of goods, chattels, merchandise, and
other things whatsoever, that are or shall be useful or necessary for the said
Plantations, and defense thereof, and usually transported, and not prohibited
by any law or statute of this our realm; yielding and paying unto us, our heirs
and successors, such duties, customs and subsidies, as are or ought to be paid
or payable for the same.

And further, our will and pleasure is, and we do, for us, our heirs and
successors, ordain, declare, and grant, unto the said Governor and Company, and
their successors, that all and every the subjects of us, our heirs and
successors, which are already planted and settled within our said Colony of
Providence Plantations, or which shall hereafter go to inhabit within the said
Colony, and all and every of their children which have been born there, or
which shall happen hereafter to be born there, or on the sea going thither, or
returning from thence, shall have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of
free and natural subjects, within any the dominions of us, our heirs and
successors, to all intents, constructions, and purposes, whatsoever, as if they
and every of them were born within the realm of England.

And further, know ye, that we, of our more abundant grace, certain knowledge,
and mere motion, have given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presents, for
us, our heirs and successors, do give, grant, and confirm unto the said
Governor and Company, and their successors, all that part of our dominions, in
New England, in America, containing the Nahantick and Nanhygansett alias
Narraganset bay, and countries and parts adjacent, bounded on the west, or
westerly, to the middle or channel of a river there, commonly called and known
by the name of Pawcatuck, alias Pawcawtuck river, and so along the said river,
as the greater or middle stream thereof reaches or lies up into the north
country, northward unto the head thereof, and from thence by a straight line
drawn due north, until it meet with the south line of the Massachusetts Colony;
and on the north or northerly, by the aforesaid south or southerly line of the
Massachusetts Colony or Plantation, and extending toward the east or
eastwardly three English miles, to the east and north-east of the most eastern
and north-eastern parts of the aforesaid Narraganset bay, as the said bay lies
or extends itself from the ocean on the south or southwardly, unto the mouth
of the river which runs toward the town of Providence, and from thence
along the eastwardly side or bank of the said river (higher called by the name
of Seacunk river) up to the falls called Patucket falls, being the most
w^stwardly line of Plymouth Colony; and so from the said falls, in a straight
line due north, until it meet with the aforesaid line of the Massachusetts
Colony, and bounded on the south by the ocean, and in particular the lands
belonging to the town of Providence, Patuxit, Warwick, Misquammacock, alias
Pawcatuck, and the rest upon the main land, in the tract aforesaid, together
with Rhode Island, Block-Island and all the rest of the islands and banks in
the Narraganset bay, and bordering upon the coast of the tract aforesaid,
(Fisher's island only excepted) together with all firm lands, soils, grounds,
havens, ports, rivers, waters, fishings, mines royal, and all other mines,
minerals, precious stones, quarries, woods, wood-grounds, rocks, slates, and
all and singular other commodities, jurisdictions, royalties, privileges,
franchises, pre-eminences and hereditaments whatsoever, within the said tract,
bounds, lands, and islands aforesaid, to them or any of them belonging, or in
anywise appertaining -- to have and to hold the same, unto the said Governor
and Company, and their successors forever upon trust, for the use and benefit
of themselves, and their associates, freemen of the said Colony, their heirs
and assigns; -- to be holden of us, our heirs and successors, as of the manor
of East-Greenwich in our county of Kent, in free and common soccage, and not in
capite, n^r by knight's service; -- yielding and paying therefore to us, our
heirs and successors, only the fifth part of all the ore of gold and silver,
which, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall be there gotten,
had or obtained, in lieu and satisfaction of all services, duties, sines,
forfeitures, made or to be made, claims or demands whatsoever, to be to us, our
heirs or successors, therefore or thereabout rendered, made or paid; any grant
or clause, in a late grant to the Governor and Company of Connecticut Colony in
America, to the contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding; the aforesaid
Pawcatuck river having been yielded, after much d^bate, for the fixed and
certain bounds between these our said Colonies, by the agents thereof, who have
also agreed, that the said Pawcatuck river shall also be called alias
Narrogancett or Narrogansett river, and to prevent future disputes that
otherwise might arise thereby, forever hereafter shall be construed, deemed and
taken to be the Narrogancett river, in our late grant to Connecticut Colony,
mentioned as the easterly bounds of that Colony.

And further, our will and pleasure is, that in all matters of public
controversies, which may fall out between our Colony of Providence Plantations,
to make their appeal therein to us, our heirs and successors, for redress in
such cases, within this our realm of England; and that it shall be lawful to
and for the inhabitants of the said Colony of Providence Plantations, without
let or molestation, to pass and re-pass with freedom into and through the rest
of the English Colonies, upon their lawful and civil occasions, and to
converse, and hold commerce, and trade with such of the inhabitants of our
other English Colonies, as shall be willing to admit them thereunto, they
behaving themselves peaceably among them; any act, clause, or sentence, in any
of the said Colonies provided, or that shall be provided, to the contrary in
anywise notwithstanding.

And lastly, we do, for us, our heirs and successors, ordain and grant unto the
said Governor and Company, and their successors, by these presents, that th^^^
^ur letters patent shall be firm, good, effectual, and ava^^^ble, in all things
in the law, to all intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever, according
to our true intent and meaning herein before declared; and shall be construed,
reputed and adjudged, in all cases, most favorably on the behalf, and for the
best benefit and behoof of the said Governor and Company, and their successors,
although express mention, etc. In witness, etc. Witness, etc.

Per ipsum regem.

The State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations has not assumed a form of
government different from that contained in the foregoing chapter. For in that,
the King ceded to the Governor and Company, all powers, legislative, executive,
and judicial, reserving to himself, as an acknowledgment of his sovereignty, a
render of the fifth part of the gold and silver ore that should be found within
the territory. The Governor, chief magistrates, and legislators are chosen by
the freemen as usual, and all judicial and executive officers are annually
elected by the Governor and Company, or Upper and Lower House of Assembly. All
processes, original and judicial, formerly issued in the King's name, but they
now issue in the name of the Governor and Company. The oaths of allegiance and
of office are made conformable to the principles of the revolution. The
Governor, in his legislative capacity, cannot give a negative to any act of the
two Houses; but, in common with the other magistrates, has one voice only.

The State is divided into five counties, in each of which there is a Court of
Common Pleas and General Sessions of the Peace, held twice every year, for the
trial of all causes not capital, that arise within their limits; from which an
appeal lies, to the Superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assize and General
Jail Delivery, whose Jurisdiction extends over the whole State, and who also
sit twice a year in each county. The Constitution admits not of religious
establishments, any further than depends upon the voluntary choice of
individuals. All men professing one Supreme Being, are equally protected by the
laws; and no particular sect can claim pre-eminence.

THE CONSTITUTION OF CONNECTICUT.
ACCOUNT OF THE CONSTITUTION OF CONNECTICUT.
CONNECTICUT is divided into six counties, and each county is divided into a
number of towns. Each town has a right to send two Representatives to the
General Court or Assembly. The General Court consists of two branches, called
the Upper and Lower House. The Upper House is composed of the Governor,
Deputy Governor, and twelve Assistants or Counselors; and the Lower House, of
the Representatives of the several towns. This Court has the sole power to make
and rep^al laws, grant levies, dispose of lands belonging to the State, to
particular towns and persons; to erect and style judicatories and officers, as
they shall see necessary, for the good government of the people; also to call
to account any court, magistrate, or other officer, for any misdemeanor and
mal-administration; and for just cause, may sine, displace, or remove them, or
deal otherwise, as the nature of the case shall require; and deal or act in any
other matter, that concerns the good of the State, except the election of
Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants, Treasurer, and Secretary, which shall be
done by the freemen, at the yearly court of election, unless there be any
vacancy, by reason of death or otherwise, after the election, which may be
filled up by the General Court. This Court has power also, for reasons
satisfactory to them, to grant suspension, release, and jail delivery upon
reprieve in capital and criminal cases. The General Court has two stated
sessions annually, on the second Thursday of May and October.

The Governor, or, in his absence, the Deputy Governor, may call the Assembly,
on special emergencies, to meet at any other time. The Governor,
Deputy Governor, Assistants, and Secretary, are annually elected, on the second
Thursday in May. The Representatives are newly chosen for each stated session.
The Judges and Justices are annually appointed by the General Court; the same
persons are commonly re-appointed, from time to time, during their capacity to
serve, unless guilty of misbehaviour. The Sheriffs are appointed by the
Governor and Council, without limitation of time; but may be superseded, by the
authority that appoints them. The Governor, for the time being, is captain
general of the militia; the Deputy Governor, lieutenant general; the other
general officers, and the field officers, are appointed by the General Court,
and commissioned by the Governor. The captains and subalterns are chosen by the
vote of the Company and householders, living within the limits of the Company;
the persons, so chosen, must be approved by the General Court, and commissioned
by the Governor, before they have power to execute their offices. All the
military officers hold their offices during the pleasure of the Assembly; nor
can they resign their commissions without leave of the captain general, under
penalty of doing duty in the ranks, as private soldiers. The mode of electing
the Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants, Treasurer and Secretary is, that the
freemen in the several towns meet on the Monday next after the first Tuesday in
April, annually (being the day appointed by law, for that purpose, and choosing
Representatives) and give in their votes for the persons they choose for said
offices respectively, with their names written on a piece of paper, which votes
are received and sealed up by a constable, in the freemen's meeting -- the
votes for each of said offices, in a different paper -- writing on the outside
the name of the town, and the office, for which the votes are given in; which
are sent by the Representatives, to the General Court, to be held on the second
Thursday of May next ensuing; at which time, after the House of Representatives
have chosen a Speaker and Clerk, a committee is chosen of members of both
Houses, to sort and count the votes, and declare the names of the persons
chosen to said offices. Any freeman, qualified to vote for Representatives,
etc. may be elected to any office in the government. In choosing Assistants,
twenty persons are nominated by the votes of the freemen, given in at their
meeting for choosing Representatives in September annually, and sealed up and
sent to the General Court, in October then next; which are cou^^^ (...)
committee of both Houses, and the twenty persons, ^ho have the greatest number
of votes, stand in nomination, out of which number, twelve are to be chosen
Assistants by the freemen, the next April, in manner before described.

The qualifications requisite to entitle a person to vote in elections of the
officers of government, are maturity in years, quiet and peaceable behavior, a
civil conversation, and forty shillings freehold, or forty pounds personal
estate; if the Selectmen of the town certify a person qualified in those
respects, he is admitted a freeman, on his taking an oath of fidelity to the
State.

The ^^^es of all, that are thus admitted, are enrolled in the T^wn-^^^^^'s
office, and continue freemen during life, unless disfranchised by a sentence of
the Superior Court, on conviction of a misdemeanor.

The Governor, or, in his absence, the Deputy Governor, in the Upper House --
and the Speaker, in the Lower House of Assembly -- have a casting voice, when
the members of the respective Houses, including the Governor and Speaker, are
equally divided in opinion on any question.

There is, in this State, a Superior Court, consisting of one Chief Judge and
four other Judges, who have authority in all criminal cases, extending to life,
limb, and banishment, and to hear and determine all civil actions, brought by
appeal from the County Courts, or on writs of error. This Court also has
authority in all matters of divorce. There are two stated sessions of the
Superior Court in each county annually.

There are also County Courts held in the several counties, consisting of one
Judge and four Justices of the quorum, who have jurisdiction in all criminal
cases, arising within their respective counties, where the punishment does not
extend to life, limb, or banishment. The County Courts also have original
jurisdiction, in all civil actions, wherein the demand exceeds forty shillings.

The Superior and County Courts try matters of fact, by a jury, according to
the course of the common law.

Justices (...) the Peace have authority to hear and determine civil actions,
where the demand does not exceed forty shillings. They also have authority, in
some cases of a criminal nature, punishable by sine not exceeding forty
shillings, or whipping not exceeding ten stripes, or sitting in the stocks.

This State is also divided into a number of probate districts, less than
counties; in each of which, is appointed a Judge for the Probate of Wills,
granting administration on intestate estates, appointing guardians for minors,
ordering distribution of intestate estates, etc. An appeal lies, from any
decree of this Court, to the Superior Court.

The Superior, County and Probate Courts appoint their respective Clerks.

The General Court has, till very lately, been the only Court of Chancery in
this State. But by a late law, the County Courts determine matters of equity,
from five pounds, to two hundred pounds value; the Superior Court, from two
hundred to eight hundred pounds' value; and the General Assembly, all cases
exceeding the last mentioned sum.

All attorneys at law are admitted and sworn by the County Courts; there is no
Attorney General, but there used to be one King's Attorney in each county; but
since the King has abdicated the government, they are now attorneys to the
Governor and Company.

CONSTITUTION OF NEW YORK.
CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Established by the Convention,
authorized and empowered for that purpose, April 20, 1777.
THIS Convention, in the name and by the authority of the good people of this
State, does ordain, determine, and declare, that no authority shall, on any
pretense whatever, be exercised over the people or members of this State, but
such as shall be derived from and granted by them.

II. This Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the good
people of this State, ordain, determine, and declare, that the supreme
legislative power within this State, shall be vested in two separate and
distinct bodies of men -- the one to be called, The Assembly of the State of
New York -- the other to be called, The Senate of the State of New York -- who
together shall form the Legislature, and meet once at least in every year, for
the dispatch of business.

III. And whereas laws, inconsistent with the spirit of this Constitution, or
with the public good, may be hastily and unadvisedly passed; be it ordained,
that the Governor for the time being the Chancellor, and the Judges of the
Supreme Court -- or any two of them, together with the Governor -- shall be,
and hereby are, constituted a Council, to revise all bills about to be passed
into laws by the Legislature; and for that purpose shall assemble themselves,
from time to time, when the Legislature shall be convened; for which,
nevertheless, they shall not receive any salary or consideration, under any
pre^^nce whatever. And that all bills, which have passed the Senate and
Assembly, shall, before they become laws, be presented to the said Council, for
their revisal and consideration; and if, upon such revision and consideration,
it should appear improper to the said Council, or a majority of them, that the
said bill should become a law of this State, that they return the same,
together with their objections thereto in writing, to the Senate or House of
Assembly (in whichsoever the same shall have originated) who shall enter the
objections, sent down by the Council, at large in their minutes, and proceed to
re-consider the said bill. But if, after such re-consideration, two thirds of
the said Senate or House of Assembly shall, notwithstanding the said
objections, agree to pass the same, it shall, together with the objections, be
sent to the other branch of the Legislature, where it shall also be
reconsidered, and, if approved by two thirds of the members present, shall be a
law.

And in order to prevent any unnecessary delays, be it further ordained, that
if any bill shall not be returned by the Coucil within ten days after it shall
have been presented, the same shall be a law, unless the Legislature shall, by
their adjournment, render a return of the said bill, with in ten days,
impracticable; in which case, the bill shall be returned on the first day of
the meeting of the Legislature, after the expiration of the said ten days.

IV. That the Assembly shall consist of at least seventy members, to be
annually chosen in the several counties, in the proportions following, viz. For
the city and county of New York, nine. The city and county of Albany, ten. The
county of Duchess, seven. The county of Westchester, six. The county of Ulster,
six. The county of Suffolk, five. The county of Queens, four. The county of
Orange, four. The county of Kings, two. The county of Richmond, two. The county
of Tryon, six. The county of Charlotte, four. The county of Cumberland, three.
The county of Gloucester, two.


V. That as soon, after the expiration of seven years, (subsequent to the
termination of the present war) as may be, a census of the electors and
inhabitants in this State be taken, under the direction of the Legislature. And
if, on such census, it shall appear, that the number of Representatives in
Assembly, from the said counties, is not justly ^roportioned to the number of
electors, in the said counties respective^y, that the ^^gislature do adjust and
apportion the same by that rule. And further, that once in every seven years,
after the taking of the said first census, a just account of the electors,
resident in each county. shall be taken; and if it shall thereupon appear, that
the number of electors, in any county, shall have increased or diminished one
or more seventieth parts of the whole number of electors, which, on the said
first census, shall be found in this State, the number of Representatives for
such county hall be increased or diminished accordingly -- that is to say, one
Representative for every seventieth part as aforesaid.

VI. And whereas an opinion has long prevailed among (...) of the good people
of this State, that voting at elec^ (...) by ^allot would tend more to preserve
the liberty and ^qual freedom of the people, than voting viva voce: To the end,
therefore, that a fair experiment be made, which of those two methods of voting
is to be preferred:

Be it ordained, that as soon as may be, after the termination of the present
war between the United States of America and Great Britain, an^act or acts be
parsed by the Legisl^ture of this State, for causing all elections there^^^^r
to be he^d in this State, for Senators and Reprefe^^^^^s in Assembly, to be by
ball^t, and directing the manner in which the same shall be conducted. And
whereas it is p^^^le, that after all the care of the Legislature, in ^^aming
the said act or acts, certain inconveniences and m^^ch^^ss, unforeseen at this
day, may be found to attend the said mode of electing by b^^^et:

It is further ordained, that if, after a f^ll and fair experiment shall be
m^de of voting by ballot aforesaid, the same shall be found less conducive to
the safety or interest of the State, th^n the method of voting viva voce, it
shall be (...) and constitutional for the Legislature to abolish the (...)
^^ded two thirds of the members, present in each House respectively, shall
concur therein: And further, that during the continuance of the present war,
and until the Legislature of this State shall provide for the election of
Senators and Representatives in Assembly, by ballot, the said elections shall
be made viva voce.

VII. That every male inhabitant, of full age, who shall have personally
resided within one of the counties of this State, for six months immediately
preceding the day of election, shall, at such election, be entitled to vote for
Representatives of the said county in Assembly; if, during the time aforesaid,
he shall have been a freeholder, possessing a freehold of the value of twenty
pounds, within the said county, or have rented a tenement therein, of the
yearly value of forty shillings, and been rated and actually paid taxes to this
State: -- provided always, that every person, who now is a freeman of the city
of Albany, or who was made a freeman of the city of New York, on or before the
fourteenth day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, and shall be actually and usually resident in the said cities
respectively, shall be entitled to vote for Representatives in Assembly, within
his said place of residence.

VIII. That every elector, before he is admitted to vote, shall, if required by
the returning officer, or either of the inspectors, take an oath, or, if of the
people called Quakers, an affirmation, of alleg^ance to the State.

IX. That the Assembly, thus constituted, shall choose their own Speaker, be
judges of their own members, and enjoy the same privileges, and proceed in
doing business, in like manner as the Assemblies of the Colony of New York of
right formerly did; and that a majority of the said members shall, from time to
time, constitute a House, to proceed upon business.

X. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this State, ordain, determine and declare, that the Senate of
the State of New York shall consist of twenty-four freeholders, to be chosen
out of the body of the freeholders; and that they be chosen by the freeholders
of this State, possessed of freeholds of the value of one hundred pounds, over
and above all debts charged thereon.

XI. That the members of the Senate be elected for four years; and immediately
after the first election, they be divided by lot into four classes, six in each
class, and numbered one, two, three, and four; that the seats of the members of
the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the first year, the
second class the second year, and so on continually; to the end, that the
fourth part of the Senate, as nearly as possible, may be annually chosen.

XII. That the election of Senators shall be after this manner; that so much of
this State, as is now parcelled into counties, be divided into four great
districts; the southern district to comprehend the city and county of New York,
Suffolk, Westchester, Kings, Queens, and Richmond counties; the middle district
to comprehend the counties of Duchess, Ulster, and Orange; the western
district, the city and county of Albany and Tryon county; and the eastern
district, the counties of Charlotte, Cumberland, and Gloucester. That the
Senators shall be elected by the freeholders of the said districts, qualified
as aforesaid, in the proportions following; to wit, in the southern district,
nine; in the middle district, six; in the western district, six; and in the
eastern district, three. And be it ordained, that a census shall be taken, as
soon as may be, after the expiration of seven years from the termination of the
present war, under the direction of the Legislature: and if on such census it
shall appear, that the number of Senators is not justly proportioned to the
several districts, that the Legislature adjust the proportion, as near as may
be, to the number of freeholders, qualified as aforesaid in each district. That
when the number of electors, within any of the said districts, shall have
increased one twenty-fourth part of the whole number of electors, which by the
said census shall be found to be in this State, an additional Senator shall be
chosen by the electors of such district. That a majority of the number of
Senators, to be chosen ^s aforesaid, shall be necessary to constitute a Senate,
sufficient to proceed upon business; and that the Senate shall, in like manner
with the Assembly, be the judges of (...) own members. And be it ordained, that
it shall be in the power of the future Legislatures of this State, for the
convenience and advantage of the good people thereof, to divide the same into
such further and other counties and districts, as shall to them appear
necessary.

XIII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ordain, determine, and declare, that no member
of this State shall be disfranchised, or deprived of any of the rights or
privileges ^ec^red to the subjects of this State by this Cons^^t^^ion, unless
by the law of the land, or the judgment of his peers.

XIV. That neither the Assembly nor the Senate shall have the power to adjourn
themselves, for any longer time than two days, without the mutual consent of
both.

XV. That whenever the Assembly and Senate disagree, a conference shall be
held, in the presence of both, and be managed by committees, to be by them
respectively chosen by ballot. That the doors both of the Senate and Assembly
shall at all times be kept open to all persons, except when the welfare of the
State shall require their debates to be kept secret. And the journals of all
their proceedings shall be kept, in the manner heretofore accustomed by the
General Assembly of the colony of New York; and (except such parts as they
shall, as aforesaid, respectively determine not to make public) be from day to
day (if the business of the Legislature will permit) published.

XVI. It is nevertheless provided, that the number of Senators shall never
exceed one hundred, nor the number of Assembly three hundred; but that whenever
the number of Senators shall amount to one hundred, or of the Assembly to three
hundred, then and in such case, the Legislature shall from time to time
thereafter, by laws for that purpose, apportion and distribute the said one
hundred Senators, and three hundred Representatives, among the great districts
and counties of this State, in proportion to the number of their respective
electors; so that the representation of the good people of this State, b^^h in
the Senate and Assembly, shall forever remain proportionate and adequate.

XVII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ordain, determine, and declare, that the supreme
executive power and authority of this State shall be vested in a Governor; and
that statedly, once in every three years, and as often as the seat of
government shall become vacant, a wise and discreet freeholder of this State
shall be, by ballot, elected Governor, by the freeholders of this State,
qualified, as before described, to elect Senators; which elections shall be
always held at the times and places of choosing Representatives in Assembly for
each respective co^^ty; and that the person, who has the greatest number of
^^tes within the said State, shall be Governor thereof.

XVIII. That the Governor shall continue in office three years, and shall, by
virtue of his office, be general and commander in chief of all the militia, and
admiral of the navy of this State; that he shall have power to convene the
Assembly and Senate on extraordinary occasions; to prorogue them from time to
time, provided such prorogations shall not exceed sixty days in the space of
any one year; and, at his discretion, to grant reprieves and pardons to persons
convicted of crimes, other than treason or murder, in which be may suspend the
execution of the sentence, until it shall be reported to the Legislature at
their subsequent meeting; and they shall either pardon, or direct the execution
of the criminal, or grant a further reprieve.

XIX. That it shall be the duty of the Governor to inform the Legislature, at
every sessions, of the condition of the State, so far as may respect his
department; to recommend such matters to their consideration, as shall appear
to him to concern its good government, welfare, and prosperity; to correspond
with the Continental Congress, and other States; to transact all necessary
business, with the officers of government, civil and military; to take care
that the laws are faithfully executed, to the best of his ability; and to
expedite all such measures, as may be resolved upon by the Legislature.

XX. That a Lieutenant Governor shall, at every election of a Governor, (and as
often as the Lieutenant Governor shall die, resign, or be removed from office,)
be elected in the same manner with the Governor, to continue in office until
the next election of a Governor; and such Lieutenant Governor shall, by virtue
of his office, be President of the Senate, and upon an equal division, have a
casting voice in then decisions, but not vote on any other occasion.

And in case of the impeachment of the Governor, or his removal from office,
death, resignation, or absence from the State, the Lieutenant Governor shall
exercise all the power and authority appertaining to the ^ffice of Governor
until another be chosen, or the Governor, absent or impeached, shall return or
be acquitted. Provided, that where the Governor shall, with the consent of the
Legislature, be out of the State, in time of war, at the head of a military
force thereof, he shall still continue in his command of all the military force
of the State both by sea and land.

XXI. That whenever the government shall be administered by he Lieutenant
Governor, or he shall be unable to attend as President of the Senate, the
Senators shall have ^ower to elect one of their own members to the office of
President of the Senate, which he shall exercise pro hac vice. And if, during
such vacancy of the office of Governor, the Lieutenant Governor shall be
impeached, displaced, resign, die, or be absent from the State, the President
of the Senate shall, in like manner as the Lieutenant Governor, administer the
government, until others shall be elected by the suffrage of the people, at the
succeeding election.

XXII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ordain, determ^^e and declare, that the
Treasurer of this State shall be appointed by act of the Legislature, to
originate with the Assembly: provided that he shall not be elected out of
either b^anch of the Legislature.

XXIII. That all officers, other than those who, by this Constitution, are
directed to be otherwise appointed, shall be appointed in the manner following;
to wit -- The Assembly ^^^ll, o^^^ in every year, openly nominate and appoint
one of the Senators from each great district, which Senators shall form a
Council, for the appointment of the said officers, of which the Governor, for
the time being, or the Lieutenant Governor, or the President of the Senate,
(when they shall respectively administer the government) shall be President,
and ^^ve a casting voi^^, but no other vote; and with the advice and consent of
the said Council, shall appoint all the said officers; and that a majority of
the said Council be a quorum. And further, the said Senators shall not be
eligible to the said Council -- for two years successively.

XXIV. That all military officers be appointed during pleasure; that all
commissioned officers, civil and military, be commissioned by the Governor; and
that the Chancellor, the Judges of the Supreme Court, and first Judge of the
County Court in every County, hold their offices during good behavior, or
until they shall have respectively attained the age of sixty years.

XXV. That the Chancellor, and Judges of the Supreme Court, shall not, at the
same time, hold any other office, excepting that of Delegate to the General
Congress, upon special occasions; and that the first Judges of the County
Courts, in the several counties, shall not, at the same time, hold any other
office, excepting that of Senator, or Delegate to the General Congress. But if
the Chancellor, or either of the said Judges, be elected or appointed to any
other office, excepting as is before excepted, it shall be at his option in
which to serve.

XXVI. That Sheriffs and Coroners be annually appointed; and that no person
shall be capable of holding either of the said offices more than four years
successively; nor the Sheriff of holding any other office at the same time.

XXVII. And be it further ordained, that the Register, and Clerks in Chancery,
be appointed by the Chancellor; the Clerks of the Supreme Court, by the Judges
of the said Court; the Clerk of the Court of Probate, by the Judge of the said
Court; and the Register and Marshal of the Court of Admiralty, by the Judge of
the Admiralty. The said Marshal, Registers, and Clerks, to continue in office
during the pleasure of those by whom they are to be appointed, as aforesaid.

And that all Attorneys, Solicitors, and Counselors at law, hereafter to be
appointed, be appointed by the Court, and licensed by the first Judge of the
Court in which they shall respectively plead or practice; and be regulated by
the rules and orders of the said Courts.

XXVIII. And be it further ordained, that where, by this Convention, the
duration of any office shall not be ascertained, such office shall be construed
to be held during the pleasure of the Council of Appointment -- provided that
new commissions shall be issued to Judges of the County Courts (other than to
the first Judge) and to Justices of the Peace, once at the least in every three
years.

XXIX. That Town Clerks, Supervisors, Assessors, Constables, Collectors, and
all other officers heretofore eligible by the people, shall always continue to
be so eligible, in the manner directed by the present or future acts of the
Legislature.

That Loan Officers, County Treasurers, and Clerks of the Supervisors, continue
to be appointed in the manner directed by the present or future acts of the
Legislature.

XXX. That Delegates to represent this State in the General Congress of the
United States of America, be annually appointed as follows; to wit -- The
Senate and Assembly shall each openly nominate as many persons, as shall be
equal to the whole number of Delegates to be appointed; after which nomination,
they shall meet together, and those persons, named in both lists, shall be
Delegates; and out of those persons, whose names are not in both lists, one
half shall be chosen by the joint ballot of the Senators and members of
Assembly, so met together as aforesaid.

XXXI. That the style of all laws shall be as follows; to wit -- "Be it enacted
by the people of the State of New York, represented in Senate and Assembly:"
And that all writs and other proceedings shall run in the name of the people of
the State of New York, and be tested in the name of the Chancellor, or Chief
Judge of the Court from whence they shall issue.

XXXII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ordain, determine and declare, that a Court
shall be instituted for the trial of impeachments, and the correction of
errors, under the regulations which shall be established by the Legislature;
and to consist of the President of the Senate, for the time being, and the
Senators, Chancellor, and Judges of the Supreme Court, or the major part of
them; except, that when an impeachment shall be prosecuted against the
Chancellor, or either of the Judges of the Supreme Court, the person, so
impeached, shall be suspended from exercising his office, until his acquittal:
and in like manner, when an appeal, from a decree in equity, shall be heard,
the Chancellor shall inform the Court of the reasons of his decree, but shall
not have a voice in the final sentence. And if the cause to be determined shall
be brought up by writ of error, on a question of law, on a judgment in the
Supreme Court, the Judges of that Court shall assign the reasons of such their
judgment, but shall no have a voice for its affirmance or reversal.

XXXIII. That the power of impeaching all officers of the State, for mal and
corrupt conduct in their respective offices, be vested in the Representatives
of the people in Assembly; but that it shall always be necessary, that two
third parts of the members present shall consent to and agree in such
impeachment. That previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of
the said Court shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and
determine the charge in question, according to evidence; and that no judgment
of the said Court shall be valid, unless it be assented to by two third parts
of the members then present; nor shall it extend farther than to removal from
office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any place of honor, trust, or
profit, under this State. But the party, so convicted, shall be, nevertheless,
liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment, and punishment, according to
the laws of the land.

XXXIV. And it is further ordained, that, in every trial on impeachment, or
indictment for crimes or misdemeanors, the party impeached or indicted shall be
allowed counsel, as in civil actions.

XXXV. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ordain, determine and declare, that such parts
of the common law of England, and of the statute law of England and Great
Britain, and of the acts of the Legislature of the Colony of New York, as
together did form the law of the said Colony on the 19th day of April, in the
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, shall be and
continue the law of this State, subject to such alterations and provisions as
the Legislature of this State shall, from time to time, make concerning the
same. That such of the said acts as are temporary, shall expire at the times
limited for their duration respectively. That all such parts of the said common
law, and all such of the said statutes, and acts aforesaid, or parts thereof,
as may be construed to establish or maintain any particular denomination of
Christians or their ministers, or concern the allegiance heretofore yielded to,
and the supremacy, sovereignty, government, or prerogatives, claimed or
exercised by the King of Great Britain, and his predecessors, over the Colony
of New York and its inhabitants, or are repugnant to this Constitution -- be,
and they hereby are, abrogated and rejected. And this Convention does further
ordain, that the resolves or resolutions of the Congresses of the Colony of
New York, and of the Convention of the State of New York, now in force, and not
repugnant to the government established by this Constitution, shall be
considered as making part of the laws of this State; subject nevertheless to
such alterations and provisions as the Legislature of this State may, from time
to time, make concerning the same.

XXXVI. And be it further ordained, that all grants of lands, within this
State, made by the King of Great Britain, or persons acting under his
authority, after the fourteenth day of October, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, shall be null and void: but that nothing in this Constitution
contained, shall be construed to affect any grants of land, within this State,
made by the authority of the said King or his predecessors, or to annul any
charters to bodies politic, by him or them, or any of them, made prior to that
day. And that none of the said charters shall be adjudged to be void, by reason
of any non-user or misuser of any of their respective rights or privileges,
between the nineteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-five, and the publication of this Constitution. And
further, that all such of the officers, described in the said charters
respectively, as, by the terms of the said charters, were to be appointed by
the Governor of the Colony of New York, with or without the advice and consent
of the Council of the said King, in the said Colony, shall henceforth be
appointed by the Council, established by this Constitution, for the appointment
of officers in this State, until otherwise directed by the Legislature.

XXXVII. And whereas it is of great importance to the safety of this State,
that peace and amity with the Indians, within the same, be at all times
supported and maintained; -- and whereas the frauds, too often practiced
toward the said Indians, in contracts made for their lands, have, in diverse
instances, been productive of dangerous discontents and animosities: Be it
ordained, that no purchases or contracts for the sale of lands, made since the
fourteenth day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, or which may hereafter be made with or of the said Indians,
within the limits of this State, shall be binding on the said Indians, or
deemed valid, unless made under the authority, and with the consent of the
Legislature of this State.

XXXVIII. And whereas we are required, by the benevolent principles of rational
liberty, not only to expel civil tyranny, but also to guard against that
spiritual oppression and intolerance, wherewith the bigotry and ambition of
weak and wicked priests and princes have scourged mankind; this Convention does
further, in the name and by the authority of the good people of this State,
ordain, determine, and declare, that the free exercise and enjoyment of
religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall
forever hereafter be allowed, within this State, to all mankind. Provided that
the liberty of conscience, hereby granted; shall not be so construed, as to
excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace
or safety of this State.

XXXIX. And whereas the ministers of the gospel are, by their profession,
dedicated to the service of God and the care of souls, and ought not to be
diverted from the great duties of their function; therefore no minister of the
gospel, or priest of any denomination whatsoever, shall, at any time hereafter,
under any pretense or description whatever, be eligible to or capable of
holding any civil or military office or place within this State.

XL. And whereas it is of the utmost importance to the safety of every State,
that it should always be in a condition of defense; and it is the duty of every
man, who enjoys the protection of society, to be prepared and willing to defend
it; this Convention, therefore, in the name and by the authority of the good
people of this State, does ordain, determine, and declare, that the militia of
this State, at all times hereafter, as well in peace as in war, shall be armed,
and disciplined, and in readiness for service. That all such of the inhabitants
of this State (being of the people called Quakers) as, from scruples of
conscience, may be averse to the bearing of arms, be therefrom excused by the
Legislature, and do pay to the State such sums of money, in lieu of their
personal service, as the same may, in the judgment of the Legislature, be
worth: And that a proper magazine of warlike stores, proportionate to the
number of inhabitants, be, forever hereafter, at the expense of this State, and
by acts of the Legislature, established, maintained, and continued, in every
county in this State.

XLI. And this Convention does further ordain, determine, and declare, in the
name and by the authority of the good people of this State, that trial by jury,
in all cases in which it has heretofore been used in the Colony of New York,
shall be established, and remain inviolate forever. And that no acts of
attainder shall be passed by the Legislature of this State, for crimes, other
than those committed before the termination of the present war; and that such
acts shall not work a corruption of blood. And further, that the Legislature of
this State shall, at no time hereafter, institute any new court or courts, but
such as shall proceed according to the course of the common law.

XLII. And this Convention does further, in the name and by the authority of
the good people of this State, ordain, determine, and declare, that it shall be
in the discretion of the Legislature to naturalize all such persons, and in
such manner, as they shall think proper; provided all such of the persons, so
to be by them naturalized, as, being born in parts beyond sea, and out of the
United States of America, shall come to settle in, and become subjects of this
State, shall take an oath of allegiance to this State, and abjure and renounce
all allegiance and subjection to all and every foreign king, prince, potentate,
and State, in all matters, ecclesiastical, as well as civil.

By Order, LEONARD GANSEVOORT, Pres. pro. tem.

THE CONSTITUTION OF NEW JERSEY.
WHEREAS all the constitutional authority, ever possessed by the kings of Great
Britain, over these Colonies, or their other dominions, was, by compact,
derived from the people, and held of them, for the common interest of the whole
society; allegiance and protection are, in the nature of things, reciprocal
ties, each equally depending upon the other, and liable to be dissolved by the
other's being refused or withdrawn: and whereas George the Third, king of
Great Britain, has refused protection to the good people of these Colonies; and
by assenting to sundry acts of the British parliament, attempted to subject
them to the absolute dominion of that body; and has also made war upon them, in
the most cruel and unnatural manner, for no other cause than asserting their
just rights; all civil authority under him is necessarily at an end, and a
dissolution of government in each Colony has consequently taken place.

And whereas, in the present deplorable situation of these Colonies, exposed to
the fury of a cruel and relentless enemy, some form of government is absolutely
necessary, not only for the preservation of good order, but also the more
effectually to unite the people, and enable them to exert their whole force in
their own necessary defense; and as the honorable the Continental Congress,
the supreme council of the American Colonies, has advised such of the Colon^es
as have not yet gone into the measure, to adopt, for themselves respectively,
such government as shall best conduce to their own happiness and safety, and
the wellbeing of America in general: -- We, the Representatives of the Colony
of New Jersey, having been elected by all the counties in the freest manner,
and in Congress assembled, have, after mature deliberations, agreed upon a set
of charter rights and the form of a Constitution, in manner following, viz.

I. That the government of this Province shall be vested in a Governor,
Legislative Council, and General Assembly.

II. That the Legislative Council, and General Assembly, shall be chosen, for
the first time, on the second Tuesday in August next; the members whereof shall
be the same in number and qualifications as are herein after mentioned; and
shall be and remain vested with all the powers and authority to be hold by any
future Legislative Council and Assembly of this Colony, until the second
Tuesday in October, which shall be in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and seventy-seven.

III. That on the second Tuesday in October yearly, and every year forever
(with the privilege of adjourning from day to day, as occasion may require) the
counties shall severally choose one person, to be a member of the Legislative
Council of this Colony, who shall be, and have been, for one whole year next
before the election, an inhabitant and freeholder in the county in which he is
chosen, and worth at least one thousand pounds proclamation money, of real and
personal estate, within the same county: that, at the same time, each county
shall also choose three members of Assembly; provided that no person shall be
entitled to a seat in the said Assembly unless he be, and have been, for one
whole year next before the election, an inhabitant of the county he is to
represent, and worth five hundred pounds proclamation money, in real and
personal estate, in the same county: that on the second Tuesday next after the
day of election, the Council and Assembly shall separately meet; and that the
consent of both Houses shall be necessary to every law; provided, that seven
shall be a quorum of the Council, for doing business, and that no law shall
pass, unless ther^ be a majority of all the Representatives of each body
personally present, and agreeing thereto. Provided always, that if a majority
of the Representatives of this Province, in Council and General Assembly
convened, shall, at any time or times hereafter, judge it equitable and proper,
to add to or diminish the number or proportion of the members of Assembly for
any county or counties in this Colony, then, and in such case, the same may, on
the principles of more equal representation, be lawfully done; any thing in
this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding: so that the whole number of
Representatives in Assembly shall not, at any time, be less than thirty-nine.

IV. That all inhabitants of this Colony, of full age, who are worth fifty
pounds proclamation money, clear estate in the same, and have resided within
the county in which they claim a vote for twelve months immediately preceding
the election, shall be entitled to vote for Representatives in Council and
Assembly; and also for all other public officers, that shall be elected by the
people of the county at large.

V. That the Assembly, when met, shall have power to choose a Speaker, and
other their officers; to be judges of the qualifications and elections of their
own members; sit upon their own adjournments; prepare bills, to be passed into
laws; and to empower their Speaker to convene them, whenever any extraordinary
occurrence shall render it necessary.

VI. That the Council shall also have power to prepare bills to pass into laws,
and have other like powers as the Assembly, and in all respects be a free and
independent branch of the Legislature of this Colony; save only, that they
shall not prepare or alter any money bill -- which shall be the privilege of
the Assembly: that the Council shall, from time to time, be convened by the
Governor or Vice President, but must be convened, at all times, when the
Assembly sits; for which purpose the Speaker of the House of Assembly shall
always, immediately after an adjournment, give notice to the Governor, or
Vice President, of the time and place to which the House is adjourned.

VII. That the Council and Assembly jointly, at their first meeting after each
annual election, shall, by a majority of votes, elect some fit person within
the Colony, to be Governor for one year, who shall be constant President of the
Council, and have a casting ^ote in their proceedings; and that the Council
themselves shall choose a Vice President, who shall act as such in the absence
of the Governor.

VIII. That the Governor, or, in his absence, the Vice President of the
Council, shall have the supreme executive power, be Chancellor of the Colony,
and act as captaingeneral and commander in chief of all the militia, and other
military force in this Colony; and that any three or more of the Council shall,
at all times, be a privy council, to consult them; and that the Governor be
ordinary or surrogate general.

IX. That the Governor and Council, (seven whereof shall be a quorum) be the
Court of Appeals, in the last resort, in all clauses of law, as heretofore; and
that they possess the power of granting pardons to criminals, after
condemnation, in all cases of treason, felony, or other offenses.

X. That captains, and all other inferior officers of the militia, shall be
chosen by the companies, in the respective counties; but field and general
officers, by the Council and Assembly.

XI. That the Council and Assembly shall have power to make the Great Seal of
this Colony, which shall be kept by the Governor, or, in his absence, by the
Vice President of the Council, to be used by them as occasion may require: and
it shall be called, The Great Seal of the Colony of New Jersey.

XII. That the Judges of the Supreme Court shall continue in orfice for seven
years: the Judges of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in the several
counties, Justices of the Peace, Clerks of the Supreme Court, Clerks of the
Inferior Court of Common Pleas and Quarter Sessions, the Attorney General, and
Provincial Secretary, shall continue in office for five years: and the
Provincial Treasurer shall continue in office for one year; and that they shall
be severally appointed by the Council and Assembly, in manner aforesaid, and
commissioned by the Governor, or, in his absence, the Vice President of the
Council. Provided always, that the said officers, severally, shall be capable
of being re-appointed, at the end of the terms severally before limited; and
that any of the said officers shall be liable to be dismissed, when adjudged
guilty of misbehaviour, by the Council, on an impeachment of the Assembly.

XIII. That the inhabitants of each county, qualified to vote as aforesaid,
shall at the time and place of electing their Representatives, annually elect
one Sheriff, and one or more Coroners; and that they may re-elect the same
person to such offices, until he shall have served three years, but no longer;
after which, three years must elapse before the same person is capable of being
elected again. When the election is certified to the Governor, or
Vice President, under the hands of fix freeholders of the county for which they
were elected, they shall be immediately commissioned to serve in their
respective offices.

XIV. That the townships, at their annual town meetings for electing other
officers, shall choose constanbles for the districts respectively; and also
three or more judicious freeholders of good character, to hear and finally
determine all appeals, relative to unjust assessments, in cases of public
taxation; which commissioners of appeal shall, for that purpose, sit at some
suitable time or times, to be by them appointed, and made known to the people
by advertisements.

XV. That the laws of the Colony shall begin in the following style, viz. "Be
it enacted by the Council and General Assembly of this Colony, and it is hereby
enacted by authority of the same:" that all commissions, granted by the
Governor or Vice President, shall run thus -- "The Colony of New Jersey to A.
B. etc. greeting:" and that all writs shall likewise run in the name of the
Colony: and that all indictments shall conclude in the following manner, viz.
"Against the peace of this Colony, the government and dignity of the same."

XVI. That all criminals shall be admitted to the same privileges of witnesses
and counsel, as their prosecutors are or shall be entitled to.

XVII. That the estates of such persons as shall destroy their own lives, shall
not, for that offense, be forseited; but shall descend in the same manner, as
they would have done, had such persons died in the natural way; nor stall any
article, which may occasion accidentally the death of any one, be henceforth
deemed a deodand: or in any wise forseited, on account of such misfortune.

XVIII. That no person shall ever, within this Colony, be deprived of the
inestimable privilege of worshipping Almighty God in a manner agreeable to the
dictates of his own conscience; nor, under any pretense whatever, be compelled
to attend any place of worship, contrary to his own faith and judgment; nor
shall any person, within this Colony, ever be obliged to pay tithes, taxes, or
any other rates, for the purpose of building or repairing any other church or
churches, place or places of worship, or for the maintenance of any minister or
ministry, contrary to what he believes to be right, or has deliberately or
voluntarily engaged himself to perform.

XIX. That there shall be no establishment of any one religious sect in this
Province, in preference to another; and that no Protestant inhabitant of this
Colony shall be denied the enjoyment of any civil right, merely on account of
his religious principles; but that all persons, professing a belief in the
faith of any Protestant sect, who shall demean themselves peaceably under the
government, as hereby established, shall be capable of being elected into any
office of profit or trust, or being a member of either branch of the
Legislature, and shall fully and freely enjoy every privilege and immunity,
enjoyed by others their fellow subjects.

XX. That the legislative department of this government may, as much as
possible, be preserved from all suspicion of corruption, none of the Judges of
the Supreme or other Courts, Sheriffs, or any other person or persons possessed
of any post of profit under the government, other than Justices of the Peace,
shall be entitled to a seat in the Assembly; but that, on his being elected,
and taking his seat, his office or post shall be considered as vacant.

XXI. That all the laws of this Province, contained in the edition lately
published by Mr. Al^inson, shall be and remain in full force, until altered by
the Legislature of this Colony (such only excepted, as are incompatible with
this Charter) and shall be, according as heretofore, regarded in all respects,
by all civil officers, and others, the good people of this Province.

XXII. That the common law of England, as well as so much of the statute law,
as have been heretofore practiced in this Colony, shall still remain in force,
until they shall be altered by a future law of the Legislature; such parts only
excepted, as are repugnant to the rights and privileges contained in this
Charter; and that the inestimable right of trial by jury shall remain confirmed
as a part of the law of this Colony, without repeal, forever.

XXIII. That every person, who shall be elected as aforesaid to be a member of
the Legislative Council, or House of Assembly, shall, previous to his taking
his seat in Council or Assembly, take the following oath or affirmation, viz.

"I, A. B. do solemnly declare, that, as a member of the Legisl^tive Council
[or Assembly, as the case may be,] of the Colony of New Jersey, I will not
assent to any law, vote or proceeding, which shall appear to me injurious to
the public welfare of said Colony, nor that shall annul or repeal that part of
the third section in the Charter of this Colony, which establishes, that the
elections of members of the Legislative Council and Assembly shall be annual;
nor that part of the twenty-second section in said Charter, respecting the
trial by jury, nor that shall annul, repeal, or alter any part or parts of the
eighteenth or nineteenth sections of the same."

And any person or persons, who shall be elected as aforesaid, is hereby
empowered to administer to the said members the said oath or affirmation.

Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Congress, that
if a reconciliation between Great Britain and these Colonies should take place,
and the latter be taken again under the protection and government of the crown
of Britain, this Charter shall be null and void -- otherwise to remain firm and
inviolable.

In PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, New Jersey, Burlington, July 2, 1776. By order of
Congress, Extract from the minutes, SAMUEL TUCKER, Pres. WILLIAM PATERSON,
Secretary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF PENNSYLVANIA.
CONSTITUTION OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, As ratified in Convention,
the 2d Day of September, 1790.
WE the people of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, ordain and establish this
Constitution for its government.

ARTICLE I.
I. THE legislative power of this Commonwealth shall be vested in a General
Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

II. The Representatives shall be chosen annually, by the citizens of the city
of Philadelphia, and of each county respectively, on the second Tuesday of
October.

III. No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained the age
of twenty-one years, and have been a citizen and inhabitant of the State three
years next preceding his election, and the last year thereof an inhabitant of
the city or county, in which he shall be chosen; unless he shall have been
absent on the public business of the United States, or of this State. No
person, residing within any city, town, or borough, which shall be entitled to
a separate representation, shall be elected a member for any county; nor shall
any person, residing without the limits of any such city, town, or borough, be
elected a member therefore.

IV. Within three years after the first meeting of the General Assembly, and
within every subsequent term of seven years, an enumeration of the taxable
inhabitants shall be made, in such manner as shall be directed by law. The
number of Representatives shall, at the several periods of making such
enumeration, be fixed by the Legislature, and apportioned among the city of
Philadelphia, and the several counties, according to the number of taxable
inhabitants in each; and shall never be less than sixty, nor greater than one
hundred. Each county shall have, at least, one Representative: but no county,
hereafter erected, shall be entitled to a separate representation, until a
sufficient number of taxable inhabitants shall be contained within it, to
entitle them to one Representative, agreeable to the ratio which shall then be
established.

V. The Senators shall be chosen for four years, by the citizens of
Philadelphia, and of the several counties, at the same time, in the same
manner, and at the same places where they shall vote for Representatives.

VI. The number of Senators shall, at the several periods of making the
enumeration before mentioned, be fixed by the Legislature, and apportioned
among the districts formed as herein after directed, according to the number of
taxable inhabitants in each; and shall never be less than one fourth, nor
greater than one third, of the number of Representatives.

VII. The Senators shall be chosen in districts, to be formed by the
Legislature; each district containing such a number of taxable inhabitants, as
shall be entitled to elect not more than four Senators. When a district shall
be composed of two or more counties, they shall be adjoining. Neither the city
of Philadelphia, nor any county, shall be divided, in forming a district.

VIII. No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained the age of
twenty-five years, and have been a citizen and inhabitant of the State four
years next before his election, and the last year thereof an inhabitant of the
district for which he shall be chosen; unless he shall have been absent on the
public business of the United States, or of this State.

IX. Immediately after the Senators shall be assembled, in consequence of the
first election, subsequent to the first enumeration, they shall be divided, by
lot, as equally as may be, into four classes. The seats of the Senators of the
first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the first year; of the second
class, at the expiration of the second year; of the third class, at the
expiration of the third year; and of the fourth class at the expiration of the
fourth year; so that one fourth may be chosen every year.

X. The General Assembly shall meet on the first Tuesday of December in every
year, unless sooner convened by the Governor.

XI. Each House shall choose its Speaker and other officers: and the Senate
shall also choose a Speaker, protempore, when the Speaker shall exercise the
office of Governor.

XII. Each House shall judge of the qualifications of its members. Contented
elections shall be determined by a committee to be selected, formed, and
regulated in such manner as shall be directed by law. A majority of each House
shall constitute a quorum to do business: but a smaller number may adjourn from
day to day, and may be authorized, by law, to compel the attendance of absent
members, in such manner, and under such penalties, as may be provided.

XIII. Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings; punish its
members for disorderly behavior; and, with the concurrence of two-thirds,
expel a member; but not a second time for the same cause; and shall have all
other powers necessary for a branch of the Legislature of a free State.

XIV. Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and publish them
weekly, except such parts as may require secrecy. And the yeas and nays of the
members, on any question, shall, at the desire of any two of them, be entered
on the journals.

XV. The doors of each House, and of committees of the whole, shall be open,
unless when the business shall be such as ought to be kept secret.

XVI. Neither House shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for more
than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the two Houses shall
be sitting.

XVII. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their
services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the
Commonwealth. They shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach or
surety of the p^ace, be privileged from arrest, during their at^^^dance at the
session of the respective Houses, and in going to and returning from the same.
And for any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in
any other place.

XVIII. No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he shall
have been elected, be appointed to any civil office, under this Commonwealth,
which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have been
increased, during such time: and no member of Congress, or other person holding
any office (except of attorney at law, and in the militia) under the United
States or this Commonwealth, shall be a member of either House, during his
continuance in Congress, or in office.

XIX. When vacancies happen in either House, the Speaker shall issue writs of
election to sill such vacancies.

XX. All bills, for raising revenue, shall originate in the House of
Representatives: but the Senate may propose amendments, as in other bills.

XXI. No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law.

XXII. Every bill, which shall have passed both Houses, shall be presented to
the Governor. If he approve, he shall sign it: but if he shall not approve, he
shall return it, with his objections, to the House in which it shall have
originated, who shall enter the objections at large upon their journals, and
proceed to re-consider it. If, after such re-consideration, two-thirds of that
House shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, with the objections, to
the other House, by which likewise it shall be re-considered: and if approved
by two-thirds of that House, it shall be a law. But in such cases, the votes of
both Houses shall be determined by yeas and nays: and the names of the persons
voting for or against the bill, shall be entered on the journals of each House
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the Governor within ten days
(Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him; it shall be a
law, in like manner as if he had signed it; unless the General Assembly, by
their adjournment, prevent its return; in which case it shall be a law, unless
sent back within three days after their next meeting.

XXIII. Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of both
Houses may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be
presented to the Governor; and, before it shall take effect, be approved by
him; or, being disapproved, shall be re-passed by two-thirds of both Houses,
according to the rules and limitations prescribed in case of a bill.

ARTICLE II.
I. The supreme executive power of this Commonwealth shall be vested in a
Governor.

II. The Governor shall be chosen on the second Tuesday of October, by the
citizens of the Commonwealth, at the places where they shall respectively vote
for Representatives. The returns of every election for Governor shall be sealed
up, and transmitted to the seat of government, directed to the Speaker of the
Senate, who shall open and publish them, in the presence of the members of both
Houses of the Legislature. The person having the highest number of votes shall
be Governor. But if two or more shall be equal and highest in votes, one of
them shall be chosen Governor, by the joint vote of the members of both Houses.
Contested elections shall be determined by a committee, to be selected from
both Houses of the Legislature, and formed and regulated in such manner as
shall be directed by law.

III. The Governor shall hold his office during three years from the third
Tuesday of December next ensuing his election; and shall not be capable of
holding it longer than nine in any term of twelve years.

IV. He shall be at least thirty years of age, and have been a citizen and
inhabitant of this State seven years next before his election; unless he shall
have been absent on the public business of the United States, or of this State.

V. No member of Congress, or person holding any office under the United
States, or this State, shall exercise the office of Governor.

VI. The Governor shall, at stated times, receive for his services a
compensation, which shall be neither increased nor diminished during the period
for which he shall have been elected.

VII. He shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of this Commonwealth,
and of the militia; except when they shall be called into the actual service of
the United States.

VIII. He shall appoint all officers, whose offices are established by this
Constitution, or shall be established by law, and whose appointments are not
herein otherwise provided for; but no person shall be appointed to an office
within any county, who shall not have been a citizen and inhabitant therein one
year next before his appointment, if the county shall have been so long
crected; but, if it shall not have been so long erected, then within the limits
of the county or counties, out of which it shall have been taken. No member of
Congress from this State, nor any person holding or ex^re^sing any office of
trust or prosit under the United States, shall, at the same time, hold or
exercise the office of Judge, Secretary, Treasurer, Prothonotary, Register of
Wills, Recorder of Deeds, Sheriff, or any office in this State, to which a
salary is by law annexed, or any other office which suture Legislatures shall
declare incompatible with offices or appointments under the United States.

IX. He shall have power to remit fines and forfeitures, and grant reprieves
and pardons, except in cases of impeachment.

X. He may require information, in writing, from the officers in the executive
department, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices.

XI. He shall, from time to time, give to the General Assembly information of
the state of the Commonwealth, and recommend to their consideration such
measures as he shall judge expedient.

XII. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the General Assembly; and, in
case of disagreement between the two Houses, with respect to the time of
adjournment, adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper, not exceeding
fear months.

XIII. He shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed.

XIV. In case of the death or resignation of the Governor, or of his removal
from office, the Speaker of the Senate shall exercise the office of Governor,
until another Governor shall be duly qualified. And if the trial of a contested
election shall continue longer than until the third Tuesday in December next
ensuing the election of a Governor; the Governor of the last year, or the
Speaker of the Senate, who may be in the exercise of the executive authority,
shall continue therein, until the determination of such contested election, and
until a Governor shall be qualified as aforesaid.

XV. A Secretary shall be appointed and commissioned during the Governor's
continuance in office, if he shall so long behave himself well. He shall keep a
fair register of all the official acts and proceedings of the Governor, and
shall, when required, lay the same, and all papers, minutes, and vouchers
relative thereto, before either branch of the Legislature: and shall perform
such other duties as shall be enjoined him by law.

ARTICLE III.
I. In elections by the citizens, every freeman, of the age of twenty-one
years, having resided in the State two years next before the election, and
within that time paid a State or County tax, which shall have been assessed at
least six months before the election, shall enjoy the rights of an elector;
provided, that the sons of persons qualified as aforesaid, between the ages of
twenty-one and twenty-two years, shall be entitled to vote, although they shall
not have paid taxes.

II. All elections shall be by ballot, except those by persons in their
representative capacities, who shall vote viva voce.

III. Electors shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach or
surety of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at
elections, and in going to and returning from them.

ARTICLE IV.
I. The House of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeaching.

II. All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When sitting for that
purpose, the Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation. No person shall be
convicted, without the concurrence of two thirds of the members present.

III. The Governor, and all other civil officers, under this Commonwealth,
shall be liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in office. But judgment, in
such cases, shall not extend further than to removal from office, and
disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit under this
Commonwealth. The party, whether convicted or acquitted, shall nevertheless be
liable to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment according to law.

ARTICLE V.
I. The judicial power of this Commonwealth shall be vested in a Supreme Court,
in Courts of Oyer and Terminer and General Jail Delivery, in a Court of Common
Pleas, Orphans' Court, Register's Court, and a Court of Quarter Sessions of the
Peace for each County, in Justices of the Peace, and in such other Courts as
the Legislature may, from time to time, establish.

II. The Judges of the Supreme Court, and of the several Courts of Common
Pleas, shall hold their offices during good behavior. But for any reasonable
cause, which shall not be sufficient ground of impeachment, the Governor may
remove any of them, on the address of two thirds of each branch of the
Legislature. The Judges of the Supreme Court, and the Presidents of the several
Courts of Common Pleas, shall, at stated times, receive, for their services, an
adequate compensation, to be fixed by law, which shall not be diminished during
their continuance in office: but they shall receive no fees or perquisites of
office, nor hold any other office of prosit under this Commonwealth.

III. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall extend over the State; and
the Judges thereof shall, by virtue of their offices, be Justices of Oyer and
Terminer and General Jail Delivery in the several counties.

IV. Until it shall be otherwise directed by law, the several Courts of Common
Pleas shall be established in the following manner. The Governor shall appoint
in each County, not fewer than three, nor more than four Judges, who, during
their continuance in office, shall reside in such county. The State shall be
divided, by law, into circuits, none of which shall include more than six, nor
sewer than three counties. A President shall be appointed of the Courts in each
circuit, who, during his continuance in office, shall reside therein. The
President and Judges, any two of whom shall be a quorum, shall compose the
respective Courts of Common Pleas.

V. The Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, in each County, shall, by virtue
of their offices, be Justices of Oyer and Terminer and General Jail Delivery,
for the trial of capital and other offenders therein: any two of the said
Judges, the President being one, shall be a quorum; but they shall not hold a
Court of Oyer and Terminer or Jail Delivery in any county, when the Judges of
the Supreme Court, or any of them, shall be sitting in the same county. The
party accused, as well as the Commonwealth, may, under such regulations as
shall be prescribed by law, remove the indictment and proceedings, or a
transcript thereof, into the Supreme Court.

VI. The Supreme Court and the several Courts of Common Pleas shall, beside the
powers heretofore usually exercised by them, have the powers of a Court of
Chancery, so far as relates to the perpetuating testimony, the obtaining of
evidence from places not within the State, and the care of the persons and
estates of those, who are non compotes mentis: and the Legislature shall vest,
in the said Courts, such other powers, to grant relief in equity, as shall be
found necessary; and may, from time to time, enlarge or diminish those powers,
or vest them in such other Courts as they shall judge proper, for the due
administration of justice.

VII. The Judges of the Court of Common Pleas of each county, any two of whom
shall be a quorum, shall compose the Court of Quarter Sessions of the Peace,
and Orphans' Court thereof: and the Register of Wills, together with the said
Judges, or any two of them, shall compose the Register's Court of each county.

VIII. The Judges of the Courts of Common Pleas shall, within their respective
counties, have the like powers with the Judges of the Supreme Court, to issue
writs of certiorari to the Justices of the Peace, and to cause their
proceedings to be brought before them, and the like right and justice to be
done.

IX. The President of the Court, in each circuit, within such circuit, and the
Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, within their respective counties, shall be
Justices of the Peace so far as relates to criminal matters.

X. The Governor shall appoint a competent number of Justices of the Peace, in
such convenient districts, in each county, as are or shall be directed by law:
they shall be commissioned during good behavior; but may be removed on
conviction of misbehaviour in office, or of any infamous crime, or on the
address of both Houses of the Legislature.

XI. A Register's office for the Probate of Wills and granting letters of
administration, and an office ^^r the recording of deeds, shall be kept in each
county.

XII. The style of all process shall be, The commonwealth of Pennsylvania; all
prosecutions shall be carried on in the name and by the authority of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and conclude, Against the peace and dignity of
the same.

ARTICLE VI.
I. Sheriffs and Coroners shall, at the times and places of election of
Representatives, be chosen by the citizens of each county. Two persons shall be
chosen for each office, one of whom, for each respectively, shall be appointed
by the Governor. They shall hold their offices for three years, if they shall
so long behave themselves well, and until a successor be duly qualified: but no
person shall be twice chosen or appointed Sheriff in any term of six years.
Vacancies, in either of the said offices, shall be filled by a new appointment,
to be made by the Governor, to continue until the next general election, and
until a successor shall be chosen and qualified as aforesaid.

II. The freemen of this Commonwealth shall be armed and disciplined for its
defense. Those, who conscientiously scruple to bear arms, shall not be
compelled to do so; but shall pay an equivalent for personal service. The
militia officers shall be appointed, in such manner, and for such time, as
shall be directed by law.

III. Prothonotaries, Clerks of the Peace and Orphans' Courts, Recorders of
Deeds, Registers of Wills, and Sheriffs, shall keep their offices in the county
town of the county in which they respectively shall be officers; unless when
the Governor shall, for special reasons, dispense therewith, for any term not
exceeding five years, after the county shall have been erected.

IV. All commissions shall be in the name and by the authority of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and be sealed with the State feal, and signed by
the Governor.

V. The State Treasurer shall be appointed, annually, by the joint vote of the
members of both Houses. All other officers, in the treasury department,
attorneys at law, election officers, officers relating to taxes, to the poor
and highways, constables, and other twonship officers, shall be appointed in
such manner as is or shall be directed by law.

ARTICLE VII.
I. The Legislature shall, as soon as conveniently may be, provide, by law, for
the establishment of schools throughout the State, in such manner, that the
poor may be taught gratis.

II. The arts and sciences shall be promoted in one or more seminaries of
learning.

III. The rights, privileges, immunities, and estates of religious societies
and corporate bodies, shall remain, as if the Constitution of this State had
not been altered or amended.

ARTICLE VIII.
Members of the General Assembly, and all officers, executive and judicial,
shall be bound by oath or affirmation, to support the Constitution of this
Commonwealth, and to perform the duties of their respective offices with
fidelity.

ARTICLE IX. That the general, great, and essential principles of liberty and
free government may be recognized and unalterably established, WE DECLARE,
I. That all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain
inherent and indefeasible rights, among which are those of enjoying and
defending life and liberty, of acquiring, possessing, and protecting property
and reputation, and of pursuing their own happiness.

II. That all power is inherent in the people; and all free governments are
founded on their authority, and instituted for their peace, safety, and
happiness. For the advancement of those ends, they have, at all times, an
unalienable and indefeasible right, to alter, reform, or abolish their
government, in such manner as they may think proper.

III. That all men have a natural and indefeasible right to worship Almighty
God according to the dictates of their own consciences; that no man can, of
right, be compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of worship, or to
maintain any ministry, against his consent; that no human authority can, in any
case whatever, control or interfere with the rights of conscience; and that no
preference shall ever be given, by law, to any religious establishments or
modes of worship.

IV. That no person, who acknowledges the being of a God, and a future state of
rewards and punishments, shall, on account of his religious sentiments, he
lisqualified to hold any office or place of trust or profit under this
Commonwealth.

V. That elections shall be free and equal.

VI. That trial by jury shall be as heretofore, and the right thereof remain
inviolate.

VII. That the printing presses shall be free to every person, who undertakes
to examine the proceedings of the Legislature or any branch of government: and
no law shall ever be made to restrain the right thereof. The free communication
of thoughts and opinions is one of the invaluable rights of man: and every
citizen may freely speak, write and print on any subject, being responsible for
the abuse of that liberty. In prosecutions for the publication of papers,
investigating the official conduct of officers, or men in a public capacity, or
where the matter published is proper for public information, the truth thereof
may be given in evidence. And, in all indictments for libels, the jury shall
have a right to determine the law and the facts, under the direction of the
Court, as in other cases.

VIII. That the people shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
possessions, from unreasonable searches and seizures; and that no warrant, to
search any place or to seize any person or things, shall issue without
describing them as nearly as may be, nor without probable cause, supported by
oath or affirmation.

IX. That, in all criminal prosecutions, the accused has a right to be heard
by himself and his counsel; to demand the nature and cause of the accusation
against him; to meet the witnesses face to face; to have compulsory process for
obtaining witnesses in his favor; and, in prosecutions by indictment or
information, a speedy public trial, by an impartial jury of the vicinage: that
he cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself; nor can he be deprived
of his life, liberty, or property, unless by the judgment of his peers, or the
law of the land.

X. That no person shall, for any indictable offense, be proceeded against
criminally by information, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces,
or in the militia, when in actual service, in time of war or public danger, or,
by leave of the Court, for oppression, and misdemeanor in office. No person
shall, for the same offense, be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb: nor
shall any man's property be taken or applied to public use, without the consent
of his Representatives, and without just compensation being made.

XI. That all Courts shall be open; and every man, for an injury done him in
his lands, goods, person, or reputation, shall have remedy by the due course of
law, and right and justice administered without sale, denial, or delay. Suits
may be brought against the Commonwealth in such manner, in such Courts, and in
such cases, as the Legislature may, by law, direct.

XII. That no power of suspending laws shall be exercised, unless by the
Legislature, or its authority.

XIII. That excessive bail shall not be required, not excessive sines imposed,
nor cruel punishments inflicted.

XIV. That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, unless for
capital offenses, when the proof is evident, or presumption great: and the
privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when, in
cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

XV. That no commission of Oyer and Terminer or Jail Delivery shall be issued.

XVI. That the person of a debtor, where there is not strong presumption of
fraud, shall not be continued in prison, after delivering up his estate for the
benefit of his creditors, in such manner as shall be prescribed by law.

XVII. That no ex post facto law, nor any law impairing contracts, shall be
made.

XVIII. That no person shall be attainted of treason or felony by the
Legislature.

XIX. That no attainder shall work corruption of blood, nor, except during the
life of the offender, forfeiture of estate to the Commonwealth; that the
estates of such persons as shall destroy their own lives shall descend or vest
as in case of natural death; and if any person shall be killed by casualty,
there shall be no forfeiture by reason thereof.

XX. That the citizens have a right, in a peaceable manner, to assemble
together for their common good, and to apply to those invested with the powers
of government for redress of grievances, or other proper purposes, by petition,
address, or remonstrance.

XXI. That the right of the citizens to bear arms, in defense of themselves and
the State, shall not be questioned.

XXII. That no standing army shall, in time of peace, be kept up, without the
consent of the Legislature; and the military shall, in all cases, and at all
times, be in strict subordination to the civil power.

XXIII. That no soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house,
without the consent of the owner, nor, in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.

XXIV. That the Legislature shall not grant any title of nobility or hereditary
distinction, nor create any office, the appointment to which shall be for a
longer term than during good behavior.

XXV. That emigration from the State shall not be prohibited.

XXVI. To guard against transgressions of the high powers which we have
delegated, WE DECLARE. That every thing in this article is excepted out of the
general powers of government, and shall forever remain inviolate.

SCHEDULE.
That no inconvenience may arise from the alterations and amendments in the
Constitution of this Commonwealth, and in order to carry the same into complete
operation, it is hereby declared and ordained,

I. THAT all laws of this Commonwealth, in force at the time of making the said
alterations and amendments in the said Constitution, and not inconsistent
therewith, and all rights, actions, prosecutions, claims, and contracts, as
well of individuals, as of bodies corporate, shall continue as if the said
alterations and amendments had not been made.

II. That the President and Supreme Executive Council shall continue to
exercise the executive authority of this Commonwealth as heretofore, until the
third Tuesday of December next: but no intermediate vacancies in the Council
shall be supplied by new elections.

III. That all officers, in the appointment of the executive department, shall
continue in the exercise of the duties of their respective offices, until the
first day of September one thousand seven hundred and ninety-one -- unless
their commissions shall sooner expire by their own limitations, or the said
offices become vacant by death or resignation -- and no longer, unless
re-appointed and commissioned by the Governor; except that the Judges of the
Supreme Court shall hold their offices for the terms in their commissions
respectively expressed.

IV. That justice shall be administered in the several counties of this State,
until the period aforesaid, by the same Justices, in the same courts, and in
the same manner, as heretofore.

V. That no person, now in commission as Sheriff, shall be eligible at the next
election for a longer term than will, with the time which he shall have served
in the said office, complete the term of three years.

VI. That, until the first enumeration shall be made, as directed in the fourth
section of the first article of the Constitution, established by this
Convention, the city of Philadelphia and the several counties shall be
respectively entitled to elect the same number of Representatives, as is now
prescribed by law.

VII. That the first Genete shall consist of eighteen members, to be chosen i^
districts, formed as follows, to wit: The city of Philadelphia and the counties
of Philadelphia and Delaware shall be a district, and elect three Senators: the
county of Chester shall be a district, and shall elect one Senator: the county
of Bucks shall be a district, and shall elect one Senator: the county of
Montgomery shall be a district, and shall elect one Senator: the county of
Northampton shall be a district, and shall elect one Senator: the counties of
Lancaster and York shall be a district, and shall elect three Senators: the
counties of Berks and Dauphin shall be a district, and shall elect two
Senators: the counties of Cumberland and Mifflin shall be a district, and shall
elect one Senator: the counties of Northumberland, Luzerne, and Huntingdon,
shall be a district, and shall elect one Senator: the counties of Bedford and
Franklin shall be a district, (...) shall elect one Senator: the counties of
Westmoreland and Allegany shall be a district, and shall elect one Senator: and
the counties of Washington and Fayette shall be a district, and shall elect two
Senators: which Senators shall serve until the first enumeration before
mentioned shall be made, and the representation in both Houses of the
Legislature shall be established by law, and chosen as in the Constitution is
directed. Any vacancies which shall happen in the Senate within the said time
shall be supplied as prescriben in the nineteenth section of the first article.

VIII. That the elections of Senators shall be conducted, and the returns
thereof made, to the Senate, in the same manner as is prescribed by the
election laws of the State for conducting and making return of the election of
Representatives. In those districts which consist of more than one county, the
Judges of the district elections within each county, after having formed a
return of the whole election within that county, in such manner as is directed
by law, shall send the same, by one or more of their number, to the place
herein after mentioned within the district of which such county is a part,
where the Judges, so m^t, shall compare and cast up the several county returns,
and execute, under their hands and seals, one general and true return for the
whole district: that is to say, the Judges of the district composed of the city
of Philadelphia, and the counties of Philadelphia and Del^ware, shall meet in
the State-house in the city of Philadelphia; the Judges of the district
composed of the courties of Lancaster and York shall meet at the Courthouse,
in the county of Lancaster; the Judges of the district composed of the counties
of Parks and Da^ph^^, (...) meet at Middletown in the county of Berks; the
Judges of the district composed of the counties of Cumberland and Misslin,
shall meet in Greenwood township, county of Cumberland, at the house now
occupied by David Miller; the Judges of the district composed of the counties
of Northumberland, Luzerne, and Huntingdon, shall meet in the town of Sanbury;
the Judges of the district composed of the counties of Bedford and Franklin,
shall meet at the house now occupied by John Dickey, in Air township, Bedford
county; the Judges of the district composed of the counties of Westmoreland and
Aliegany, shall meet in Westmoreland county, at the Courthouse in the town of
Greensborough; and the Judges of the district composed of the counties of
Washington and Fayette shall meet at the Court house in the town of Washington,
in Washington county, on the third Tuesday in October respectively, for the
purposes aforesaid.

IX. That the election of the Governor shall be conducted, in the several
counties, in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State for the election of
Representatives: and the returns in each county shall be sealed by the Judges
of the elections, and transmitted to the President of the Supreme Executive
Council, directed to the Speaker of the Senate, as foon after the election as
may be.

DONE in Convention, the second day of September, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety, and of the independence of the United States
of America, the fifteeenth. In testimony whereof we have hereunto subscribed
our names. THOMAS MIFFLIN, President. James Wilson, Hil^ry Baker, Paul Groscop,
Baltzet G^hr, William Lewis, Thomas M'Kean, George Gray, William Robinson, jun.
Robert Hare, Enoch Edwards, Samuel Ogden, Thomas Jenks, John Barclay, Abraham
Stout, William Gibbons, Thomas Bull, James Boyd, Edward Hand, Robert Coleman,
Sebastian Graff, John Hubly, John Breckbill, Henry Miller, Henry Slegle,
William Reed, Benjamin Tyson, Benjamin Pedan, Matthew Dill, William Irvine,
James Power, Joseph Heister, Christian Lower, Abraham Lincoln, Samuel
Sitgreaves, John Arndt, Peter Rhoads, Joseph Powell, John Piper, Charles Smith,
Simon Snyder, William Findley, William Todd, Alexander Addison, John Hoge,
David Redick, James Ross, John Smilie, Albert Gallatin, James M'Lene, George
Matthews, James Morris, Lindsay Coats, Jonathan Shoemaker, John Gloninger,
William Brown, Alexander Graydon, Timothy Pickering, Andrew Henderson, John
Gibson, Thomas Beale, John Sellers, Nathaniel Newlin. Attest. JOSEPH REDMAN,
Secretary. Attest. JACOB SHALLUS, Assistant Secretary.


THE CONSTITUTION OF DELAWARE.
A. DECLARATION OF RIGHTS and Fundamental Rules of the DELAWARE STATE, formerly
styled, The Government of the Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex upon
Delaware.
I. THAT all government of right originates from the people, is founded in
compact only, and instituted solely for the good of the whole.

II. That all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences and understanding^; and that
no man ought, or of right can be compelled to attend any religious worship, or
maintain any ministry, contrary to, or against his own free will-and consent;
and that-no authority can or ought to be vested in, or assumed by, any power
whatever, that shall in any case interfere with, or in any manner control the
right of conscience, in the free exercise of religious worship.

III. That all persons, professing the Christian religion, ought forever to
enjoy equal rights and privileges, in this S^ate; unless, under color of
religion, any man disturb the peace, the happiness, or safety of society.

IV. That the people of this State have the sole, exclusive, and inherent right
of governing and regulating the internal police of the same.

V. That persons entrusted with the legislative and executive powers, are the
trustees and servants of the public, and, as such, accountable for their
conduct; wheref^^^, whenever the ends of government are perverted, and p^^^i^
liberty manifestly endangered, by the legislative sing^y, or a treacherous
combination of both, the people may, and of right ought to establish a new or
reform the old government.

VI. That the right, in the people, to participate in the Legislature, is the
foundation of liberty and of all free government; and for this end, all
elections ought to be free and frequent: and every freeman, having sufficient
evidence of a permanent common interest with, and attachment to the community,
has a right of suffrage.

VII. That no power of suspending laws, or the execution of laws, ought to be
exercised, unless by the Legislature.

VIII. That, for redress of grievances, and for amending and strengthening of
the laws, the Legislature ought to be frequently convened.

IX. That every man has a right to petition the Legislature for the redress of
grievances, in a peaceable and orderly manner.

X. That every member of society has a right to be protected, in the enjoyment
of life, liberty, and property, and therefore is bound to contribute his
proportion toward the expense of that protection, and yield his personal
service, when necessary, or an equivalent thereto; but no part of a man's
property can be justly taken from him, or applied to public uses, without his
own consent, or that of his legal Representatives: nor can any man, that is
conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms in any case, be justly compelled
thereto, if he will pay such equivalent.

XI. That retrospective laws, punishing offenses committed before the existence
of such laws, are oppressive and unjust, and ought not to be made.

XII. That every freeman, for every injury done him in his goods, lands, or
person, by any other person, ought to have remedy, by the course of the law of
the land, and ought to have justice and right for the injury done to him,
freely without sale, fully without any denial, and speedily without delay,
according to the law of the land.

XIII. That trial, by jury, of facts where they arise, is one of the greatest
securities of the lives, liberties, and estates of the people.

XIV. That in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, every man has a right to
be informed of the accusation against him, to be allowed counsel, to be
confronted with the accusers or witnesses, to examine evidence on oath in his
favor, and to a speedy trial, by an impartial jury, without whose unanimous
consent he ought not to be found guilty.

XV. That no man, in the courts of common law, ought to be compelled to give
evidence against himself.

XVI. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive sines
imposed, nor cruel nor unusual punishments inflicted.

XVII. That all warrants, without oath, to search suspected places, or to seize
any person or his property, are grievous and oppressive; and all general
warrants -- to search suspected places, or to apprehend all persons suspected,
without naming or describing the place or any person in special -- are illegal,
and ought not to be granted.

XVIII. That a well-regulated militia is the proper, natural, and safe defense
of a free government.

XIX. That standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised
or kept up, without the consent of the Legislature.

XX. That, in all cases, and at all times, the military ought to be under
strict subordination to, and governed by, the civil power.

XXI. That no soldier ought to be quartered in any house, in time of peace,
without the consent of the owner; and in time of war, in such manner only, as
the Legislature shall direct.

XXII. That the independency and uprightness of Judges are essential to the
impartial administration of justice, and a great security to the rights and
liberties of the people.

XXIII. That the liberty of the press ought to be inviolably preserved.

The CONSTITUTION, or SYSTEM of GOVERNMENT, agreed to and resolved upon by the
Representatives, in full Convention, of the DELAWARE STATE, formerly styled,
The Government of the Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware;
the said Representatives being chosen by the freemen of the said State, for
that express purpose.
I. THE government of the counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex, upon
Delaware, shall hereafter, in all public and other writings, be called, The
Delaware State.

II. The Legislature shall be formed of two distinct branches. They shall meet
once or oftener in every year, and shall be called, The General Assembly of
Delaware.

III. One of the branches of the Legislature shall be called, The House of
Assembly, and shall consist of seven Representatives, to be chosen for each
county annually, of such persons as are freeholders of the same.

IV. The other branch shall be called, The Council, and consist of nine
members; three to be chosen for each county at the time of the first election
of the Assembly, who shall be freeholders of the county for which they are
chosen, and be upwards of twenty five years of age. At the end of one year
after the general election, the Counselor who had the smallest number of votes
in each county shall be displaced, and the vacancies, thereby occasioned,
supplied by the freemen of each county choosing the same or another person, at
a new election, in manner aforesaid. At the end of two years after the first
general election, the Counselor who stood second in number of votes in each
county shall be displaced, and the vacancies, thereby occasioned, supplied by a
new election, in manner aforesaid. And at the end of three years from the first
general election, the Counselor who had the greatest number of votes in each
county shall be displaced, and the vacancies, thereby occasioned, supplied by a
new election in manner aforesaid. And this rotation, of a Counselor being
displaced at the end of three years in each county, and his office supplied by
a new choice, shall be continued afterward in due order annually forever;
whereby, after the first general election, a Counselor will remain in trust
for three years from the time of his being elected, and a Counselor will be
displaced; and the same or another chosen in each county at every election.

V. The right of suffrage, in the election of members for both Houses, shall
remain, as exercised by law at present; and each House shall choose its own
Speaker, appoint its own officers, judge of the qualifications and elections of
its own members, settle its own rules of proceeding, and direct writs of
election, for supplying intermediate vacancies. They may also severally expel
any of their own members for misbehaviour, but not a second time in the same
sessions for the same offense, if re-elected; and they shall have all other
powers, necessary for the Legislature of a free and independent State.

VI. All money bills, for the support of government, shall originate in the
House of Assembly, and may be altered, amended, or rejected, by the Legislative
Council. All other bills and ordinances may take rise in the House of Assembly,
or Legislative Council, and may be altered, amended, or rejected by either.

VII. A President or Chief Magistrate shall be chosen by joint ballot of both
Houses, to be taken in the House of Assembly, and the box examined by the
Speakers of each House, in the presence of the other members; and in case the
numbers, for the two highest in votes, should be equal, then the Speaker of the
Council shall have an additional casting voice; and the appointment of the
person, who has the majority of votes, shall be entered at large on the minutes
and journals of each House; and a copy thereof, on parchment, certified and
signed by the Speakers respectively, and sealed with the Great Seal of the
State, which they are hereby authorized to affix, shall be delivered to the
person so chosen President, who shall continue in that office three years, and
until the sitting of the next General Assembly, and no longer; nor be eligible
until the expiration of three years, after he shall have been out of that
office. An adequate, but moderate salary shall be settled on him, during his
continuance in office. He may draw for such sums of money, as shall be
appropriated by the General Assembly, and be accountable to them for the same;
he may, by and with the advice of the Privy Council, lay embargoes, or prohibit
the exportation of any commodity, for any time not exceeding thirty days, in
the recess of the General Assembly; he shall have the power of granting pardons
or reprieves, except where the prosecution shall be carried on by the House of
Assembly, or the law shall otherwise direct; in which cases no pardon or
reprieve shall be granted, but by a resolve of the House of Assembly; and may
exercise all the other executive powers of government, limited and restrained,
as by this Constitution is mentioned, and according to the laws of the State.
And on his death, inability, or absence from the State, the Speaker of the
Legislative Council, for the time being, shall be Vice President; and in case
of his death, inability, or absence from the State, the Speaker of the House of
Assembly shall have the powers of a President, until a new nomination be made
by the General Assembly.

VIII. A Privy Council, consisting of four members, shall be chosen by ballot,
two by the Legislative Council, and two by the House of Assembly: provided,
that no regular officer of the army or navy, in the service and pay of the
Continent, or of this, or of any other State, shall be eligible. And a member
of the Legislative Council, or of the House of Assembly, being chosen of the
Privy Council, and accepting thereof, shall thereby lose his seat. Three
members shall be a quorum; and their advice and proceedings shall be entered on
record, and signed by the members present, (to any part of which, any member
may enter his dissent) to be laid before the General Assembly when called for
by them. Two members shall be removed by ballot, one by the Legislative
Council, and one by the House of Assembly, at the end of two years; and those
who remain, the next year after; who shall severally be ineligible for the
three next years. These vacancies, as well as those oc^asioned by death or
incapacity, shall be supplied by new elections, in the same manner. And this
rotation of a Privy Counselor shall be continued afterward in due order,
annually, forever. The President may, by summons, convene the Privy Council, at
any time when the public exigencies may require, and at such place as he shall
think most convenient, when and where they are to attend accordingly.

IX. The President, with the advice and consent of the Privy Council, may
embody the militia, and act as captain general and commander in chief of them,
and the other military force of this State, under the laws of the same.

X. Either House of the General Assembly may adjourn themselves respectively.
The President shall not prorogue, adjourn, or dissolve the General Assembly;
but he may, with the advice of the Privy Council, or on the application of a
majority of either House, call them before the time to which they shall stand
adjourned: and the two Houses shall always sit at the same time and place; for
which purpose, immediately after every adjournment, the Speaker of the House of
Assembly shall give notice to the Speaker of the other House, of the time to
which the House of Assembly stands adjourned.

XI. The Delegates for Delaware to the Congress of the United States of
America, shall be chosen annually, or superseded in the mean time, by joint
ballot of both Houses in the General Assembly.

XII. The President and General Assembly shall, by joint ballot, appoint three
Justices of the Supreme Court for the State, one of whom shall be Chief
Justice, and a Judge of Admiralty, and also four Justices of the Courts of
Common Pleas and Orphans' Courts, for each county, one of whom in each Court
shall be styled Chief Justice, (and, in case of division on the ballot, the
President shall have an additional casting voice) to be commissioned by the
President, under the Great Seal -- who shall continue in office during good
behavior. And during the time the Justices of the said Supreme Court, and
Courts of Common Pleas, remain in office, they shall hold none other, except in
the militia. Any one of the Justices of either of said Courts shall have power,
in case of the non-coming of his brethren, to open and adjourn the Court. An
adequate, fixed, but moderate salary shall be settled on them, during their
continuance in office. The President and Privy Council shall appoint the
Secretary, the Attorney General, Registers for the Probate of Wills, and
granting letters of administration, Registers in Chancery, Clerks of the Courts
of Common Pleas and Orphans' Courts, and Clerks of the Peace, who shall be
commissioned as aforesaid, and remain in office during five years, if they
behave themselves well; during which time, the said Registers in Chancery, and
Clerks, shall not be Justices of either of the said Courts, of which they are
officers, but they shall have authority to sign all writs, by them issued, and
take recognizances of bail. The Justices of the Peace shall be nominated by the
House of Assembly; that is to say, they shall name twenty-four persons for each
county, of whom the President, with the approbation of the Privy Council, shall
appoint twelve, who shall be commissioned, as aforesaid, and continue in office
daring seven years, if they behave themselves well; and in case of vacancies,
or if the Legislature shall think proper to increase the number, they shall be
nominated and appointed in like manner. The members of the Legislative and
Privy Councils shall be Justices of the Peace for the whole State, during their
continuance in trust; and the Justices of the Courts of Common Pleas shall be
conservators of the peace in their respective counties.

XIII. The Justices of the Courts of Common Pleas and Orphans' Courts shall
have the power of holding inferior Courts of Chancery, as heretofore, unless
the Legislature shall otherwise direct.

XIV. The Clerks of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the Chief Justice
thereof, and the Recorders of Deeds, by the Justices of the Courts of Common
Pleas for each county severally, and commissioned by the President, under the
Great Seal, and continue in office five years, if they behave themselves well.

XV. The Sheriffs and Coroners of the respective counties shall be chosen
annually, as heretofore; and any person, having served three years as Sheriff,
shall be ineligible for three years after; and the President and Privy Council
shall have the appointment of such of the two candidates, returned for the said
offices of Sheriff and Coroner, as they shall think best qualified, in the same
manner that the Governor heretofore enjoyed this power.

XVI. The General Assembly, by joint ballot, shall appoint the generals and
field officers, and all other officers in the army or navy of this State. And
the President may appoint, during pleasure, until otherwise directed by the
Legislature, all necessary civil officers, not herein before mentioned.

XVII. There shall be an appeal from the Supreme Court of Delaware, in matters
of law and equity, to a court of seven persons, to consist of the President for
the time being, who shall preside therein, and six others, to be appointed,
three by the Legislative Council, and three by the House of Assembly, who shall
continue in office during good behavior, and be commissioned by the President,
under the Great Seal; which court shall be styled, The Court of Appeals, and
have all the authority and powers heretofore given by law, in the last resort,
to the King in Council, under the old government. The Secretary shall be the
Clerk of this Court: and vacancies therein, occasioned by death or incapacity,
shall be supplied by new elections, in manner aforesaid.

XVIII. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Courts of Common Pleas, the
members of the Privy Council, the Secretary, the Trustees of the Loan Office,
and Clerks of the Court of Common Pleas, during their continuance in office,
and all persons concerned in any army or navy contracts, shall be ineligible to
either House of Assembly; and any member of either House, accepting of any
other of the offices herein before mentioned (excepting the office of a Justice
of the Peace) shall have his seat thereby vacated, and a new election shall be
ordered.

XIX. The Legislative Council and Assembly shall have the power of making the
Great Seal of this State, which shall be kept by the President, or, in his
absence, by the Vice President, to be used by them as occasion may require. It
shall be called, The Great Seal of the Delaware State, and shall be affixed to
all laws and commissions.

XX. Commissions shall run in the name of The Delaware State, and bear test by
the President. Writs shall run in the same manner, and bear test in the name of
the Chief Justice, or Justice first named in the commissions for the several
Courts, and be sealed with the public seals of such Courts. Indictments shall
conclude, Against the peace and dignity of the State.

XXI. In case of vacancy of the offices, above directed to be filled by the
President and General Assembly, the President and Privy Council may appoint
others in their stead, until there shall be a new election.

XXII. Every person, who shall be chosen a member of either House, or appointed
to any office or place of trust, before taking his seat, or entering upon the
execution of his office, shall take the following oath, or affirmation, if
conscientiously scrupulous of tak^^g an oath, to wit.

"I, A. B. will bear true allegiance to the Delaware State, submit to its
Constitution and laws, and do no act wittingly whereby the freedom thereof may
be prejudiced."

And also make and subscribe the following declaration, to wit.

"I, A. B. do profess faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only
Son, and the Holy Ghost, one God, blessed for evermore; and I do acknowledge
(...) holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine
inspiration."

And all officers shall also take an oath of office.

XXIII. The President, when he is out of office, and within eighteen months
after, and all others offending against the State, either by
mal-administration, corruption, or other means, by which the safety of the
Commonwealth may be endangered, within eighteen months after the offense
committed, shall be impeachable, by the House of Assembly, before the
Legislative Council: such impeachment to be prosecuted by the Attorney General,
or such other person or persons as the House of Assembly may appoint, according
to the laws of the land. If found guilty, he or they shall be either forever
disabled to hold any office under government, or removed from office
protempore, or subjected to such pains and penalties as the laws shall direct.
And all officers shall be removed, on conviction of misbehaviour, at common
law, or on impeachment, or upon the address of the General Assembly.

XXIV. All acts of Assembly, in force in this State on the fifteenth day of May
last (and not hereby altered, or contrary to the resolutions of Congress, or of
the late House of Assembly of this State,) shall so continue, until altered or
repealed by the Legislature of this State, unless where they are temporary, in
which case they shall expire at the times respectively limited for their
duration.

XXV. The common law of England, as well as so much of the statute law as has
been heretofore adopted in practice in this State, shall remain in force,
unless they shall be altered by a future law of the Legislature; such parts
only excepted as are repugnant to the rights and privileges contained in this
Constitution, and the Declaration of Rights, etc. agreed to by this Convention.

XXVI. No person, hereafter imported into this State from Africa ought to be
held in slavery under any pretense whatever; and no Negro, Indian, or Mulatto
slave, ought to be brought into this State, for sale, from any part of the
world.

XXVII. The first election for the General Assembly of this State shall be held
on the twenty-first day of October next, at the Court Houses in the several
counties, in the manner heretofore used in the election of the Assembly, except
as to choice of Inspectors and Assessors, where Assessors have not been chosen
on the sixteenth day of September instant, which shall be made on the morning
of the day of election, by the electors, inhabitants of the respective hundreds
in each county. At which time the Sheriffs and Coroners, for the said counties
respectively, are to be elected: and the present Sheriffs of the counties of
Newcastle and Kent, may be re-chosen to that office, until the first day of
October in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine;
and the present Sheriff for the County of Sussex may be re-chosen to that
office until the first day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and seventy-eight, provided the freemen think proper to re-elect
them at every general election; and the present Sheriffs and Coroners
respectively shall continue to exercise their offices as heretofore, until the
Sheriffs and Coroners, to be elected on the said twenty-first day of October,
shall be commissioned and sworn into office. The members of the Legislative
Council and Assembly shall meet for transacting the business of the State, on
the twenty-eighth day of October next, and continue in office, until the first
day of October, which will be in the year one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-seven; on which day, and on the first day of October in each year
forever after, the Legislative Council, Assembly, Sheriffs and Coroners shall
be chosen by ballot, in manner directed by the several laws of this State, for
regulating elections of members of Assembly, and Sheriffs and Coroners; and the
General Assembly shall meet on the twentieth day of the same month for
transacting the business of the State; and if any of the said first and
twentieth days of October should be Sunday, then, and in such case, the
elections shall be held, and the General Assembly meet the next day following.

XXVIII. To prevent any violence or force being used at the said elections, no
persons shall come armed to any of them, and no muster of the militia shall be
made on that day; nor shall any battalion or company give in their votes
immediately succeeding each other, if any other voter, who offers to vote,
objects thereto; nor shall any battalion or company, in the pay of the
Continent, or of this or any other State, be suffered to remain at the time and
place of holding the said elections, nor within one mile of the said places
respectively, for twenty-four hours before the opening said elections, nor
within twenty-four hours after the same are closed, so as in any manner to
impede the freely and conveniently carrying on the said election: provided
always, that every elector may, in a peaceable and orderly manner, give in his
vote on the said day of election.

XXIX. There shall be no establishment of any one religious sect in this State,
in preference to another; and no clergyman or preacher of the gospel, of any
denomination, shall be capable of holding any civil office in this State, or of
being a member of either of the branches of the Legislature, while they
continue in the exercise of the pastoral function.

XXX. No article of the Declaration of Rights and fundamental rules of this
State, agreed to by this Convention, nor the first, second, fifth, (except that
part thereof that relates to the right of suffrage) twenty-sixth and
twenty-ninth articles of this Constitution, ought ever to be violated, on any
pretense whatever. No other part of this Constitution shall be altered, changed
or diminished, without the consent of five parts in seven of the Assembly, and
seven members of the Legislative Council.

Friday, September 20, 1776.
THE CONSTITUTION OF MARYLAND.
A DECLARATION OF RIGHTS, and the CONSTITUTION and FORM of GOVERNMENT, agreed
to by the Delegates of Maryland, in free and full Convention assembled.
A DECLARATION OF RIGHTS, and.
THE parliament of Great Britain, by a declaratory act, having assumed a right
to make laws to bind the Colonies in all cases whatsoever, and, in pursuance of
such claim, endeavored, by force of arms, to subjugate the United Colonies to
an unconditional submission to their will and power, and having at length
constrained them to declare themselves independent States, and to assume
government under the authority of the people; -- Therefore we, the Delegates of
Maryland, in free and full Convention assembled, taking into our most serious
consideration the best means of establishing a good Constitution in this State,
for the sure foundation and more permanent security thereof, declare,

I. That all government of right originates from the people, is founded in
compact only, and instituted solely for the good of the whole. II. That the
people of this State ought to have the sole and exclusive right of regulating
the internal government and police thereof. III. That the inhabitants of
Maryland are entitled to the common law of England, and the trial by jury,
according to the course of that law, and to the benefit of such of the English
statutes, as existed at the time of their first emigration, and which, by
experience, have been found applicable to their local and other circumstances,
and of such others as have been since made in England, or Great Britain, and
have been introduced, used and practiced by the courts of law or equity; and
also to all acts of Assembly, in force on the first of June seventeen hundred
and seventy-four, except such as may have since expired, or have been or may be
altered by acts of Convention, or this Declaration of Rights -- subject,
nevertheless, to the revision of, and amendment or repeal by, the Legislature
of this State: and the inhabitants of Maryland are also entitled to all
property, derived to them, from or under the Charter, granted by his Majesty
Charles I. to Caecilius Calvert, baron of Baltimore. IV. That all persons
invested with the legislative or executive powers of government are the
trustees of the public, and, as such, accountable for their conduct; wherefore,
whenever the ends of government are perverted, and public liberty manifestly
endangered, and all other means of redress are ineffectual, the people may, and
of right ought, to reform the old or establish a new government. The doctrine
of non-resistance, against arbitrary power and oppression, is absurd, slavish,
and destructive of the good and happiness of mankind. V. That the right in the
people to participate in the Legislature, is the best security of liberty, and
the foundation of all free government; for this purpose, elections ought to be
free and frequent, and every man, having property in, a common interest with,
and an attachment to the community, ought to have a right of suffrage. VI. That
the legislative, executive and judicial powers of government, ought to be
forever separate and distinct from each other. VII. That no power of suspending
laws, or the execution of laws, unless by or derived from the Legislature,
ought to be exercised or allowed. VIII. That freedom of speech and debates, or
proceedings in the Legislature, ought not to be impeached in any other court or
judicature. IX. That a place for the meeting of the Legislature ought to be
fixed, the most convenient to the members thereof, and to the depository of
public records; and the Legislature ought not to be convened or held at any
other place, but from evident necessity. X. That, for redress of grievances,
and for amending, strengthening and preserving the laws, the Legislature ought
to be frequently convened. XI. That every man has a right to petition the
Legislature, for the redress of grievances, in a peaceable and orderly manner.
XII. That no aid, charge, tax, see, or fees, ought to be set, rated, or levied,
under any pretense, without consent of the Legislature. XIII. That the levying
taxes by the poll is grievous and oppressive, and ought to be abolished; that
paupers ought not to be assessed for the support of government; but every other
person in the State ought to contribute his proportion of public taxes, for the
support of government, according to his actual worth, in real or personal
property, within the State; yet sines, duties, or taxes, may properly and
justly be imposed or laid, with a political view, for the good government and
benefit of the community. XIV. That sanguinary laws ought to be avoided, as far
as is consistent with the safety of the State: and no law, to inflict cruel and
unusual pains and penalties, ought to be made in any case, or at any time
hereafter. XV. That retrospective laws, punishing facts committed before the
existence of such laws, and by them only declared criminal, are oppressive,
unjust, and incompatible with liberty; wherefore no ex post facto law ought to
be made. XVI. That no law, to attaint particular persons of treason or felony,
ought to be made in any case, or any time hereafter. XVII. That every freeman,
for any injury done him in his person or property, ought to have remedy, by the
course of the law of the land, and ought to have justice and right freely
without sale, fully without any denial, and speedily without delay, according
to the law of the land. XVIII. That the trial of facts where they arise, is one
of the greatest securities of the lives, liberties and estates of the people.
XIX. That, in all criminal prosecutions, every man has a right to be informed
of the accusation against him: to have a copy of the indictment or charge in
due time (if required) to prepare for his defense; to be allowed counsel; to be
confronted with the witnesses against him; to have process for his witnesses;
to examine the witnesses, for and against him, on oath; and to a speedy trial
by an impartial jury, without whose unanimous consent he ought not to be found
guilty. XX. That no man ought to be compelled to give evidence against himself,
in a common court of law, or in any other court, but in such cases as have been
usually practiced in this State, or may hereafter be directed by the
Legislature. XXI. That no freeman ought to be taken, or imprisoned, or
disseized of his freehold, liberties, or privileges, or outlawed, or exiled, or
in any manner destroyed, or deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by
the judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land. XXII. That excessive bail
ought not to be required, nor excessive sines imposed, nor cruel or unusual
punishments inflicted, by the courts of law. XXIII. That all warrants, without
oath or affirmation, to search suspected places, or to seize any person or
property, are grievous and oppressive; and all general warrants -- to search
suspected places, or to apprehend suspected persons, without naming or
describing the place, or the person in special -- are illegal, and ought not to
be granted. XXIV. That there ought to be no forfeiture of any part of the
estate of any person, for any crime except murder, or treason against the
State, and then only on conviction and attainder. XXV. That a well-regulated
militia is the proper and natural defense of a free government. XXVI. That
standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised or kept
up, without consent of the Legislature. XXVII. That in all cases, and at all
times, the military ought to be under strict subordination to and control of
the civil ^ower. XXVIII. That no soldier ought to be quartered in any house, in
time of peace, without the consent of the owner; and in time of war, in such
manner only, as the Legislature shall direct. XXIX. That no person, except
regular soldiers, mariners, and marines in the service of this State, or
militia when in actual service, ought in any case to be subject to or
punishable by martial law. XXX. That the independency and uprightness of Judges
are essential to the impartial administration of justice, and a great security
to the rights and liberties of the people; wherefore the Chancellor and Judges
ought to hold commissions during good behavior; and the said Chancellor and
Judges shall be removed for misbehaviour, on conviction in a court of law, and
may be removed by the Governor, upon the address of the General Assembly;
provided that two thirds of all the members of each House concur in such
address. That salaries, liberal, but not profuse, ought to be secured to the
Chancellor and the Judges, during the continuance of their commissions, in such
manner, and at such times, as the Legislature shall hereafter direct, upon
consideration of the circumstances of this State. No Chancellor or Judge ought
to hold any other office, civil or military, or receive fees or perquisites of
any kind. XXXI. That a long continuance, in the first executire departments of
power or trust, is dangerous to liberty; a rotation, therefore, in those
departments, is one of the best securities of permanent freedom. XXXII. That no
person ought to hold, at the same ^ime, more than one office of pro^it, nor
ought any person, in public trust, to rece^e any present from any foreign
prince or state, or from the United States, or any of them, without the
approbation of this State. XXXIII. That, as it is the duty of every man to
worship God in such manner as he thinks most acceptable to him; all persons,
professing the Christian religion, are equally entitled to protection in their
religious liberty; wherefore no person ought by any law to be molested in his
person or estate on account of his religious persuasion or profession, or for
his religious practice; unless, under color of religion, any man shall dist^rb
the good order, peace or safety of the State, or shall infringe the laws of
morality, or injure others, in their natural, civil, or religious rights; nor
ought any person to be compelled to frequent or maintain, or contribute, unless
on contract, to maintain any particular place of worship, or any particular
ministry; yet the Legislature may, in their discretion, lay a general and equal
tax, for the support of the Christian religion; leaving to each individual the
power of appointing the payment over of the money, collected from him, to the
support of any particular place of worship or minister, or for the benefit of
the poor of his own denomination, or the poor in general of any particular
county: but the churches, chapels, glebes, and all other property now belonging
to the church of England, ought to remain to the church of England forever. And
all acts of Assembly, lately passed, for collecting moneys for building or
repairing particular churches or chapels of ease, shall continue in force, and
be executed, unless the Legislature shall, by act, supersede or repeal the
same: but no county court shall assess any quantity of tobacco, or sum of
money, hereafter, on the application of any vestry-men or churchwardens; and
every encumbent of the church of England, who has remained in his parish, and
performed his duty, shall be entitled to receive the provision and support
established by the act, entitled "An act for the support of the clergy of the
church of England, in this Province," till the November court of this present
year, to be held for the county in which his parish shall lie, or partly lie,
or for such time as he has remained in his parish, and performed his duty.
XXXIV. That every gift, sale, or devise of lands, to any minister, public
teacher, (...) preacher of the gospel, as such, or to any religious sect, order
or denomination, or to or for the support, use or benefit of, or in trust for,
any minister, public teacher, or preacher of the gospel, as such, or any
religious sect order or denomination -- and every gift or sale of goods, or
chattels, to go in succession, or to take place after the death of the seller
or donor, or to or for such support, use or benefit -- and also every devise of
goods or chattels to or for the support, use or benefit of any minister, public
teacher, or preacher of the gospel, as such, or any religious sect, order, or
denomination, without the leave of the Legislature, shall be void; except
always any sale, gift, lease or devise of any quantity of land, not exceeding
two acres, for a church, meeting, or other house of worship, and for a
burying-ground, which shall be improved, enjoyed or used only for such purpose
-- or such sale, gift, lease, or devise, shall be void. XXXV. That no other
test or qualification ought to be required, on admission to any office of trust
or prosit, than such oath of support and fidelity to this State, and such oath
of office, as shall be directed by this Convention, or the Legislature of this
State, and a declaration of a belief in the Christian religion. XXXVI. That the
manner (...) administering an oath to any person, ought to be such, as those of
the religious persuasion, profession, or denomination, of which such person is
one, generally esteem the most effectual confirmation, by the attestation of
the Divine Being. And that the people called Quakers, those called Dunkers, and
those called Menonists, holding it unlawful to take an o^th on any occasion,
ought to be allowed to make their solemn affirmation, in the manner that
Quakers have been heretofore allowed to affirm; and to be of the same avail as
an oath, in all such cases, as the affirmation of Quakers has been allowed and
accepted within this State, instead of an oath. And further, on such
affirmation, warrants to search for stolen goods, or for the apprehension or
commitment of offenders, ought to be granted, or security for the peace
awarded, and Quakers, Dunkers or Menonists ought also, on their solemn
affirmation as aforesaid, to be admitted as witnesses, in all criminal cases
not capital. XXXVII. That the city of Annapolis ought to have all its rights,
privileges and benefits, agreeable to its Charter, and the acts of Assembly
confirming and regulating the same, subject nevertheless to such alterations as
may be made by this Convention, or any suture Legislature. XXXVIII. That the
liberty of the press ought to be inviolably preserved. XXXIX. That monopolies
are odious, contrary to the spirit of a free government, and the principles of
commerce; and ought not to be suffered. XL. That no title of nobility, or
hereditary honors, ought to be granted in this State. XLI. That the subsisting
resolves of this and the several Conventions held for this Colony, ought to be
in force as laws, unless altered by this Convention, or the Legislature of this
State. XLII. That this Declaration of Rights, or the Form of Government, to be
established by this Convention, or any part or either of them, ought not to be
altered, changed or abolished, by the Legislature of this State, but in such
manner as this Convention shall prescribe and direct.
This Declaration of Rights was assented to, and passed, in Convention of the
Delegates of the freemen of Maryland, begun and held at Annapolis, the 14th day
of August, A. D. 1776. By order of the Convention, MAT. TILGHMAN, President.

The CONSTITUTION, or FORM of GOVERNMENT, etc.
I. THAT the Legislature consist of two distinct branches, a Senate and House
of Delegates, which shall be styled, The General Assembly of Maryland.

II. That the House of Delegates shall be chosen in the following manner: All
freemen, above twenty-one years of ager having a freehold of fifty acres of
land, in the county in which they offer to vote, and residing therein -- and
all freemen, having property in this State above the value of thirty pounds
current money, and having resided in the county, in which they offer to vote,
one whole year next preceding the election, shall have a right of suffrage, in
the election of Delegates for such county: and all freemen, so qualified,
shall, on the first Monday of October, seventeen hundred and seventy seven, and
on the same day in every year thereafter, assemble in the counties, in which
they are respectively qualified to vote, at the courthouse, in the said
counties; or at such other place as the Legislature shall direct; and, when
assembled, they shall proceed to elect, viva voce, four Delegates, for their
respective counties, of the most wise, sensible, and discreet of the people,
residents in the county where they are to be chosen, one whole year next
preceding the election, above twenty-one years of age, and having, in the
State, real or personal property above the value of five hundred pound^ current
money; and upon the final casting of the polls, the four persons who shall
appear to have the greatest number of legal votes shall be declared and
returned duly elected for their respective counties.

III. That the Sheriff of each county, or, in case of sickness, his Deputy
(summoning two Justices of the county, who are required to attend, for the
preservation of the peace) shall be the judges of the election, and may adjourn
from day to day, it necessary, till the same be sinished, so that the whole
election shall be concluded in four days; and shall make his return thereof,
under his hand, to the Chancellor of this State for the time being.

IV. That all persons qualified, by the charter of the city of Annapolis, to
vote for Burgesses, shall, on the same first Monday of October, seventeen
hundred and seventy-seven, and en the same day in every year forever
thereafter, elect, viva voce, by a majority of votes, two Delegates, qualified
agreeable to the said charter; that the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen of the
said city, or any three of them, be judges of the election, appoint the place
in the said city for holding the same, and may adjourn from day to day, as
aforesaid, and shall make return thereof as aforesaid: but the inhabitants of
the said city shall not be entitled to vote for Delegates for Anne-Arundel
county, unless they have a frechold of fifty acres of land in the county
distinct from the city.

V. That all persons, inhabitants of Baltimore town, and having the same
qualifications as electors in the county, shall, on the same first Monday in
October, seventeen hundred and seventy-seven, and on the same day in every year
forever thereafter, at such place in the said town as the Judges shall appoint,
elect, viva voce, by a majority of votes, two Delegates, qualified as
aforesaid: but if the said inhabitants of the town shall so decrease, as that a
number of persons, having a right of suffrage therein, shall have been, for the
space of seven years successively, less than one half the number of voters in
some one county in this State, such town shall thenceforward cease to send two
Delegates or Representatives to the House of Delegates, until the said town
shall have one half of the number of voters in some one county in this State.

VI. That the commissioners of the said town, or any three or more of them, for
the time being, shall be judges of the said election, and may adjourn, as
aforesaid, and shall make return thereof, as aforesaid: but the inhabitants of
the said town shall not be entitled to vote for, or be elected, Delegates for
Baltimore county: neither shall the inhabitants of Baltimore county, out of the
limits of Baltimore town, be entitled to vote for, or be elected, Delegates for
the said town.

VII. That on refusal, death, disqualification, resignation, or removal out of
this State, of any Delegate, or on his becoming Governor, or member of the
Council, a warrant of election shall issue by the Speaker, for the election of
another in his place; of which ten days' notice, at least, (excluding the day
of notice, and the day of election) shall be given.

VIII. That not less than a majority of the Delegates, with their Speaker (to
be chosen by them, by ballot) constitute a House, for the transaction of any
business other than that of adjourning.

IX. That the House of Delegates shall judge of the elections and
qualifications of Delegates.

X. That the House of Delegates may originate all money bills, propose bills to
the Senate, or receive those offered by that body; and assent, dissent, or
propose amendments; that they may inquire, on the oath of witnesses, into all
complaints, grievances, and offenses, as the grand inquest of this State; and
may commit any person, for any crime, to the public jail, there to remain till
he be discharged by due course of law. They may expel any member, for a great
misdemeanor, but not a second time for the same cause. They may examine and
pass all accounts of the State, relating either to the collection or
expenditure of the revenue, or appoint auditors, to state and adjust the same.
They may call for all public or official papers and records, and send for
persons, whom they may judge necessary in the course of their inquiries,
concerning affairs relating to the public interest; and may direct all office
bonds (which shall be made payable to the State) to be sued for any breach of
duty.

XI. That the S^^^^^ may be at full and perfect liberty to exercise their
judgment in passing laws -- and that they may not be compelled by the House of
Delegates, either to reject a money bill, which the emergency of affairs may
require, or to assent to some other act of legislation, in their conscience and
judgment injurious to the public welfare -- the House of Delegates shall not,
on any occasion, or under any pretense, annex to, or blend with a money bill,
any matter, clause, or thing, not immediately relating to, and necessary for
the imposing, assessing, levying, or applying the taxes or supplies, to be
raised for the support of government, or the current expenses of the State: and
to prevent altercation about such bills, it is declared, that no bill, imposing
duties or customs for the m^^e regulation of commerce, or inflicting fines for
the reformation of morals, or to enforce the execution of the laws, by which an
incidental revenue may arise, shall be accounted a money bill: but every bill,
assessing, levying or applying taxes or supplies, for the support of
government, or the current expenses of the State, or appropriating money in the
treasury, shall be deemed a money bill.

XII. That the House of Delegates may punish, by imprisonment, any person who
shall be guilty of a contempt in their view, by any disorderly or riotous
behavior, or by threats to, or abuse of their members, or by any obstruction
to their proceedings. They may also punish, by imprisonment, any person who
shall be guilty of a breach of privilege, by arresting on civil process, or by
assaulting any of their members, during their sitting, or on their way to, or
return from the House of Delegates, or by any assault of, or obstruction to
their officers, in the execution of any order or process, or by assaulting or
obstructing any witness, or any other person, attending on, or on their way to
or from the House, or by rescuing any person committed by the House: and the
Senate may exercise the same power, in similar cases.

XIII. That the Treasurers (one for the western, and another for the eastern
shore) and the Commissioners of the Loan Office, may be appointed by the House
of Delegates, during their pleasure; and in case of refusal, death,
resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the State, of any of the said
Commissioners or Treasurers, in the recess of the General Assembly, the
Governor with the advice of the Council, may appoint and commission a fit and
proper person to such vacant office, to hold the same until the meeting of the
next General Assembly.

XIV. That the Senate be chosen in the following manner: All persons, qualified
as aforesaid to vote for county Delegates, shall, on the first day of
September, 1781, and on the same day in every fifth year forever thereafter,
elect, viva voce, by a majority of votes, two persons for their respective
counties (qualified as aforesaid to be elected county Delegates) to be electors
of the Senate: and the Sheriff of each county, or, in case of sickness, his
Deputy (summoning two Justices of the county, who are required to attend, for
the preservation of the peace,) shall hold and be judge of the said election,
and make return thereof, as aforesaid. And all persons, qualified as aforesaid,
to vote for Delegates for the city of Annapolis and Baltimore town, shall, on
the same first Monday of September, 1781, and on the same day in every fifth
year forever thereafter, elect, viva voce, by a majority of votes, one person
for the said city and town respectively, qualified as aforesaid to be elected a
Delegate for the said city and town respectively; the said election to be held
in the same manner, as the election of Delegates for the said city and town;
the right to elect the said elector, with respect to Baltimore town, to
continue as long as the right to elect Delegates for the said town.

XV. That the said electors of the Senate meet at the city of Annapolis, or
such other place as shall be appointed for convening the Legislature, on the
third Monday in September, 1781, and on the same day in every fifth year
forever thereafter, and they, or any twenty-four of them so met, shall proceed
to elect, by ballot, either out of their own body, or the people at large,
fifteen Senators (nine of whom to be residents on the western, and six to be
residents on the eastern shore) men of the most wisdom, experience and virtue,
above twenty-five years of age, residents of the State above three whole years
next preceding the election, and having real and personal property above the
value of one thousand pounds current money.

XVI. That the Senators shall be balloted for, at one and the same time and out
of the gentlemen residents of the western shore, who shall be proposed as
Senators, the nine who shall, on striking the ballots, appear to have the
greatest numbers in their favor, shall be accordingly declared and returned
duly elected: and out of the gentlemen residents of the eastern shore, who
shall be proposed as Senators, the six who shall, on striking the ballots,
appear to have the greatest number in their favor, shall (...) accordingly
declared and returned duly elected: and (...) two or more on the same shore
shall have an equal number of ballots in their favor, by which the choice
shall not be determined on the first ballot, then the electors shall again
ballot, before they separate; in which they shall be confined to the persons
who on the first ballot shall have an equal number: and they who shall have the
greatest number in their favor on the second ballot, shall be accordingly
declared and returned duly elected: and if the whole number should not thus be
made up, because of an equal number, on the second ballot, still being in
favor of two or more persons, then the election shall be determined by lot,
between those who have equal numbers; which proceedings of the electors shall
be certified under their hands, and returned to the Chancellor for the time
being.

XVII. That the electors of Senators shall judge of the qualifications and
elections of members of their body; and, on a contested election, shall admit
to a seat, as an elector, such qualified person as shall appear to them to have
the greatest number of legal votes in his favor.

XVIII. That the electors, immediately on their meeting, and before they
proceed to the election of Senators, take such oath of support and fidelity to
this State, as this Convention, or the Legislature, shall direct; and also an
oath, "to elect without favor, affection, partiality, or prejudice, such
persons for Senators, as they, in their judgment and conscience, believe best
qualified for the office."

XIX. That in case of refusal, death, resignation, disqualification, or removal
out of this State, of any Senator, or on his becoming Governor, or a member of
the Council, the Senate shall, immediately thereupon, or at their next meeting
thereafter, elect by ballot (in the same manner as the electors are above
directed to choose Senators) another person in his place, for the residue of
the said term of five years.

XX. That not less than a majority of the Senate, with their President (to be
chosen by them, by ballot) shall constitute a House, for the transacting any
business, other than that of adjourning.

XXI. That the Senate shall judge of the elections and qualifications of
Senators.

XXII. That the Senate may originate any other, except money bills, to which
their assent or dissent only shall be given; and may receive any other bills
from the House of Delegates, and assent, dissent, or propose amendments.

XXIII. That the General Assembly meet annually, on the first Monday of
November, and if necessary, oftener.

XXIV. That each House shall appoint its own officers, and settle its own rules
of proceeding.

XXV. That a person or wisdom, experience, and virtue, shall be chosen
Governor, on the second Monday of November, seventeen hundred and
seventy-seven, and on the second Monday in every year forever thereafter, by
the joint ballot of both Houses (to be taken in each House respectively)
deposited in a conference room; the boxes to be examined by a joint committee
of both Houses, and numbers severally reported, that the appointment may be
entered; which mode of taking the joint ballot of both Houses shall be adopted
in all cases. But if two or more shall have an equal number of ballots in their
favor, by which the choice shall not be determined on the first ballot, then a
second ballot shall be taken, which shall be confined to the persons who, on
the first ballot, shall have had an equal number; and, if the ballots should
again be equal between two or more persons, then the election of the Governor
shall be determined by lot, between those who have equal numbers: and if the
person chosen Governor shall die, resign, remove out of the State, or refuse to
act, (the General Assembly sitting) the Senate and House of Delegates shall,
immediately thereupon, proceed to a new choice, in manner aforesaid.

XXVI. That the Senators and Delegates, on the second Tuesday of November,
1777, and annually on the second Tuesday of November forever thereafter, elect
by joint ballot (in the same manner as Senators are directed to be chosen) five
of the most sensible, discreet, and experienced men, above twenty-five years of
age, residents in the State above three years next preceding the election, and
having therein a freehold of lands and tenements, above the value of one
thousand pounds current money, to be the Council to the Governor, whose
proceedings shall be always entered on record, to any part whereof any member
may enter his dissent; and their advice, if so required by the Governor, or any
member of the Council, shall be given in writing, and signed by the members
giving the same respectively: which proceedings of the Council shall be laid
before the Senate, or House of Delegates, when called for by them, or either of
them. The Council may appoint their own Clerk, who sha^^ take such oath of
support and fidelity to this State, as this Convention, or the Legislature,
shall direct; and of secrecy, in such matters as he shall be directed by the
board to keep secret.

XXVII. That the Delegates to Congress, from this State, shall be chosen
annually, or superseded in the mean time by the joint ballot of both Houses of
Assembly; and that there be a rotation, in such manner, that at least two of
the number be annually changed; and no person shall be capable of being a
Delegate to Congress for more than three in any term of six years; and no
person, who holds any office of profit in the gift of Congress, shall be
eligible to sit in Cougress; but if appointed to any such office, his seat
shall be thereby vacated. That no person, unless above twenty-one years of age,
and a resident in the State more than five years next preceding the election,
and having real and personal estate in this State above the value of one
thousand pounds current money, shall be eligible to sit in Congress.

XXVIII. That the Senators and Delegates, immediately on their annual meeting,
and before they proceed to any business, and every person, hereafter elected a
Senator or Delegate, before he acts as such, shall take an oath of support and
fidelity to this State, as aforesaid; and before the election of a Governor, or
members of the Council, shall take an oath, "to elect without favor,
affection, partiality, or prejudice, such person as Governor, or member of the
Council, as they, in their judgment and conscience, believe best qualified for
the office."

XXIX. That the Senate and Delegates may adjourn themselves respectively: but
if the two Houses should not agree on the same time, but adjourn to different
days, then shall the Governor appoint and notify one of those days, or some day
between; and the Assembly shall then meet and be held accordingly: and he
shall, if (...) by advice of the Council, call them before the (...), to which
they shall in any manner be adjourned, on giving pot less turn ten days' notice
thereof: but the Governor ^^^ll (...) adjourn the Assembly, otherwise than as
aforesaid, nor prorogue or dissolve it, at any time.

XXX. That no person, unless above twenty-five years of age, a resident in this
State above five years next preceding the election -- and having in the State
real and personal property, above the value of five thousand pounds, current
money, (one thousand pounds whereof, at least, to be freehold estate) shall be
eligible as Governor.

XXXI. That the Governor shall not continue in that office longer than three
years successively, nor be eligible as Governor, until the explantation of four
years after he shall have been out of that office.

XXXII. That upon the death, resignation, or removal out of this State, of the
Governor, the first named of the Council, for the time being, shall (...) as
Governor, and qualify in the same manner; and shall immediately call a meeting
of the C^^^^^l Assembly, giving not less than fourteen d^^s' notice of the
meeting, at which meeting, a Governor shall be ^^^^^ted, in manner aforesaid,
for the residue of they (...).

XXXIII. That the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Council,
may embody the militia; and, when ^mbod^^ shall a^^^e have the detection
thereof; and shall also have (...) di^^^en of all the regular land and sea
forces, under the laws of this State, (out he shall not command in person,
(...) advised thereto by the Council, and then, only so long as any shall
approve thereof); and may alone exercise all other the execativ^ powers of
government, where the concurrence of the Council i^ not required, according to
the laws of this State; and grant reprieve or pardons for any crime, except in
such cases where the law shall otherwise direct: and may, during the recess of
the General Assembly, lay embargoes, to prevent the departure of any shipping,
or the exportation of any commedities, for any time not exceeding thirty days
in any one year -- summoning the General Assembly to meet within the time of
the continuance of such embargo: and may also order and compel any vessel to
ride quarantine, if such vessel, or the port from which she may have come,
shall, on strong grounds, be suspected to be infected with the plague: but the
Governor shall not, under any pretense, exercise any power or prerogative by
virtue of any law, statute or custom of England or Great Britain.

XXXIV. That the members of the Council, or any three or more of them, when
convened, shall constitute a board for the transacting of business; that the
Governor, for the time being, shall preside in the Council, and be entitled to
a vote, on all questions in which the Council shall be divided in opinion: and,
in the absence of the Governor, the first named of the Council shall preside;
and, as such, shall also vote, in all cases, where the other members disagree
in their opinion.

XXXV. That, in case of refusal, death, resignation, disqualification, or
removal out of the State, of any person chosen a member of the Council, the
members thereof, immediately thereupon, or at their next meeting thereafter,
shall elect by ballot another person (qualified as aforesaid) in his place, for
the residue of the year.

XXXVI. That the Council shall have power to make the Great Seal of this State,
which shall be kept by the Chancellor for the time being, and affixed to all
laws, commissions, grants, and other public testimonials, as has been
heretofore practiced in this State.

XXXVII. That no Senator, Delegate of Assembly, or member of the Council, if he
shall qualify as such, shall hold or execute any office of profit, or receive
the profits of any office exercised by any other person, during the time for
which he shall be elected; nor shall any Governor be capable of holding any
other office of profit in this State, while he acts as such. And no person,
holding a place of profit or receiving any part of the profits thereof, or
receiving the profits or any part of the profits arising on any agency, for the
supply of clothing or provisions for the army or navy, or holding any office
under the United States, or any of them -- or a minister, or p^^^ch^^ of the
gospel, of any denomination -- (...) any ^^^ion, employed in the regular land
server or (...) of this or the United States -- shall have a s^^ in the General
Assembly or the Council of this State.

XXXVIII. That (...) Governor, Senator, Delegate to Congress or Assembly, and
member of the Council, before he acts as such, shall take an oath "that he will
not receive, directly or indirectly, at any time, any part of the profits of
any office, held by any other person, during his acting in his office of
Governor, Senator, Delegate to Congress or Assembly, or member of the Council,
or the profits or any part of the profits arising on any agency for the supply
of clothing or provisions for the army or navy."

XXXIX. That if any Senator, Delegate to Congress or Assembly, or member of the
Council, shall hold or execute any office of profit, or receive, directly or
indirectly, at any time, the profits or any part of the profits of any office
exercised by any other person, during his acting as Senator, Delegate to
Congress or Assembly, or member of the Council -- his seat (on conviction, in a
Court of law, by the oath of two credible witnesses) shall be void; and he
shall suffer the punishment of wilful and corrupt perjury, or be banished this
State forever, or disqualified forever from holding any office or place of
trust or profit, as the Court may Judge.

XL. That the Chancellor, all Judges, the Attorney General, Clerks of the
General Court, the Clerks of the County Courts, the Registers of the Land
Office, and the Registers of Wills, shall hold their commissions during good
behavior, removable only for misbehaviour, on conviction in a Court of law.

XLI. That there be a Register of Wills appointed for each county, who shall be
commissioned by the Governor, on the joint recommendation of the Senate and
House of Delegates; and that, upon the death, resignation, disqualification, or
removal out of the county of any Register of Wills, in the recess of the
General Assembly, the Governor, with the (...) of the Council, may appoint and
commission mission a sit and proper person to such vacant office, to hold the
same until the meeting of the General Assembly.

XLII. That Sheriffs shall be elected in each county, by ballot, every third
year; that is to say, two persons for the office of Sheriff for each county,
the one of whom having the majority of votes, or if both have an equal number,
either of them, at the discretion of the Governor, to be commissioned by the
Governor for the said office; and having served for three years, such person
shall be ineligible for the four years next succeeding; bond with security to
be taken every year, as usual; and no Sheriff shall be qualified to act before
the same is given. In case of death, refusal, resignation, disqualification, or
removal out of the county before the expiration of the three years, the other
person, chosen as aforesaid, shall be commissioned by the Governor to execute
the said office, for the residue of the said three years, the said person
giving bond and security as aforesaid: and in case of his death, refusal,
resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the county, before the
expiration of the said three years, the Governor, with the advice of the
Council, may nominate and commission a fit and proper person to execute the
said office for the residue of the said three years, the said person giving
bond and security as aforesaid. The election shall be held at the same time and
place appointed for the election of Delegates; and the Justices, there summoned
to attend for the preservation of the peace, shall be judges thereof, and of
the qualification of candidates, who shall appoint a Clerk, to take the
ballots. All freemen above the age of twenty-one years, having a freehold of
fifty acres of land in the county in which they offer to ballot, and residing
therein -- and all freemen above the age of twenty-one years, and having
property in the State above the value of thirty pounds current money, and
having resided in the county in which they offer to ballot one whole year next
preceding the election -- shall have a right of suffrage. No person to be
eligible to the office of Sheriff for a couray, but an inhabitant of the said
county above the age of twenty-one years, and l^ving r^^l and personal property
in the State above the value of one thousand pounds current money. The Justices
aforesaid shall ex^^^^ the ballots: and the two candidates properly qualified,
having in each county the majority of legal ballots, shall be declared duly
elected for the office of Sheriff for such county, and returned to the Governor
and Council, with a certificate of the number of ballots for each of them.

XLIII. That every person who shall offer to vote for Delegates, or for the
election of the Senate, or for the Sheriff, shall (if required by any three
persons qualified to vote) before he be admitted to poll, take such oath or
affirmation of support and fidelity to this State, as this Convention or the
Legislature shall direct.

XLIV. That a Justice of the Peace may be eligible as a Senator, Delegate, or
member of the Council, and may continue to act as a Justice of the Peace.

XLV. That no field officer of the militia be eligible as a Senator, Delegate,
or member of the Council.

XLVI. That all civil officers, hereafter to be appointed for the several
counties of this State, shall have been residents of the county, respectively,
for which they shall be appointed, six months next before their appointment;
and shall continue residents of their county, respectively, during their
continuance in office.

XLVII. That the Judges of the General Court, and Justices of the County
Courts, may appoint the Clerks of their respective Courts; and in case of
refusal, death, resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the State, or
from their respective shores, of the Clerks of the General Court, or either of
them, in the vacation of the said Court -- and in case of the refusal, death,
resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the county, of any of the said
County Clerks, in the vacation of the County Court of which he is Clerk -- the
Governor, with the advice of the Council, may appoint and commission a sit and
proper person to such vacant office respectively, to hold the same until the
meeting of the next General Court, or County Court, as the case may be.

XLVIII. That the Governor, for the time being, with the advice and consent of
the Council, may appoint the Chancellor, and all Judges and Justices, the
Attorney General, Naval Officers, officers in the regular land and sea service,
officers of the militia. Registers of the Land Office, Surveyors, and all other
civil officers of government (Assessors, Constables and Overseers of the Roads
only excepted) and may also suspend or remove any civil officer, who has not a
commission, during good behavior; and may suspend any militia officer, for one
month: and may also suspend or remove any regular officer in the land or sea
service: and the Governor may remove or suspend any militia officer, in
pursuance of the judgment of a Court Martial.

XLIX. That all civil officers of the appointment of the Governor and Council,
who do not hold commissions during good behavior, shall be appointed annually
in the third week of November. But if any of them shall be reappointed, they
may continue to act, without any new commission or qualification; and every
officer, though not reappointed, shall continue to act, until the person who
shall be appointed and commissioned in his stead shall be qualified.

L. That the Governor, every member of the Council, and every Judge and
Justice, before they act as such, shall respectively take an oath, "That he
will not, through favor, affection or partiality vote for any person to
office; and that he will vote for such person as, in his judgment and
conscience, he believes most sit and best qualified for the office; and that he
has not made, nor will make, any promise or engagement to give his vote or
interest in favor of any person."

LI. That there be two Registers of the Land Office, one upon the western, and
one upon the eastern shore: that short extracts of the grants and certificates
of the land, on the western and eastern shores respectively, be made in
separate books, at the public expense, and deposited in the offices of the said
Registers, in such manner as shall hereafter be provided by the General
Assembly.

LII. That every Chancellor, Jodge, Register of Wills, Commissioner of the L^^^
Office, Attorney General, Sheriff, Treasurer, Naval Officer, Register of the
Land Office, Register of the Chancery Court, and every Clerk of the common law
courts, Serve you and Auditor of the public accounts, before he acts as such,
shall take an oath "That he will not directly or indirectly receive any see or
reward, for doing his office of but what is or shall be allowed by law; nor
will, directly or indirectly, receive the profits or any part of the profits of
any office held by any other person; and that he does not hold the same office
in trust, or for the benefit of any other person."

LIII. That if any Governor, Chancellor, Judge, Register of Wills,
Attorney General, Register of the Land Office, Register of the Chancery Court,
or any Clerk of the common law courts, Treasurer, Naval Officer, Sheriff,
Surveyor or Auditor of public accounts, shall receive, directly or indirectly,
at any time, the profits, or any part of the profits of any office, held by any
other person, during his acting in the office to which he is appointed; his
election, appointment and commission (on conviction in a court of law by oath
of two credible witnesses) shall be void; and he shall suffer the punishment
for wilful and corrupt perjury, or be banished this State forever, or
disqualified forever from holding any office or place of trust or profit, as
the Court may adjudge.

LIVE. That if any person shall give any bribe, present, or reward, or any
pro^^ise, or any security for the payment or delivery of any money, or any
other thing, to obtain or procure a vote to be Covernor, Senator, Delegate to
Congress or Assembly, member of the Council, or Judge, or to be appointed to
any of the said offices, or to any office of profit or trust, new created or
hereafter to be created in this State -- the person giving, and the person
receiving the ^^ne (on conviction in a court of law) shall be forever
disqualified to hold any office of trust or profit in this State.

LV. That every person, appointed to any office of profit or trust, (...),
before he enters on the execution thereof, take the following oath; to wit. "I,
A. B. do swear, that I do not hold myself bound in allegiance to the King of
Great Britain, and that I will be faithful, and bear true allegiance to the
State of Maryland; and shall also subscribe a decla^^^on of his belief in the
Christian religion.

LVI. That there be a Court of Appeals, composed of persons of integrity and
sound judgment in the law, whose judgment shall be final and conclusive, in all
cas^s of appeal, from the General Court, Court of Chancery, and Court of
Admiralty: that one person of integrity and sound judgment in the law, be
appointed Chancellor: that three persons of integrity and sound judgment in the
law, be appointed Judges of the Court now called the Provincial Court; and that
the same Court be hereafter called and known by the name of The General Court;
which Court shall sit on the western and eastern shores, for transacting and
determining the business of the respective shores, at such times and places as
the future Legislature of this State shall direct and appoint.

LVII. That the style of all laws run thus; "Be it enacted by the General
Assembly of Maryland:" that all public commissions and grants run thus; "The
State of Maryland," etc. and shall be signed by the Governor, and attested by
the Chancellor, with the seal of the State annexed -- except military
commissions, which shall not be attested by the Chancellor, or have the seal of
the State annexed: that all writs shall run in the same style, and be attested,
sealed and signed as usual: that all indictments shall conclude, "Against the
peace, government, and dignity of the State."

LVIII. That all penalties and forfeitures, heretofore going to the King or
proprietary, shall go to the State -- save only such, as the General Assembly
may abolish or otherwise provide for.

LIX. That this Form of Government, and the Declaration of Rights, and no part
thereof, shall be altered, changed, or abolished, unless a bill so to alter,
change or abolish the same shall pass the General Assembly, and be published at
least three months before a new election, and shall be confirmed by the General
Assembly, after a new election of Delegates, in the first session after such
new election; provided that nothing in this form of government, which relates
to the eastern shore particularly, shall at any time hereafter be altered,
unless for the alteration and confirmation thereof at least two-thirds of all
the members of each branch of the General Assembly shall concur.

LX. That every bill passed by the General Assembly, when engrossed, shall be
presented by the Speaker of the House of Delegates, in the Senate, to the
Governor for the time being, who shall sign the same, and thereto affix the
Great Seal, in the presence of the members of both Houses: every law shall be
recorded in the General Court office of the western shore, and in due time
printed, published, and certified under the Great Seal, to the several County
Courts, in the same manner as has been heretofore used in this State.

THIS Form of Government was assented to, and passed in Convention of the
Delegates of the freemen of Maryland, begun and held at the city of Annapolis,
the fourteenth of August, A. D. one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six. By
order of the Convention, M. TILGHMAN, President.

THE CONSTITUTION OF VIRGINIA.
The CONSTITUTION, or FORM of GOVERNMENT, agreed to, end r^solved upon by the
Delegate^ and Representatives of the several Counties and Corporations of
VIRGINIA, in a General Convention, ^^d at Willi^^sourgh, on the 6th of May, and
continued, by adjournments, to the 5th of July, 1776.

WE, the Delegates and Representatives of the good people of Virginia, do
declare the future form of government of Virginia to be as follows:

The legislative, executive, and judiciary department, shall be separate and
distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the other:
nor shall any person exercise the powers of more than one of them, at the same
time; except that the Justices of the County Courts shall be eligible to either
House of Assembly.

The legislative shall be formed of two distinct branches, who, together, shall
be a complete Legislature. They shall meet once, or oftener, every year, and
shall be called, The General Assembly of Virginia. One of these shall be
called, The House of Delegate^, and consist of two Representatives, to be
chosen for each county, and for the district of West-Augusta, annually, of such
men as act^^lly reside in, and are freeholders of the same, or duly qualified
according to law, and also of one Delegate or Representative, to be chosen
annually for the city of Willi^^^ourgh, and one for the borough of Norfolk, and
a Representative for each of such other cities and boroughs, as may hereafter
be allowed particular representation by the ^^^^^^ature; but when any city or
borough shall so decrease, as that the number of persons, having right of
suffrage therein, shall have been, for the space of seven years successively,
less than half the number of voters in some one county in Virginia, such city
or borough thenceforward shall cease to send a Delegate or Representative to
the Assembly.

The other shall be called The Senate, and consist of twenty-four members, of
whom thirteen shall constitute a House to proceed on business; for whose
election, the different counties shall be divided into twenty-four districts;
and each county of the respective district, at the time of the election of its
Delegates, shall vote for one Senator, who is actually a resident and
freeholder within the district, or duly qualified according to law, and is
upwards of twenty-five years of age; and the Sheriffs of each county, within
five days at farthest, after the last county election in the district, shall
meet at some convenient place, and from the poll, so taken in their respective
counties, return, as a Senator, the man who shall have the greatest number of
votes in the whole district. To keep up this Assembly by rotation, the
districts shall be equally divided into four classes and numbered by lot. At
the end of one year after the general election, the six members, elected by the
first division, shall be displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned
supplied from such class or division, by new election, in the manner aforesaid.
This rotation shall be applied to each division, according to its number, and
continued in due order annually.

The right of suffrage in the election of members for both Houses shall remain
as exercised at present; and each House shall choose its own Speaker, appoint
its own officers, settle its own rules of proceeding, and direct writs of
election, for the supplying intermediate vacancies.

All laws shall originate in the House of Delegates, to be approved of or
rejected by the Senate, or to be amended, with consent of the House of
Delegates; except money-bills, which in no instance shall be altered by the
Senate, but wholly approved or rejected.

A Governor, or chief magistrate, shall be chosen annually by joint ballot of
both Houses (to be taken in each House respectively) deposited in the
conference room; the boxes examined jointly by a committee of each House, and
the numbers severally reported to them, that the appointments may be entered
(which shall be the mode of taking the joint ballot of both Houses, in all
cases) who shall not continue in that office longer than three years
successively, nor be eligible, until the expiration of four years after he
shall have been out of that office. An adequate, but moderate salary shall be
settled on him, during his continuance in office; and he shall, with the advice
of a Council of State, exxrcise the executive powers of government, according
to the laws of this Commonwealth; and shall not, under any pretense, exercise
any power or prerogative, by virtue of any law, statute or custom of England.
But he shall, with the advice of the Council of State, have the power of
granting reprieves or pardons, except where the prosecution shall have been
carried on by the House of Delegates, or the law shall otherwise particularly
direct; in which cases, no reprieve or pardon shall be granted, but by resolve
of the House of Delegates.

Either House of the General Assembly may adjourn themselves respectively. The
Governor shall not prorogue or adjourn the Assembly, during their sitting, nor
dissolve them at any time; but he shall, if necessary, either by advice of the
Council of State, or on application of a majority of the House of Delegates,
call them before the time to which they shall stand prorogued or adjourned.

A Privy Council, or Council of State, consisting of eight members, shall be
chosen, by joint ballot of both Houses of Assembly, either from their own
members or the people at large, to assist in the administration of government.
They shall annually choose, out of their own members, a President, who, in case
of death, inability, or absence of the Governor from the government, shall act
as Lieutenant Governor. Four members shall be sufficient to act, and their
advice and proceedings shall be entered on record, and signed by the members
present, (to any part whereof, any member may enter his dissent) to be laid
before the General Assembly, when called for by them. This Council may appoint
their own Clerk, who shall have a salary settled by law, and take an oath of
secrecy, in such matters as he shall be directed by the board to conceal. A sum
of money, appropriated to that purpose, shall be divided annually among the
members, in proportion to their attendance; and they shall be incapable, during
their continuance in office, of sitting in either House of Assembly. Two
members shall be removed, by joint ballot of both Houses of Assembly, at the
end of every three years, and be ineligible for the three next years. These
vacancies, as well as those occasioned by death or incapacity, shall be
supplied by new elections, in the same manner.

The Delegates for Virginia to the Continental Congress shall be chosen
annually, or superseded in the mean time, by joint ballot of both Houses of
Assembly.

The present militia officers shall be continued, and vacancies supplied by
appointment of the Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council, on
recommendations from the respective County Courts; but the Governor and Council
shall have a power of suspending any officer, and ordering a Court Martial, on
complaint of misbehaviour or inability, or to supply vacancies of officers,
happening when in actual service.

The Governor may embody the militia, with the advice of the Privy Council; and
when embodied, shall alone have the direction of the militia, under the laws of
the country.

The two Houses of Assembly shall, by joint ballot, appoint Judges of the
Supreme Court of Appeals, and General Court, Judges in Chancery, Judges of
Admiralty, Secretary, and the Attorney General, to be commissioned by the
Governor, and continue in office during good behavior. In case of death,
incapacity, or resignation, the Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council,
shall appoint persons to succeed in office, to be approved or displaced by both
Houses. These officers shall have fixed and adequate sa^aries, and, together
with all others holding lucrative offices, and all ministers of the gospel, of
every denomination, be incapable of being elected members of either House of
Assembly or the Privy Council.

The Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council, shall appoint Justices of
the Peace for the counties; and in case of vacancies, or a necessity of
increasin^ the number hereafter, such appointments to be made upon the
recommendation of the respective County Courts. The present acting Secretary in
Virginia, and Clerks of all the County Courts, shall continue in office. In
case of vacancies, either by death, incapacity, or resignation, a Secretary
shall be appointed, as before directed; and the Clerks, by the respective
Courts. The present and future Clerks shall hold their offices during good
behavior, to be judged of, and determined in the General Court. The Sheriffs
and Coroners shall be nominated by the respective Courts, approved by the
Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council, and commissioned by the
Governor. The Justices shall appoint Constables; and all fees of the aforesaid
officers be regulated by law.

The Governor, when he is out of office, and others, offending against the
State, either by mal-administration, corruption, or other means, by which the
safety of the State may be endangered, shall be impeachable by the House of
Delegates. Such impeachment to be prosecuted by the Attorney General, or such
other person or persons, as the House may appoint in the General Court,
according to the laws of the land. If found guilty, he or they shall be either
forever disabled to hold any office under government, or be removed from such
office pro tempore, or subjected to such pains or penalties as the laws shall
direct.

If all or any of the Judges of the General Court should on good grounds (to be
judged of by the House of Delegates) be accused of any of the crimes or
offenses above mentioned, such House of Delegates may, in like manner, impeach
the Judge or Judges so accused, to be prosecuted in the Court of Appeals; and
he or they, if found guilty, shall be punished in the same manner as is
prescribed in the preceding clause.

Commissions and grants shall run, "In the name of the Commonwealth of
Virginia," and bear test by the Governor, with the feal of the Commonwealth
annexed. Writs shall run in the same manner, and bear test by the Clerks of the
several Courts. Indictments shall conclude, "Against the place and d^^^ity of
the Co^^^^^alth."

A Treasurer shall be appointed annually, by joint ballot of both Houses.

All es^^eats, penalties, and forfeitures, heretofore going to the King, shall
go to the Commonw^^lth, saw only such as the Legislature may abol^h, or
otherwise provide for.

The territories, contained within the Charters, erecting the Colonies of
Maryland, Pennsyl^ania, North and South Carolina, are hereby ceded, released,
and forever confirmed, to the people of these Colonies respectively, with all
the rights of property, jurisdiction and government, and all other rights
whatsoever, which might, at any time heretofore, have been claimed by Virginia,
except the free navigation and use of the rivers Patomaque and Pokomoke, with
the property of the Virginia shores and strands, bordering on either of the
said rivers, and all improvements, which have been, or shall be made thereon.
The western and northern extent of Virginia shall, in all other respects, stand
as sixed by the Charter of King James I. in the year one thousand six hundred
and nine, and by the public treaty of peace between the Courts of Britain and
France, in the year one thousand seven hundred and sixty-three; unless by act
of this Legislature, one or more governments be established westward of the
Alleghany mountains. And no purchases of lands shall be made of the Indian
natives, but on behalf of the public, by authority of the General Assembly.

THE CONSTITUTION OF NORTH CAROLINA.
The CONSTITUTION, or ^ORM of GOVERNMENT, agreed to, and resolved upon, b^ he
Representatives of the Freemen of the State of NORT CAROLINA, elected and
chosen for that particular purpose, in Congress assembled, at Halifax, December
18, 1776.

A DECLARATION OF RIGHTS, etc.
I. THAT all political power is vested in and derived from the people only.

II. That the people of this State ought to have the sole and exclusive right
of regulating the internal government and police thereof.

III. That no man or set of men are entitled to exclusive or separate
emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration of public
servicee.

IV. That the legislative, ex^entive, and supreme judicial powers of
government, ought to be forever separate and distinct from each other.

V. That all powers of suspending laws, or the execution of laws, by any
authority, without consent of the Representatives of the people, is injurious
to their rights, and ought not to be exercised.

VI. That elections of members, to serve as Representatives in General
Assembly, ought to be free.

VII. That, in all criminal prosecutions, every man has a right to be informed
of the accusation against him, and to confront the accosers and witnesses with
other testimony, and shall not be compelled to give evidence against himself.

VIII. That no freemen shall be put to answer any criminal charge b^t by
indictment, presentment, or impeachment.

IX. That no freeman shall be convicted of any crime, but by the unanimous
verdict of a jury of good and lawful men, in open court, as heretofore used.

X. That excessive bail should not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel or unusual punishments inflicted.

XI. That general warrants -- whereby an officer or messenger may be commanded
to search suspected places, without ^^idence of the fact committed, or to seize
any person or persons, not named, whose offenses are not particularly
described, and supported by evidence -- are dangerous to liberty, and ought not
to be granted.

XII. That no freeman ought to be taken, imprisoned, or disseized of his
freehold, liberties or privileges, or outlawed, or exiled or in any manner
destroyed, or deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by the law of the
land.

XIII. That every freeman, restrained of his liberty, is entitled to a remedy,
to inquire into the lawfulness thereof, and to remove the same, if unlawful;
and that such remedy ought not to be denied or delayed.

XIV. That in all controversies at law, respecting property, the ancient mode
of trial, by jury, is one of the best securities of the rights of the people,
and ought to remain sacred and inviolable.

XV. That the freedom of the press is one of the great bulwarks of liberty, and
therefore ought never to be restrained.

XVI. That the people of this State ought not to be taxed, or made subject to
the payment of any impost or duty, without the consent of themselves, or their
Representatives in General Ass^^bly, freely given.

XVII. That the people have a right to bear arms, for the defense of the State;
and as standing armies, in time of peace, are dangerous to liberty, they ought
not to be kept up: and that the military should be kept under strict
subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

XVIII. That (...) people have a right to assemble together, to cons^it (...)
their common good, to initruct their (...) ^^matives, and to apply to the
Legislature ^^^^^^ess (...)

XIX. That all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences.

XX. That for redress of grievances, and for amending and strengthening the
laws, elections ought to be often held.

XXI. That a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is absolutely
necessary, to preserve the blessings of liberty.

XXII. That no hereditary emoluments, privileges or honors ought to be granted
or conferred in this State.

XXIII. That perpetuities and monopolies are contrary to the genius of a free
State, and ought not to be allowed.

XXIV. That retrospective laws, punishing facts committed before the existence
of such laws, and by them only declared criminal, are oppressive, unjust, and
incompatible with liberty; wherefore no ex post facto law ought to be made.

XXV. The property of the soil, in a free government, being one of the
essential rights of the collective body of the people, it is necessary, in
order to avoid future disputes, that the limits of the State should be
ascertained with precision: and as the former temporary line, between North and
South Carolina, was confirmed, and extended by Commissioners, appointed by the
Legislatures of the two States, agreeable to the order of the late King George
II. in Council, that line, and that only, should be esteemed the southern
boundary of this State -- that is to say, beginning on the sea side, at a cedar
stake, at or near the mouth of Little River (being the southern extremity of
Brunswic county,) and running from thence a north west course, through the
boundary house, which stands in thirty-three degrees fifty-six minutes, to
thirty-five degrees north latitude; and from thence a west course so far as is
mentioned in the Charter of King Charles II. to the late Proprietors of
Carolina. Therefore all the territory, seas, waters, and harbors, with their
appurtenances, lying between the line above described, and the southern line of
the State of Virginia, which begins on the sea shore, in thirty-six degrees
thirty minutes, north latitude, and from thence ^^ns west, agreeable to the
said Charter of King Charles, are the right and property of the people of this
State, to be held by them in sovereignty; any partial ^ine, without the consent
of the Legislature of this State, at any time thereafter directed, or laid out,
in anywise notwithstanding: -- Provided always, That this Declaration of Rights
shall not prejudice any nation or nations of Indians, from enjoying such
hunting-grounds as may have been, or hereafter shall be, secured to them by any
former or future Legislature of this State: -- And provided also, That it shall
not be construed so as to prevent the establishment of one or more governments
westward of this State, by consent of the Legislature: -- And provided further,
That nothing herein contained shall affect the titles or possessions of
individuals holding or claiming under the laws heretofore in force, or grants
heretofore made by the late King George II. or his predecessors, or the late
lords' proprietors, or any of them.

The CONSTITUTION, or FORM of GOVERNMENT, etc.
WHEREAS allegiance and protection are, in their nature, reciprocal, and the
one should of right be refused when the other is withdrawn:

And whereas George the Third, King of Great Britain, and late Sovereign of the
British American Colonies, hath-not only withdrawn from them his profection,
but, by an act of the British Legislature, declared the inhabitants of these
States out of the protection of the British crown, and all their property,
found upon the high seas, liable to be seized and confiscated to the uses
mentioned in the said act; and the said George the Third has also sent fleets
and armies to prosecute a cruel war against them, for the purpose of reducing
the inhabitants of the said Colonies to a state of abject slavery; in
consequence whereof, all government under the said King, within the said
Colonies, has ceased, and a total dissolution of government in many of them
has taken place.

And whereas the Continental Congress, having considered the premises, and
other previous violations of the rights of the good people of America, have
therefore declared, that the Thirteen United Colonies are, of right, wholly
absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, or any other foreign
jurisdiction whatsoever; and that the said Colonies now are, and forever shall
be, free and independent States.

Wherefore, in our present state, in order to prevent anarchy and confusion, it
becomes necessary, that government should be established in this State;
therefore we, the Representatives of the freemen of North Carolina, chosen and
assembled in Congress, for the express purpose of framing a Constitution, under
the authority of the people, most conducive to their happiness and prosperity,
do declare, that a government for this State shall be established, in mann^^
and form following, to wit:

I. That the legislative authority shall be vested in two distinct branches,
both dependent on the people, to wit, a Senate and House of Commons. II. That
the Senate shall be composed of Representatives, annually chosen by ballot, one
for each county in the State. III. That the House of Commons shall be composed
of Representatives annually chosen by ballot, two for each county, and one for
each of the towns of Edenton, Newbern, Wilmington, Salisbury, Hillsborough and
Halifax. IV. That the Senate and House of Commons, assembled for the purpose of
legislation, shall be denominated, The General Assembly. V. That each member of
the Senate shall have usually resided in the county in which he is chosen for
one year immediately preceding his election, and for the same time shall have
possessed, and continue to possess, in the county which he represents, not less
than three hundred acres of land in fee. VI. That each member of the House of
Commons shall have usually resided in the county in which he is chosen for one
year immediately preceding his election, and for six months shall have
possessed, and continue to possess, in the county which he represents, not less
than one hundred acres of land in fee, or for the term of his own life. VII.
That all freemen, of the age of twenty-one years, who have been inhabitants of
any one county within the State twelve months immediately preceding the day of
any election, and possessed of a freehold within the same county of fifty acres
of land, for six months next before, and at the day of election, shall be
entitled to vote for a member of the Senate. VIII. That all freemen of the age
of twenty-one years, who have been inhabitants of any one county within the
State twelve months immediately preceding the day of any election, and shall
have paid public taxes, shall be entitled to vote for members of the House of
Commons for the county in which he resides. IX. That all persons possessed of a
freehold in any town in this State, having a right of representation, and also
all freemen, who have been inhabitants of any such town twelve months next
before, and at the day of election, and shall have paid public taxes, shall be
entitled to vote for a member to represent such town in the House of Commons:
-- Provided always, That this section shall not entitle any inhabitant of such
town to vote for members of the House of Commons, for the county in which he
may reside, nor any freeholder in such county, who resides without or beyond
the limits of such town, to vote for a member for said town. X. That the Senate
and House of Commons, when met, shall each have power to choose a Speaker, and
other their officers; be judges of the qualifications and elections of their
members; sit upon their own adjournments from day to day; and prepare bills, to
be passed into laws. The two Houses shall direct writs of election for
supplying intermediate vacancies; and shall also jointly, by ballot, adjourn
themselves to any future day and place. XI. That all bills shall be read three
times in each House, before they pass into laws, and be signed by the Speakers
of both Houses. XII. That every person, who shall be chosen a member of the
Senate or House of Commons, or appointed to any office or place of trust,
before taking his seat, or entering upon the execution of his office, shall
take an oath to the State; and all officers shall also take an oath of office.
XIII. That the General Assembly shall, by joint ballot of both Houses, appoint
Judges of the Supreme Courts of Law and Equity, Judges of Admiralty, and
Attorney General, who shall be commissioned by the Governor, and hold their
offices during good behavior. XIV. That the Senate and House of Commons shall
have power to appoint the generals and field officers of the militia, and all
officers of the regular army of this State. XV. That the Senate and House of
Commons, jointly at their first meeting after each annual election, shall by
ballot elect a Governor for one year, who shall not be eligible to that office
longer than three years, in six successive years. That no person, under thirty
years of age, and who has not been a resident in this State above five years,
and having, in the State, a freehold in lands and tenements above the value of
one thousand pounds, shall be eligible as a Governor. XVI. That the Senate and
House of Commons, jointly, at their first meeting after each annual election,
shall by ballot elect seven persons to be a Council of State for one year, who
shall advise the Governor in the execution of his office; and that four members
shall be a quorum; their advice and proceedings shall be entered in a journal,
to be kept for that purpose only, and signed by the members present; to any
part of which, any member present may enter his diffent. And such journal shall
be laid before the General Assembly when called for by them. XVII. That there
shall be a seal of this State, which shall be kept by the Governor, and used by
him, as occasion may require; and shall be called, The Great Seal of the State
of North Carolina, and be affixed to all grants and commissions. XVIII. The
Governor, for the time being, shall be captain general and commander in chief
of the militia; and, in the recess of the General Assembly, shall have power,
by and with the advice of the Council of State, to embody the militia for the
public safety. XIX. The Governor, for the time being, shall have power to draw
for and apply such sums of money as shall be voted by the General Assembly, for
the contingencies of government, and be accountable to them for the same. He
also may, by and with the advice of the Council of State, lay embargoes, or
prohibit the exportation of any commodity, for any term not exceeding thirty
days, at any one time in the recess of the General Assembly; and shall have the
power of granting pardons and reprieves, except where the prosecution shall be
carried on by the General Assembly, or the law shall otherwise direct; in which
case he may, in the recess, grant a reprieve until the next sitting of the
General Assembly; and may exercise all the other executive powers of
government, limited and restrained as by this Constitution is mentioned, and
according to the laws of the State. And on his, death, inability, or absence
from the State, the Speaker of the Senate for the time being -- (and in case of
his death, inability, or absence from the State, the Speaker of the House of
Commons) shall exercise the powers of government, after such death, or during
such absence or inability of the Governor (or Speaker of the Senate,) or until
a new nomination is made by the General Assembly. XX. That in every case where
any officer, the right of whose appointment is by this Constitution vested in
the General Assembly, shall, during their recess, die, or his office by other
means become vacant, the Governor shall have power, with the advice of the
Council of State, to fill up such vacancy, by granting a temporary commission,
which shall expire at the end of the next session of the General Assembly. XXI.
That the Governor, Judges of the Supreme Court of Law and Equity, Judges of
Admiralty, and Attorney General, shall have adequate salaries during their
continuance in office. XXII. That the General Assembly shall, by joint ballot
of both Houses, annually appoint a Treasurer or Treasurers for this State.
XXIII. That the Governor, and other officers, offending against the State, by
violating any part of this Constitution, maladministration, (...) corruption,
may be prosecuted, on the impeachment of the General Assembly, or presentment
of the Grand Jury of any Court of supreme jurisdiction in this State. XXIV.
That the General Assembly shall, by joint ballot of both Houses, triennially,
appoint a Secretary for this State. XXV. That no persons, who heretofore have
been, or hereafter may be, receivers of public moneys, shall have a seat in
either House of General Assembly, or be eligible to any office in this State,
until such person shall have fully accounted for and paid into the treasury all
sums for which they may be accountable and liable. XXVI. That no Treasurer
shall have a seat, either in the Senate, House of Commons, or Council of State,
during his continuance in that office, or before he shall have finally settled
his accounts with the public, for all the moneys which may be in his hands at
the expiration of his office belonging to the State, and has paid the same
into the hands of the succeeding Treasurer. XXVII. That no officer in the
regular army or navy, in the service and pay of the United States, of this or
any other State, nor any contractor or agent for supplying such army or navy
with clothing or provisions, shall have a seat either in the Senate, House of
Commons, or Council of State, or be eligible thereto: and any member of the
Senate, House of Commons, or Council of State, being appointed to and accepting
of such office, shall thereby vacate his seat. XXVIII. That no member of the
Council of State shall have a seat, either in the Senate, or House of Commons.
XXIX. That no Judge of the Supreme Court of Law or Equity, or Judge of
Admiralty, shall have a seat in the Senate, House of Commons, or Council of
State. XXX. That no Secretary of this State, Attorney General, or Clerk of any
Court of record, shall have a seat in the Senate, House of Commons, or Council
of State. XXXI. That no clergyman, or preacher of the gospel, of any
denomination (...) be capable of being a member of either the Senate, House of
Commons, or Council of State, while he continues in the exercise of the
pastoral function. XXXII. That no person, who shall deny the being of God or
the truth of the Protestant religion, or the divine authority either of the Old
or New Testaments, or who shall hold religious principles incompatible with the
freedom and safety of the State, shall be capable of holding any office or
place of trust or profit in the civil department within this State. XXXIII.
That the Justices of the Peace, within their respective counties in this State,
shall in future be recommended to the Governor for the time being, by the
Representatives in General Assembly; and the Governor shall commission them
accordingly: and the Justices, when so commissioned, shall hold their offices
during good behavior, and shall not be removed from office by the General
Assembly, unless for misbehaviour, absence, or inability. XXXIV. That there
shall be no establishment of any one religious church or denomination in this
State, in preference to any other; neither shall any person, on any pretense
whatsoever, be compelled to attend any place of worship contrary to his own
faith or judgment, nor be obliged to pay, for the purchase of any glebe, or the
building of any house of worship, or for the maintenance of any minister or
ministry, contrary to what he believes right, or has voluntarily and personally
engaged to perform; but all persons shall be at liberty to exercise their own
mode of worship: -- Provided, That nothing herein contained shall be construed
to exempt preachers of treasonable or seditious discourses, from legal trial
and punishment. XXXV. That no person in the Sat shall hold more than one
lucrative office, at any one time: -- Provided, That no appointment in the
militia, or the office of a Justice of the Peace, shall be considered as a
lucrative office. XXXVI. That all commissions and grants shall run in the name
of the State of North Carolina, and bear test, and be signed by the Governor.
All writs shall run in the same manner, and bear test, and be signed by the
Clerks of the respective Courts. Indictments shall conclude, Against the peace
and dignity of the State. XXXVII. That the Delegates for this State, to the
Continental Congress while necessary, shall be chosen annually by the General
Assembly, by ballot; but may be superseded, in the mean time, in the same
manner; and no person shall be elected, to serve in that capacity, for more
than three years successively. XXXVIII. That there shall be a Sheriff, Coroner
or Coroners, and Constables, in each county within this State. XXXIX. That the
person of a debtor, where there is not a strong presumption of fraud, shall not
be continued in prison, after delivering up, bona fide, all his estate real and
personal, for the use of his creditors, in such manner as shall be hereafter
regulated by law. All prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties,
unless for capital offenses, when the proof is evident, or the presumption
great. XL. That every foreigner, who comes to settle in this State, having
first taken an oath of allegiance to the same, may purchase, or, by other just
means, acquire, hold, and transfer land, or other real estate; and after one
year's residence, shall be deemed a free citizen. XLI. That a school or schools
shall be established by the Legislature, for the convenient instruction of
youth, with such salaries to the masters, paid by the public, as may enable
them to instruct at low prices; and all useful learning shall be duly
encouraged, and promoted, in one or more universities. XLII. That no purchase
of lands shall be made of the Indian natives, but on behalf of the public, by
authority of the General Assembly. XLIII. That the future Legislature of this
State shall regulate entails, in such a manner as to prevent perpetuities.
XLIV. That the Declaration of Rights is hereby declared to be part of the
Constitution of this State, and ought never to be violated, on any pretense
whatsoever. XLV. That any member of either House of General Assembly shall have
liberty to dissent from, and protest against any act or resolve, which he may
think injurious to the public, or any individual, and have the reasons of his
dissent entered on the journals. XLVI. That neither House of the General
Assembly shall proceed upon public business, unless a majority of all the
members of such House are actually present: and that, upon a motion made and
seconded, the yeas and nays, upon any question, shall be taken and entered on
the journals: and that the journals of the proceedings of both Houses of the
General Assembly shall be printed, and made public, immediately after their
adjournment.
This Constitution is not intended to preclude the present Congress from making
a temporary provision, for the well ordering of this State, until the General
Assembly shall establish government, agreeable to the mode herein before
described.

RICHARD CASWELL, President.
December the eighteenth, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, read the
third time, and ratified in open Congress. By order, JAMES GREEN, jun.
secretary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF SOUTH CAROLINA.
WE, the Delegates of the People of the State of South Carolina, in General
Convention met, do ordain and establish this Constitution for its government.

ARTICLE I.
Section I. The legislative authority of this State shall be vested in a
General Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

II. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members, chosen by
ballot every second year, by the citizens of this State, qualified as in this
Constitution is provided.

III. The several election districts in this State shall elect the following
number for Representatives, viz.

Charleston, (including St. Philip and St. Michael,) Fifteen members Christ
Church, Three members St. John, Berkley, Three members St. Andrew, Three
members St. George, Dorchester, Three members St. James, Goose creek, Three
members St. Thomas and St. Dennis, Three members St. Paul, Three members St.
Bartholomew, Three members St. James, Santee, Three members St. John, Colleton,
Three members St. Stephen, Three members St. Helena, Three members St. Luke,
Three members Prince William, Three members St. Peter, Three members All
Saints, (including its ancient boundaries) One member Winyaw, (not including
any part of All Saints) Three members Kingston, (not including any part of All
Saints) Two members Williamsburgh, Two members Liberty, Two members
Marlborough, Two members Chesterfield, Two members Darlington, Two members
York, Three members Chester, Two members Fairfield, Two members Richland, Two
members Lancaster, Two members Kershaw, Two members Claremont, Two members
Clarendon, Two members Abbeville, Three members Edgefield, Three members
Newbury, (including the Fork between Broad and Saluda rivers,) Three members
Laurens, Three members Union, Two members Spartan, Two members Greenville, Two
members Pendleton, Three members St. Matthew, Two members Orange, Two members
Winton, (including the district between Savannah River and the North Fork of
Edisto,) Three members Saxe Gotha, Three members
IV. Every free white man, of the age of twenty-one years, being a citizen of
this State, and having resided therein two years previous to the day of
election, and who has a freehold of fifty acres of land, or a town lot, of
which he has been legally seized and possessed at least six months before such
election, or, (not having such freehold or town lot) has been a resident in
the election district, in which he offers to give his vote, six months before
the said election, and has paid a tax, the preceding year, of three shillings
sterling toward the support of this government, shall have a right to vote for
a member or members to serve in either branch of the Legislature, for the
election district in which he holds such property, or is so resident.

V. The returning officer, or any other person present, entitled to vote, may
require any person, who shall offer his vote at an election, to produce a
certificate of his citizenship, and a receipt from the tax collector, of his
having paid a tax, entitling him to vote, or to swear or affirm, that he is
duly qualified to vote, agreeably to this Constitution.

VI. No person shall be eligible to a seat in the House of Representatives,
unless he is a free white man, of the age of twenty-one years, and has been a
citizen and resident in this State three years previous to his election. If a
resident in the election district, he shall not be eligible to a seat in the
House of Representatives unless he be legally seized and possessed, in his own
right, of a settled freehold estate of five hundred acres of land and ten
negroes; or of a real estate, of the value of one hundred and fifty pounds
sterling, clear of debt. If a non-resident, he shall be legally seized and
possessed of a settled freehold estate therein, of the value of five hundred
pounds sterling, clear of debt.

VII. The Senate shall be composed of members to be chosen for four years, in
the following proportions, by the citizens of this State, qualified to elect
members to the House of Representatives, at the same time, in the same manner,
and at the same places, where they shall vote for Representatives, viz.

Charleston, (including St. Philip and St. Michael) Two members Christ Church,
One member St. John, Berkley, One member St. Andrew, One member St. George, One
member St. James, Goose creek, One member St. Thomas and St. Dennis, One member
St. Paul, One member St. Bartholomew, One member St. James, Santee, One member
St. John, Colleton, One member St. Stephen, One member St. Helena, One member
St. Luke, One member Prince William, One member St. Peter, One member All
Saints, One member Winyaw and Williamsourgh, One member Liberty and Kingston,
One member Marlborough, Chesterfield, and Darlington, Two member York, One
member Fairfield, Richland, and Chester, One member Lancaster and Kershaw, One
member Claremont and Clarendon, One member Abbeville, One member ^dgefield, One
member Newbury, (including the Fork between Broad and Saluda Rivers,) One
member Laurens, One member Union, One member Spartan, One member Greenville,
One member Pendleton, One member St. Matthew and Orange, One member Winton,
(including the district between Savannah River and the North Fork of Edisto,)
One member Saxe Gotha, One member
VIII. No person shall be eligible to a seat in the Senate, unless he is a free
white man, of the age of thirty years, and has been a citizen and resident in
this State five years previous to his election. If resident in the election
district, he shall not be eligible unless he be legally seized and possessed,
in his own right, of a settled freehold estate of the value of three hundred
pounds sterling, clear of debt. If a non-resident in the election district, he
shall not be eligible, unless he be legally seized and possessed, in his own
right, of a settled freehold estate in the said district of the value of one
thousand pounds sterling, clear of debt.

IX. Immediately after the Senators shall be assembled, in consequence of the
first election, they shall be divided by lot into two classes. The s^ats of the
Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second
year, and of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year; so that one
half thereof, as near as possible may be chosen, forever thereafter, every
second year, for the term of four years.

X. Senators, and members of the House of Representatives, shall be chosen on
the second Monday in October next, and the day following, and on the same days,
in every second year thereafter, in such manner and at such times as are herein
directed: -- and shall meet on the fourth Monday in November annually at
Columbia, (which shall remain the seat of government, until otherwise
determined, by the concurrence of two thirds of both branches of the whole
representation) unless the casualties of war, or contagious disorders, should
render it unsafe to meet there; in either of which cases, the Governor, or
commander in chief for the time being, may, by proclamation, appoint a more
secure and convenient place of meeting.

XI. Each House shall judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its
own members; and a majority of each House shall constitute a quorum to do
business: but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be
authorized to compel the attendance of absent members in such manner, and under
such penalties, as may be provided by law.

XII. Each House shall choose by ballot its own officers, determine its rules
of proceeding, punish its members for disorderly behavior, and (with the
concurrence of two-thirds) expel a member, but not a second time for the same
cause.

XIII. Each House may punish, by imprisonment, during sitting, any person not a
member, who shall be guilty of disrespect to the House, by any disorderly or
contemptuous behavior in its presence -- or who, d^ring the time of its
sitting, shall threaten harm to the body or estate of any member, for any thing
said or done in either House -- or who shall assault any of them therefore -- or
who shall assault or arrest any witness, or other person, ordered to attend the
House, in his going to, or returning therefrom, or who shall rescue any person
arrested by order of the House.

XIV. The members of both Houses shall be protected, in their persons and
estates, during their attendance on, going to, and returning from, the
Legislature, and ten days previous to their fitting, and ten days after the
adjournment of the Legislature. But these privileges shall not be extended, so
as to protect any member who shall be charged with treason, felony, or breach
of the peace.

XV. Bills for raising a revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives, but may be altered, amended, o^ rejected by the Senate.

All other bills may originate in either House, and may be a^^nded, altered, or
rejected by the other.

XVI. No bill or ordinance shall have the force of law, until it shall have
been read three times, and on three several days, in each House, has had the
Great Seal affixed to it, and has been signed in the Senate House, by the
President of the Senate, and Speaker of the House of Representatives.

XVII. No money shall be drawn out of the public treasury, but by the
legislative authority of the State.

XVIII. The members of the Legislature, who shall assemble under this
Constitution, shall be entitled to receive out of the public treasury, as a
compensation for their expenses, a sum, not exceeding seven shillings sterling
a day, during their attendance on, going to, and returning from the
Legislature; but the same may be increased or diminished by law, if
circumstances shall require: but no alterations shall be made by any
Legislature, to take effect during the existence of the Legislature, which
shall make such alteration.

XIX. Neither House shall, during their session, without the consent of the
other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in
which the two Houses shall be sitting.

XX. No bill or ordinance, which shall have been rejected by either House,
shall be brought in again during the sitting, without leave of the House, and
notice of six days being previously given.

XXI. No person shall be eligible to a seat in the Legislature whilst he holds
any office of profit or trust under this State, the United States, or either of
them, or under any other power -- except officers in the militia, army or navy
of this State, Justices of the Peace, or Justices of the County Courts, while
they receive no salaries; nor shall any contractor of the army or navy of this
State, the United States, or either of them, or the agents of such contractor,
be eligible to a seat in either House. And if any member shall accept or
exercise any of the said disqualifying offices, he shall vacate his seat.

XXII. If any election district shall neglect to choose a member or members, on
the days of election, or if any person chosen a member of either House should
refuse to qualify and take his seat, or should die, depart the State, or accept
of any disqualifying office, a writ of election shall be issued by the
President of the Senate, or Speaker of the House of Representatives, (as the
case may be) for the purpose of filling up the vacancy, thereby occasioned, for
the remainder of the term for which the person so refusing to qualify, dying,
departing the State, or accepting a disqualifying office, was elected to serve.

XXIII. And whereas the ministers of the gospel are, by their profession,
dedicated to the service of God, and the care of souls, and ought not to be
diverted from the great duties of their function, therefore no minister of the
gospel, or public preacher, of any religious persuasion, whilst he continues in
the exercise of his pastoral functions, shall be eligible to the office of
Governor, Lieutenant Governor, or to a seat in the Senate, or House of
Representatives.

ARTICLE II.
I. The executive authority of this State shall be invested in a Governor, to
be chosen in manner following: As soon as may be after the first meeting of the
Senate and House of Representatives, and at every first meeting of the House of
Representatives thereafter, when a majority of both Houses shall be present,
the Senate and House of Representatives shall, jointly, in the House of
Representatives choose, by ballot, a Governor, to continue for two years, and
until a new election shall be made.

II. No person shall be eligible to the office of Governor, unless he has
attained the age of thirty years, and has resided within this State, and been
a citizen thereof, ten years, and unless he be seized and possesed of a settled
estate within the same, in his own right, of the value of fifteen hundred
pounds sterling, clear of debt.

No person having served two years as Governor, shall be re-eligible to that
office till after the expiration of four years.

No person shall hold the office of Governor, and any other office, or
commission, civil or military (except in the militia) either in this State, or
under any State, or the United States, or any other power, at one and the same
time.

III. A Lieutenant Governor shall be chosen, at the same time, in the same
manner, continue in office for the same period, and be possessed of the same
qualifications, as the Governor.

IV. A member of the Senate or House of Representatives, being chosen and
acting as Governor or Lieutenant Governor, shall vacate his seat, and another
person shall be elected in his stead.

V. In case of the impeachment of the Governor, or his removal from office,
death, resignation, or absence from the State, the Lieutenant Governor shall
succeed to his office. And in case of the impeachment of the
Lieutenant Governor, or his removal from office, death, resignation, or absence
from the State, the President of the Senate shall succeed to his office, till a
nomination to those offices respectively shall be made by the Senate and House
of Representatives, for the remainder of the time for which the officer; so
impeached, removed from office, dying, resigning, or being absent, was elected.

VI. The Governor shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of this
State, and of the militia, except when they shall be called into the actual
service of the United States.

VII. He shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons, after conviction
(except in cases of impeachment) in such manner, on such terms, and under such
restrictions, as he shall think proper; and he shall have power to remit fines
and forfeitures unless otherwise directed by law.

VIII. He shall take care, that the laws be faithfully executed in mercy.

IX. He shall have power to prohibit the exportation of provision, for any
time, not exceeding thirty days.

X. He shall, at stated times, receive for his services a compensation, which
shall neither be increased or diminished during the period for which he shall
have been elected.

XI. All officers in the executive department, when required by the Governor,
shall give him information in writing, upon any subject, relating to the duties
of their respective offices.

XII. The Governor shall, from time to time, give to the General Assembly
information of the condition of the State, and recommend to their consideration
such measures as he shall judge necessary or expedient.

XIII. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the General Assembly, and in
case of disagreement between the two Houses with respect to the time of
adjournment, adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper, not beyond the
fourth Monday in the month of November then ensuing.

ARTICLE III.
I. The judicial power shall be vested in such superior and inferior courts of
law and equity, as the Legislature shall, from time to time, direct and
establish.

The Judges of each shall hold their commissions during good behavior; and
Judges of the Superior Courts shall, at stated times, receive a compensation
for their services, which shall neither be increased or diminished during their
continuance in office; but they shall receive no fees, or perquisites of
office, nor hold any other office of profit or trust, under this State, the
United States, or any other power.

II. The style of all processes shall be, "The State of South Carolina." All
prosecutions shall be carried on in the name and by the authority of the State
of South Carolina, and conclude, "Against the peace and dignity of the same."

ARTICLE IV.
All persons who shall be chosen or appointed to any office of profit or trust,
before entering on the execution thereof, shall take the following oath. "I do
swear, [or affirm] that I am duly qualified, according to the Constitution of
this State, to exercise the office to which I have been appointed, and will, to
the best of my abilities, discharge the duties thereof, and preserve, protect
and defend the Constitution of this State, and of the United States."

ARTICLE V.
I. The House of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeaching; but
no impeachment shall be made, unless with the concurrence of two-thirds of the
House of Representatives.

II. All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When sitting for that
purpose, the senators shall be o^ oath or affirmation; and no person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.

III. The Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and all the civil officers, shall be
liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in office; but judgment in such cases
shall not extend further than to a removal from office, and disqualification to
hold any office of honor, trust or profit under this State. The party
convicted shall nevertheless be liable to indictment, trial, judgment and
punishment, according to law.

ARTICLE VI.
I. The Judges of the Superior Courts, Commissioners of the Treasury, Secretary
of the State, and Surveyor-General, shall be elected by the joint ballot of
both Houses, in the House of Representatives. The Commissioners of the
Treasury, Secretary of this State, and Surveyor-General, shall hold their
offices for four years: but shall not be eligible again for four years after
the expiration of the time for which they shall have been elected.

II. All other officers shall be appointed, as they hitherto have been, until
otherwise directed by law; but Sheriffs shall hold their offices for four
years, and not be again eligible for four years after the term for which they
shall have been elected.

III. All commissions shall be in the name and by the authority of the State of
South Carolina, and be sealed with the seal of the State, and be signed by the
Governor.

ARTICLE VII.
All laws, of force in this State at the passing of this Constitution, shall so
continue, until altered or repealed by the Legislature, except where they are
temporary, in which case they shall expire at the times respectively limited
for their duration, if not continued by act of the Legislature.

ARTICLE VIII.
I. The free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship,
without discrimination or preference, shall, forever hereafter, be allowed
within this State to all mankind; provided that the liberty of conscience,
thereby declared, shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of
licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of
this State.

II. The rights, privileges, immunities and estates of both civil and religious
societies, and of corporate bodies, shall remain as if the Constitution of this
State had not been altered or amended.

ARTICLE IX.
III. All power is originally vested in the people; and all free governments
are founded on their authority, and are instituted for their peace, safety and
happiness.

VI. No freeman of this State shall be taken, or imprisoned, or disseized of
his freehold, liberties, or privileges, or outlawed, or exiled, or in any
manner destroyed, or deprived of his life, liberty or property, but by the
judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land; nor shall any bill of
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts,
ever be passed by the Legislature of this State.

V. The military shall be subordinate to the civil power.

VI. Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel punishments inflicted.

V. The Legislature shall not grant any title of nobility, or hereditary
distinction, nor create any office, the appointment to which shall be for any
longer time than during good behavior.

VI. The trial by jury, as heretofore used in this State, and the liberty of
the press, shall be forever inviolably preserved.

ARTICLE X.
I. The business of the treasury shall be in future conducted by two
Treasurers, one of whom shall hold his office and reside at Columbia; the other
shall hold his office and reside in Charleston.

II. The Secretary of State, and Surveyor-General, shall hold their offices
both in Columbia and in Charleston. They shall reside at one place, and their
deputies at the other.

III. At the conclusion of the circuits, the Judges shall meet and sit at
Columbia, for the purpose of hearing and determining all motions which may be
made for new trials, and in arrest of judgments, and such points of law as may
be submitted to them. From Columbia, they shall proceed to Charleston, and
there hear and determine all such motions for new trials, and in arrest of
judgment, and such points of law as may be submitted to them.

IV. The Governor shall always reside, during the sitting of the Legislature,
at the place where their session may be held; and, at all other times,
wherever, in his opinion, the public good may require.

V. The Legislature shall, as soon as may be convenient, pass laws, for the
abolition of the rights of primogeniture, and for giving an equitable
distribution of the real estate of intestates.

ARTICLE XI.
No convention of the people shall be called, unless by the concurrence of two
thirds of both branches of the whole representation.

No part of this Constitution shall be altered, unless a bill to alter the same
shall have been read three times in the House of Representatives, and three
times in the Senate, and agreed to by two-thirds of both branches of the whole
representation; neither shall any alteration take place, until the bill so
agreed to, be published three months, previous to a new election for members to
the House of Representatives; and if the alteration, proposed by the
Legislature, shall be agreed to, in their first session, by two thirds of the
whole representation in both branches of the Legislature, after the same shall
have been read three times, or three several days, in each House, then, and not
otherwise, the same shall become a part of the Constitution.

Done in Convention, at Columbia, in the State of South Carolina, the third day
of June, in the year of our Lord, 1790, and in the fourteenth year of the
independence of the United States of America. By the unanimous order of the
Convention, CHARLES PINCKNEY, President:

THE CONSTITUTION OF GEORGIA.
WE, the underwritten Delegates from the people, in Convention met, do declare,
that the following articles shall form the Constitution for the government of
this State; and, by virtue of the powers in us vested for that purpose, do
hereby ratify and confirm the same.

ARTICLE I.
I. The legislative power shall be vested in two separate and distinct
branches, to wit; a Senate and House of Representatives, to be styled, "The
General Assembly."

II. The Senate shall be elected on the first Monday in October in every third
year, until such day of election be altered by law; and shall be composed of
one member from each county, chosen by the electors thereof, and shall continue
for the term of three years.

III. No person shall be a member of the Senate, who shall not have attained to
the age of twenty-eight years, and who shall not have been nine years an
inhabitant of the United States, and three years a citizen of this State: and
shall be an inhabitant of that county for which he shall be elected; and have
resided therein six months immediately preceding his election, and shall be
possessed in his own right of two hundred and fifty acres of land, or some
property to the amount of two hundred and fifty pounds.

IV. The Senate shall elect, by ballot, a President out of their own body.

V. The Senate shall have solely the power to try all impeachments.

VI. The election of members for the House of Representatives shall be annual,
on the first Monday in October, until such day of election be altered by law,
and shall be composed of members from each county, in the following
proportions: Camden, two; Glynn, two; Liberty, four; Chatham, five; Effingham,
two; Burke, four; Richmond, four; Wilkes, five; Washington, two; Green, two;
and Franklin two.

VII. No person shall be a member of the House of Representatives, who shall
not have attained to the age of twenty-one years, and have been seven years a
citizen of the United States, and two years an inhabitant of this State; and
shall be an inhabitant of that county for which he shall be elected, and have
resided therein three months immediately preceding his election; and shall be
possessed in his own right of two hundred acres of land, or other property to
the amount of one hundred and fifty pounds.

VIII. The House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and other
officers.

IX. They shall have solely the power to impeach all persons who have been or
may be in office.

X. No person, holding a military commission, or office of profit, under this
or the United States, or either of them, (except Justices of the Peace and
officers of the militia) shall be allowed to take his seat as a member of
either branch of the General Assembly: nor shall any Senator or Repr^sentative
be elected to any office of profit which shall be created during his
appointment.

XI. The meeting of the General Assembly shall be annual, on the first Monday
in November, until such day of meeting be altered by law.

XII. One third of the members of each branch shall have power to proceed to
business: but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and compel the
attendance of their members in such manner as each House may prescribe.

XIII. Each House shall be judges of the elections, returns and qualifications
of its own members; with powers to expel or punish for disorderly behavior.

XIV. No senator or representative shall be liable to be arrested during his
attendance on the General Assembly, or for a reasonable time in going thereto
or returning home, except it be for treason, felony, or breach of the peace:
nor shall any member be liable to answer for any thing spoken in debate in
either House, in any court or place elsewhere.

XV. The members of the Senate and House of Representatives shall take the
following oath or affirmation: "I, A. B. do solemnly swear, (or affirm, as the
case may be) that I have not obtained my election by bribery or other unlawful
me^^s; and, that I will give my vote, on all questions that may come before me,
as a senator, or representative, in such manner as, in my judgment, will best
promote the good of this State; and that I shall bear true faith and allegiance
to the same, and to the utmost of my power, observe, support and defend the
Constitution thereof."

XVI. The General Assembly shall have power to make all laws and ordinances
which they shall deem necessary and proper for the good of the State, which
shall not be repugnant to this Constitution.

XVII. They shall have power to alter the boundaries of the present counties,
and to lay off new ones, as well out of the counties already laid off, as out
of the other territory belonging to the State. When a new county or counties
shall be laid off, out of any of the present county or counties, such new
county or counties shall have their representation apportioned out of the
number of the representatives of the county or counties out of which it or they
shall be laid out: and when any new county shall be laid off in the vacant
territory belonging to the State, such county shall have a number of
representatives, not exceeding three, to be regulated and determined by the
General Assembly. And no money shall be drawn out of the treasury, or from the
public funds of this State, except by appropriations made by law.

XVIII. No clergyman of any denomination shall be a member of the General
Assembly.

ARTICLE II.
I. The executive power shall be vested in a Governor, who shall hold his
office during the term of two years, and shall be elected in the following
manner:

II. The House of Representatives shall, on the second day of their making a
House, in the first, and in every second year thereafter, vote by ballot for
three persons; and shall make a list containing the names of the persons voted
for, and of the number of votes for each person, -- which list the Speaker
shall sign in the presence of the House; and deliver it in person to the
Senate: and the Senate shall, on the same day, proceed by ballot, to elect one
of the three persons having the highest number of votes; and the person having
a majority of the votes of the Senators present, shall be the Governor.

III. No person shall be eligible to the office of Governor, who shall not have
been a citizen of the United States twelve years, and an inhabitant of this
State six years, and who has not attained to the age of thirty years, and who
does not possess five hundred acres of land, in his own right, within this
State, and other species of property to the amount of one thousand pounds
sterling.

IV. In case of death, resignation, or disability of the Governor, the
President of the Senate shall exercise the executive powers of government,
'until luch disability be removed, or until the next meeting of the General
Assembly.

V. The Governor shall, at stated times, receive for his service a compensation
which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he
shall be elected; neither shall he receive, within that period, any other
emolument from the United States, or any of them, or from any foreign power.
Before he enters on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear, (or affirm, as the case may be) that
I will faithfully execute the office of Governor of the State of Georgia, and
will, to the best of my abilities, preserve, protect and defend the said State,
and cause justice to be executed with mercy therein, according to the
Constitution and laws of the same."

VI. He shall be commander in chief in and over the State of Georgia and of the
militia thereof.

VII. He shall have powers to grant reprieves for offenses against the State,
except in cases of impeachment. and to grant pardons, in all cases after
conviction, except for treason or murder, in which cases he may respite the
execution, and make a report thereof to the next General Assembly, by whom a
pardon may be granted.

VIII. He shall issue writs of election to fill up all vacancies that happen in
the Senate or House of Representa^ives, and shall have power to convene the
General Assem^ly on extraordinary occasions, and shall give them, from ^^me to
time, information of the state of the republic, and ^^commend to their
consideration such measures as he may ^eem necessary and expedient.

IX. In case of a disagreement between the Senate and House of Representatives,
with respect to the time to which the General Assembly shall adjourn, he may
adjourn them to such time as he may think proper.

X. He shall have the revision of all bills passed by both Houses, before the
same shall become laws: but two thirds of both Houses may pass a law,
notwithstanding his dissent, and, if any bill should not be returned by the
Governor within five days after it has been presented to him, the same shall
be a law, unless the General Assembly, by their adjournment, shall prevent its
return.

XI. The Great Seal of the State shall be deposited in the office of the
Secretary, and it shall not be affixed to any instrument of writing without it
be by order of the Governor, or General Assembly: and the General Assembly may
direct the Great Seal to be altered.

ARTICLE III.
I. A Superior Court shall be held in each county twice in every year; in which
shall be tried, and brought to final decision, all causes, civil and criminal,
except such as may be subject to a Federal Court, and such as may, by law, be
referred to inferior jurisdiction.

II. The General Assembly shall point out the modes of correcting errors and
appeals, which shall extend so far as to empower the Judges to direct a new
trial by jury within the county where the action originated, and which shall be
final.

III. Courts merchant shall be held as heretofore, subject to such regulations
as the General Assembly may by law direct.

IV. All causes shall be tried in the county where the defendant resides,
except in cases of real estate, which shall be tried in the county where such
estate lies, and in criminal cases, which shall be tried in the county where
the crime shall be committed.

V. The Judges of the Supreme Court and Attorney General shall have a competent
salary established by law, which shall not be increased nor diminished during
their continuance in office, and shall hold their commission during the term of
three years.

ARTICLE IV.
I. The electors of the members of both branches of the General Assembly shall
be citizens and inhabitants of this State, and shall have attained to the age
of twenty-one years, and have paid tax for the year preceding the election, and
shall have resided six months within the county.

II. All elections shall be by ballot, and the House of Representatives, in all
appointments of State officers, shall vote for three persons; and a list of the
three persons having the highest number of votes, shall be signed by the
Speaker, and sent to the Senate, which shall from such list determine, by a
majority of their votes, the officer elected, except militia officers and the
Secretaries of the Governor, who shall be appointed by the Governor alone,
under such regulations and restrictions as the General Assembly may prescribe.
The General Assembly may vest the appointment of inferior officers in the
Governor, the courts of justice, or in such other manner as they may by law
establish.

III. Freedom of the press, and trial by jury shall remain inviolate.

IV. All persons shall be entitled to the benefit of the writ of Habeas Corpus.

V. All persons shall have the free exercise of religion, without being obliged
to contribute to the support of any religious profession but their own.

VI. Estates shall not be entailed; and when a person dies intestate, leaving a
wife and children, the wife shall have a child's share, or her dower, at her
option; if there be no wife, the estate shall be equally divided among the
children and their legal representatives of the first degree. The distribution
of all other intestate estates may be regulated by law.

VII. At the general election for members of Assembly, in the year one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-four, the electors in each county shall elect three
persons to represent them in a Convention, for the purpose of taking into
consideration the alterations necessary to be made in this Constitution, who
shall meet at such time and place as the General Assembly may appoint: and if
two thirds of the whole number shall meet and concur, they shall proceed to
agree on such alterations and amendments, as they may think proper. Provided,
that after two thirds shall have concurred to proceed to alterations and
amendments, a majority shall determine on the particulars of such alterations
and amendments. We have heard that a Convention was held, but have not heard of
any alterations in this Constitution.


VIII. This Constitution shall take effect, and be in full force, on the first
Monday in October next, after the adoption of the same; and the executive shall
be authorized to alter the time for the sitting of the Superior Courts, so that
the same may not interfere with the annual elections in the respective
counties, or the meeting of the first General Assembly.

Done at Augusta, in Convention, the sixth day of May, in the year of our Lord,
one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, and in the year of the sovereignty
and independence of the United States, the thirteenth. WM. GIBBONS, President
and Delegate from Chatham. Asa Emanuel, Justus H. Scheuber, Chatham. Benjamin
Lamer, John Green, N. Brownson, Effingham. David Emanuel, Hugh Lawson, William
Little, Burke. Abr. Marshal, W. F. Booker, Leonard Marbury, Richmond. John
Talbot, Jeremiah Walker, Wilkes. Lauchlan M'Intosh, Liberty. Alexander Bisset,
Glynn. Jared Irwin, John Watts, Joshua Williams, Washington. Middleton Woods,
Franklin. Joseph Carmichael, Henry Karr, Green. Attest, D. LONGSTREET, Sec'ry.


THE CONSTITUTION OF VERMONT.
WHEREAS all government ought to be instituted and supported for the security
and protection of the community as such, and to enable the individuals, who
compose it, to enjoy their natural rights, and the other blessings which the
Author of existence has bestowed upon man: and whenever those great ends of
government are not obtained, the people have a right, by common consent, to
change it, and take such measures as to them may appear necessary, to promote
their safety and happiness.

And whereas the inhabitants of this State have (in consideration of protection
only) heretofore acknowledged allegiance to the King of Great Britain: and the
said King has not only withdrawn that protection, but commenced and still
continues to carry on, with unabated vengeance, a most cruel and unjust war
against them; employing therein not only the troops of Great Britain, but
foreign mercenaries, savages, and slaves, for the avowed purpose of reducing
them to a total and abject submission to the despotic domination of the British
Parliament, with many more acts of tyranny, (more fully set forth in the
Declaration of Congress) whereby all allegiance and fealty to the said King and
his Successors, are dissolved and at an end; and all power and authority
derived from him ceased in the American Colonies. And whereas the Territory,
which now comprehends the State of Vermont, did antecedently of right belong to
the government of New Hampshire, and the former Governor thereof, viz. his
excellency Benning Wentworth, Esquire granted many charters of lands and
corporations within this State to the present inhabitants and others. And
whereas the late Lieutenant Governor Colden, of New York, with others, did, in
violation of the tenth command, covet those very lands: and by a false
representation, made to the Court of Great Britain, (in the year 1764, that for
the convenience of trade and administration of justice, the inhabitants were
desirous of being annexed to that government) obtained jurisdiction of those
very identical lands, ex part, which ever was and is disagreeable to the
inhabitants. And whereas the Legislature of New York ever have, and still
continue to disown the good people of this State, in their landed property,
which will appear in the complaints hereafter inserted, and in the 36th section
of their present Constitution, in which is established the Grants of Land made
by that government.

They have refused to make re-grants of our lands to the original Proprietors
and Occupants, unless at the exorbitant rate of 2,300 dollars fees for each
township; and did enhance the quitrent threefold, and demanded an immediate
delivery of the title derived from New Hampshire.

The Judges of their Supreme Court have made a solemn declaration, that the
charters, conveyances, etc. of the lands included in the before-described
premises, were utterly null and void, on which said title was founded. In
consequence of which declaration, writs of possession have been by them issued,
and the Sheriff of the county of Albany sent at the head of six or seven
hundred men, to enforce the execution thereof.

They have passed an act, annexing a penalty thereto, of thirty pounds' fine,
and six months' imprisonment, on any person who should refuse assisting the
Sheriff, after being requested, for the purpose of executing writs of
possession.

The Governors Dunmore, Tryon, and Colden, have made re-grants of several
tracts of land included in the premises, to certain favorite land jobbers in
the government of New York, in direct violation of his Britannic Majesty's
express prohibition, in the year 1767.

They have issued proclamations, wherein they have offered large sums of money
for the purpose of apprehending those very persons, who have dared boldly and
publicly to appear in defense of their just rights.

They did pass twelve acts of outlawry on the ninth day of March, A. D. 1774,
empowering the respective Judges of their Supreme Court to award execution of
death against those inhabitants in said district, that they should judge to be
offenders, without trial.

They have and still continue an unjust claim to those lands, which greatly
retards emigration into any settlement of this State.

They have hired foreign troops, emigrants from Scotland, at two different
times, and armed them to drive us out of possession.

They have sent the Savages on our frontiers to distress us.

They have proceeded to erect the counties of Cumberland and Gloucester, and
establish courts of justice there, after they were discountenanced by the
authority of Great Britain.

The free Convention of the State of New York, at Harlem, in the year 1776,
unanimously voted, "That all quitrents, formerly due to the King of
Great Britain, are now due, and owing to this Convention, or such future
government as shall be hereafter established in this State."

In the several stages of the aforesaid oppressions, we have petitioned his
Britannic Majesty in the most humble manner for redress, and have, at very
great expense, received several reports in our favor: and in other instances,
wherein we have petitioned the late legislative authority of New York, those
petitions have been treated with neglect. And whereas, the local situation of
this State from New York, which, at the extreme part, is upward of four hundred
and fifty miles from the seat of that government, renders it extreme difficult
to continue under the jurisdiction of said State;

Therefore it is absolutely necessary, for the welfare and safety of the
inhabitants of this State, that it should be henceforth a free and independent
State, and that a just, permanent, and proper form of government should exist
in it, derived from and founded on the authority of the people only, agreeable
to the direction of the honorable American Congress.

We the Representatives of the freemen of Vermont, in General Convention met,
for the express purpose of forming such a government -- confessing the goodness
of the great Governor of the universe (who alone knows to what degree of
earthly happiness mankind may attain by perfecting the arts of government) in
permitting the people of this State, by common consent, and without violence,
deliberately to form for themselves such just rules as they shall think best,
for governing their future society; and being fully convinced, that it is o^r
indispensable duty to establish such original principles of government as will
best promote the general happiness of the people of this State, and their
posterity, and provide for future improvements, without partiality for, or
prejudice against, any particular class, sect, or denomination of men whatever;
do, by virtue of authority vested in us by our constituents, ordain, declare
and establish the following Declaration of Rights, and Frame of Government, to
be the Constitution of this Commonwealth, and to remain in force therein
forever unaltered, except in such articles as shall hereafter on experience be
found to require improvement, and which shall, by the same authority of the
people, fairly delegated, as this Frame of Government directs, be amended or
improved, for the more effectual obtaining and securing the great end and
design of all government, herein before mentioned.

CHAPTER I. A DECLARATION of the RIGHTS of the INHABITANTS of the STATE of
VERMONT.
I. THAT all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain
natural, inherent and unalienable rights; amongst which are, the enjoying and
defending life and liberty -- acquiring, possessing and protecting property --
and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety. Therefore, no male person,
born in this country, or brought from over sea, ought to be holden by law to
serve any person, as a servant, slave, or apprentice, after he arrives to the
age of twenty-one years; nor female, in like manner, after she arrives to the
age of eighteen years; unless they are bound by their own consent after they
arrive to such age; or bound by law for the payment of debts, damages, fines,
costs, or the like.

II. That private property ought to be subservient to public uses, when
necessity requires it; nevertheless, whenever any particular man's property is
taken for the use of the public, the owner ought to receive an equivalent in
money.

III. That all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences and understandings, as in
their opinion shall be regulated by the word of God; and that no man ought, or
of right can be compelled to attend any religious worship, or erect or support
any place of worship, or maintain any minister, contrary to the dictates of his
conscience; nor can any man be justly deprived or abridged of any civil right
as a citizen, on account of his religious sentiments, or peculiar mode of
religious worship; and that no authority can, or ought to be vested in, or
assumed by any power whatsoever, that shall in any case interfere with, or in
any manner control the rights of conscience, in the free exercise of religious
worship: Nevertheless, every sect or denomination of Christians ought to
observe the Sabbath or Lord's day, and keep up some sort of religious worship,
which to them shall seem most agreeable to the revealed will of God.

IV. Every person within this Commonwealth ought to find a certain remedy, by
having recourse to the laws, for all injuries or wrongs which he may receive in
his person, property, or character: he ought to obtain right and justice
freely, and without being obliged to purchase it -- completely, and without any
denial -- promptly, and without delay; conformably to the laws.

V. That the people of this State, by their legal representatives, have the
sole, exclusive and inherent right of governing and regulating the internal
police of the same.

VI. That all power being originally inherent in, and consequently derived from
the people; therefore, all officers of government, whether legislative or
executive, are their trustees and servants, and at all times, in a legal way,
accountable to them.

VII. That government is, or ought to be, instituted for the common benefit,
protection and security of the people, nation, or community, and not for the
particular emolument or advantage of any single man, family, or set of men, who
are a part only of that community: and that the community has an indubitable,
unalienable, and indefeasible right, to reform or alter government, in such
manner as shall be, by that community, judged to be most conducive to the
public weal.

VIII. That those who are employed in the legislative and executive business of
the State may be restrained from oppression, the people have a right, by their
legal representatives, to enact laws for reducing their public officers to a
private station, and for supplying their vacancies in a constitutional manner,
by regular elections, at such periods as they may think proper.

IX. That all elections ought to be free and without corruption; and that all
freemen, having a sufficient evident common interest with, and attachment to
the community, have a right to elect officers, and be elected into office.

X. That every member of society has a right to be protected in the enjoyment
of life, liberty and property; and therefore is bound to contribute his
proportion toward the expense of that protection, and yield his personal
service, when necessary, or an equivalent thereto: but no part of a man's
property can be justly taken from him, or applied to public uses, without his
own consent, or that of the representative body of the freemen; nor can any
man, who is conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms, be justly compelled
thereto, if he will pay such equivalent; nor are the people bound by any law,
but such as they have in like manner assented to, for their common good. And
previous to any law being made to raise a tax, the purpose, for which it is to
be raised ought to appear evident to the Legislature to be of more service to
the community, than the money would be if not collected.

XI. That in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, a man has a right to be
heard by himself and his counsel -- to demand the cause and nature of his
accusation -- to be confronted with the witnesses -- to call for evidence in
his favor, and a speedy public trial by an impartial jury of the country,
without the unanimous consent of which jury he cannot be found guilty -- nor
can he be compelled to give evidence against himself -- nor can any man be
justly deprived of his liberty, except by the laws of the land, or the judgment
of his peers.

XII. That the people have a right to hold themselves, their houses, papers and
possessions, free from search or seizure: and therefore warrants, without oaths
or affirmations first made, affording sufficient foundation for them, and
whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded or required to search
suspected places, or to seize any person or persons, his, her or their property
not particularly described, are contrary to that right, and ought not to be
granted.

XIII. That no warrant or writ to attach the person or estate of any freeholder
within this State, shall be issued in civil action, without the person or
persons, who may request such warrant or attachment, first make oath, or affirm
before the authority who may be requested to issue the same, that he or they
are in danger of losing his, her, or their debts.

XIV. That when an issue in fact, proper for the cognizance of a jury, is
joined in a court of law, the parties have a right to a trial by jury; which
ought to be held sacred.

XV. That the people have a right of fredom of speech and of writing and
publishing their sentiments, concerning the transactions of government -- and
therefore the freedom of the press ought not to be restrained.

XVI. The freedom of deliberation, speech, and debate, in the legislature, is
so essential to the rights of the people, that it cannot be the foundation of
any accusation or prosecution, action or complaint, in any other court or place
whatsoever.

XVII. The power of suspending laws, or the execution of laws, ought never to
be exercised, but by the Legislature, or by authority derived from it, to be
exercised in such particular cases only as the Legislature shall expressly
provide for.

XVIII. That the people have a right to bear arms, for the defense of
themselves and the State: and as standing armies, in the time of peace, are
dangerous to liberty, they ought not to be kept up; and that the military
should be kept under strict subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

XIX. That no person in this Commonwealth can, in any case, be subjected to
law-martial or to any penalties or pains, by virtue of that law, except those
employed in the army, and the militia in actual service.

XX. That frequent recurrence to fundamental principles, and a firm adherence
to justice, moderation, temperance, industry, and frugality, are absolutely
necessary to preserve the blessings of liberty, and keep government free; the
people ought therefore to pay particular attention to these points, in the
choice of officers and representatives; and have a right, in a legal way, to
exact a due and constant regard to them, from their legislators and
magistrates, in the making and executing such laws as are necessary for the
good government of the State.

XXI. That all people have a natural and inherent right to emigrate from one
State to another, that will receive them; or to form a new State in vacant
countries, or in such countries as they can purchase, whenever they think that
thereby they can promote their own happiness.

XXII. That the people have a right to assemble together, to consult for their
common good -- to instruct their representatives, and to apply to the
Legislature for redress of grievances, by address, petition or remonstrance.

XXIII. That no person shall be liable to be transported out of this State, for
trial for any offense committed within the same.

CHAP. II. PLAN or FRAME of GOVERNMENT.
SECT. I. THE Commonwealth or State of Vermont, shall be governed hereafter by
a Governor, (or Lieutenant Governor) Council, and an Assembly of the
Representatives of the freemen of the same, in manner and form following:

II. The supreme legislative power shall be vested in a House of
Representatives of the freemen, or Commonwealth, or State of Vermont.

III. The supreme executive power shall be vested in a Governor, (or, in his
absence, a Lieutenant Governor) and Council.

IV. Courts of justice shall be maintained in every county in this State, and
also in new counties when formed; which courts shall be open for the trial of
all causes proper for their cognizance, and justice shall be therein
impartially administered, without corruption, or unnecessary delay. The Judges
of the Supreme Court shall be Justices of the Peace throughout the State; and
the several Judges of the County Courts, in their respective counties, by
virtue of their offices, except in the trial of such causes as may be appealed
to the County Court.

V. A future Legislature may, when they shall conceive the same to be expedient
and necessary, erect a Court of Chancery, with such powers as are usually
exercised by that Court, or as shall appear for the interest of the
Commonwealth: Provided they do not constitute themselves the Judges of the said
Court.

VI. The legislative, executive and judiciary departments shall be separate and
distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the other.

VII. In order that the freemen of this State may enjoy the benefit of
election, as equally as may be, each town within this State, that consists or
may consist of eighty taxable inhabitants, within one septenary or seven years
next after the establishing this Constitution, may hold elections therein, and
choose each two representatives; and each other inhabited town in this State
may, in like manner, choose each one representative to represent them in
General Assembly, during the said septenary or seven years; and after that,
each inhabited town may, in like manner, hold such election, and choose each
one representative forever thereafter.

VIII. The House of Representatives of the freemen of this State shall consist
of persons most noted for wisdom and virtue, to be chosen by ballot by the
freemen of every town in this State respectively, on the first Tuesday of
September annually forever.

IX. The representatives, so chosen, (a majority of whom shall constitute a
quorum for transacting any other business than raising a State tax, for which
two thirds of the members elected shall be present) shall meet on the second
Thursday of the succeeding October, and shall be styled, The General Assembly
of the State of Vermont: they shall have power to those ^^^^r Sp^aker,
Secretary of the State, their Clerk and other necessary officers of the House
-- sit on their own adjournments -- prepare bills, and enact them into laws --
judge of the elections and qualifications of their own members: they may expel
members, but not for causes known to their constituents antecedent to their
election; they may administer oaths, or affirmations, in matters depending
before them -- redress grievances -- impeach State criminals -- grant charters
of incorporation -- constitute towns, boroughs, cities and counties: they may
annually, in their first session after their election, and at other times when
vacancies happen, choose Delegates to Congress: and shall also, in conjunction
with the Council, annually, (or oftener if need be) elect Judges of the Supreme
and several County and Probate Courts, Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace: and
also with the Council, may elect Major-Generals and Brigadier-Generals, from
time to time, as often as there shall be occasion; and they shall have all
other powers necessary for the Legislature of a free and sovereign State: but
they shall have no power to add to, alter, abolish, or infringe, any part of
this Constitution.

X. The Supreme Executive Council of this State shall consist of a Governor,
Lieutenant Governor, and twelve persons, chosen in the following manner, viz.
The freemen of each town shall, on the day of election for choosing
representatives to attend the General Assembly, bring in their votes for
Governor, with his name fairly written, to the Constable, who shall seal them
up, and write on them, Votes for the Governor, and deliver them to the
representative chosen to attend the General Assembly: and at the opening of the
General Assembly, there shall be a committee appointed out of the Council and
Assembly, who, after being duly sworn to the faithful discharge of their trust,
shall proceed to receive, sort and count the votes for the Governor, and
declare the person who has the major part of the votes to be Governor, for the
year ensuing. And if there be no choice made, then the Council and General
Assembly, by their joint ballot, shall make choice of a Governor.

The Lieutenant Governor and Treasurer shall be chosen in the manner above
directed. And each freeman shall give in twelve votes for twelve Counselors,
in the same manner: and the twelve highest in nomination shall serve for the
ensuing year as counselors.

XI. The Governor, and in his absence, the Lieutenant Governor, with the
Council, (a major part of whom, including the Governor or Lieutenant Governor,
shall be a quorum to transact business) shall have power to commissionate all
officers -- and also to appoint officers, except where provision is or shall be
otherwise made by law, or this frame of government; and shall supply every
vacancy in any office occasioned by death or otherwise, until the office can be
filled in the manner directed by law or this Constitution. They are to
correspond with other States -- transact business with officers of government,
civil and military, and to prepare such business as may appear to them
necessary to lay before the General Assembly. They shall sit as Judges to hear
and determine on impeachments, taking to their assistance, for advice only, the
Judges of the Supreme Court; and shall have power to grant pardons, and remit
sines in all cases whatsoever, except in treason and murder, in which they
shall have power to grant reprieves, but not to pardon, until after the end of
the next session of Assembly, and except in cases of impeachment, in which
there shall be no remission or mitigation of punishment, but by act of
legislation. They are also to take care that the laws be faithfully executed.
They are to expedite the execution of such measures as may be resolved upon by
the General Assembly: and they may draw upon the Treasurer for such sums as may
be appropriated by the House of Representatives. They may also lay embargoes,
or prohibit the exportation of any commodity, for any time not exceeding thirty
days, in the recess of the House only: they may grant such licenses as shall be
directed by law, and shall have power to call together the General Assembly,
when necessary, before the day to which they shall stand adjourned. The
Governor shall be captain general and commander in chief of the forces of the
State, but shall not command in person, except advised thereto by the Council,
and then only as long as they shall approve thereof: and the
Lieutenant Governor shall, by virtue of his office, be Lieutenant General of
all the forces of the State. The Governor, or Lieutenant Governor, and the
Council, shall meet at the time and place with the General Assembly: the
Lieutenant Governor shall, during the presence of the commander in chief, vote
and act as one of the Council; and the Governor, and, in his absence, the
Lieutenant Governor, shall, by virtue of their offices, preside in Council, and
have a casting, but no other vote. Every member of the Council shall be a
Justice of the Peace for the whole State, by virtue of his office. The Governor
and Council shall have a Secretary, and keep fair books of their proceedings,
wherein any counselor may enter his dissent, with his reasons to support it.

XII. The representatives, having met, and chosen their speaker and clerk,
shall each of them, before they proceed to business, take and subscribe, as
well the oath or affirmation of allegiance herein after directed (except where
they shall produce certificates of their having heretofore taken and subscribed
the same) as the following oath or affirmation, viz.

You -- do solemnly swear, (or affirm) that, as a member of this Assembly, you
will not propose or assent to any bill, vote, or resolution, which shall appear
to you injurious to the people; nor do nor consent to any act or thing
whatever, that shall have a tendency to lessen or abridge their rights and
privileges as declared by the Constitution of this State; but will, in all
things, conduct yourself as a faithful, honest representative and guardian of
the people, according to the best of your judgment and abilities. (In case of
an oath) So help you God. (And in case of an affirmation) Under the pains and
penalties of perjury.

And each member, before he takes his seat, shall make and subscribe the
following declaration, viz.

You do believe in one God, the Creator and Governor of the Universe, the
rewarded of the good, and punisher of the wicked. And you do acknowledge the
scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration; and
own and profess the Protestant religion.

And no further or other religious test shall ever hereafter be required of any
civil officer or magistrate, in this State.

XIII. The doors of the House, in which the General Assembly of this
Commonwealth shall sit, shall be open for the admission of all persons who
behave decently, except only when the welfare of the State may require them to
be shut.

XIV. The votes and proceedings of the General Assembly shall be printed (when
one third of the members think it necessary) as soon as conveniently may be,
after the end of each session, with the yeas and nays on any question, when
required by any member, (except where the votes shall be taken by ballot) in
which case every member shall have a right to insert the reasons of his vote
upon the minutes.

XV. The style of laws of this State, in future to be passed, shall be, It is
hereby enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Vermont.

XVI. To the end that laws, before they are enacted, may be more maturely
considered, and the inconvenience of hasty determinations as much as possible
prevented, all bills which originate in the Assembly shall be laid before the
Governor and Council for their revision and concurrence, or proposals of
amendment; who shall return the same to the Assembly, with their proposals of
amendment (if any) in writing: and if the same are not agreed to by the
Assembly, it shall be in the power of the Governor and Council to suspend the
passing of such oills until the next session of the Legislature. Provided, that
if the Governor and Council shall neglect or refuse to return any such bill to
the Assembly with written proposals of amendment, within five days, or before
the rising of the Legislature, the same shall become a law.

XVII. No person ought, in any case, or in any time, to be declared guilty of
treason or felony by the Legislature.

XVIII. Every man, of the full age of twenty-one years, having resided in this
State, for the space of one whole year, next before the election of
representatives, and is of a quiet and peaceable behavior, and will take the
following oath, (or affirmation) shall be entitled to all the privileges of a
freeman of this State.

You solemnly swear, (or affirm) that whenever you give your vote or suffrage,
touching any matter that concerns the State of Vermont, you will do it so as in
your conscience you shall judge will most conduce to the best good of the same,
as established by the Constitution, without fear or favor of any man.

XIX. The inhabitants of this Commonwealth shall be trained and armed for its
defense, under such regulations, restrictions, and exceptions, as the General
Assembly shall by law direct. The several companies of militia shall, as often
as vacancies happen, elect their captains and other inferior officers; and the
captains and subalterns shall nominate and recommend the field officers of
their respective regiments, who shall appoint their staff-officers.

XX. All commissions shall be in the name of the freemen of the State of
Vermont, sealed with the State seal, signed by the Governor, and in his absence
the Lieutenant Governor, and attested by the Secretary; which seal shall be
kept by the Council.

XXI. Every officer of State, whether judicial or executive, shall be liable to
be impeached by the General Assembly, either when in office, or after his
resignation, or removal for mal-administration. All impeachments shall be
before the Governor or Lieutenant Governor, and Council, who shall bear and
determine the same, and may award costs.

XXII. As every freeman, to preserve his independence, (if without a sufficient
estate) ought to have some profession, calling, trade, or farm, whereby he may
honestly subsist, there can be no necessity for, nor use in establishing
offices of profit, the usual effects of which are dependence and servility,
unbecoming freemen, in the possessors or expectants, faction, contention,
corruption and disorder among the people. But if any man is called into public
service, to the prejudice of his private affairs, he has a right to a
reasonable compensation: and whenever an office, through increase of fees or
otherwise, becomes so profitable as to occasion many to apply for it, the
profits ought to be lessened by the Legislature. And if any officer shall take
greater or other fees than the laws allow him, either directly or indirectly,
it shall ever after disqualify him from holding any office in this State.

XXIII. No person in this State shall be capable of holding or exercising more
than one of the following offices at the same time, viz. Governor,
Lieutenant Governor, Judge of the Supreme Court, Treasurer of the State, member
of the Council, member of the General Assembly, Surveyor-General, or Sheriff.

XXIV. The Treasurer of the State shall, before the Governor and Council, give
sufficient security to the Secretary of the State, in behalf of the General
Assembly; and each High Sheriff, before the first Judge of the County Court, to
the Treasurer of their respective counties, previous to their respectively
entering upon the execution of their offices, in such manner, and in such sums,
as shall be directed by the Legislature.

XXV. The Treasurer's accounts shall be annually audited, and a fair state
thereof laid before the General Assembly, at their session in October.

XXVI. Every officer, whether judicial, executive, or military, in authority
under this State, before he enter upon the execution of his office, shall take
and subscribe the following oath or affirmation of allegiance to this State,
(unless he shall produce evidence that ^e has before taken the same) and also
the following oath or affirmation of office, (except such as shall be exempted
by the Legislature) viz.

The oath or affirmation of allegiance.

You do solemnly swear, (or affirm) that you will be true and faithful to the
State of Vermont; and that you will not, directly nor indirectly, do any act or
thing injurious to the Constitution or government thereof, as established by
Convention. (If an oath) So help you God. (If an affirmation) Under the pains
and penalties of perjury.

The oath or affirmation of office.

You -- do solemnly swear, (or affirm) that you will faithfully execute the
office of -- for the -- of --; and will therein do equal right and justice to
all men, to the best of your judgment and abilities, according to law. (It an
oath) So help you God. (If an affirmation) Under the pains and penalties of
perjury.

XXVII. Any delegate to Congress may be superseded at any time, by the General
Assembly appointing another in his stead. No man shall be capable of being a
delegate to represent this State in Congress for more than three years, in any
term of six years; -- and no person, who holds any office in the gift of
Congress, shall, during the time of his holding such office, be elected to
represent this State in Congress.

XXVIII. Trials of issues, proper for the cognizance of a jury, in the Supreme
and County Courts, shall be by jury, except where parties otherwise agree: and
great care ought to be taken to prevent corruption or partiality in the choice
and return, or appointment of juries.

XXIX. All prosecutions shall commence by the authority of the Sat of Vermont
-- all indictments shall conclude with these words, Against the peace and
dignity of the State. And all fines shall be proportionate to the offenses.

XXX. The person of a debtor, where there is not strong presumption of fraud,
shall not be continued in prison after delivering up and assigning over, bona
fide, all his estate, real and personal, in possession, reversion, or
remainder, for the use ose of his creditors, in such manner as shall be
hereafter regulated by law. And all prisoners, unless in execution, or
committed for capital offenses, when the proof is evident or presumption great,
shall be bailable by sufficient sureties: nor shall excessive bail be exacted
for bailable offenses.

XXXI. All elections, whether by the people, or in General Assembly, shall be
by ballot, free and voluntary: and any elector, who shall receive any gift or
reward for his vote, in meat, drink, moneys or otherwise, shall forfeit his
right to elect at that time, and suffer such other penalty as the laws shall
direct: and any person who shall, directly or indirectly, give, promise or
bestow any such rewards to be elected, shall thereby be rendered incapable to
serve for the ensuing year, and be subject to such further punishment as a
future Legislature shall direct.

XXXII. All deeds and conveyances of land shall be recorded in the Town Clerk's
office, in their respective towns; and, for want thereof, in the County Clerk's
office of the same county.

XXXIII. The Legislature shall regulate entails in such manner as to prevent
perpetuities.

XXXIV. To deter more effectually from the commission of crimes, by continued
visible punishment, of long duration, and to make sanguinary punishment less
necessary, means ought to be provided for punishing by hard labor, those who
shall be convicted of crimes not capital, whereby the criminal shall be
employed for the benefit of the public, or for reparation of injuries done to
private persons: and all persons, at proper times, ought to be permitted to see
them at their labor.

XXXV. The estates of such persons as may destroy their own lives, shall not
for that offense be forfeited, but descend or ascend in the same manner as if
such persons had died in a natural way. Nor shall any article, which shall
accidentally occasion the death of any person, be henceforth deemed a deodand,
or in anywise forfeited on account of such misfortune.

XXXVI. Every person of good character, who comes to settle in this State,
having first taken an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the same, may
purchase, or by other just means, acquire, hold and transfer land, or other
real estate; and, after one year's residence, shall be deemed a free denizen
thereof, and entitled to all the rights of a natural born subject of this
State, except that he shall not be capable of being elected Governor,
Lieutenant Governor, Treasurer, Counselor, or Representative in Assembly,
until after two years' residence.

XXXVII. The inhabitants of this State shall have liberty, in seasonable times,
to hunt and fowl on the lands they hold, and on other lands not enclosed; and
in like manner to fish in all boatable and other waters, not private property,
under proper regulations, to be hereafter made and provided by the General
Assembly.

XXXVIII. Laws for the encouragement of virtue, and prevention of vice and
immorality, ought to be constantly kept in force, and duly executed; and a
competent number of schools ought to be maintained in each towa for the
convenient instruction of youth; and one or more grammar schools be
incorporated, and properly supported in each county in this State. And all
religious societies, or bodies of men, that may be hereafter united or
incorporated, for the advancement of religion and learning, or for other pious
and charitable purposes, shall be encouraged and protected in the enjoyment of
the privileges, immunities, and estates, which they in justice ought to enjoy,
under such regulations as the General Assembly of this State shall direct.

XXXIX. The declaration of the political rights and privileges of the
inhabitants of this State, is hereby declared to be a part of the Constitution
of this Commonwealth; and ought not to be violated on any pretense whatsoever.

XL. In order that the freedom of this Commonwealth may be preserved inviolate
forever, there shall be chosen by ballot, by the freemen of this State, on the
last Wednesday in March, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-five, and on the last Wednesday in March in every seven years
thereafter, thirteen persons, who shall be chosen in the same manner the
Council is chosen, except that they shall not be out of the Council or General
Assembly, to be called the Council of Censors; who shall meet together on the
first Wednesday of June next ensuing their election, the majority of whom shall
be a quorum in every case, except as to calling a convention, in which two
thirds of the whole number elected shall agree: and whose duty it shall be to
inquire whether the Constitution has been preserved inviolate in every part,
during the last septenary (including the year of their service;) and whether
the legislative and executive branches of government have performed their duty,
as guardians of the people, or assumed to themselves, or exercised other or
greater powers than they are entitled to by the Constitution: they are also to
inquire, whether the public taxes have been justly laid and collected in all
parts of this Commonwealth -- in what manner the public moneys have been
disposed of -- and whether the laws have been duly executed. For these
purposes, they shall have power to send for persons, papers, and records; they
shall have authority to pass public censures -- to order impeachments -- and to
recommend to the Legislature the repealing such laws as appear to them to have
been enacted contrary to the principles of the Constitution; these powers they
shall continue to have, for, and during the space of one year from the day of
their election, and no longer. The said Council of Censors shall also have
power to call a Convention, to meet within two years after their sitting, if
there appears to them an absolute necessity of amending any article of this
Constitution which may be defective -- explaining such as may be thought not
clearly expressed -- and of adding such as are necessary for the preservation
of the rights and happiness of the people; but the articles to be amended, and
the amedments proposed and such articles as are proposed to be added or
abolished, shall be promulgated at least six months before the day appointed
for the election of such Convention, for the previous consideration of the
people, that they may have an opportunity of instructing their delegates on the
subject.

By order of Convention, July 4th, 1786. MOSES ROBINSON, President. Attest,
ELIJAH PAIN, Secretary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF TENNESSEE.
WE, the people of the Territory of the United States, south of the river Ohio,
having the right of admission into the General Government as 2 Member State
thereof, consistent with the Constitution of the United States, and the act of
^^^^on of the State of North Carolina, recognizing the ordinance for the
government of the Territory of the United States, northwest of the river Ohio,
do ordain and establish the following Constitution, or form of government, and
do mutually agree with each other to form ourselves into a free and independent
State, by the name of THE STATE OF TENNESSEE.

ARTICLE I.
SECT. I. The legislative authority of this State shall be vested in a General
Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives, both
dependent on the people.

SECT. II. Within three years after the first meeting of the General Assembly,
and within every subsequent term of seven years, an enumeration of the taxable
inhabitants shall be made in such manner as shall be directed by law; the
number of representatives shall, at the several periods of making such
enumeration, be sixed by the Legislature, and apportioned among the several
counties, according to the number of taxable inhabitants in each; and shall
never be less than twenty-two, nor greater than twenty-six, until the number of
taxable inhabitants shall be forty thousand; and after that event, at such
ratio that the whole number of representatives shall never exceed forty,

SECT. III. The number of ser ators shall, at the several periods of making the
enumeration before mentioned, be fixed by the Legislature, and apportioned
among the districts, formed as herein after directed, according to the number
of taxable inhabitants in each, and shall never be less than one third, nor
more than one half of the number of representatives.

SECT. IV. The senators shall be chosen by districts, to be formed by the
Legislature, each district containing such a number of taxable inhabitants, as
shall be entitled to elect not more than three senators. When a district shall
be composed of two or more counties, they shall be adjoining, and no county
shall be divided in forming a district.

SECT. V. The first election for senators and representatives, shall commence
on the second Thursday of March next, and shall continue for that, and the
succeeding day; and the next election shall commence on the first Thursday of
August, one thousand seven hundred and ninetyseven, and shall continue on that
and the succeeding day; and forever after, elections shall be held once in two
years, commencing on the first Thursday, in August, and terminating the
succeeding day.

SECT. VI. The first session of the General Assembly shall commence on the last
Monday of March next. The second on the third Monday of September, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-seven. And forever after, the General Assembly shall
meet on the third Monday of September next ensuing the then election, and at no
other period, unless as provided for by this Constitution.

SECT. VII. That no person shall be eligible to a seat in the General Assembly,
unless he shall have resided three years in the State, and one year in the
county immediately preceding the election, and shall possess in his own right
in the county which he represents, not less than two ^^^dred acres of land, and
shall have attained to the age of ^^^^ty-one years.

SECT. VIII. The Senate and House of Representatives, when ^^^^bled, shall each
choose a Speaker and its other officers, be judges of the qualifications and
elections of its members, and sit upon its own adjournments from day to day.
Two thirds of each House shall constitute a quorum to do business; but a
smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized, by law, to
compel the attendance of absent members.

SECT. IX. Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its
members for disorderly behavior, and with the concurrence of two thirds, expel
a member, but not a second time for the same offense, and shall have all other
powers necessary for the Legislature of a free State.

SECT. X. Senators and Representatives shall in all cases, except treason,
felony, or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during the session of
the General Assembly, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any
speech or debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

SECT. XI. Each House may punish, by imprisonment, during their session, any
person, not a member, who shall be guilty of disrespect to the House, by any
disorderly or contemptuous behavior in their presence.

SECT. XII. When vacancies happen in either House, the Governor, for the time
being, shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

SECT. XIII. Neither House shall, during their session, adjourn without consent
of the other, for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in
which the two Houses shall be sitting.

SECT. XIV. Bills may originate in either House, but may be amended, altered or
rejected by the other.

SECT. XV. Every bill shall be read three times, on three different days, in
each House, and be signed by the respective speakers, before it becomes (...)
^aw.

SECT. XVI. After a bill has been rejected, no bill containing the same
substance, shall be passed into a law during the same s^ssion.

SECT. XVII. The style of the laws of this State shall be, BE IT ENACTED BY THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF TENNESSEE.

SECT. XVIII. Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and publish
them, except such parts as the welfare of the State may require to be kept
secret. And the yeas and nays of the members on any question, shall, at the
request of any two of them, be entered on the journals.

SECT. XIX. The doors of each House, and committees of the whole, shall be kept
open, unless when the business shall be such as ought to be kept secret.

SECT. XX. The Legislature of this State shall not allow the following officers
of government greater annual salaries than as follows, until the year one
thousand eight hundred and four, to wit.

The Governor not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars.

The Judges of the Superior Courts, not more than six hundred dollars each.

The Secretary not more than four hundred dollars.

The Treasurer or Treasurers, not more than four per cent. for receiving and
paying out all moneys.

The Attorney or Attorneys for the State shall receive a compensation for their
services, not exceeding fifty dollars for each Superior Court which he shall
attend.

No member of the Legislature shall receive more than one dollar and
seventy-five cents per day, nor more for every twenty-five miles he shall
travel in going to and returning from the General Assembly.

SECT. XXI. No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law.

SECT. XXII. No person who heretofore has been, or hereafter may be a
Collector or holder of public moneys, shall have a seat in either House of the
General Assembly, until such person shall have accounted for, and paid into the
treasury, all sums for which he may be accountable or liable.

SECT. XXIII. No Judge of any Court of law or equity, Secretary of State,
Attorney General, Register, Clerk of any Court of Record, or person holding any
office under the authority of the United States shall have a seat in the
General Assembly; nor shall any person, in this State, hold more than one
lucrative office at one and the same time; provided that no appointment in the
militia or to the office of a Justice of the Peace, shall be considered as a
lucrative office.

SECT. XXIV. No member of the General Assembly shall be eligible to any office
or place of trust, except to the office of a Justice of the Peace, or trustee
of any literary institution, where the power of appointment to such office or
place of trus^ is vested in their own body.

SECT. XXV. Any member of either House of the General Assembly, shall have
liberty to dissent from, and protest against any act or resolve which he may
think injurious to the public, or any individual, and have the reasons of his
dissent entered on the journals.

SECT. XXVI. All lands liable to taxation, in this State held by deed, grant,
or entry, shall be taxed equal and uniform, in such manner, that no one hundred
acres shall be taxed higher than another, except town lots, which shall not be
taxed higher than two hundred acres of land each; no freeman shall be taxed
higher than one hundred acres, and no slave higher than two hundred acres on
each poll.

SECT. XXVII. No article manufactured of the produce of this State, shall be
taxed otherwise than to pay inspection fees.

ARTICLE II.
SECT. I. The supreme executive power of this State shall be vested in a
Governor.

SECT. II. The Governor shall be chosen by the electors of the members of the
General Assembly, at the times and places where they shall respectively vote
for the members thereof. The returns of every election for Governor shall be
sealed up, and transmitted to the seat of government, by the returning
officers, directed to the Speaker of the Senate, who shall open and publish
them in the presence of a majority of the members of each House of the General
Assembly. The person having the highest number of votes, shall be Governor; but
if two or more shall be equal, and highest in votes, one of them shall be
chosen Governor, by joint ballot of both Houses of the General Assembly.
Contested elections for Governor, shall be determined by both Houses of the
General Assembly, in such manner as shall be prescribed by law.

SECT. III. He shall be at least twenty-five years of age, and possess a
freehold estate of five hundred acres of land, and have been a citizen or
inhabitant of this State four years next before his election, unless he shall
have been absent on the public business of the United States, or of this State.

SECT. IV. The first Governor shall hold his office until the fourth Tuesday of
September, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven, and until another
Governor shall be elected and qualified to office; and forever after, the
Governor shall hold his office for the term of two years, and until another
Governor shall be elected and qualified; but shall not be eligible more than
six years in any term of eight.

SECT. V. He shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of this State,
and of the militia, except when they shall be called into the service of the
United States.

SECT. VI. He shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons, after
conviction, except in cases of impeachment.

SECT. VII. He shall, at stated times, receive a compensation for his services,
which shall not be increased or diminished during the period for which he shall
have been elected.

SECT. VIII. He may require information, in writing, from the officers in the
executive department, upon any subject relating to the duties of their
respective offices.

SECT. IX. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the General Assembly by
proclamation, and shall state to them, when assembled, the purpose for which
they shall have been convened.

SECT. X. He shall take care that the laws shall be faithfully executed.

SECT. XI. He shall, from time to time, give to the General Assembly
information of the-state of the government, and recommend to their
consideration such measures as he shall judge expedient.

SECT. XII. In case of his death, or resignation, or removal from office, the
Speaker of the Senate shall exercise the office of Governor until another
Governor shall be duly qualified.

SECT. XIII. No member of Congress, or person holding any office under the
United States, or this State, shall execute the office of Governor.

SECT. XIV. When any officer, the right of whose appointment is by this
Constitution vested in the General Assembly, shall, during the recess, die, or
his office by other means become vacant, the Governor-shall have power to fill
up such vacancy by granting a temporary commission, which shall expire at the
end of the next session of the Legislature.

SECT. XV. There shall be a seal of this State, which shall be kept by the
Governor, and used by him officially, and shall be called the Great Seal of the
State of Tennessee.

SECT. XVI. All grants and commissions shall be in the name and by the
authority of the State of Tennessee, be sealed with the State seal, and signed
by the Governor.

SECT. XVII. A Secretary of this State shall be appointed and commissioned
during the term of four years. He shall keep a fair register of all the
official acts and proceedings of the Governor; and shall, when required, lay
the same, and all papers, minutes, and vouchers relative thereto, before the
General Assembly, and shall perform such other duties as shall be enjoined him
by law.

ARTICLE III.
SECT. I. Every freeman of the age of twenty-one years and upwards, possessing
a freehold in the county wherein he may vote, and being an inhabitant of this
State, and every freeman, being an inhabitant of any one county in the State
six months immediately preceding the day of election, shall be entitled to vote
for members of the General Assembly, for the county in which he shall reside.

SECT. II. Electors shall in all cases, except treason, felony, or breach of
the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at elections, and
in going to and returning from them.

SECT. III. All elections shall be by ballot.

ARTICLE IV.
SECT. I. The House of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeachment.

SECT. II. All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When sitting for that
purpose, the senators shall be upon oath or affirmation.

SECT. III. No person shall be convicted, without the concurrence of two thirds
of the members of the whole House.

SECT. IV. The Governor, and all civil officers under this State, shall be
liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in office; but judgment, in such
cases, shall not extend further than to removal from office, and
disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit under this
State. The party shall, nevertheless, in all cases be liable to indictment,
trial, judgment, and punishment, according to law.

ARTICLE V.
SECT. I. The judicial power of the State shall be vested in such superior and
inferior Courts of law and equity, as the Legislature shall, from time to time,
direct and establish.

SECT. II. The General Assembly shall, by joint ballot of both Houses, appoint
Judges of the several Courts of law and equity, also an Attorney or Attorneys
for the State, who shall hold their respective offices during good behavior.

SECT. III. The Judges of the Superior Court shall, at stated times, receive a
compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law; but shall not be
allowed any fees or perquisites of office, nor shall they hold any other office
of trust or profit under this State, or the United States.

SECT. IV. The Judges of the Superior Courts shall be Justices of oyer and
terminer and general gaol delivery, throughout the State.

SECT. V. The Judges of the Superior and Inferior Courts shall not charge
juries with respect to matters of fact, but may state the testimony and declare
the law.

SECT. VI. The Judges of the Superior Courts shall have power, in all civil
cases, to issue writs of certiorari, to remove any cause, or a transcript
thereof, from any Inferior Court of record into the Superior, on sufficient
cause supported by oath or affirmation.

SECT. VII. The Judges or Justices of the Inferior Courts of law, shall have
power, in all civil cases, to issue writs of certiorari, to remove any cause,
or a transcript thereof, from any inferior jurisdiction into their court, on
sefficient cause, supported by oath or affirmation.

SECT. VIII. No Judge shall fit on the trial of any cause where the parties
shall be connected with him, by affinity or consanguinity, except by consent of
parties. In case all the Judges of the Superior Court shall be interested in
the event of any cause, or related to all or either of the parties, the
Governor of the State shall in such case specially commission three men, of law
knowledge, for the determination thereof.

SECT. IX. All writs and other process shall run IN THE NAME OF THE STATE OF
TENNESSEE; and bear test, and be signed by the respective clerks. Indictments
shall conclude, AGAINST THE PEACE AND DIGNITY OF THE STATE.

SECT. X. Each court shall appoint its own clerk, who may hold his office
during good behavior.

SECT. XI. No fine shall be laid on any citizen of this State, that shall
exceed fifty dollars, unless it shall be assessed by a jury of his peers, who
shall assess the fine at the time they find the fact, if they think the fine
ought to be more than fifty dollars.

SECT. XII. There shall be Justices of the Peace appointed for each county, not
exceeding two for each captain's company, except for the company which includes
the county town, which shall not exceed three, who shall hold their offices
during good behavior.

ARTICLE VI.
SECT. I. There shall be appointed in each county, by the County Court, one
Sheriff, one Coroner, one Trustee, and a sufficient number of Constables, who
shall hold their offices for two years. They shall also have power to appoint
one Register and Ranger for the county, who shall hold their offices during
good behavior. The Sheriff and Coroner shall be commissioned by the Governor.

SECT. II. There shall be a Treasurer or Treasurers appointed for the State,
who shall hold his or their offices for two years.

SECT. III. The appointment of all officers not otherwise directed by this
Constitution, shall be vested in the Legislature.

ARTICLE VII.
SECT. I. Captains, Subalterns, and non-commissioned officers, shall be elected
by those citizens, in their respective districts, who are subject to military
duty.

SECT. II. All field officers of the militia shall be elected by those citizens
in their respective counties who are subject to military duty.

SECT. III. Brigadiers General shall be elected by the field officer of their
respective brigades.

SECT. IV. Majors General shall be elected by the Brigadiers and field officers
of the respective divisions.

SECT. V. The Governor shall appoint the Adjutant General; the Majors General
shall appoint their Aids; the Brigadiers General shall appoint their Brigade
Majors, and the commanding officers of regiments their Adjutants and Quarter
Masters.

SECT. VI. The Captains and the Subalterns of the cavalry shall be appointed by
the troops enrolled in their respective companies, and the field officers of
the district shall be appointed by the said Captains and Subalterns, provided,
that whenever any new county is laid off, that the field officers of the said
cavalry shall appoint the Captain and other officers therein, pro tempore,
until the company is filled up and completed, at which time the election of the
Captains and Subalterns shall take place as aforesaid.

SECT. VII. The Legislature shall pass laws, exempting citizens belonging to
any sect or denomination of religion, the tenets of which are known to be
opposed to the bearing of arms, from attending private and general musters.

ARTICLE VIII.
SECT. I. Whereas the ministers of the gospel are, by their professions,
dedicated to God and the care of souls, and ought not be to diverted from the
great duties of their functions: therefore no minister of the gospel, or priest
of any denomination whatever, shall be eligible to a seat in either House of
the Legislature.

SECT. II. No person who denies the being of God, or a future state of rewards
and punishments, shall hold any office in the civil department of this State.

ARTICLE IX.
SECT. I. That every person, who shall be chosen or appointed to any office of
trust or profit, shall, before entering on the execution thereof, take an oath
to support the Constitution of this State, and also an oath of office.

SECT. II. That each member of the Senate and House of Representatives shall,
before they proceed to business, take an oath or affirmation to support the
Constitution of this State, and also the following oath:

I, A. B. do solemnly swear (or affirm) that, as a member of this General
Assembly, I will in all appointments vote without favor, affection,
partiality, or prejudice, and that I will not propose or assent to any bill,
vote, or resolution which shall appear to me injurious to the people, or
consent to any act or thing whatever, that shall have a tendency to lessen or
abridge their rights and privileges, as declared by the Constitution of this
State.

SECT. III. Any elector who shall receive any gift or reward for his vote, in
meat, drink, money, or otherwise, shall suffer such punishment as the laws
shall direct. And any person who shall directly or indirectly give, promise, or
bestow any such reward to be elected, shall thereby be rendered incapable, for
two years, to serve in the office for which he was elected, and be subject to
such further punishment as the Legislature shall direct.

SECT. IV. No new county shall be established by the General Assembly, which
shall reduce the county or counties, or either of them, from which it shall be
taken, to a less content than six hundred and twenty-five square miles. Nor
shall any new county be laid off, of less contents. All new counties, as to the
right of suffrage and representation, shall be considered as a part of the
county or counties from which it was taken, until entitled by numbers to the
right of representation. No bill shall be passed into a law, for the
establishment of a new county, except upon a petition to the General Assembly,
for that purpose, signed by two hundred of the free male inhabitants within the
limits or bounds of such new county prayed to be laid off.

ARTICLE X.
SECT. I. KNOXVILLE shall be the seat of government, until the year one
thousand eight hundred and two.

SECT. II. All laws and ordinances now in force and use in this territory, not
inconsistent with this Constitution, shall continue to be in force and use in
this State, until they shall expire, be altered, or repealed by the Legislature.

SECT. III. That whenever two thirds of the General Assembly shall think it
necessary to amend or change this Constitution, they shall recommend to the
electors, at the next election for members to the General Assembly, to vote for
o^ against a convention; and if it shall appear that a majority of all the
citizens of the State, voting for representatives, have voted for a convention,
the General Assembly shall, at their next session, call a convention, to
consist of as many members as there be in the General Assembly, to be chosen in
the same manner, at the same place, and by the same electors, that chose the
General Assembly, who shall meet within three months after the said election,
for the purpose of revising, amending or changing the Constitution.

SECT. IV. The declaration of rights hereto annexed, is declared to be a part
of the Constitution of this State, and shall never be violated on any pretense
whatever. And to guard against transgressions of the high powers which we have
delegated, we declare, that every thing in the bill of rights contained, and
every other right not hereby delegated, is excepted out of the general powers
of government, and shall forever remain inviolate.

ARTICLE XI. DECLARATION OF RIGHTS.
I. THAT all power is inherent in the people, and all free governments are
founded on their authority, and instituted for their peace, safety, and
happiness: for the advancement of those ends, they have at all times an
unalienable and indefeasible right to alter, reform, or abolish the government
in such manner as they may think proper.

II. That government being instituted for the common benefit, the doctrine of
non-resistance against arbitrary power and oppression is absurd, slavish, and
destructive to the good and happiness of mankind.

III. That all men have a natural and indefeasible right to worship ALMIGHTY
GOD according to the dictates of their own consciences; that no man can of
right be compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of worship, or to
maintain any ministry against his consent; that no human authority can in any
case whatever control or interfere with the rights of conscience; and that no
preference shall ever be given by law to any religious establishments or modes
of worship.

IV. That no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any
office or public trust under this state.

V. That elections shall be free and equal.

VI. That the right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.

VII. That the people shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
possessions, from unreasonable searches, and seizures, and that general
warrants, whereby an officer may be commanded to search suspected places,
without evidence of the fact committed, or to seize any person or persons not
named, whose offenses are not particularly described and supported by evidence,
are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be granted.

VIII. That no freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or disseized of his
freehold, liberties, or privileges, or ou^-lawed, or exiled, or in any manner
destroyed, or deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by the judgment
of his peers, or the law of the land.

IX. That in all criminal prosecutions, the accused has a right to be heard by
himself, and his counsel; to demand the nature and cause of the accusation
against him, and to have a copy thereof; to meet the witnesses face to face; to
have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and in
prosecutions by indictment, or presentment, a speedy public trial, by an
impartial jury of the county or district in which the crime shall have been
committed; and shall not be compelled to give evidence against himself.

X. That no person shall, for the same offense, be twice put in jeopardy of
life or limb.

XI. That laws made for the punishment of facts committed previous to the
existence of such laws, and by them only declared criminal, are contrary to the
principles of a free government; wherefore no (...) post facto law shall be
made.

XII. That no conviction shall work comption of blood or forfeiture of estate.
-- The estate of such persons as shall destroy their own lives, shall descend
or vest as in case of natural death. -- If any person be killed by casualty,
there shall be no forfeiture in consequence thereof.

XIII. That no person arrested, or confined in gaol, shall be treated with
unnecessary rigor.

XIV. That no freeman shall be put to answer any criminal charge, but by
presentment, indictment, or impeachment.

XV. That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, unless for
capital offenses, when the proof is evident or the presumption great. And the
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in
case of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.

XVI. That excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.

XVII. That all courts shall be open: and every man, for an injury done him in
his lands, goods, person, or reputation, shall have remedy by due course of
law, and right and justice administered without sale, denial, or delay. Suits
may be brought against the state in such manner and in such courts as the
Legislature may by law direct, provided the right of bringing suit be limited
to the citizens of this state.

XVIII. That the person of a debtor, where there is not strong presumption of
frand, shall not be continued in prison, after delivering up his estate for the
benefit of his creditor or creditors, in such manner as shall be prescribed by
law.

XIX. That the printing presses shall be free to every person who undertakes to
examine the proceedings of the Legislature, or of any branch or officer of
government; and no law shall ever be made to restrain the right thereof. The
free communication of thoughts and opinions, is one of the invaluable rights of
man; and every citizen may freely speak, write, and print on any subject, being
responsible for the abuse of that liberty. But in prosecutions for the
publication of papers investigating the official conduct of officers or men in
public capacity, the truth thereof may be given in evidence; and in all
indictments for libels, the jury shall have a right to determine the law and
the facts, under the direction of the court, as in other cases.

XX. That no retrospective law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts,
shall be made.

XXI. That no man's particular services shall be demanded, or property taken,
or applied to public use, without the consent of his representatives, or
without just compensation being-made therefore.

XXII. That the citizens have a right, in a peaceable manner, to assemble
together for their common good, to instruct their representatives, and to apply
to those invested with the powers of government for redress of grievances, or
other proper purposes, by address or remonstrance.

XXIII. That perpetuities and monopolies are contrary to the genius of a free
state, and shall not be allowed.

XXIV. That the sure and certain defense of a free people is a well regulated
militia; and as standing armies, in time of peace, are dangerous to freedom,
they ought to be avoided, as far as the circumstances and safety of the
community will admit; and that in all cases the military shall be in strict
subordination to the civil authority.

XXV. That no citizen in this State, except such as are employed in the army of
the United States, or militia in actual service, shall be subject to corporal
punishment under the martial law.

XXVI. That the freemen of this State have a right to keep and to bear arms for
their common defense.

XXVII. That no soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house
without consent of the owner, nor in time of war but in a manner prescribed by
law.

XXVIII. That no citizen of this State shall be compelled to bear arms,
provided he will pay an equivalent, to be ascertained by law.

XXIX. That an equal participation of the free navigation of the Missisippi, is
one of the inherent rights of the citizens of this State: it cannot, therefore,
be conceded to any prince, potentate, power, person, or persons whatever.

XXX. That no hereditary emoluments, privileges, or honors shall ever be
granted or conferred in this State.

XXXI. That the people residing south of French Broad and Holston, between the
rivers Tennessee and the Big Pigeon, are entitled to the right of pre-emption
and occupancy in that tract.

XXXII. That the limits and boundaries of this State be ascertained, it is
declared they are as hereafter mentioned; that is to say: -- Beginning on the
extreme height of the Stone Mountain, at the place where the line of Virginia
intersects it, in latitude thirty six degrees and thirty minutes North --
running thence along the extreme height of the said Mountain, to the place
where Watauga River breaks through it; thence a direct course to the top of the
Yellow Mountain, where Bright's road crosses the same; thence along the ridge
of said Mountain, between the waters of Do River and the waters of Rock Creek,
to the place where the road crosses the Iron Mountain; from thence along the
extreme height of said Mountain to where Nolichucky River runs through the
same; thence to the top of the Bald Mountain; thence along the extreme height
of said Mountain to the painted Rock, on French Broad River; thence along the
highest ridge of said Mountain, to the place where it is called the Great Iron
or Smoky Mountain; thence along the extreme height of said Mountain to the
place where it is called Unicoi or Unaka Mountain, between the Indian Towns of
Cowee and Old Chota; thence along the main ridge of the said Mountain to the
southern boundary of this State, as described in the act of cession of
North Carolina to the United States of America; and that all the Territory
lands and waters lying West of the said line, as before mentioned, and
contained within the chartered limits of the State of North Carolina, are
within the boundaries and limits of this State, over which the people have the
right of exercising sovereignty and right of soil so far as is consistent, with
the constitution of the United States, recognizing the articles of
confederation, the bill of rights and constitution of North Carolina, the
cession act of the said State, and the ordinance of the late Congress, for the
government of the Territory North-West of the Ohio; provided nothing herein
contained shall extend to affect the claim or claims of individuals, to any
part of the soil which is recognized to them by the aforesaid cession act.

SCHEDULE.
SEC. I. That no inconvenience may arise from a change of the temporary to a
permanent State government, it is declared, that all rights, actions,
prosecutions, claims, and contracts, as well of individuals as of bodies
corporate, shall continue, as if no change had taken place in the
administration of government.

SEC. II. All fines, penalties, and forfeitures, due and owing to the territory
of the United States of America south of the river Ohio, shall enure to the use
of the State. All bonds for performance, executed to the Governor of this
State, and his successors in office, for the use of the State, or by him or
them respectively to be assigned over to the use of those concerned, as the
case may be.

SEC. III. The Governor, Secretary, Judges and Brigadiers General have a right,
by virtue of their appointments, under the authority of the United States, to
continue in the exercise of the duties of their respective offices, in their
several departments, until the said officers are superseded under the authority
of this constitution.

SEC. IV. All officers, civil and military, who have been appointed by the
Governor, shall continue to exercise their respective offices until the second
Monday in June, and until successors in office shall be appointed under the
authority of this constitution, and duly qualified.

SEC. V. The Governor shall make use of his private seal, until a State seal
shall be provided.

SEC. VI. Until the first coumeration shall be made, as directed in the second
section of the first article of this constitution, the several counties shall
be respectively entitled to elect one senator and two representatives: Provided
that no new county shall be entitled to separate representation previous to
taking the enumeration.

SEC. VII. That the next election for representatives and other officers, to be
held for the county of Tennessee, shall be held at the house of William Miles.

SEC. VIII. Until a land office shall be opened, so as to enable the citizens
south of French Broad and Holston, between the rivers Tennessee and Big Pigeon,
to obtain titles upon their claims of occupancy and pre-emption, those who hold
land by virtue of such claims, shall be eligible to serve in all capacities,
where a freehold is by this constitution made a requisite qualification.

Done in Convention, at KNOXVILLE, by unanimous consent, on the sixth day of
February, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-six,
and of the Independence of the United States of America, the twentieth. In
Testimony whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names. WILLIAM BLOUNT,
President. Attest, WILLIAM MACLIN, Secretary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF KENTUCKEY.
WE, the Representatives of the People of the State of Kentuckey, in Convention
assembled, do ordain and establish this Constitution for its Government.

ARTICLE I.
The powers of government shall be divided into three distinct Departments,
each of them to be consided to a separate body of Magistracy, to wit, those
which are Legislative to one, those which are Executive to another, and those
which are Judiciary to another.

No person, or collection of persons, being of one of these departments, shall
exercise any power properly belonging to either of the others, except in the
instances herein after expressly permitted.

The Legislative powers of this Commonwealth shall be vested in a General
Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

The Representatives shall be chosen annually, by the qualified electors of
each county respectively, on the first Tuesday in May; but the several
elections may be continued for three days, if, in the opinion of the presiding
officer or officers, it shall be necessary, and no longer.

No person shall be a Representative, who shall not have attained the age of
twenty-four years, and have been a citizen and inhabitant of the state two
years preceding his election, and the last six mouths thereof an inhabitant of
the county in which he may be chosen; unless he shall have been absent on the
public business of the United States, or this state.

Within two years after the first meeting of the General Assembly, and within
every subsequent term of four years, an enumeration of the free male
inhabitants above twenty-one years of age, shall be made in such manner as may
be directed by law. The number of the Representatives shall, at the several
periods of making such enumeration, be fixed by the Legislature, and
apportioned among the several counties, according to the number of free male
inhabitants above the age of twenty-one years in each, and shall never be less
than forty, nor greater than one hundred; but no county hereafter erected,
shall be entitled to a separate representation, until a sufficient number of
free male inhabititants above the age of twenty-one years, shall be contained
within it, to entitle them to one Representative agreeable to the ratio which
shall then be established.

The Senators shall be chosen for four years. Until the first enumeration be
made, the Senate shall consist of eleven members, and thereafter for every four
members added to the House of Representatives, one member shall be added to the
Senate.

In choosing the Senate, one member at least shall be elected from each county,
until the number of counties is equal to the number of Senators: after which,
when a new county is made, it shall, as to the choice of Senators, be
considered as being a part of the county or counties from which it shall have
been taken.

The Senate shall be chosen in the following manner: All persons qualified to
vote for Representatives, shall, on the first Tuesday in May, in the present
year, and on the same day in every fourth year, forever thereafter, at the
place appointed by law for choosing Representatives, elect by ballot, by a
majority of votes, as many persons as they are entitled to have for
Representatives for their respective counties, to be electors of the Senate.

No person shall be chosen an elector, who shall not have resided in the state
three years next before his election, and who shall not have attained the age
of twenty-seven years.

The electors of the Senate shall meet at such place as shall be appointed for
convening the Legislature, on the third Tuesday in May, in the present year,
and on the same day in every fourth year forever thereafter; and they, or a
majority of them so met, shall proceed to elect by ballot, as Senators, men of
the most wisdom, experience and virtue, above twenty-seven years of age, who
shall have been residents of the state above two whole years next preceding the
election. If on the ballot two or more shall have an equal number of ballots in
their favor, by which the choice shall not be determined by the first ballot,
then the electors shall again ballot before they separate, in which they shall
be confined to the persons, who on the first ballot shall have had an equal
number, and they who shall have the greatest number in their favor on the
second ballot, shall be accordingly declared and returned duly elected; and if
on the second ballot an equal number shall still be in favor of two or more
persons, then the election shall be determined by lot, between those who have
equal numbers; which proceedings of the electors shall be certified under their
hands, and returned to the Secretary for the time being; to whom shall also be
made by the proper officers, returns of the persons chosen as electors in the
respective counties.

The electors of Senators shall judge of the qualifications and elections of
members of their body, and on a contested election, shall admit to a seat as an
elector, such qualified person as shall appear to them to have the greatest
number of legal votes in his favor.

The electors, immediately on their meeting, and before they proceed to the
election of Senators, shall take an oath or affirmation, to elect, without
favor, affection, partiality, or prejudice, such person for Governor, and such
persons for Senators, as they in their judgment and conscience believe best
qualified for the respective offices.

That in case of refusal, death, resignation, disqualification, or removal out
of this state, of any Senator, the Senate shall immediately thereupon, or at
their next meeting thereafter, elect, by ballot, in the same manner as the
electors are herein directed to choose Senators, another person in his place,
for the residue of the said term of four years.

The General Assembly shall meet on the first Monday in November in every year,
till the time of their meeting shall be altered by the Legislature, unless
sooner convened by the Governor.

Each House shall choose its Speaker and other officers, and the Senate shall
also choose a Speaker, pro tempore, when their Speaker shall exercise the
office of Governor.

Each House shall judge of the qualifications of its members: contested
elections shall be determined by a committee to be selected, formed and
regulated, in such manner as shall be directed by law. A majority of each House
shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from
day to day, and may be authorized by law to compel the attendance of absent
members, in such manner and under such penalties as may be provided.

Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for
disorderly behavior, and with the concurrence of two thirds, expel a member;
but not a second time for the same cause.

Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and publish them weekly,
except such parts of them as may require secrecy, and the yeas and nays of the
members on any question, shall, at the desire of any two of them, be entered on
the journals.

The doors of each House and of committees of the whole, shall be open, unless
when the business shall be such as ought to be kept secret.

Neither House shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for more than
three days; nor to any other place than that in which the two Houses shall be
sitting.

The members of the General Assembly, and the electors of the Senate, shall
receive from the Public Treasury, a compensation for their services, which for
the present shall be six shillings a day during their attendance on, going to,
and returning from the Legislature, and the place for choosing the Senators;
but the same may be increased or diminished by law, if circumstances shall
require it, but no alteration shall be made, to take effect during the
existence of the Legislature, which shall make such alteration: They shall in
all cases except treason, felony, breach or surety of the peace, be privileged
from arrest, during their attendance at the session of the respective Houses;
and at the place for choosing Senators, and in going to and returning from the
same: and for any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be
questioned in any other place.

No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he shall have
been elected, or for one year afterward, be appointed to any civil office
under this State, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which
shall have been increased, during the time such Senator or Representative was
in office: Provided that no member of the first Legislature which shall be
assembled under this Constitution shall be precluded from being appointed to
any office which may have been created, during his time of service in the said
Legislature; and no Minister of religious society, member of Congress, or other
person holding any office of profit under the United States, or this
Commonwealth, except Attorneys at Law, Justices of the Peace, Militia Officers
and Coroners, shall be a member of either House, during his continuance to act
as a minister, in Congress, or in office.

When vacancies happen in the House of Representatives, the Speaker shall issue
writs of election to fill such vacancies.

All bills for raising Revenue, shall originate in the House of
Representatives, but the Senate may propose amendments as in other bills.

Each Senator, Representative and Sheriff shall, before he be permitted to act
as such, take an oath, or make affirmation, that he has not directly or
indirectly given or promised any bribe or treat to procure his election to said
office, and every person shall be disqualified from serving as a Senator,
Representative or Sheriff, for the term for which he shall have been elected,
who shall be convicted of having given or offered any bribe or treat, or
canvassed for the said office.

Every bill which shall have passed both Houses, shall be presented to the
Governor; if he approve, he shall sign it, but if he shall not approve, he
shall return it with his objections, to the House in which it shall have
originated, who shall enter the objections at large upon their journals, and
proceed to reconsider it; if after such reconsideration two thirds of that
House shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent with the objections to the
other House, by which likewise it shall be reconsidered, and if approved by two
thirds of that House, it shall be a law: But in such cases, the votes of both
Houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons
voting for or against the bill, shall be entered on the journals of each House
respectively; if any bill shall not be returned by the Governor within ten
days, Sundays excepted, after it shall have been presented to him, it shall be
a law in like manner as if he had signed it: unless the General Assembly by
their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall be a law, unless
sent back within three days after their next meeting.

Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of both Houses may
be necessary, except on a question of adjournment, shall be presented to the
Governor, and before it shall take effect, be approved by him; or being
disapproved, shall be repassed by two thirds of both Houses, according to the
rules and limitations prescribed in case of a bill.

ARTICLE II.
THE Supreme Executive power of this Commonwealth shall be vested in a Governor.

The Governor shall be chosen by the electors of the Senate, at the same time,
at the same place, and in the same manner, that they are herein directed to
elect Senators, and the said electors shall make return of their proceedings in
the choice of a Governor, to the Secretary for the time being.

The Governor shall hold his office during four years from the first of June
next ensuing his election.

He shall be at least thirty years of age, and have been a citizen and
inhabitant of this state at least two years next before his election, unless he
shall have been absent on public business of the United States, or of this
state.

No Member of Congress, or person holding any office under the United States,
or this state, shall exercise the office of Governor.

The Governor shall, at stated times, receive for his services a compensation,
which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he
shall have been elected.

He shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of this Commonwealth, and
of the Militia, except when they shall be called into the service of the United
States.

He shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
appoint all officers, whose offices are established by this Constitution, or
shall be established by law, and whose appointments are not herein otherwise
provided for, but no person shall be appointed to an office within any county,
who shall not have been a citizen or inhabitant therein one year next before
his appointment, if the county shall have been so long erected, but if it shall
not have been so long erected, then within the limits of the county or counties
out of which it shall have been taken.

The Governor shall have power to fill up all vacancies, that may happen during
the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions, which shall expire at the
end of their next session.

He shall have power to remit sines and forfeitures, and grant reprieves and
pardons, except in cases of impeachment; in cases of treason, he shall have
power to grant reprieves until the end of the next session of the General
Assembly, in whom the power of pardoning shall be vested.

He may require information in writing from the Officers in the Executive
Department upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices.

He shall, from time to time, give to the General Assembly, information of the
state of the Commonwealth, and recommend to their consideration, such measures
as he shall judge expedient.

He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the General Assembly, and in case
of disagreement between the two Houses, with respect to the time of
adjournment, adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper, not exceeding
four months.

He shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed.

In case of the death or resignation of the Governor, or of his removal from
office, the Speaker of the Senate shall exercise the office of Gover^^^, until
another shall be duly qualified.

An Attorney General shall be appointed and commissioned during good behavior;
who shall appear for the Commonwealth in all criminal prosecutions, and in all
civil cases, in which be Commonwealth shall be interested in any of the
Superior Courts; shall give his opinion when called upon for that purpose, by
either branch of the Legislature, or by the Executive; and shall perform such
other duties as shall be enjoined him by law.

A Secretary shall be appointed and commissioned during the Governor's
continuance in office, if he shall so long behave himself well; he shall keep a
fair register of, and attest all the official acts and proceedings of the
Governor, and shall, when required, lay the same, and all papers, minutes, and
vouchers relative thereto, before either branch of the Legislature, and shall
perform such other duties as shall be enjoined him by law.

ARTICLE III.
IN elections by the citizens, all free male citizens of the age of twenty one
years, having resided in the state two years, or the county in which they offer
to vote one year next before the election, shall enjoy the rights of an
elector, but no person shall be entitled to vote except in the county in which
he shall actually reside at the time of the election.

All elections shall be by ballot.

Electors shall in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach or surety of
the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at elections, and
in going to, and returning from them.

ARTICLE IV.
The House of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeaching.

All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate; when sitting for that purpose,
the Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation; no person shall be convicted
without the concurrence of two thirds of the Members present.

The Governor and all other civil officers shall be liable to impeachment for
any misdemeanor in office; but judgment in such cases shall not extend further
than to removal from office and disqualification to hold any office of honor,
trust or profit under this Commonwealth; but the party convicted shall
nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and
punishment according to law.

ARTICLE V.
THE Judicial power of this Commonwealth, both as to matters of law and equity,
shall be vested in one Supreme Court, which shall be styled the Court of
Appeals, and in such inferior Courts as the Legislature may from t^^^ ^o time
ordain and establish.

The Judges of both the Supreme and Inferior Court^ shall hold their offices
during good behavior; but for any reasonable cause which shall not be
sufficient ground of impeachment, the Governor may remove any of the^ (...) the
address of two thirds of each branch of the Leg^^^ture. They shall, at stated
times, receive for their se^^^^ an adequate compensation, to be fixed by law,
which (...) not be diminished during their continuance in office.

The Supreme Court shall have original and final jurisdiction in all cases
respecting the titles to land under the present land laws of Virginia,
including those which may be depending in the present Supreme Court for the
District of Kentuckey, at the time of establishing the said Supreme Court; and
in all cases concerning contracts for lands, prior to the establishment of
those titles. And the said Court shall have power to ^ear and determine the
same in a summary way, and to direct the mode of bringing the same to a
hearing, so as to enable them to do right and justice to the parties, with as
little delay, and at as small an expense, as the nature of the business will
allow; but the said Court shall, in all such cases, oblige the parties to state
the material parts of their complaint and defense in writing; and shall, on the
conclusion of every cause, state on the records, of the whole merits of the
case, the questions arising therefrom, the opinions of the Court thereupon, and
a summary of the reasons in support of those opinions.

And it shall be the duty of each Judge of the Supreme Court, present at the
hearing of any such case, and differing from a majority of the Court, to
deliver his opinion in writing, to be entered as aforesaid; and each Judge
shall deliver his opinion in open Court. And the said Court shall have power on
the determination of any such cause, to award the legal costs against either
party, or to divide the same among the different parties, as to them shall seem
just and right. And the said Court shall have full power to take such steps as
they may judge proper, to perpetuate testimony in all cases concerning such
titles. Provided, that a Jury shall always be empannelled for the finding of
such facts as are not agreed by the parties; unless the parties, or their
Attorneys, shall wave their right of trial by Jury, and refer the marter of
fact to the decision of the Court. Provided also, that the Legislature may,
whenever they may judge it expedient, pass an act or acts, to regulate the mode
of proceedings in such cases, or to take away entirely the original
jurisdiction hereby given to the said Court in such cases.

In all other cases the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction only,
with such exceptions, and under such regulations as the Legislature shall make;
and the Legislature may, from time to time, vest in the Supreme and Inferior
Courts, or either of them, such powers both in law and equity as they shall
judge proper and necessary, for the due administration of justice.

A competent number of Justices of the Peace shall be appointed in each county;
they shall be commissioned during good behavior, but may be removed on
conviction of misbehaviour in office, or any infamous crime, or on the address
of both Houses of the Legislature.

The Judges shall, by virtue of their office, be conservators of the peace
throughout the State. The style of all process shall be, "The Commonwealth of
Kentuckey;" all prosecutions shall be carried on in the name, and by the
authority of the Commonwealth of Kentuckey, and conclude "Against the peace and
dignity of the same."

ARTICLE VI.
SHERIFFS and Coroners shall, at the times and places of elections of
Representatives, be chosen by the citizens of each county, qualified to vote
for Representatives. They shall bold their office for three years, if they
shall so long behave themselves well, and until a successor be duly qualified;
but no person shall be twice chosen or appointed Sheriff in any term of six
years. Vacancies in either of the said offices, shall be silled by a new
appointment, to be made by the Governor, to continue until the next general
election, and until a successor shall be chosen and qualified as aforesaid.

The freemen of this Commonwealth shall be armed and disciplined for its
defense. Those who conscientiously scruple to bear arms, shall not be compelled
to do so; but shall pay an equivalent for personal service.

The field and staff Officers of the Militia shall be appointed by the
Governor, except the battalion staff Officers, who shall be appointed by the
field Officers of each battalion respectively.

The Officers of companies shall be chosen by the persons enrolled in the list
of each company, and the whole s^all be commissioned during good behavior, and
during their residence in the bounds of the battalion or company to which they
shall be appointed.

Each Court shall appoint its own Clerk, who shall hold his office during good
behavior; but no person shall be appointed Clerk, only pro tempore, who shall
not produce to the Court appointing him, a certificate from a majority of the
Judges of the Court of Appeals, that he has been examined by their Clerk, in
their presence, and under their direction, and that they judge him to be well
qualified to execute the office of Clerk to any Court of the sime dignity with
that for which he offers himself. They shall be removable for breach of good
behavior, by the Court of Appeals only, who shall be judges of the fact as
well as of the law. Two thirds of the members present must concur in the
sentence.

All commissions shall be in the name and by the authority of the State of
Kentuckey, and be sealed with the State Seal, and signed by the Governor.

The State Treasures shall be appointed annually by the joint ballot of both
Houses.

ARTICLE VII.
MEMBERS of the General Assembly, and all officers Executive and Judicial,
before they enter upon the execution of their respective offices, shall take
the following oath or affirmation. "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case
may be) that I will be faithful and true to the Commonwealth of Kentuckey, so
long as I continue a citizen thereof, and that I will faithfully execute to the
best of my abilities the office of (...) according to law."

ARTICLE VIII.
TREASON against the Commonwealth shall consist only in levying war against it,
or in adhering to its enemies, giving them aid or comfort. No person shall be
convicted of Treason, unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same
overt act, or on his own confession in open Court.

Laws shall be made to exclude from office and from suffrage, those who
thereafter be convicted of bribery, perjury, forgery, or other high crimes or
misdemeanor^. The privilege of free suffrage shall be supported by laws
regulating elections, and prohibiting under adequate penalties, all undue
influence thereon from power, bribery, tumult or other improper practices.

No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law, nor shall any appropriations of money for the
support of an army, be made for a longer term than one year, and a regular
statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money
shall be published annually.

The Legislature shall direct by law, in what manner and what Courts, suits may
be brought against the State.

The manner of administering an oath or affirmation, shall be such as is most
consistent with the conscience of (...) deponent, and shall be esteemed by the
Legislature the m^st solemn appeal to God.

All laws now in force in the State of Virginia, not inconsistent with this
Constitution, which are of a general nature, and not local to the eastern part
of that State, shall be in force in this State, until they shall be altered or
repealed by the Legislature.

The compact with the State of Virginia, subject to such al^^rations as may be
made therein, agreeably to the mode prescribed by the said compact, shall be
considered as a part of this Constitution.

ARTICLE IX.
THE Legislature shall have no power to pass laws for the emancipation of
Slaves, without the consent of their owners, previous to such emancipation, a
full equivalent in money, for the slaves so ema^^ipated. They shall have no
power to prevent emigrants to this State, from bringing with them such persons
as are d^^^med slaves by the laws of any one of the United States, so long as
any person of the same age or description, shall be continued in Slavery by the
laws of this State. They shall pass laws to permit the owners of Slaves to
emancipate them, saving the rights of creditors, and preventing them from
becoming chargeable to the county in which they reside. They shall have full
power to prevent slaves being brought into this state as merchandise. They
shall have full power to prevent any slaves being brought into this State, from
a foreign country, and to prevent those from being brought into this state, who
have been since the first day of January, one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-nine, or hereafter may be imported into any of the United States from
a^foreign country. And they shall have full power to pass such laws as may be
necessary, to oblige the owners of slaves to treat them with humanity, to
provide for them necessary clothing and provision, to abstain from all injuries
to them extending to life or limb, and in case of their neglect or refusal to
comply with the directions of such laws, to have such slave o^ slaves sold for
the benesit of their owner or owners.

ARTICLE X.
The place for the seat of Government shall be fixed in the following manner.
The House of Representatives shall during their session, which shall be held in
the year one thousand s^^en hundred and ninety-two, choose by ba^lo^ twenty one
persons, from whom the representation from Fayette and Mercer Counties then
present, shall alternately strike out one, until the number shall be reduced to
sive, who, or any three of them concurring in opinion, shall have power to six
on the place for the seat of Government, to receive grants from individuals
therefore, and to make such conditions with the proprietor or proprietors of the
land, so pitched on by them, as to them shall seem right, and shall be agreed
to by the said proprietor or proprietors; and to lay off a town thereon, in
such manner as they shall judge most proper.

The General Assembly and the Supreme Court^ shall within five years hold their
sessions at the place so pitched upon by the said Commissioners; and the seat
of Government so sined, shall continue until it shall be changed by two thirds
of both branches of the Legislature. The Commissioners, before they proceed to
act, shall take an oa^^ or make affirmation that they will discharge the trust
reposed in them, in such manner as in their judgment will be most beneficial to
the State at large.

ARTICLE XI.
That the citizens of this state may have an opportunity to amend or change
this Constitution in a peaceable man's, if to them it shall seem expedient,
the persons qualified to vote for Representatives, shall, at the general
election to be held in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven,
vote also, by ballot, for or against a Convention, as they shall severally
choose to do; and if thereupon it shall appear that a majority of all the
citizens in the state voting for Representatives, have voted for a Convention,
the General Assembly shall direct that a similar ballot shall be taken the next
year: and if thereupon, it shall also appear that a majority of all the
citizens in the state, voting for Representatives, have voted for a Convention,
the General Assembly shall at their next session call a Convention to consist
of as many members as there shall be in the House of Representatives, to be
chosen in the same manner, (at the same places and at the same time that
Representatives are) by the Citizens entitled to vote for Representatives, and
to meet within three months after the said election, for the purpose of
re-adopting, amending or changing this Constitution. If it shall appear upon
the ballot of either year, that a majority of the citizens, voting for
Representatives, is not in favor of a Convention being called, it shall not be
done until two thirds of both branches of the Legislature shall deem it
expedient.

ARTICLE XII.
That the general, great and essential principles of liberty and free
Government may be recognized and unaltecably established; WE DECLARE, That all
men, when they form a social compact, are equal, and that no man, or set of
men, are entitled to exclusive or separate public emoluments or privileges from
the community, but in consideration of public services.

That all power is inherent in the people, and all free governments are founded
on their authority, and instituted for their peace, safety, and happiness. For
the advancement of those ends, they have at all times an unalienable and
indefeasible right to alter, reform or abolish their government, in such manner
as they may think proper.

That all men have a natural and indefeasible right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences; that no man of right can be
compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of worship, or to maintain a^y
ministry against his consent; that no human authority can in any case whatever
control or interfere with the rights of conscience; and that no preference
shall ever be given by law to any religious societies or modes of worship.

That the civil rights, privileges or capacities of ^^y citizen shall in no
ways be diminished or enlarged on account of his religion.

That all elections shall be free and equal.

That trial by Jury shall be as heretofore, and the right thereof remain
inviolate.

That the printing ^^ess shall be free to every person who undertakes to
examine the proceedings of the Legislature or any branch of Government, and no
law shall ever be made to restrain the right thereof. The free communications
of thoughts and opinions is one of the invaluable rights of man, and every
citizen may freely speak, write and print on any subject, being responsible for
the abus^ of that liber^^.

In prosecutions for publications of papers, investiga^^ng the official conduct
of officers or men in a public capacity, or where the matter published is
proper for public information, the truth thereof may be given in evidence. And
in all indictments for libels, the Jury shall have a right to determine the law
and the facts, under the direction of the Court, as in other cases.

That the people shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers and
possessions, from unreasonable searches and seizures; and that no warrant to
search any place or to seize any person or things, shall issue without
describing them as nearly as may be, nor without probable cause supported by
oath or affirmation.

That in all criminal prosecutions, the accused has a right to be heard by
himself and his counsel; to demand the nature and cause of accusation against
him; to meet the witnesses face to face; to have compulsory process for
obtaining witnesses in his favor; and in prosecutions by indictment or
information, a speedy public trial by an impartial Jury of the vicinage; that
he cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor can he be deprived
of his life, liberty or property, unless by the judgment of his peers, or the
law of the land.

That no person shall for any indictable offense be proceeded against
criminally by information; except in cases arising in the land or naval forces,
or in the Militia when in actual service, in time of war or public danger; or
by leave of the Court for oppression or misdemeanor in office.

No person shall, for the same offense, be twice put in jeopardy of his life or
limb, nor shall any man's property be taken or applied to public use without
the consent of his Representatives, and without just compensation being
previously made to him.

That all Courts shall be open, and every person for an injury done him in his
lands, goods, person or reputation, shall have remedy by the due course of law,
and right and justice administered, without sale, denial or delay.

That no power of suspending laws shall be exercised, unless by the Legislature
or its authority.

That excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor
cruel punishments inflicted.

That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, unless for
capital offenses, when the proof is evident or presumption great, and the
privilege of the writ of Habeas Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in
cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.

That the person of a debtor, where there is not strong presumption of fraud,
shall not be continued in prison after delivering up his estate for the benefit
of his creditors, in such manner as shall be prescribed by law.

That no ex-post facto law, not any law impairing contracts shall be made.

That no persons shall be attainted of treason or felony by the Legislature.

That no attainder shall work corruption of blood, nor, except during the life
of the offender, forfeiture of estate to the Commonwealth.

That estates of such persons as shall destroy their own lives, shall descend
or vest as in case of natural death, and if any person shall be killed by
casualty, there shall be no forfeiture by reason thereof.

That the citizens have a right in a peaceable manner to assemble together for
their common good, and to apply to those invested with the powers of Government
for redress of grievances, or other proper purposes, by petition, address or
remonstrance.

That the right of the citizens to bear arms in defense of themselves and the
state, shall not be questioned.

That no Standing Army shall, in time of peace, be kept up, without the consent
of the Legislature; and the Military shall, in all cases, and at all times, be
in strict subordination to the Civil Power.

That no soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house, without
the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed
by law.

That the Legislature shall not grant any title of nobility or hereditary
distinction, nor create any office, the appointment to which shall be for a
longer term than during good behavior.

That emigration from the State shall not be prohibited.

To guard against the high powers which have been delegated, WE DECLARE, That
every thing in this article is excepted out of the general powers of
Government, and shall forever remain inviolate; and that all laws, contrary
thereto, or contrary to this Constitution, shall be void.

SCHEDULE.
THAT no inconvenience may arise from the establishing the Government of this
state, and in order to carry the same into complete operation, it is hereby
declared and ordained,

That all rights, actions, prosecutions, claims and contracts, as well
individuals as of bodies corporate, shall continue as if the said Government
had not been established.

That all officers, civil and military, now in commission under the State of
Virginia, shall continue to hold and exercise their offices until the tenth day
of August next, and no longer.

That until the first enumeration shall be made, as directed by the sixth
section of the first article of this Constitution, the county of Jefferson
shall be entitled to elect three Representatives: the county of Lincoln, four
Representatives; the county of Favette, nine Representatives; the county of
Nelson, six Representatives; the county of Mercer, four Representatives; the
county of Madison, three Representatives; the county of Bourbon, five
Representatives; the county of Woodford, four Representatives; and the county
of Mason, two Representatives.

The General Assembly shall meet at Lexington on the fourth day of June next.

All returns herein directed to be made to the Secretary, shall, previous to
his appointment, be made to the Clerk of the Supreme Court for the District of
Kentuckey.

Until a seal shall be provided for the state, the Governor shall be at liberty
to use his private seal.

The oaths of office herein directed to be taken, may be administered by any
Justice of the Peace, until the Legislature shall otherwise direct.

All bonds given by any officer within the district of Kentuckey, payable to
the Governor of Virginia, may be prosecuted in the name of the Governor of
Kentuckey.

All offenses against the laws of Virginia, which have been committed within
the present district of Kentuckey, or which may be committ^^ within the same
before the first day of June next, shall be cognizable in the Courts of this
state in the same manner that they would be if they were committed within this
state, after the said first day of June.

At the elections herein directed to be held in May next, the Sheriff of each
county, or in case of his absence one of his Deputies shall preside, and if
they neglect or refuse to act, the said elections shall be held by any one of
the Justices of the Peace for the County where such neglect or refusal shall
happen; each officer holding such election having first taken an oath before a
Justice of the Peace to conduct the said election with impartiality, shall have
power to administer to any person offering to vote at such election, the
following oath or affirmation.

"I do swear (or affirm) that I am qualified to vote for Representatives in the
County of agreeably to the Constitution formed for the state of Kentuckey;" and
such officers shall have a ^ight to refuse to receive the vote of any person
who shall refuse to take the said oath or make affirmation when tendered to
him. And the said elections shall be held at the several places appointed for
holding Courts in the different counties.

The Government of the Commonwealth of Kentuckey shall commence on the first
day of June next.

DONE in Convention, at Danville, the nineteenth day of April, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-two, and of the Independence of the United States of
America the Sixteanth. By order of the Convention, SAMUEL M^DOWELL. Auest. THO.
TODD, Clk. Con.

FINIS.

