A VIEW OF EHE SCIENCE OF LIFE; ON THE PRINCIPLES ESTABLISHED IN THE ELEMENTS
OF MEDICINE, OF THE LATE CELEBRATED JOHN BROWN, M. D. WITH AN ATTEMPT TO
CORRECT SOME IMPORTANT ERRORS OF THAT WORK.

And Cases in illustration, chiefly selected from the Records of their
Practice, at the General Hospital, at Calcutta.

BY WILLIAM YATES and CHARLES MACLEAN.

TO WHICH IS SUBJOINED, A TREATISE On the Action of Mercury upon Living Bodies,
and its Application for the Cure of Diseases of Indirect Debility. AND A
DISSERTATION ON THE SOURCE OF EPIDEMIC AND PESTILENTIAL DISEASES; IN WHICH IS
ATTEMPTED TO PROVE, BY A NUMEROUS INDUCTION OF FACTS, THAT THEY NEVER ARISE
FROM CONTAGION, BUT ARE ALWAYS PRODUCED BY CERTAIN STATES, OR CERTAIN
VICISSITUDES OF THE ATMOSPHERE.

BY CHARLES MACLEAN, OF CALCUTTA.

WHITEHALL: PRINTED BY WILLIAM YOUNG, BOOKSELLER, No. 52, SECOND-STREET, CORNER
OF CHESNUT-STREET, Philadelphia.

1797.

A VIEW OF THE SCIENCE OF LIFE; ON THE PRINCIPLES ESTABLISHED IN THE ELEMENTS
OF MEDICINE, OF THE LATE CELEBRATED JOHN BROWN, M. D. WITH AN ATTEMPT TO
CORRECT SOME IMPORTANT ERRORS OF THAT WORK; AND CASES IN ILLUSTRATION, CHIEFLY
SELECTED FROM THE RECORDS OF THEIR PRACTICE, AT THE GENERAL HOSPITAL, AT
CALCUTTA.

BY WILLIAM YATES and CHARLES MACLEAN.

THERE are some modern Practioners, who declaim against medical Theory, in
general, not considering, that to think is to theorise; and th^^ no one can
direct a Method of Cure to a Person laboring under Disease, without thinking,
-- that is without theorising; and happy, therefore, is the Patient, whose
Physician possesses the best Theory. DARWIN'S ZOONOMIA. -- PREFACE, P. 2.
Philadelphia:

1797.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HE who abandons Principles in Deference to popular clamor, and he who
perseveres in Error in spite of Conviction, may indeed obtain a momentary
Celebrity; but they are equally unqualified for the Promotion of Science.

As Truth, not an indiscriminate Assertion of any Doctrine, is the Object of
this Publication, Members of the Profession, and others who may be so inclined,
are invited to communicate Facts, or Observations, whether they may tend to
confirm, or refute the Principles which it avows.

The Communications thus received, will be published, with Comments, with or
without the Name of the Author, as may be most agreeable to himself.

Papers on this subject, addressed to Mr. MACLEAN, to Messi'rs THOMSON and
FERRIS, Printers, Calcutta, or the Publisher, Philadelphia, will be attended to.

PREFACE.
HAVING applied to practice, in the General Hospital, at Calcutta, those
medical Principles, vulgarly known by the Name of the Brunonian Doctrine; and
being convinced, from the Result, of their Conformity to truth; we think it may
be useful to attempt to promulgate the Doctrine in India, where it seems to be
almost wholly unknown, and to call forth the Attention of medical Men, to a
Subject so worthy of Investigation.

SOME Cases are annexed, in illustration of the Mode, in which, according to
our Ideas, the Principles of the Doctrine should be applied to practice.

To those who cannot be acquainted with the Circumstances, it may be proper to
explain, why two Names appear to this Publication. Having carried on our
Practice together, in the General Hospital, at Calcutta, and having by Chance
discovered, that each of us entertained a Design of Attempting to promulgate
the Doctrine of Brown, with some modifications, in India; we thought it might
be more conducive to the End in View, to consider the Subject conjointly. --
The Result is now submitted to the Public.

WILLIAM YATES. CHARLES MACLEAN.


INDEX.
CASE of dysentery, of high degree, cured by opium, in which salivation was
produced by the medicine. Page. 54 -- Dysentery cured by mercury and opium,
Page. 60 -- Dysentery, terminating fatally, in which salivation was not
produced, after having used an immense quantity of mercury, Page. 64 --
Incipient consumption, cured by opium, producing a slight degree of salivation,
Page. 69 -- Contusion and Concussion, of uncommon degree, cured, not only
without blood-letting, or other evacuations, but by the application of
stimulant powers, Page. 75 -- Typhus, cured by calomel, etc. given so as not to
produce evacuations, Page. 77 -- Intermittent, cured by mercury; showing that
salivation arises from indirect debility, and is to be cured by stimulant
powers, Page. 82 -- Anomalous, in its symptoms, occurring in a patient of
plethoric habit, with a peculiar slowness of pulse, cured by opium and mercury,
Page. 87
CASE, Peripneumony, in an advanced stage, treated unsuccessfully with mercury;
in which uncommon adhesions, etc. of the thoracic viscera were found upon
dissection, Page. 90 -- Hepatitis, treated unsuccessfully with opium, mercury,
and other stimulant powers, with a description of the appearances upon
dissection, Page. 96 -- Dysentery, treated unsuccessfully, with a description
of the appearances upon dissection, Page. 100 -- Dysentery of high degree,
treated successfully, Page. 108 -- Fever, etc. in which a great quantity of
mercury was used, showing that salivation arises from the subduction, or
irregular application of that medicine. Page. 116 -- Fever cured by mercury,
etc. in farther illustration of the mode of applying that medicine, according
to principle, Page. 121
CONTAGION, not the cause of pestilential diseases, Page. 33 DEBILITY, direct,
-- diseases of, Page. 33 36 -- Cure of, Page. 36 -- Indirect, -- diseases of,
Page. 37 42 -- Proportion of, to diseases of direct dibility, Page. 37 42 --
Diseases of warm climates, without exception, of this state Page. 37 -- Cure
of, Page. 37 40
DISEASES, definition of, Page. 30 -- In what respects they differ, Page. 30 --
Two cannot possibly co-exist in the whole or any part of a living body, Page.
31 -- Principles of cure, Page. 31 -- Supposed to have arisen from excessive
excitement, depend upon a state of exhaustion, or indirect debility, Page. 42
EXCITABILITY, what, Page. 29 -- Accumulation of, Page. 30 -- Middle or healthy
state of, Page. 30 -- Exhaustion of, Page. 30
EXCITEMENT what, Page. 31 -- Excessive does not exist, Page. 46
EXHAUSTION, increased by the abstraction of stimuli, Page. 42 INFLAMMATION,
always depends on a state of debility, direct or indirect, Page. 48 -- Cure of,
depends on the application of stimulant powers, Page. 51
LOCAL DISEASES, Page. 48 -- Depend upon accumulation or exhaustion of the
excitability, Page. 48
MEDICINES, called cathartics are stimulant, Page. 46 POISONS, effects of,
Page. 32 PURGING, arises from indirect debility, Page. 46 STIMULI, division of
into ordinary and extraordinary, Page. 32 STIMULANT, or exciting powers, what,
Page. 29 -- Powers applied to a body in a state of accumulation will produce
exhaustion, Page. 44

ERRATA.
Introduction, page 23d, line 13th, for sentiments read errors.

Ditto 22d, for effect, read affect.

Page 24th, line 15th, for molis, read moles.

INTRODUCTION.
UPON examining the records of medicine, from the earliest periods, it appears
that physicians have never considered the living body as subject, like all
other parts of the universe, to regular and immutable laws; but seem actually
to have drawn an opposite conclusion. It is from this circumstance principally,
that the practice of medicine has hitherto acquired so small a portion of
certainty, as still to merit the appellation bestowed upon it, more than two
thousand years ago, of a "conjectural art."

THE various doctrines which have been published to the world, regarding the
human body, are in general, nothing more than a mere assemblage of words,
without the power of conveying any distinct ideas. As truth is but one, and the
hypothesis, which may be formed upon any given subject, infinite; so the chance
of any hypothesis being true, is as one is to an infinite number; or the
certainty of its being erroneous, absolute. Every just deduction of reasoning,
is properly called theory. But these terms are, to the great detriment of
science, very generally confounded.
Hypothesis has succeeded hypothesis, in the same regular manner, that physician
has succeeded physician. Opinions have been adopted, according to the chances
of education; supported by the authority of great names; and religiously
adhered to, as fundamental axioms, into the truth of which it would have been
heresy to enquire.

THE mischiefs arising from this source, greatly extend their influence, and
spread in every possible direction, when error acquires the patronage of
authority, and the protection of dignified names. It then takes its chair in
the schools, and assumes the pompous titles of profound, refined, or liberal
knowledge. Raised to this eminence, the industry of a single teacher, or
author, may corrupt thousands; that of a few, whole nations; and the addition
of a proportional number, ruin the education of a world.

THIS universal diffusion of error, receives sanction and establishment from
the progress of time. It becomes venerable: and every attempt to detect it, is
branded with the name of profanity or madness. Vide Introduction to the
Outlines, etc. by John Brown, p. ii.
Such has, unhappily, been too long the state of science. But, of late years,
every department of human knowledge has undergone a rapid improvement. The dawn
of reason has, in a particular degree, begun to enlighten the medical world;
and the practice to assume a consistency, which could only be founded on the
discovery of the laws, by which all living bodies are governed.

THIS discovery, one of the grandest efforts of the human mind, that ever
dignified the page of science, the discoveries of the immortal Newton himself
not excepted, is contained in the Elements of Medicine, of the late celebrated
John Brown. This discovery, hitherto neglected from ignorance, opposed from the
shame of recantation, and calumniated from interest, prejudice, and passion,
contains so many undeniable truths that, to an unbiassed mind, it only requires
to be known, in order to be admired and adopted. The doctrine, although it has
not yet been sanctioned by the medical schools of Britain, has, however* been
very generally received, in the other schools of Europe, and in America. "In
the University of Pavia," says Dr. Rasori, undoubtedly one of the first in
Europe, there is hardly a student endowed with talents, who is not a Brunonian.
The doctrine begins equally to spread in Germany. Many of the periodical
publications of that country have noticed it, and the Elementa have lately been
published there. A friend at Genoa assures me, that several surgeons to French
men of war have informed him, that Brown is known and much admired in France.
In the University of Pavia, Brown is in high esteem, even with some of the most
respectable professors; and in other parts of Italy, I can assert, from my own
knowledge, that old physicians have not refused their sanction to many of the
Brunonian principles. Vide Beddoes' Life of Brown.


ONE of his Italian critics, supposed to be Professor Carminati, says,
Quaerenti mihi causas incredibilis prope illius commotionis animorum, atque
ingentis fere plausus, quibus nuperime singularis illa hypothesis, cui novum
Universae Medicinae Systema celebrismus Angliae Scriptor et Medicus BRUNO
superstruxit, ab iis optimae spei adolescentibus excepta esset, qui in
florentissimo Ticinensi Archigymnasio salutaris artis studiis omnibus mecum
incumbunt, peraduum sane, non fuit eas **** invenire.

MANY translations and editions of this work, and various criticisms upon it,
have appeared in different parts of Europe, which it is by no means necessary
to enumerate here. That the knowledge of it has also made a considerable
progress, among the medical philosophers of America, is evident, from the
frequent allusions made to it, in a late publication, by Dr. Rush, of
Philadelphia. The principle of the gradual application of stimuli to the body,
in all the diseases of indirect debility on the one hand, and of direct on the
other, opens a wide field for the improvement of medicine. Perhaps all the
discoveries of future ages, will consist more in a new application of
established principle, and in new modes of exhibiting old medicine, than in the
discoveries of new theories, or of new articles of the Materia Medica. Vide "An
Account of the bilious remitting yellow Fever," -- page 284.


ANOTHER proof of the excellence of the doctrine, no less convincing, is
deducible from the frequent plagiarisms of its fundamental principles, by which
some men, desirous of passing them upon the world as their own discoveries,
have lately endeavored to establish a reputation for superior genius. Any
attempt to detect these, in their various and most infinite ramifications,
would, as Dr. Beddoes It would be injustice, upon this occasion, to pass over,
without a tribute of applause, the laudable exertions of Dr. Beddoes, in
promulgating the knowledge of Brown's doctrine, He is perhaps the only author
in Britain, who has dared publicly to assert the merits of it. This ingenious
conduct, and the liberal manner in which he stepped forward, to benefit the
unfortunate family of our illustrious philosopher, Vide a new edition of the
Elements of Medicine, of John Brown, M. D. with a biographical Preface by
Thomas Beddoes, M. D.
equally evince his superior mind, and universal philanthropy.
very justly remarks, be now unnecessary. Among the most conspicuous, however,
in this list, we may particularise Doctor Gritanner. -- There is not a single
idea in any of the papers, which he has published upon that subject, that is
not borrowed from the Doctrine of Brown, or the different modifications of it,
discussed in the Medical Society of Edinburgh, and recorded upon its books.
These he has freely used, without the smallest acknowledgment. His doctrine, of
the principle of irritability, is taken from a paper, written by a respectable
member of that Society.

DR. G. was a student at Edinburgh, long after the publication of the Elementa
Medicinae; and at a time, when the principles of the doctrine, were the subject
of investigation, in the literary societies of that University. His plagiarisms
must therefore have been wilful; and no acknowledgment, subsequent to
detection, can be considered as an atonement. There is something so flagitious
in the attempt to rob departed genius of its honors -- honors too, in the
acquisition of which friendships, emolument, and ease, were all sacrificed, --
that it cannot be too severely reprobated.

IT is a common and often a true observation, that "no man is a prophet in his
own country." Accordingly, it appears, that this doctrine was longer neglected,
and is still more anxiously opposed in Britain, than in other nations. Few men
at an advanced period of life, have sufficient courage to relinquish sentiments
to which they have been habituated, from their early years; fewer still have
candor enough to acknowledge the truth of what they have strenuously opposed;
and young men, although generally open to conviction, seldom have sufficient
confidence in themselves, to stem the torrent of general opinion. The rising
generation, however, in order to adopt the new doctrine, will not have many
sacrifices to make. It will neither ^ffect their interest, nor wound their
vanity.

THAT the force of truth already begins to silence the unmeaning clamor, which
has hitherto been made against this doctrine in Baitain, is evinced, by the
reception of a late voluminous publication, of which the chief merit consists
in, an occasional and imperfect coincidence with the principles of Brown. It
will readily be perceived, that we allude to the Zoonomia of Dr. Darwin, -- a
work which, from the excellent character and reputed talents of its author, had
raised considerable expectation in the public mind. But disappointment, on the
perusal, was in proportion to the previous expectation. Instead of important
and luminous corrections of the doctrine, which might have been looked for, at
this time of day, from a man of abilities, pursuing the same track of
investigation, a want of argument and correct reasoning, is found to pervade
the whole. It is such a rudis indigestaque molis that, after wading through
nearly six hundred pages, At the time this was written, the first volume only,
of Darwin's Zoonomia, appeared in India.
it seems impossible to comprehend the scientific principles, upon which the
author intended to build his doctrine. From these strictures, it ought not to
be inferred, that we wish to detract from the merits of the excellent poet, who
has so elegantly sung the "Loves of the Plants." But justice forbids that, out
of respect to character or reputation, one man should be allowed to assume to
himself, any portion of that honor, which exclusively belongs to another.
Science knows no personal distinctions. The author of a grand discovery, is, at
least, entitled to posthumous fame.

THE ORIGIN of this, like every other discovery of importance, has been
attempted to be traced to hints thrown out by preceding authors. Even the
visionary speculations of Cullen, have been mentioned, as the source, of some
of its fundamental principles: -- with just as much propriety might they he
imputed to any ingenious suggestion in "The life and Opinions of Tristram
Shandy." Upon the whole, it may with confidence be asserted, that this doctrine
is, in all its parts, original, as it is undoubtedly true, and important in its
application. And those, who are disposed to deny it this merit, should, in
decency, adduce something like argument, instead of the ebullitions of vanity,
detraction, or jealousy.

AFTER this eulogy, the reader may perhaps expect, that the following pages
contain a mere verbal copy of Brown's Elements of Medicine; but he will soon
perceive, that this is not the case. For, although its fundamental principles
are indisputably true, there are several errors in the detail, and some of them
of very considerable importance. His opponents, however, if truth had been
their object, should have endeavored to perfect the doctrine, by a correction
of its errors, instead of illiberally affecting, on account of partial
blemishes, to reject the whole. To the candid, liberal, and enlightened, it
will appear much less wonderful, that Brown should have some times erred, than
that he should have been so pre-eminently successful, in first pointing out, to
the world, the right path of medical investigation.

THE principal deviations, from the original doctrine, to be found in the
following View of the Science of Life, are these: 1st. -- It is demonstrated,
that diseases of excessive excitement cannot exist; and that all those, which
have been so called, are diseases of indirect debility. 2dly. -- ALMOST the
whole of the diseases, which were ranked, by Brown, and his followers, among
the diseases of direct debility, are shown to be diseases of indirect debility.
3dly. -- IN the mode of applying the exciting powers, for the cure of diseases
of indirect debidebility.


FROM this statement, it appears, that the alterations, here made in the
doctrine, as they affect the method of cure, in more than one half of the
diseases, to which living bodies are subject, are of the first importance; and
therefore deserve a candid examination.

IT may be proper to remark, that some persons have affected to reject this
doctrine, upon the very grave and solemn ground, of its being favorable to
intemperance. To those however, who will take the trouble of making themselves
acquainted with its principles, it will only be necessary to observe, that such
persons do not understand the subject.

IN climates and countries where the transition, from health to disease, and
from disease to death, is often alarmingly rapid, and health always precarious,
the knowledge of a doctrine, which reduces the practice of medicine to a degree
of certainty hitherto unknown, cannot but be attended with great and evident
advantages. To diffuse that knowledge in India, where the doctrine seems to
have been but little cultivated, and so have acquired but a small degree of
reputation so justly due to it, is the design of this undertaking. The attempt
is made with the greater confidence, from having experienced, in the
application of the principles to practice, a degree of success, far beyond even
the most sanguine expectations, that had previously been formed in theory. If,
however, this confidence should not, after a fair investigation, be justified
by the experience of others, the subject remains open for free discussion, by
which alone the doctrine must, finally, be either confirmed, or refuted.

AS it is, for obvious reasons, desirable, that a knowledge of medical
science, should not be exclusively confined to medical men, we have entirely
divested our observations of the mysterious garb, in which such knowledge is
usually conveyed to the world.

VIEW OF THE SCIENCE OF LIFE.
CHAPTER I. FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS.
I. -- ALL living bodies possess a certain property, capable of being acted
upon by external powers, so as to produce the phoenomena of life.

THIS property is denominated EXCITABILITY. Some recent modifiers of this
doctrine, are of opinion, that the exciting powers act upon the muscular fiber
only; and therefore use the term IRRITABILITY. But as the powers which produce,
as well as those which remove disease, evidently affect the whole body, we
think it safer to retain the more comprehensive term, adopted by the original
author.


II. -- THE external powers are all such objects as, applied to the whole, or a
part of any living body, are capable of acting upon the excitabili^y.

THEY are denominated STIMULI, or EXCITING ^^WERS.

III. -- UPON the application of the exciting powers in a due, deficient, or
excessive degree, depend the different states of the excitability.

IV. -- UPON the different states of the excitability depend all the phoenomena
of health, and disease.

V. -- THERE are three states of the excitability.

1st. -- THE state of ACCUMULATION. -- When a portion of the usual stimuli is
withheld, the excitability accumulates; and the body becomes susceptible of
impression, in the direct ratio of the subduction.

THIS state constitutes diseases of ACCUMULATION, or of DIRECT DEBILITY.

2dly. -- THE MIDDLE state. When the excitability is such, that the application
of the accustomed degree of exciting powers, produces TONE, or HEALTH.

3dly. -- THE state of EXHAUSTION. When the application of stimuli, has been
greater than that which produces healthy action, the excitability is exhausted;
and the body becomes less susceptible of impression, in the direct ratio of the
access.

THIS state constitutes diseases of EXHAUSTION, or of INDIRECT DEBILITY.

VI. -- THE states of accumulation, and exhaustion of the excitability, in
their different degrees, constitute all the diseases, to which living bodies
are subject.

VII. -- DISEASES differ from each other, only in the degree of accumulation,
or exhaustion of the excitability in the whole, or parts of the body.

VIII. -- CONSEQUENTLY, as two degrees of the same state, or two different
states of the excitability, cannot take place at the same time, in the whole,
or any particular part of the body, two diseases cannot possibly co-exist, in
the whole, or a particular part.

IX. -- THE cure of all diseases depends upon an application of stimuli, in a
degree proportionate to the accumulation, or exhaustion of the excitability.

X. -- THE degree of power, with which the functions of life are performed, is
expressed by the term EXCITEMENT. Thus, there is a healthy excitement, when the
functions of life are justly performed. But in proportion as a deviation from
health takes place either in direct or indirect debility, so the functions of
life are performed with less power, or the excitement is diminished.

CHAPTER II. OF STIMULI, OR THE EXCITING POWERS.
XI. -- ALL objects in nature, capable of producing an effect upon living
bodies, are stimulant, (11.)

XII. -- STIMULI, may be divided into ordinary, and extraordinary.

1st. -- ORDINARY stimuli, are all such powers as are usually applied to living
bodies, in a state of health.

2dly. -- EXTRAORDINARY stimuli, are such as are occasionally applied to living
bodies, as noxious, or may be used, as curative powers. Of this description are
all the active substances that are or may be employed as medicines, whether
animal, vegetable, or mineral.

SUBSTANCES usually called POISONS, as their deleterious operation depends
wholly upon their superior degree of stimulant power, ought not to be
distinctly considered. Any stimulant, when exhibited in sufficient quantity to
exhaust the excitability, acts as a poison.

CONTAGION has been enumerated as a cause of pestilential diseases. But as the
existence of such a power is by no means proved, it ought not to be admitted in
philosophical disquisitions. The grounds of dissent, from an opinion so
universally received, will be fully explained in another place.

CHAPTER III. APPLICATION OF STIMULI, OR THE EXCITING POWERS, FOR THE CURE OF
DISEASES.
1. Diseases of direct Debility, or of Accumulation.
XIII. As the body becomes susceptible of impression, in the direct ratio of
subduction of stimuli (v. 1.), it follows that the force of stimulus to be
applied, in the cure of diseases, of this state, should be inversely as the
accumulation of the excitability. Thus in the case of persons who have been
exposed to great degrees of cold, heat should be applied, first in a degree not
much greater than the lowest temperature, to which the person has been exposed,
and gradually increased to the usual standard. To frozen limbs, the first
application should be snow, then cold water, afterward water less cold, and so
on, through the various degrees, until motion and sensation are fully restored.
Whereas, by the immediate application of the accustomed degree of heat, death
would be produced in the whole, or those parts of the body, which had been
exposed. -- To persons who may have remained long without food, nourishment
should be exhibited in the same gradual manner. The quantity usually taken at a
meal would, in such a case, instantly extinguish life, -- a fact of which there
are many instances upon record. The eyes of persons, who have been long kept in
darkness, become exceedingly sensible to the smallest degree of light. Those
unfortunate beings, whom the mistaken and perverse policy of man has doomed to
long confinement in dungeons, become, in the course of time, capable of
distinguishing all the corners of their gloomy abode; where, upon their first
entrance, they could distinguish nothing. The impression of the full glare of a
meridian light, upon organs in such a state of susceptibility, would occasion
instant and irrecoverable blindness. A person, suddenly awoke in the night, can
scarcely bear even the small degree of light, emitted from a common candle. It
is only by the gradual approach of day, that the eye is enabled to bear the
full force of the midday sun.

SCURVY seems to be a disease of direct debility, occasioned by the absence of
some of the usual exciting powers, particularly nutritive food, heat, and the
mental stimuli. These powers must be gradually applied, in order to re-produce
health. Upon this principle it is, that vegitables and vegitable acids, as
being less stimulant than fresh animal food, are found so useful in the cure of
scurvy. An immediate indulgence in the latter, after a long abstinence, would
produce dangerous consequences. In advanced stages of this disease, a very
small quantity of stimulus, such as a glass of ardent spirits, or a strong
mental impulse, has been frequently known to extinguish life. That diminution
of heat has a share in the production of scurvy, is evident from its more
frequent occurrence in cold, than in hot climates. And that the absence of the
mental stimuli, is often a source of this disease, is obvious from this, --
that every circumstance that can occur, during a long voyage, calculated to
rouse the mind to moderate exertion, will produce an alleviation of the
symptoms; -- the sight of an enemy -- the sight of land -- approach to the
destined port -- the anticipation of the pleasures of the shore, etc. This is
farther corroborated by the frequency of scurvy among the enslaved Africans, in
their passage to the West Indies, where all the mental stimuli are as
completely abstracted, as can be supposed to happen in almost any possible
situation. The disease in this case affects the men, more than the women and
children. The reason is evident. With men, the transition from liberty to
slavery, is greater than with women and children, accustomed, in their most
free state, to look up to them as their superiors. The minds of the latter too,
from being less exercised, are the less capable of reflection, and become more
easily reconciled to their new situation; which is also rendered less irksome,
by the indulgence usually granted to them, even on board of ships, employed in
the vile traffic of slaves.

THE absence of those objects, which were wont to excite pleasurable sensation
in the mind, produce diseases of this state. -- Such is the despondence of a
lover, in the absence of the object beloved: and that melancholy, with which
some persons are affected, when absent from their native country.

XIV. -- AS the situations, in which the ordinary stimuli can be withheld, in
any considerable degree, are rare, the diseases of this state are consequently
few in number; and seldom become objects of medical treatment.

XV. -- IN all of them, the cure consists in a gradual re-application of those
exciting powers, the abstraction of which occasioned the disease; or, in
situations where that is impracticable, by a similar application of other
powers equivalent in force.

2. -- Diseases of indirect Debility, or of Exhaustion.
XVI. -- AS the body becomes less susceptible of impression, in the direct
ratio of the excessive application of stimuli (v. iii), it follows that the
force of stimulus to be applied, in the cure of diseases of this state, should
be directly as the exhaustion of the excitability.

XVII. -- AS all diseases arise, either from accumulation or exhaustion of the
excitability, (vi.) and as the diseases of accumulation have been shown to be
extremely few (xiv), diseases of indirect will probably be to those of direct
debility, in some such proportion, as nine hundred and ninety nine to one. The
diseases of warm climates may be considered, without exception, as diseases of
exhaustion, or of indirect debility.

XVIII. -- AS the highest excitement is the greatest degree of health, it is
evident that, in disease, health is to be reproduced, by the application of
such a degree of stimulant power, as is calculated to support the highest state
of excitement, of which the body, at the time, is capable. Let the middle state
of the excitability for instance, be represented by 20, and the appropriate
degree of stimulus, producing healthy excitement, by 20 also (vide Table); let
the diminishing or increasing sum of stimulus, in proportion to the
accumulation or exhaustion of the excitability, be represented by numbers, as
in the annexed table. If the excitability is exhausted to 10, the sum of
stimulus to be applied, in order to produce the greatest excitement, which the
state of the body will allow, will be as 30. Every degree of stimulus, beyond
that, will exhaust the body still farther, and every degree, below it, will
retard the cure. Thus 35 degrees of stimulus will be too much, 25 too little.

XIX. -- AS the production of the healthy state is always gradual and
progressive, and is effected by the powers of life; it follows that, in
proportion to the degree, in which these powers can be maintained, the cure
will be accelerated. There is no other mode of supporting them, but by an
application of stimuli, proportionate to the susceptibility of impression.

XX. -- AS the sum of the powers, producing disease, cannot possibly be
ascertained, the degree of stimulus to be applied, for the reproduction of
health, must be entirely regulated by observation of the effects, arising from
the application of medicines.

XXI. -- AS the varieties of diseases that occur, from the highest degree of
accumulation, to the lowest degree of exhaustion, of excitability; so is the
variety, in the degree of stimulus, necessary to be applied, for the cure.

XXII. -- THIS variety is of very great extent. The usual mode, therefore, of
prescribing certain fixed doses of medicines, in every disease, whatever may be
the degree of it, is and must be nugatory and inefficacious; excepting when
these doses happen, by mere chance, to correspond with the state of
excitability. -- In ascertaining these degrees, and proportioning the stimuli,
consist the judgment of the physician.

XXIII. -- IF, for example, opium, ether, volatile alkali, the preparations of
mercury, wine, bark, etc. exhibited in the usual doses, do not produce effects,
which indicate an approximation to health, -- such as a diminution of
frequency, There is sometimes a peculiar slowness, which is equally a sign of
debility, with a quickness of pulse. Vide Case 8th.
and an increase of strength, in the pulse, a coolness of the skin, moisture of
the tongue, refreshing sleep, and the other familiar signs of increasing
excitement, -- it is evident that the doses are insufficient, and should be
increased, until these effects are produced.

XXIV. -- THE doses should be repeated in such a manner, as to maintain the
highest degree of excitement, of which the body, at the time is capable. But in
proportion as the excitability accumulates, or the body approaches to the state
of health, the doses should be gradually and proportionally diminished, until
at length, health being established, nothing more than the action of the
ordinary exciting powers is required.

XXV. -- ALL the diseases enumerated by Brown, as diseases of accumulation or
direct debility, with perhaps the single exception of scurvy, are diseases of
exhaustion. Typhus, Intermittents, Dysentery, and some other diseases, as they
appear to be occasioned by exposure to cold, and moisture, a deficiency of
nutriment and of other stimuli, have been ranked, by him, in the class of
diseases of accumulation. But as the sum of the powers, which are concerned in
the production of any particular disease, cannot be ascertained, the nature of
it can only be determined by the effects of the stimulant powers, applied for
the cure. And, as the cure of these diseases depends upon the application of
the most powerful stimuli, it necessarily follows that, they are diseases of
indirect debility.

THIS error seems to have arisen from an opinion, that upon the abstraction of
stimuli from (or in the the words of Brown, the application of directly
debilitating powers to) a body in a state of exhaustion, the irritability would
accumulate; or that direct would be superinduced on indirect debility. But this
opinion is evidently erroneous. If from a person laboring under plague,
malagnant fever, or gangrenous sore throat, all the usual remedies are
withheld, and only cold water given, no accumulation of the excitability will
take place; but on the contrary, the exhaustion will rapidly proceed, to the
extinction of life. If a person, previously exhausted by exposure to excessive
heat, drinks largely of, or plunges himself into cold water, the exhaustion
will not be removed; but on the contrary, those greater degrees of it produced,
constituting Tetanus, Spasms of the stomach, etc. And that these are all
diseases of indirect debility, the mode of cure, which consists in the
application of a very high degree of stimulant power, is a sufficient proof.
Gout is a familiar instance in point. The state of body liable to this disease,
is produced by a long continued application of food and drink, stimulant in too
high a degree. Let a gouty person be exposed to cold and moisture, and a
paroxysm will readily be produced. Let him suddenly refrain from his usual
quantity of food and drink, his stomach or head will be affected; and the most
powerful stimuli, as Ether, Brandy, etc. will be requisite to relieve him.

XXVI. -- HENCE it follows that, in diseases of exhaustion, the irritability
does not accumulate upon the abstraction of stimuli; but on the contrary, the
state of exhaustion is, thereby, increased.

XXVII. -- IT follows also that, in the production of Typhus, Intermittents,
Dysentery, and such other diseases as have appeared to arise from exposure to
cold, moisture, etc. and have therefore been ranked by Brown, among the
diseases of direct debility, the body must have previously been in a state
exhaustion. By a subduction of exciting powers, from a body in such a state,
the previous degree of exhaustion must be increased, and the diseases of that
state consequently induced.

XXVIII. -- MOST of the diseases of exhaustion appear to be produced in this
manner.

CHAPTER IV. OF DISEASES DENOMINATED BY BROWN, DIEASES OF EXCESSIVE EXCITEMENT.
Vide Lynch's Table, prefixed to Beddoes's edition of Brown's Elements of
Medicine.

XXIX. -- AS there are three states of the excitability, (v. 1, 2, 3) so there
are three corresponding states of excitement.

1st. -- THE state of diminished excitement, from a deficient application of
stimuli, corresponding with the state of accumulation, or direct debility.

2dly. -- THE state of high excitement, from a due application of stimuli,
corresponding with the middle state of the excitability or health.

3dly. -- THE state of diminished excitement, from an excessive application of
stimuli, corresponding with the state of exhaustion, or indirect debility.

XXX. -- ALTHOUGH the stimulant powers may be applied, in an excessive degree,
to the middle or healthy state of the excitability, it is evident that
excitement never can be excessive; for every degree of stimulant power, greater
than is necessary to produce health, must occasion a degree of exhaustion
proportionate to the excess, (v. 3); and every degree of stimulant power, less
than is necessary to produce health, must occasion a degree of accumulation,
proportionate to the deficiency. (v. 1.)

XXXI. -- THERE are, therefore, no diseases of excessive excitement. From
whence it follows that those, which have been so denominated by Brown, must be
diseases, either of direct, or indirect debelity (vi.)

XXXII. -- THAT they are all diseases of indirect debility, seldom constituting
a very high degree of exhaustion, is proved, both by the powers that are known
to induce them, and the remedies that are found most successful in their cure.

CATARRH, pneumonia, acute rheumatism, and other diseases of this class, are
occasioned by the application of a considerable degree of heat, after the body
has been previously exposed to cold; -- or vice versa. The temperature of warm
rooms is, in general, greater than is sufficient to support healthy excitement.
If the body therefore has been previously exposed to a considerable degree of
cold, the irritability must be accumulated (v. 1); and the application of a
high degree of heat, to a body in that state, must inevitably produce
exhaustion.

IF, on the contrary, a person has been previously exposed to a degree of heat,
beyond what is necessary to support healthy excitement, and cold be suddenly
applied, the same effects will be produced (xxv.) -- In most of these diseases,
a local affection takes place, which evidently arises, from some parts being
more exposed to the exciting powers, than other parts of the body; -- as the
mucous membrane of the nose and fauces, in catarrh; the bronchioe and lungs, in
pneumonia; and the extremities, in rheumatism. The mode in which the cure of
these diseases is effected, viz. by warmth, small quantities of opium, wine,
etc. and the application of fomentations, rubefacients, and blisters to the
local affection, is a proof that they are diseases of indirect debility.

THE langour, inability to motion, want of appetite, nausea, costiveness, etc.
which occur in these diseases, are evidently incompatible with such a state, as
that of excessive excitement. Could such a state possibly exist, the functions
of the body would be invigorated, in the exact degree of the excess.

IN convalescence from these diseases, it is well known, that a greater degree
of nutritious food, wine, and other stimuli, are necessary, than in a state of
health. But if they depended upon a state of excessive excitement, the cure
could not otherwise be effected, than by persevering in an abstraction of
stimuli, until health was re-established. The exhibition of stimulant powers
would produce an increase of disease.

SMALLPOX and meazles are of this kind, and to be cured only by stimulant
powers.

THE mode in which Brown fell into error, in considering some diseases as
depending upon a state of excessive excitement, was probably this. Having
still, (although contrary to one of his own fundamental principles "that all
powers applied to living bodies are stimulant," -- in other words "that there
is not a sedative in nature,") retained an idea, that those medicines, called
evacuants, are debilitating; and having found that, under a moderate
application of them, together with the other parts of the usual treatment,
patients generally recovered from these diseases, he was led to conclude, that
they depended upon a state of excessive excitement.

THE mode of action, however, of those medicines, seems to have been
universally misunderstood. As all objects, capable of producing an effect upon
living bodies, are stimulant (x), those which produce evacuations must
necessarily be included. If a certain quantity of calomel, infusion of senna,
salts, or any other cathartic medicine, be taken, its immediate effect, like
that of opium, camphor, or any other acknowledged stimulus, will be an
increased strength of pulse, a sense of general invigoration, and all the usual
symptoms of increased excitement, in proportion to its degree. And this will
continue as long as the operation of the medicine. If the dose is sufficient to
produce a high degree of excitement, a discharge of natural foeces, when these
have previously been long retained, will be the consequence. Is there any other
mode, by which the intestines may be made to perform their functions, and to
expel their contents, but by increasing their excitement? Certainly not -- But
if a greater quantity be given than is necessary, to enable the intestines to
expel, with facility, their contents, a new disease is produced; -- indirect
debility is established; and a discharge of mucus, and sometimes of blood,
accompanied by disagreeable sensations, follows; symptoms which are only to be
removed by opium, and other stimuli. -- It is not therefore with an intention
of evacuating, that those medicines should be given. In diarrhoeas, and
incipient dysentery, where the intestines are evidently in a state of indirect
debility, calomel, castor oil, and all the other medicines called cathartics,
instead of increasing, invariably diminish the number of evacuations; and, by a
judicious repetition of the doses, cure the disease. Those medicines,
therefore, do not effect cures, by their EVACUANT, but by their STIMULANT
POWERS.

AS opium, ether, volatile alkali, wine, etc. when given in an improper
manner, diminish; so the medicines, usually denominated evacuants, when given
in a proper manner, increase the excitement.

CHAPTER V. LOCAL DISEASES.
XXXIII. -- THE principles laid down in the preceding pages, respecting
diseases, which affect the whole body, equally apply to those, which effect
only a part.

XXXIV. -- AS diseases, which affect the whole of the body, depend upon, either
accumulation or exhaustion of the excitability (vi.); the same law must apply,
with equal force, to any of its parts, separately considered.

XXXV. -- IF that proposition (vi.) be true (as it undoubtedly is) it follows,
that local diseases never depend upon a state of excessive excitement.
Inflammation, therefore, alocal disease of the most frequent occurence, does
not, as has been generally supposed, depend on such a state; but, like the
diseases of the whole body, which have been denominated by Brown, diseases of
excessive excitement, and by others inflammatory, is, on the contrary a disease
of diminished excitement, from indirect debility; excepting in the single case
of inflammation, produced by the exposure of any particular part of the body to
a high degree of cold. As this proposition is of considerable importance, it
may be necessary to enlarge upon it. The symptoms of local inflammation are
heat, pain, redness, swelling; and, in secreting surfaces, an increased
secretion. It is evident that, in inflammation, an enlargement of the vessels
takes place without a proportionate degree of contraction; and that an
increased quantity of blood flows into them. -- As the effect of stimuli, upon
the muscular fiber, is to produce contraction; and as the blood is the
appropriate stimulus of the arteries; it is evident that, if these were
diseases of excessive excitement, an increased contraction of the vessels, or a
diminution of their diameters, in proportion to the increased quantity of the
blood, would take place. If the vigor of a muscle is ascertained, by the force
of its contraction, it is clear that every increase of vigor should be
attended with an increased force of contraction. If local inflammation,
therefore, was a disease of excessive excitement, there would be a diminution,
instead of an increase, of the quantity of blood, in the vessels of the part.
But that there is actually an increased quantity of blood, in the vessels of
the parts inflamed, is evident in opthalmia, and those inflammations, which are
produced, in the course of experiments, upon the transparent membranes of
animals. The same idea too is farther confirmed, by the mode of cure, which is
universally adopted, and found successful, in those diseases. The application
of blisters, and inhalation of warm steam, in pneumonia, catarrh, and
inflammatory sore throat; of vinegar, and ardent spirits, in burns, and scalds;
warm fomentations, and poultices, in phlegmon; solution of volatile alkali,
tincture of cantharides, and the different preparations of camphor, in the
inflammation of the joints, in acute rheumatism; tincture of opium, and
solutions of corrosive sublimate in opthalmia; -- are all so many proofs of the
truth of this proposition.

XXXVI. -- IN catarrh, pneumonia, acute rheumatism, phrenitis, and those other
diseases of indirect debility, which have been called diseases of excessive
excitement, the local affection, which arises from the parts being more exposed
to the action of the exciting powers, differs from the general, only in being
greater in degree.

XXXVII. -- IN local, therefore, as well as general disease, the causes which
produce, and the powers which cure them, tend equally to prove, that a state of
excessive excitement cannot possibly take place, either in the whole, or any
part of the body; and that the diseases usually considered as dependent upon
such a state, are almost, without exception, diseases of indirect debility.

XXXVIII. -- LOCAL diseases, like those of the whole body, are to be cured by
an application of stimulant powers, in a degree proportioned to the state of
the excitability.

TABLE OF PROPORTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN THE APPLICATION OF STIMULI TO THE
EXCITABILITY.
Diseases of accumulation, in their various degrees. 40 or Death Degrees of
stimulus to be applied, to produce the greatest possible excitement. 39 -- 1 38
-- 2 37 -- 3 36 -- 4 35 -- 5 34 -- 6 33 -- 7 32 -- 8 31 -- 9 30 -- 10 29 -- 11
28 -- 12 27 -- 13 26 -- 14 25 -- 15 Small degrees of accumulation, not
constituting what is commonly called disease. 24 -- 16 Appropriate degrees of
stimulus. 23 -- 17 22 -- 18 21 -- 19 Middle state of the excitability. 20 -- 20
Appropriate degrees of stimulus, producing healthy excitement. Small degrees of
exhaustion, not constituting what is commonly called disease. 19 -- 21
Appropriate degrees of stimulus. 18 -- 22 17 -- 23 16 -- 24 Diseases of
exhaustion, in their various degrees. 15 -- 25 Degrees of stimulus to be
applied, to produce the greatest possible excitement. 14 -- 26 13 -- 27 12 --
28 11 -- 29 10 -- 30 9 -- 31 8 -- 32 7 -- 33 6 -- 34 5 -- 35 4 -- 36 3 -- 37 2
-- 38 1 -- 39 0 or Death.

EXPLANATION of the TABLE.
THIS Table is meant merely to convey a general idea of the manner, in which
stimuli should be increased, or diminished, in proportion to the exhaustion, or
accumulation of the excitability. It is not supposed, that the degree of the
excitability, or the proportion of stimulus represented by the figures in the
table, can be ascertained in any other manner, than by observation of the
effects produced by their application. The range of figures, is by no means
sufficient to express the various degrees of accumulation and exhaustion of the
excitability, that can take place, between the middle state and death. It will
however, be sufficient to give a general idea of the mode of cure, deducible
from the principles laid down in the preceding pages.

CASES,
By Dr. YATES.
CASE I.
FRANCIS LOTE, aged 35, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta, on
the 1st of May, 1796. -- At that time, he complained of general pains over his
body, with all those symptoms which indicate an exhausted constitution. On the
15th of May, he came under my care. At that time I found his mouth sore, from
the use of Mercury; and he was much purged and griped. On the 3d of June, when
I discontinued attending him, his complaints were considerably relieved, by the
use of Opium. On the 21st of August, he again came under my care, in a state of
extreme debility, with excessive purging, and bloody stools. Du^ing the whole
of this time, he had remained in the Hospital; but, from necessary
arrangements, had fallen, during intervals, under the care of other gentlemen.
During the last of these intervals, he was so extremely weak that, in the act
of vomiting, the right clavicle was fractured, which occasioned much pain. On
that and the two successive days, I gave him eighty drops of Tincture of Opium,
morning, and evening. On the 24th, in the morning, as no effect seemed to be
produced by the medicine, it was ordered to be given three times a day. At one
o'clock P. M. the same day, I was called to him; and found him complaining of
violent pain in the bowels, with incessant purging. He had taken the 2d draught
about an hour before. The draught was ordered to be immediately repeated. At 9
P. M. he was not relieved; upon which 150 drops of Tincture of Opium was
prescribed immediately and ordered to be repeated at 12 o'clock. A glyster,
with 200 drops of Tincture of Opium was also given. On the 25th he was easier.
The glysters, with 200 drops of Tincture of Opium, were continued every three
hours, and the draught, with 150 drops, was repeated in the evening. On the
26th, in the morning, he was nearly in the same state; the glysters were
continued, and the draughts ordered 3 times in the day. At 9 P. M. I found that
the relief from the glysters, was merely temporary, that he had stools every
hour, and no inclination to sleep. Four hundred drops of Tincture of Opium were
ordered in glyster, every two hours, and a fourth draught of 200 drops to be
taken at 12 o'clock. On the 26th he was easier; he had six or seven stools in
the night, with less griping. Slept better than he had done, since he came to
the Hospital. His pulse beat about 90 strokes in the minute; previous to this
his pulse had been very quick and small, but the state of it was not
particularly noted; he had 150 drops of Tincture of Opium in the morning, and
200 at 12 o'clock. Four hundred drops were ordered in glyster, every three
hours. One P. M. He had 5 stools since morning; the glysters were continued;
and a draught of 200 drops ordered to be taken at 4 o'clock. At 8 P. M. he had
13 stools since the last visit, with a good deal of pain in his bowels. He had
not slept; was ordered a draught of four hundred drops of Tincture of Opium at
ten o'clock. August the 28th, he had slept a little the preceding night; bowels
were easier; pulse 80; had draughts of 200 drops every two hours, with the
glysters occasionally. At 2 P. M. his pulse was 90; he was in other respects as
before: had taken three draughts. The draughts of 200 drops were repeated every
hour. At 9 P. M. his pulse was still 90; he had dosed much, but had no sound
sleep; he had taken 4 draughts. A draught of 400 drops was ordered to be given
at 12 o'clock. On the 29th, his pulse was 80, and strong; he had 3 stools, with
less pain; but slept little; the draughts of 200 drops were continued every
hour. -- 2 P. M. had incessant stools since morning, with violent pain of the
bowels; glysters of 400 drops were ordered every hour. 8 P. M. had four stools
since 2 o'clock; had taken only one draught; his bowels were easy after the
glysters; pulse 112. -- Eight draughts, with 200 drops each, were ordered to be
placed at his bedside, of which he was directed to take one every hour, during
the night, with glysters of 500 drops every hour, in the intervals between the
draughts. -- 30th, had six stools during the night. He was free from pain, and
his pulse 80 and full; the draughts were continued every two hours, and the
glysters occasionally. 9 o'clock P. M. he had eight or ten stools since
morning, with some griping; pulse 90. The draughts were increased to 300 drops
every two hours; and the glysters continued. -- 31st, had passed a good night;
his pulse was 90; he had five stools; his medicines were continued as the day
before. In the evening, he was nearly the same; no alteration was made in his
medicines -- September the 1st, he had six stools during the night, with
griping: did not sleep; had no blood in his stools; for two days; the draughts
of three hundred drops were given every hour, and the glysters of five hundred
drops were continued as before, and repeated according to his own discretion,
as the tenesmus and griping might indicate. -- 8 P. M. he was much worse; had
eight stools during the day, and no sleep; his pulse was 120, and he was so
extremely weak, that I considered him as approaching to dissolution. Draughts
of 500 drops each, were ordered to be given every hour, and the glysters of 500
drops; to be continued as before. -- 2d, he had not slept, but felt himself
better; pulse 104; his medicines were continued, in the same manner during the
whole of that day. On the 3d, his pulse was 100; he had slept well the
preceding night; his medicines were continued. On the 4th, he was much better,
had dosed much, and had only two stools; the draughts were directed to be taken
occasionally, as circumstances might indicate -- This plan was continued until
the 14th, at which time his mouth became sore, and the flow of saliva was
increased, as if he had been using mercury. The draughts and glysters were,
from that period, ordered to be repeated occasionally, according to his own
discretion. On the 22d, the discharge of saliva continued in the same state. --
On the 26th, he was better; and his bowels easy. -- 29th, he continued without
pain, with two or three stools in the day, and his strength increasing. On the
30th, when I discontinued attending him, he had only two stools in the day,
without pain; and felt a returning appetite. Being a sensible and steady man,
he was, at that time, allowed to proportion the strength and frequency of the
draughts and glysters according to his own judgment. -- During the whole of the
time that he was under my care, he had an allowance of wine from one to two or
three bottles in the 24 hours, according to exigency. -- From his good sense
and punctuality, I have a perfect reliance upon his having conformed to my
orders, in every particular, as far as it is possible for patients, in an
hospital, to do.

THE treatment of this case may give some idea of the manner in which stimuli
should be increased, in diseases of great exhaustion, until the quantity is
ascertained, which is capable of producing the highest degree of excitement. It
will show the very great quantity of the most powerful stimuli that may be
necessary, in some diseases of that state, in order to effect a cure; and is
also an example of the mode in which the doses ought to be repeated. The
soreness of the mouth, and the increased flow of saliva, evince that there is a
greater similitude between the action of opium and mercury, than has yet been
acknowledged. The soreness of the mouth and spitting commenced, after the
quantity of opium was diminished. Upon resuming the draughts, the mouth became
less sore, and the flow of salava decreased; and upon leaving them off, the
soreness and spitting increased. This was repeatedly remarked by the patient
himself. It should be observed, in order to prevent a rash imitation, where the
circumstances are not alike, that the tincture of opium employed; upon this
occasion, was much weaker than what is usually made in Europe; that a very
great degree of exhaustion had taken place; and that the doses were gradually
increased, from eight drops to five hundred.

CASE II.
-- DE HAES, aged 40, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta, on
the evening of the 26th of August, 1796, with dysentery of eight days standing.
He had about 30 stools in the day, containing slime, mixed with blood; and
complained of much pain in his bowels. His pulse was 90 in the minute. At 9
o'clock P. M. he was ordered to rub in, half an ounce of Mercurial Ointment,
with half a dram of Calomel, and to take a hundred drops of Tincture of
Opium, to be repeated at 1^ o'clock -- 27th, the Ointment was omitted by
neglect. He continued in the same state. Half an ounce of Mercurial Ointment,
with a dram of Calomel, was ordered to be rubbed in immediately, and repeated
at 12 o'clock. A hundred drops of Tincture of Opium was desired to be given
every two hours. -- 1 o'clock P. M. he had ten stools since morning, with blood
and slime. Had taken only two draughts. The Ointment was ordered to be repeated
at 4 o'clock, a glyster with two hundred drops of tincture of opium to be given
every two hours, and one bottle of wine to be taken in the course of the
evening -- 8 P. M. pulse 100. He had six stools with less pain. The ointment
was rubbed in, and glysters were regularly administered. The ointment was
ordered to be again repeated at 9 o'clock, the glysters to be continued, a
draught of a hundred and fifty drops of tincture of opium to be given
immediately, and to be repeated at 12 o'clock; and a bottle of Madeira to be
given during the night. -- 28th, he had vomited several times during the night,
but had only one stool; pulse 75. The ointment was ordered to be repeated, the
glysters to be omitted, a draught with one hundred drops of tincture of opium
to be given, and the wine to be continued. -- 2 P. M. pulse 72; vomited twice
since morning; he had only two stools, and the pain was less; he slept a
little. The ointment, draught, and wine were repeated. -- 9 P. M. pulse 84, had
vomited twice, and had six stools. He complained of virtigo; the ointment was
repeated, a draught of two hundred drops of tincture of opium was ordered to be
given at 12 o'clock, and the wine to be continued. -- 29th, his pulse was 80
and full. He had ten stools, consisting of slime and blood. The ointment and
wine were continued, and a draught, with one hundred drops of tincture of
opium, ordered every two hours -- 9 P. M. his pulse was 80, he had six stools,
and frequent vomitting, particularly after taking the Maderia wine. The
ointment was repeated, two hundred drops of tincture of opium ordered every two
hours, and port wine to be given in lieu of the Madeira. -- 30th, pulse 74. He
had two stools, vomited only once, and slept a little. The ointment and wine
were repeated, and the draughts with two hundred drops, continued every third
hour. -- 9 P. M. he had several stools in the course of the day, with much
pain. No return of vomiting; pulse 100. The ointment was repeated with two
drachms of calomel. Draughts of two hundred drops each, were ordered to be
continued every two hours. The port wine became disagreeabie to him, and
Medeira was again given -- 31st, pulse 84; had only two stools, and slept well.
His mouth was a little sore. The ointment was repeated with one dram of
calomel, and the draughts were continued every third hour. -- 9 P. M. pulse 80,
he had eight stools. His skin and tongue were moist, and he began to spit a
little. He had slept some during the day. The ointment, draughts, and wine were
continued. September the 1st, pulse 76, he had only one stool, slept well, and
was better in every respect. The ointment was repeated, with half a dram of
calomel; and the draughts and wine were continued. -- 8 P. M. continued better.
He had no pains, excepting in going to stool. The discharge of salava was
considerable. He had slept during the day. The ointment was omitted. A draught
of two hundred drops of tincture of opium was ordered at 12 o'clock; and the
wine was continued. -- 2d, he had only one stool during the night; pulse 68;
the ointment was repeated without the calomel; and the wine continued -- 8 P.
M. he had slept during the day, and spit considerably; the draught of two
hundred drops was repeated at 12 o'clock, and the wine continued. -- 3d, he had
slept well, and had no stool; the ointment as entirely omitted; and the evening
draught and wine were continued. -- From that period the wine, and draughts
occasionally, were continued until the 30th of September, at which time I left
him in an advanced state of convalescence.

THE great quantity of mercury that was used, in this case, in conjunction with
opium and wine, show what a high degree of stimulant power may sometimes be
required to effect a cure, in the state of exhaustion, which constitutes
dysentery.

CASE III.
JACOB MEYER, aged 35, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta, on
the 23d of August, 1796, with pain of bowels and frequent stools. These
complaints appeared at first to be slight; and seemed for sometime, to give way
to ordinary doses of calomel and opium. On the 29th he became worse; and the
same treatment was persevered in, but without effect. On the 1st of September,
calomel and opium, of each two grains, every second hour, and a draught of
eighty drops of tincture of opium, twice a day, were prescribed. The symptoms
still increased in force. On the 3d, he had very frequent stools with violent
pain in the bowels; and could not bear the least pressure on the caput coli.
His pulse was 132, thirst extreme, tongue furred; and he had no sleep. Half an
ounce of mercurial ointment, and one dram of calomel were rubbed in. The
calomel and opium were given every hour. On the 4th his pulse was 120, he had
vomited through the night, tongue brown and furred. The ointment was rubbed in,
and to be repeated at 12 o'clock; the pills of calomel and opium were
continued. -- 9 P. M. pulse 130; he had several stools during the day; tongue
dry; he thought that he spit more than usual, but his mouth did not seem
affected; one ounce of ointment and two drachms of calomel were rubbed in, and
the pills were continued. -- On the 5th his pulse was 120, he complained of
violent pain in his bowels; the medicines were continued as the day before. --
6th, his pulse was 100; he complained of violent pain on pressing the arch of
the colon, had frequent stools with profuse perspiration, and appeared to be
much alarmed and dejected; no increase of the quantity of saliva; the ointment
and pills were continued in the same manner. -- 7 P. M. his pulse was 124; in
other respects as before; he was immersed in the warm bath, and afterward had
one ounce of ointment, with half an ounce of calomel rubbed in; the pills were
continued. -- 7th, pulse 112; complaints were nearly as the day before. He had
an eruption upon the skin, such as usually appears, when salivation cannot be
produced, after having used a large quantity of mercury. The warm bath, with
the ointment and calomel, were repeated; and the calomel in the pills was
increased to four grains. -- 8 P. M. pulse 128, he had incessant stools,
accompanied by violent pains of the abdomen; his tongue was brown and furred,
and skin covered with profuse moisture. The bath was ordered to be repeated,
and an ounce of ointment, with two ounces of calomel, to be rubbed in,
immediately after the bath. A scruple of colomel and six grains of opium were
ordered to be given every second hour -- 8th, pulse 112; he had incessant
stools, with violent pain. He felt ease from the warm bath; had taken five
doses of the calomel and opium. The warm bath was ordered to be repeated three
times in the day, the ointment and calomel to be again rubbed in, and the pills
to be continued. -- 8 P. M. pulse 120, there was no increase in the quantity of
saliva from the mercury, he had incessant stools with blood, and was extremely
debilitated. Had taken six doses of the calomel and opium in the course of the
day. Could not bear the least pressure upon the colon. The warm bath was
ordered to be repeated, and afterward two ounces of ointment, with four ounces
of calomel, to be rubbed in. The calomel and opium to be given every hour --
9th, pulse 112 and small. He had stools innumerable. The medicines were
continued. 9 P. M. his pulse was almost imperceptible, and extremities cold.
The medicines were continued as far as circumstances would admit. 10th at 1
o'clock, A. M. he expired.

THE body of this patient was either not op^^ed, or the appearances upon
dissection were neglected to be noted down, at the time; and were consequently
forgotten. But from the analogy between this case and all the others, in which
the mouth could not be affected, in the usual manner, by mercury, there can
scarcely be a doubt that the colon and rectum, if not the whole of the
abdominal viscera were in a state of local disease. The cases of dissection,
described by Mr. Maclean, will explain this point more fully. Of many cases of
dysentery, and other diseases, that were opened by us, in which salivation
could not be produced by mercury, there was not one without confirmed local
disease of the viscera, either of the thorax or abdomen, or both.

THOSE, who may look upon the quantity of medicine here prescribed as
extraordinary, should consider, that when a patient is evidently incurable, by
the common practice, it becomes the duty of the practitioner to depart from it.
An opposite conduct is dictated, much more by a sly regard to reputation, than
an earnest and conscientious desire of saving the lives of patients. Nothing
can be more easy than to take shelter under customary forms.

CASES,
By Mr. MACLEAN.
CASE IV. EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF THE ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY's SHIP
NORTHUMBERLAND.
MR. --, Cadet, aged 17, -- tall, of a slender make, and consumptive habit;
June 13th, 1791, he had, since the commencement of the voyage, in April 1791,
been much indisposed with sea-sickness; for the last ten days, had feverish
symptoms, and for two days a diarrhoea; his skin was hot and dry, tongue foul
and parched, pulse quick and small. -- He was ordered to take two table
spoonsful every hour of a mixture, consisting of a hundred drops of tincture of
opium, and one pint of water, with an ounce of cinnamon water. -- In the
evening, there was a remission of the diarrhoea; but it returned on the 14th,
the mixture having been discontinued in the night. This subduction was
improper. In every case, as well as in this, it will be found detrimental.
One grain of opium was ordered to be taken every hour. -- 15th, after having
taken five pills, his skin became moist, his pulse full, he fell asleep (about
8 o'clock P. M.), and continued free from diarrhoea all night. He had perspired
profusely, and his tongue and lips were less parched; -- having complained of
thirst, he was ordered wine and water for drink. -- 16th, the opium having been
injudiciously discontinued on the 15th, all his symptoms returned; his tongue
was foul and parched, his pulse quick and small, his skin hot and dry; he was
considerably purged, and had much thirst; one grain of opium was ordered to be
taken every hour. -- On the 17th, the pills having been again imprudently
discontinued in the night, he appeared rather confused, his strength was much
exhausted, and his complaints remained the same. The pills were ordered to be
repeated, and continued through the night. The cofusion of head, and other bad
symptoms, which frequently follow the exhibition of opium, are, as I have
uniformly observed, owing to the medicine not being repeated at proper
intervals. In every case, which requires so high a stimulant power as that of
opium, the exhibition of the doses should be regulated by principle. -- They
ought to be repeated in the night as well as in the day. -- But the difficulty
of doing this, which may arise from the ignorance or carelessness of
practitioners, the prejudices or obstinacy of patients, or the negligence of
attendants, has often occasioned bad consequences, which have been erroneously
imputed to the opium.
He was allowed mutton or chicken broth, and sago alternately, as his fancy
directed; and wine and water for drink. -- 18th, the pills were regularly
taken, day and night, excepting in the intervals of sleep; his pulse was slower
and more full: and he was in other respects better, but weak, his skin was
covered with a healthy moisture; he complained of some soreness of his mouth
and throat; he had eat some biscuit, soaked in tea, for breakfast, and was
ordered sago for dinner and supper, the pills were continued. -- 19th, his
pulse was stronger, an eruption appeared on his face, such as often happens
after taking opium or mercury. -- He complained that his mouth was very sore,
and was ordered to have a gargle; the pills, etc. were continued as before. --
20th, he was better, the pills, sago, etc. were regularly taken, and he drank
plentifully of wine and water; his thirst was diminished; the pills and regimen
were ordered to be continued as before. -- 21st, he was stronger, and declared
himself in every respect better; the only complaints that remained were a
soreness of the mouth and fauces, and some swelling of the face; the pills,
etc. were continued. -- 22d, soreness of the mouth and throat were troublesome;
he spit more freely than usual, the increased flow of saliva somewhat
resembling that which takes place after the use of mercury. I cannot say, at
this distance of time, whether there was any ulceration of the gums, having
omitted to notice it in the Journal.
He appeared in other respects so much better, that the pills were
discontinued. This is the third error that was committed in the treatment of
this case, in suddenly withdrawing a stimulus, to which the patient had been
for some time accustomed, and before health was completely re-established.
-- 23a, he had slept tolerably; but his skin was hot, and he complained of
debility. No medicines were prescribed. -- 24th, slept ill, and was much
harassed with a cough and spitting; his pulse was quick and irregular, and he
was oppressed with clammy sweats, -- half a grain of opium was prescribed every
half hour, and bark in wine was given in the intervals. Regimen as before. From
that period to the 27th, his medicines were punctually administered; his cough,
spitting, and clammy sweats were diminished; his pulse, skin, and tongue were
nearly in a healthy state; and the diarrhoea entirely stopped. -- 28th, he was
stronger, had a good appetite, and could sit up; his medicines, etc. were
continued. After this, it was thought unnecessary to make daily reports in the
Journal. His medicines were continued for some days, and gradually left off as
he approached the healthy state.

IN the above case, the medicines were regularly given, either by a friend of
the patient's, who took a particular interest in his welfare, by Mr. RIDGES,
then surgeon's mate of the Northumberland, or by myself. -- The relapses which
always took place, upon suddenly laying the medicines aside, or withholding
them even for a night, show the necessity of repeating the doses, with the
utmost regularity and care. The soreness of the mouth, together with the
increased flow of saliva, after the use of opium, was not a peculiar
circumstance. Upon that subject, the following remark appears in my Journal: --
In many cases, in which opium was freely given, for a length of time, a
considerable increase in the flow of saliva, was observed to take place, and to
continue long after the medicine was laid aside. But in cases, where a
considerable spitting had before existed, opium as well as mercury had the
effect of lessening it. These facts, with the explanation of them, will be
considered in another place.

CASE V. EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF THE ENGLISH EAST INDIA COMPANY's SHIP
NORTHUMBERLAND.
ENSIGN G --, 36th regiment, a stout healthy man, about 25 years of age, went
up, in a fit of playfulness, to the main-top-mast-head, on the evening of the
10th of June, 1791. After having remained there a short time, he fell asleep
upon the cross-trees, and about midnight fell down upon the quarter deck. In
the fall, he first struck with his hip, as was supposed, against an iron
stauncheon in the main-top, which bent; he then came upon the mizzen-stay,
which took him, as far as could be collected from the confused intelligence of
some people upon deck, about the middle of the abdomen; and from the stay he
fell upon the quarter deck. He was, as may well be supposed, entirely
insensible; much blood was discharged from his mouth, nose, ears, and even from
his eyes; in this state he was carried down to his cabin; upon examination, no
fracture was found; the whole consequences of the fall seemed to consist of
contusions or concussion, the marks of which were very general over his body.
His pulse was small, but regular. There happened to be in the ship four
professional gentlemen, besides myself. They all seemed of opinion, that Mr. G.
should immediately lose blood. Some of them insisted upon it, with much
earnestness; and the bystanders, knowing that to be the common practice,
joined in urging a compliance. I replied, that, however common the practice
might be, I was convinced of its being entirely wrong; and that I would not,
even with the sanction of a majority, do what I was certain must endanger the
life of my patient. But that if any of the gentlemen present, chose to take
charge of Mr. -- G, they might have an opportunity of bleeding him, with
propriety, if convinced in their conscience that it was right; and I would give
them my opinion when asked. This offer was not accepted. Mr. G. was not bled.
In the course of two hours from the accident, he became sensible; was sick at
stomach, and vomited. This, as a symptom of concussion usually enumerated,
would farther indicate, according to the hypotheses of the schools, and the
practice of hospitals, copious blood-letting. That, however, did not alter my
plan. I was aware indeed that, if the patient died, his death would be
attributed to the non-observance of customary forms. But I was also persuaded
that, if he lived, after having been copiously bled, it would be in spite of
the blood-letting. He was my friend, as well as my patient; and in defiance of
obloquy, I determined to do what appeared to me best, in order to save his
life. Externally the most powerful stimulating substances were applied, in
concourse or succession. For four days he could not move in bed, without
excruciating pain. He had small opiates occasionally, wine, and nourishing
food; and once half an ounce of sal catharticus amarus, so as to produce one
stool. Nothing more was done. He had not an unfavourable symptom. The pains
gradually abated; and on the eighth day, from the fall, he was carried upon
deck in a chair.

THAT there was absolutely a considerable degree of concussion in this case
appears, from his having wholly lost the sight of one eye, although, when the
marks of contusion had disappeared from that side of his face, the eye looked
almost as well as the other. He complained at times of headache, which was
always relieved by wrapping up his head in warm cloths.

THE issue of this, as well as of every other case of contusion or concussion,
which I have seen treated, either in or out of hospitals, convinced me, that
blood-letting is not only unnecessary but pernicious. In private practice, I
fear, a mean and criminal compliance with vulgar prejudice, in order to
conciliate vulgar favor, too often influences practitioners, whose better
judgments would lead them to reject entirely so deplorable a remedy: -- a
remedy of which the use is not only contrary to all principle; but which, so
far as I know, cannot adduce a single uncontrovertible fact, in proof of its
utility.

CASE VI.
WILLIAM HOLLOWAY, aged 22, was admitted into the General Hospital, at
Calcutta, on the 3d of September, 1796, with symptoms of typhus fever, of
several days standing. At bed time, he took two grains of opium, and six grains
of calomel. -- 4th, he had slept a little; his tongue was parched and black;
pulse 96, he had two stools on the 3d. Six grains of calomel, and six grains of
powder of jallap, were ordered to be given every four hours. -- 5th, in
addition to his former symptoms, he complained of cough and pain of breast. He
had only one stool, since he began to take the powders. The powders. were
ordered to be repeated, and a draught, with sixty drops of tincture of opium to
be given at bed time. -- 9 o'clock, P. M. he had not yet taken the draught
prescribed for him in the morning; the pain of his breast was more severe; he
had no stool for twenty-four hours; was ordered a glyster with one ounce of
castor oil, and one ounce of Glauber's salts; and afterward to take the
draught. -- 6th, he had no stool from the glyster. His pulse was 116; his
tongue furred and black, and his mouth exceedingly parched; he was a little
confused, and had a slight degree of subsultus tendinum. Two ounces of the
common infusion of senna was ordered every hour, and a glyster, double the
strength of the former, every second hour until he should have a stool or two.
-- 7 o'clock P. M. he had one copious stool, after having taken several doses
of the infusion, and two or three glysters. Four grains of opium and four
grains of calomel were ordered to be taken at 8 o'clock, and to be repeated at
12 -- On the 7th, he conceived himself better; pulse 108; his tongue was still
furred and skin hot. He was allowed twelve glasses of wine in the day. Ten
grains of calomel, and fifteen grains of powder of jallap, were prescribed
every four hours. -- 9 o'clock, P. M. his skin was very hot, pulse only 100; he
had taken three of the powders, and had 3 stools; he complained that his tongue
was sore. It was still furred and black in the middle. He was ordered a
draught, with a hundred drops of tincture of opium, at 8 o'clock, and again at
twelve. -- 8th, his pulse was 100, and heat of skin more moderate; but his
tongue remained foul; he expressed a wish for porter. The desire for beer or
porter, is a symptom that frequently occurs, when the mouth begins to be
affected, after having used mercury.
A bottle of porter was allowed him; -- and the wine was continued. The powders
and draughts were repeated. -- 9th, he remained nearly in the same state; but
complained of a severe cough. He had two stools. All his medicines were
continued as the day before. -- 10th, he had no cough, and rested well; his
pulse was 112; he had no stool; two ounces of infusion of senna were ordered to
be taken every hour through the day, and the draughts to be repeated at night.
-- 11th, his pulse was 116, tongue very foul, and mouth parched; he had slept
but little; and had no stool since the 9th. -- A glyster, with two ounces of
castor oil, and two ounces of Glauber's salts, was ordered to be given
immediately, and to be repeated according to circumstances. The powders were
given as before. -- 7 o'clock, P. M. his pulse was only 100; tongue cleaner,
and moist. -- He had one stool after having taken two glysters. He remarked
that he had, for the first time, a distinct paroxysm of fever in the afternoon.
The draughts were given as usual. -- 12th, his pulse was 92, and his skin
nearly of a healthy temperature; his tongue remained a little furred; he had no
stool. The glysters, powders, and draughts, were directed to be given in the
same manner as the day before. -- 13th, when I visited him, he was sound
asleep, seemed easy, and his skin cool. The medicines were ordered to be
continued. -- 7 o'clock P. M. his pulse was 76; skin moist and cool; he had two
stools, and was inclined to sleep. The draughts were continued. -- 14th, he was
not so well as the day before; his pulse was 96 in the morning, and 92 in the
evening, and his tongue rather foul. The medicines were continued. On the 15th,
his skin, tongue, and pulse, approached nearly to the healthy standard. He
expressed a desire to eat, and was ordered to have chicken broth. The powders
and draughts were continued. On the 16th, he had no feverish symptom, his
tongue was sore at the edges, and there was an increased flow of saliva. The
powders were omitted, and the draughts contied. From that period, he was
convalescent, and only took one draught occasionally at night. On the 23d, he
was free from complaint, and discharged from the Hospital. -- During the whole
of the time, he was allowed wine and porter, as at first prescribed.

THIS case is not given as an uncommon one, either in respect to the violence
of the disease, or the quantity of medicines that were prescribed. The history
of it shows, that the sum of stimulant power first applied, was inadequate to
effect a cure, even in a case of slight disease; for the symptoms by no means
approached to the severity of typhus gravior. In every fever, whatever be its
nosological description, the same plan would have been pursued, increasing or
diminishing the force of the exciting powers, in proportion to the degree of
indirect debility. If such a quantity, as was used here, be necessary for the
cure of mild typhus, what powerful stimuli must often be required in typhus
gravior, dysentery, or plague?

THE intervals, I think, at which the medicines were repeated, are too long.
The duration of the action of each dose of mercury or jallap is not, perhaps
near so much as four hours -- probably not more than one. But whatever it be,
such is the period exactly, at which doses ought to be repeated.

IN this, as well as in many cases, both of dysentery and fever, I have given
castor oil, jallap, and other cathartics, with a view simply to increase the
excitement. In so far as they effect that, and thereby invigorate the functions
of life, they are proportionally as useful as opium, ether, mercury, brandy,
wine, or bark. But the purging I conceive to be proportionally as injurious a
consequence, and as much a mark of indirect debility, as the headache, sickness,
and vomiting, which follow an excessive or irregular use of these substances.
This subject is considered at greater length elsewhere.

CASE VII.
JOHN BROWN, aged 28, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta, on
the 10th of July, 1796, with typhus fever -- He had besides a sore leg, and
chancres. His fever, although apparently slight, was very obstinate. In the
course of two months, he was several times almost cured, by small and
frequently repeated quantities of opium, mercury, wine, and bark, varied
according to circumstances. But, seemingly in consequence of internal local
affection, he as often relapsed, without any apparent cause. His fever, from
continued became remittent, and from remittent intermittent. On the 24th of
September, suspecting the existence of local disease, I represented to him the
necessity of undergoing such a course of mercury as to affect his mouth, to
which he had hitherto expressed an insuperable aversion. He had, for some days
previously, taken calomel in small doses; and had latterly two emetics, at his
own request. That tartar emetic is a stimulant of very high power is evident,
from the small quantity of it, which produces the state of indirect debility,
that occasions vomiting. It should be given in such a manner, as to increase
and to support the excitement. But this will be found difficult, as the
duration of its action seems to be even shorter than that of opium. If its
action does not continue more than a quarter of an hour, might it not be
repeated at such short intervals, and the doses so gradually reduced, as not to
allow the establishment of indirect debility? If, when given at such a random
rate, as to produce vomiting, and the most disagreeable sensations that can be
imagined, medicines sometimes produce good effects, how much more useful must
they be, when given according to just principles? The prejudices of patients
may sometimes be turned to their advantage, by judiciously alternating stimuli,
so as to humor their whims. The medical prejudices of the vulgar, are
generally dictated by those of physicians. At present they are as unreasonably
in favor of tartar emetic, as they are against opium.
On that day, he was ordered to take ten grains of calomel, and fifteen grains
of jallap every four hours. -- 25th, he had taken three powders in the course
of the day, and was excessively purged and griped through the night This is one
of many facts that prove purging to be the effect of a state of indirect
debility, occasioned by the improper subduction of stimulant powers. Had the
powders been regularly repeated in the night, the purging and griping would not
have taken place. This I have observed so repeatedly with respect to calomel,
that I have no hesitation in asserting it to be an undoubted fact.
. He had no fever. Two grains of opium, and four grains of calomel were
directed to be taken every three hours, through the day, and four grains of
each at bed time. -- 26th, the same plan was continued; and he had no return of
fever. -- 27th, he had no fever, and his mouth was very sore. The pills were
ordered to be given every six hours. -- 28th, his head, face, tongue and
throat, were much swelled; he had a considerable discharge of blood from the
mouth and fauces, and some purging. In this case, the medicines were by no
means correctly exhibited. But it is probable also, that they were not
regularly taken. Salivation, or, in cases of local disease, where salivation
cannot be produced, a discharge of blood from the mouth and fauces, does not
take place, while the mercury is regularly taken, but when it is either
suddenly laid aside, or given at improper intervals. Vide the subsequent cases,
and the "Treatise on Mercury."
The following mixture was prescribed -- tincture of opium three hundred drops
-- water one pint -- peppermint-water and sugar, as much as will make the
mixture agreeable -- an ounce of it to be taken every hour. The pills were
omitted. On the 29th and 30th, he continued the mixture; his mouth was better;
he had no fever, and but little purging; and his pulse was 86. -- October the
1st, his pulse was 76, and of good strength; his mouth was much better; and he
had no return of fever. The tincture of opium was diminished to two hundred
drops. -- From that period, he recovered strength, and had no return of fever.
The mixture was gradually decreased in strength and discontinued. On the 16th
of October, he was discharged, apparently well.

THERE are several inferences to be drawn from this case. The obstinacy of the
fever convinced me, that it depended upon local disease, and determined me to
give mercury in large doses. The discharge of blood from the mouth and fauces,
without a previous increased flow of saliva, was an additional proof of the
existence of internal local affection. And, although this patient left the
Hospital apparently well, I am convinced, from the circumstances mentioned, as
well as from an irregularity of his bowels, that his abdominal viscera were in
a diseased state, and that his exemption from general disease was merely
temporary. From these observations, I would not be understood to infer, that
mercury acts as a specific in removing local disease; but that, by supporting
the exeitement of the whole body, it invigorates each particular part, and thus
occasions, to a certain extent, the regeneration of those organs, which may
have been injured by disease.

THIS is not the only instance, in which the good effects of opium have been
experienced, where an excessive salivation, or a discharge of blood from the
fauces, after the use of mercury, had taken place. As these symptoms happen
from too sudden a subduction, or an irregular repetition of the mercury; so
they may be either obviated or removed, by a proper application of the same
power. But as the prejudices of patients will seldom admit of a continuance of
the medicine, in these cases, it is absolutely necessary to substitute some
other stimulant power, equivalent in force. Those which I have found to answer
best, are opium blisters, and the warm bath. Other stimuli, justly
proportioned, might no doubt answer equally well. But from the endless
hypotheses of the art, no successful attempts have yet been made to ascertain
their relative powers. This is a discovery, which, however distant, I am yet
sanguine enough to expect. For, in the medical as in the moral world,
attachment to principles instead of persons, may be expected to increase, with
the progress of knowledge.

CASE VIII.
HENRY DOLLAWAL, aged 26, was admitted into the General Hospital, on the
evening of the 22d of October, 1796. He had, for a fortnight before, complained
of headache, pain of loins, hoarseness, and cough, etc. pulse 58. He was ordered
to take two grains of opium and four grains of calomel, at 9 o'clock, P. M. and
again at twelve. -- on the 23d, he was somewhat easier. Pulse as before. He had
no stool. One grain of opium and three grains of calomel, were given every
three hours; and several glysters of castor oil. -- 9 o'clock P. M. he had one
stool. The opium and calomel were desired to be repeated as the night before.
Pulse 64. -- 24th, he thought himself better; but his cough continued severe.
Pulse 56. He was desired to take four grains of colomel every three hours. -- 9
o'clock P. M. he was not sensible that the pills produced any effect. Four
grains of opium and ten grains of calomel were ordered to be taken immediately,
and repeated at 12 o'clock. -- 25th, he was seized in the morning with violent
spasms. Pulse 64. He was put into the warm bath, which was ordered to be
repeated according to circumstances. Afterward, two grains of opium and four
grains of calomel were directed to be taken every two hours, day and night. --
26th, he was much better, and had no cough. The pills were continued. -- 27th,
he thought himself better. His pulse beat only 44 strokes in the minute. The
pills were repeated every three hours. -- 28th, his mouth was gently affected.
Two grains of opium and two grains of calomel were given every three hours. --
29th, he was in every respect better, had some slight spitting, and felt a
returning appetite. Pulse 68. -- One grain of opium and one grain of calomel
were given every four hours. -- On the 30th, he was discharged well.

AN uncommonly flushed countenance, and what is called a plethoric habit,
together with an unusual slowness of pulse, hoarseness, cough, and pains, would
have indicated, according to the common practice, blood-letting and other
evacuations, in this case. The powers, however, by which a cure was effected,
proved, that these symptoms depended upon a state of indirect debility; and
that the use of debilitating powers, would have been improper. For the same
reason, it may be inferred, that a peculiar slowness, as well as a quickness of
the pulse, sometimes takes place in a state of indirect debility. Every
departure of the pulse from the healthy standard, whether in quickness or
slowness, depends upon debility; as well as every deviation from health, in any
of the other functions. Costiveness, as well as purging, depends upon debility
of the intestinal canal. This is shown from patients affected with the same
disease having, in some cases a quickness, in others, a slowness of pulse; in
some cases purging, in others costiveness; and all of them being cured by the
same means. It is farther corroborated by the proof, that such a state as that
of excessive excitement, cannot take place. As blood-letting is the abstraction
of a high stimulant power, it must be shown that diseases of evcessive
excitement exist, before it can be admitted as a remedy. Or if it be contended
that blood-letting is useful in diseases of debility, it must be shown that it
acts as a stimulant power. Mere assertions that it has been found useful, do
not amount to a sufficient refutation of this reasoning.

THERE was an error of some importance in the treatment of this case, which
affords the most convincing proof of the necessity of repeating the doses of
medicines, at certain regular intervals, and by a certain rule. -- On the
morning of the 25th, -- after having taken four grains of opium and ten grains
of calomel, at nine and at twelve o'clock, the preceding night, the patient was
seized with violent griping and spasms. This symptom, as I have had frequent
opportunities of observing, was undoubtedly owing to the doses not having been
repeated at proper intervals. If a dose of equal strength, or one somewhat
smaller, had been given at three, and another still smaller, at six o'clock in
the morning, the state of indirect debility, constituting spasm, would not have
taken place. As these symptoms may be occasioned, or prevented, at pleasure,
the fact is incontrovertible. In this case, they immediately yielded to the
stimulant power of the warm bath, -- another proof that they arose from a state
of indirect debility, occasioned by a deficient frequency or force, in the
application of stimulant powers. Opium, calomel, camphor, ether, or castor
oil, given in just proportions, would have produced the same effect with the
warm bath. But external applications may often, with great advantage and
convenience, be alternated, or conjoined, with internal remedies.

CASE IX.
ROBERT WILLIAMSON, aged 25, was admitted into the General Hospital, at
Calcutta, on the 28th of October, with a quick and small pulse, laborious
breathing, pain of back, loins, etc. His face was turgid; and his eyes red and
starting. His tongue was foul and furred. He reported that he was attacked with
fever, seven or eight days before, which had become more severe and continued
for the last two days. Some medicines had been taken before he came into the
Hospital. -- At 3 o'clock P. M. when I first saw him, ten grains of calomel
were ordered to be taken every three hours. At 10 P. M. his pulse was 112, and
his breathing exceedingly laborious. A scruple of calomel was ordered to be
given immediately, and to be repeated at one o'clock, A. M. A blister was
applied to his sternum. On the 29th of October, his pulse was 120, with burning
heat of skin. His tongue felt like a rough board. He had one small stool in the
morning. Ten grains of calomel were ordered to be repeated every three hours.
-- At 9 o'clock P. M. his pulse was 124. He had one stool In this case the
medicine seemed to produce but a very small effect. If to supply the waste of
the excitability be the proper function of the lungs, it is evident that, after
a certain degree of organic lesion has taken place, it cannot be recruited. But
stimuli are not therefore to be withheld. For, by such a treatment, the
excitability must be still farther exhausted.
; his breathing was laborious, his eyes starting, and he seemed in all other
respects worse. Three grains of opium and twelve grains of calomel were desired
to be given immediately, and repeated at twelve o'clock. October the 30th, he
died at 4 o'clock, A. M.

UPON dissection, the thoracic viscera were found adhering to each other, in
such a manner as to form but one mass. The lungs adhered to the pleurae,
mediastinum, and diaphragm; the heart to the pericardium; and the pericardium
to all the surrounding parts. The adhesions were remarkably strong as well as
general. The lungs were of a darker blue than usual. Upon a general view of the
abdominial viscera, they appeared to be sound. The scrotum was gangrenous. In
one of the arms, there was the mark of a recent incision, made by a lancet.

THIS was undoubtedly a case of the most violent peripneumony. According to the
common practice, the patient would have been repeatedly bled. Would the
abstraction of blood have produced a resolution of the adhesions, which were
found in the thorax? The greatest partizan of the practice, I think, would
scarcely affirm it. According to the confused notions entertained of
peripneumony being a disease of excessive excitement, it becomes necessary, in
order to preserve some appearance of consistency, to divide the disease into
different stages; and to use a different or even an opposite plan of treatment,
in each. Is it possible that any disease can vary in its progress, excepting in
degree? And if not, ought the powers applied for the cure to be varied, in the
progress of any disease, excepting in their degree of force? These would appear
to be the conclusions of reason and common sense. But to overturn such flimsy
arguments, come in medical hypotheses and say inflammation we suppose arises
from an increased impetus of the blood in the part affected, and is therefore
to be cured by diminishing the quantity of that blood. In peripneumony, there
is an inflammation of the lungs; and in order to cure the disease, the impetus
of the blood in the lungs must be lessened by blood-letting. To this curious
fabric of "reasoning, I will just oppose a single fact. -- There is not an
inflammation, with which we are acquainted, that is not to be cured (as far as
it is curable) by the application of stimulant powers, -- as warm fomentations,
tincture of opium, tincture of cantharides, camphorated spirits, ether,
volatile alkali, and mercury. If any person seriously doubts the fact, it will
be an easy matter to submit it to the test of experiment. -- And if there be
any other reason, for persevering in the practice of blood-letting, than
because it is derived from the hypotheses of the schools, and is conformable to
custom, let it be produced. That blood-letting had been used, in this case,
previous to the patient's having been sent into the hospital, appears probable
from the incision in the arm: -- that he was purged is known. As catharticks,
however, produce an increased degree of excitement, before the debilitating
operation of purging succeeds, their stimulant effects will often more than
counterbalance the indirectly debilitating effects, which afterward arise. But
as blood-letting is a directly debilitating operation, -- the abstraction of an
ordinary and powerful stimulus, -- it must always be highly injurious. In
diseases of direct debility, as far as they can become subjects of medical
treatment, it must add to the accumulation; in those of indirect debility, it
must increase the exhaustion ( Vide, "View of the Science of Life," Prop. XXVI.
). It is upon the supposition alone that some diseases depend upon a state of
excessive excitement, that blood-letting can ever be thought admissible. And
that such a state does not exist has, in my opinion been fully proved. I know
it will be urged, by individuals, that they have found blood-letting useful.
But this, like many other medical facts, is mere assertion, not proof. Whatever
has been useful in one case, must be useful in every similar case of disease.
But it is not so with blood-letting. -- It has not invariably been found useful
in any one disease. We may therefore, I think, fairly conclude, that it has
never been useful in any one case of disease. If it be said that this is
reasoning, and that experience; let me be permitted to ask whether just
reasoning and real experience can ever differ? It is impossible. -- Whatever is
true in theory, must be right in practice. To inculcate a contrary opinion is
the grand shield of empiricism. Circumstances delivered as facts, from the
presumed experience of individuals, ought never to weigh against principles,
which are deduced from numerous and undoubted facts, and which can be put to
the test of experiment by all mankind.

THE quantity of calomel given here was large. But after taking two scruples at
two doses, and allowing time for the operation of purging from indirect
debility to take place, only one scanty stool was produced. This shows clearly,
that, although the quantity was large, in proportion to what is usually given,
it was by no means sufficiently large in proportion to the exhaustion of
excitability that had taken place; or, in other words, to the violence of the
disease. Although it be extremely doubtful whether the excitability can ever be
accumulated to the healthy standard, by any degree of stimulant power, when so
many principal organs have become unable to perform their functions; yet it is
certain that, in order to give a patient, in such cirumstances, the only chance
of cure, the stimuli should be increased in power, until they produce some
effect. In this case, therefore, the medicines should have been both increased
in quantity, and more frequently repeated. But as, in every kind of practice,
the prejudices of patients, or carelessness of attendants, will frequently
render it impossible strictly to adhere to the application of principles, we
can only make such an approach to them, as these, and other circumstances, will
permit.

HAD it not been my wish to bring the theory and practice of this doctrine to
the fullest and fairest proof of discussion and experiment, this is one of
those cases which I would have suppressed. It is to be regretted that writers
do not oftener think it necessary to publish their unsuccessful, as well as
their successful cases.

CASE X.
ROBERT WOODSIDE, aged 25, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta,
on the 24th of October, with a dysentery of a fortnights standing. He had 10 or
12 stools in the day, with blood; and complained much of headache, pain of
loins, griping, and tenesmus. He lay easiest on his right side. His pulse was
108: and he had frequently a flush in both cheeks. I began by giving him small
doses of calomel, frequently repeated; frictions of mercurial ointment; and
draughts of 70 or 80 drops of tincture of opium, repeated according to
circumstances, through the night. In the course of a few days, the calomel was
increased to six grains, with two grains of opium, every two hours; an ounce
and a half of ointment was rubbed in at four times, in the course of the day;
and draughts, with two hundred drops of tincture of opium Some cases of
dysentery will require much more than this quantity. It is to be recollected
however, that the laudanum was weaker, perhaps one third, than what is commonly
used in Europe.
in each, were given, every second hour, during the night. The calomel was
occasionally alternated with camphor, and the tincture of opium with ether.
Blisters were applied, and glysters of castor oil frequently given. These
applications were made in concourse or succession; and increased or diminished
in strength, according to the judgment formed of the state of the excitement,
at the time. For a fortnight he seemed to get better; at one time, the purging
rather decreased, and he had no blood in his stools. But from his mouth not
being affected, so as to produce an increased flow of saliva, after having used
an uncommon quantity of mercury; from frequent sickness and vomiting; his
always lying on the right side; some degree of silliness and anxiety; an
occasional flush of the cheeks; and his having no appearance of getting better
upon the whole; I concluded, although there was no apparent enlargement, that
his liver was diseased. By disease of the liver is meant, that state in which
it is incapable of performing its functions, whether it consist in
inflammation, suppuration, induration, enlargement, etc.
The medicines, however, were continued, with a view of supporting the
excitement, with as much equality as possible. He continued nearly in the same
state as at first described, until the 14th of November, when his pulse (which
had varied throughout from 64 to 108, with intermissions occasionally)
increased in frequency to 120. His tongue became very dry and glossy. On the
15th, together with his other symptoms, he had a severe hiccup, and
intermission of the pulse after every 7th or 8th beat. On the 16th the hiccup
was severe and incessant; his pulse 116, and intermittent; he had no power in
his extremities -- and at ten o'clock P. M. he died.

IN tedious illness, patients naturally get disgusted with their medicines in
the course of some weeks, or their attendants become negligent. Although both
these circumstances happened, in some degree, in this case, the directions were
upon the whole observed with much punctuality. From the beginning a cure was
not expected. For in every similar case, of between twenty and thirty that were
opened by myself, and some by Dr. Yates, the appearances of local disease were
so much alike, that I can now almost venture to pronounce, from the symptoms,
in what state the viscera will be found, upon dissection. In this case, I was
so certain the liver was diseased, that it was mentioned in the daily report
some time before his death. Upon dissection, there were found several abscesses
in both lobes of the liver, communicating with each other, and containing, in
all, about one pound of matter, of a thick consistence and white color. On the
upper surface, there were five or six ulcers, communicating with the abscesses.
The edge of the right lobe, a part of the colon in contact with it, and part of
the diaphragm, at its origin from the cartilages of the ninth and tenth ribs,
were all sphacelated. The intestines, omentum, etc. were adhering throughout.

ARE flushed cheeks a symptom common to persons, whose viscera are diseased,
whether of the thorax or abdomen? I have frequently observed it in both.

CASE XI.
THOMAS KELLAN, aged 28, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta,
on the 2d of October, 1796, with dysentery of five weeks standing, accompanied
by pain in the region of the liver. He had the usual symptoms of griping,
tenesmus, and a discharge of blood; generally lay either upon his right side,
or in a sitting position; in the latter of which he found most ease. He was
frequently sick, and vomited. His tongue was white and furred; and his pulse
104. Four grains of calomel, and one grain of opium were given every hour. One
ounce of mercurial ointment, and half an ounce of calomel were rubbed in. On
the 4th, he was easier, and had slept well. His tongue and pulse remained as
before. The ointment was ordered to be rubbed in, morning and evening, and the
pills to be continued In the commencement of this case, two mistakes were made:
one in not giving draughts at night, and the other in not rubbing the ointment
at shorter intervals.
; he was allowed eight glasses of wine in the twenty four hours This quantity
was by far too little. In a case like this, a wine glassful every hour, would
not have been too much.
. -- Eight o'clock P. M. he had slept much during the day; pulse 120; he was in
other respects much as before. -- 5th, his pulse was 120, and he complained of
weakness. He had six or seven stools, without blood; and was much inclined to
dose. He complained of considerable pain, and burning sensations, in the region
of the liver. A blister was ordered to be applied; and two grains of opium,
with eight grains of calomel, to be given every hour. He was allowed twenty
glasses of wine in the twenty four hours. -- 6th, he had taken ten doses of the
opium and calomel. Was much vomited and purged, and had some degree of fever
during the night In consequence of the irregular exhibition of the pills. This
frequently happens, when pills are given in the day, and discontinued at night;
or where draughts are not given at night, in lieu of them.
; but was then better. Pulse 108. The pain in the region of the liver was
somewhat relieved. A pill of one grain of opium and four of calomel was ordered
to be taken every hour; a draught with one hundred and fifty drops of tincture
of opium, to be given at eight o'clock P. M.; and to be repeated at twelve. The
ointment was continued. -- 7th, he slept well, and had only two stools. Had
taken seven pills, and the draughts; pulse 100. The pills, ointment, and
draughts, were continued. -- 8th, he was considerably better; had five or six
stools. He had taken eleven pills, and the draughts. The pills, ointment, and
the draughts reduced to 100 drops, were continued. -- 9th, he had taken ten
pills, and one draught; had some stools yesterday, but none last night. Pulse
100: no sickness. The medicines were continued. -- 10th, having begun to get
indifferent about taking his medicines, they were varied, in order to humor
him. Instead of the pills, a mixture consisting of half an ounce of tincture of
opium, and one pint of water, was given, in divided portions, in the day. This
was again alternated with pills. Blisters were repeatedly applied, and the
draughts were continued; but the pain and burning sensations over all his
abdomen sickness and vomiting; frequency of stools with blood; smallness of the
pulse, etc. seemed to be rather increasing. On the 14th, the tincture of opium
in the mixture was increased to an ounce and a half, to one pound of water, of
which he was ordered to take an ounce every half hour; the ointment was
omitted, and the draughts continued. On the 15th, he said that he had been
easier the day before; but, having become irregular in taking his draughts, he
was frequently purged and griped at night. From that period till the 23d, the
opium and calomel, from two to four grains of the one, and from six to ten
grains of the other, were alternated with the mixture; the ointment was rubbed
occasionally; and the draughts, with from 60 to 100 drops of tincture of opium
were given at night, or 3 or 4 grains of opium, whichever he seemed inclined to
prefer. From the 23d of October, to the 18th of November, he appeared to be so
much better, that, although confident of the existence of much internal local
disease, I was not without hopes, that it was of such a degree as to admit of a
reproduction of parts. His pulse varied from 80 to 96. The doses of medicines
were considerably diminished. Camphor, four grains every two hours, was
alternated occasionally with the calomel and opium. Glysters, with one ounce of
castor oil, were sometimes given every hour, or every two hours; and two pounds
of decoction of bark, with an ounce of powder, was given in the day. The
ointment, and calomel pills were gradually diminished, to two drachms of the
former, four times in the day; and two grains of the latter, every two hours.
His sickness and vomiting still recurred. The burning sensations of the abdomen
continued. And he was sensible of a feverish exacerbation every third day. --
Nov. the 17th, the pills were omitted, and the other medicines continued. --
18th, he had not taken any of his medicines the day before. Complained of the
offensive smell of his breath. This was evidently occasioned by leaving off the
medicines. Being tired of all those to which he had been accustomed, I thought
it might be of use to try the effects of hepar sulphuris, to remove the
offensive smell of his breath, and prescribed one dram three times a day. The
other medicines (viz. decoction of bark, glysters, and draughts) were at the
same time, desired to be continued. -- 20th, he had frequent sickness, and
vomiting; much purging, and great thirst. No appetite; and a sense of burning
heat in his stomach and intestines. Common flowers of sulphur had been given,
instead of the hepor sulphuris. They were desired to be omitted. Two pounds of
decoction of bark, with half an ounce of ether, was given, in the course of
the day; and the draughts were repeated. -- 22d, his symptoms continued as
before. There was an evident enlargement of the right lobe of the liver; but no
perceptible undulation. From that period, he had two pounds of decoction of
bark, with two hundred drops of tincture of opium, in the day; the draughts
occasionally at night; calomel, castor oil, and other medicines were also
given, and alternated, so as to prevent, as much as possible, his being
disgusted with a sameness of treatment. But the symptoms were rather increasing
in violence. The purging became more severe, with blood in his stools; sickness
and vomiting more frequent; he complained much of heart-burn; and had sometimes
feverish paroxysms, which seemed to be of a quartan type. There was, from the
beginning, a flush in both cheeks, like those of a consumptive person. He
complained of insensibility of the back, and weakness of the extremities. From
all these circumstances, and from no increased flow of saliva having been
produced by the mercury, I concluded that there was such a degree of local
disease, as to render the case incurable, by any treatment that was possible,
in such a situation, to be pursued. It was, however, persisted in, with as much
regularity as was practicable. He continued gradually sinking, until the 2d of
December, when he died.

UPON dissection, the left lung was found adhering strongly to all the
neighboring parts. Its substance was unusually dry, hard, and yellow; and
appeared as if it had not, for some time, transmitted blood, or performed its
proper functions. The liver weighed about five pounds The average weight of a
sound liver, I believe, may be about three pounds and an half, or perhaps
somewhat more.
, was considerably indurated, but had undergone no suppuration. The other
abdominal viscera were adhering, in such a manner as to form but one mass; with
the exception of the spleen, which had a sound appearance. -- The coecum,
colon, and rectum, were ulcerated throughout their whole extent. The ulcers
were, in many places, an inch in diameter; and had penetrated the two inner
coats. It is somewhat remarkable that, in between thirty and forty cases of
dysentery which I have seen opened, there was not, in a single instance, any of
the scybala mentioned by authors, as a symptom of that disease.

THE uncommon quantity of mercury that was here used, without being followed by
any affection of the mouth, was a sufficient proof that there existed a lesion
of organs, which, if curable, required the application of still higher powers
than those that were employed. Even in external local affections, it is now
well known, that a cure depends more upon the support of the general
excitement, than upon local applications. The cure then, of internal local
disease, were it even possible to apply local remedies, must still be performed
by the application of powers, calculated to support the general excitement.

WE have yet, perhaps, no adequate idea of the degree of power, that may
sometimes be required, to produce this effect. But it is very certain that,
while in some cases by far too little, in others by far too much of stimulant
power is applied. Mercury, for instance, in cases of dysentery, is generally
used in too small proportions, while in venereal cases, it is by much too
freely given. Half a grain of calomel, or less, given every two or three hours,
will in a short time effect a cure in ordinary cases of chancre, gonorrhoea, or
even a certain degree of syphilis. In these cases, there is seldom any great
degree of organic lesion, at least of those organs which are most essential to
life. It is only when some of the primary organs are in a state of local
disease, that a great and long continued application, of high stimulant powers,
becomes necessary, in order to re-produce health. Of this, dysentery is one of
the most familiar and fatal examples.

The diminution of the medicines that was made at one period, upon the prospect
of the patient being better, was injudicious. Although, in such a case, no plan
would probably have succeeded, a perseverance in the regular application of
high exciting powers, would have given him one chance of recovery.

THE offensive state of his breath, of which he complained on the 18th of
November, was evidently occasioned by the subduction of the medicines. This is
a symptom of indirect debility, as well as salivation, purging, sweat, or any
other effect of an irregular application, or sudden subduction, of mercury.
That these effects are so frequently produced, by the ordinary mode of
exhibiting that medicine, ought not to surprise us. It is also obvious that if,
when given at random, this and other medicines of high stimulant power so
frequently produce good effects, their salutary effects, when applied according
to just principles, may be expected to surpass any thing, of which we can yet
form an idea.

CASE XII.
JOHN CLUFF, aged 30, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta, on
the 18th of November, 1796, with a dysentery of some days standing. He had
incessant calls to stool, passed blood, with severe griping, tenesmus, and
prolapsus any. His thirst was intense; and he seemed in dreadful agony, from
lancinating pains. Six grains of opium, and eight grains of calomel, were
ordered to be given every hour; a glyster, with three ounces of castor oil, and
three ounces of warm water every hour; and half an ounce of mercurial ointment
to be rubbed in, four times in the day. A bottle of Madeira, in two quarts of
barley water, was prescribed for drink. At twelve o'clock, A. M. he had taken
two of the pills, and seemed easier. In consequence of a consultation, the
pills were ordered to be omitted, and two ounces of the following mixture to be
given every half hour; -- viz. Sal. Cathart. Amar. ten drachms, Crem. Tart. two
drachms, Tart. Emetic two grains, water one pint. A draught, with one hundred
drops of tincture of opium, was ordered at eight o'clock, and another at
twelve. November the 19th, after having taken the mixture, he was both vomited
and purged. These operations continued occasionally during the night, and were
not entirely stopped by the draughts. His pulse was 92, tongue foul, and thirst
intense; he complained of great pain across the umbilical region; and passed
blood in his stools. The mixture was ordered to be repeated; the ointment and
glysters to be continued; warm fomentations to be used; and three draughts,
with one hundred and fifty drops of tincture of opium in each, were ordered to
be given at night, at intervals of three hours. November the 20th, he was much
better. His tongue, however, was foul. The glysters did not seem to produce
much effect. The mixture, ointment and draughts were ordered to be repeated;
and the glysters to be discontinued. -- 21st, having, on the evening of the
19th, taken his three draughts at once, in the course of yesterday, he became
rather confused; and was dissuaded, by one of his comrades, from taking the
draughts the night before as prescribed. He appeared much confused; but the
purging was less severe. The mixture, ointment, and draughts, with one hundred
drops in each, were desired to be repeated. 22d, he was again dissuaded, with
the best intentions however, from taking his draughts; in consequence of which
his confusion increased, and he ran about the ward, in a state of considerable
derangement, all night. I represented to his friend, who had withheld the
medicines through kindness, the danger of persevering in such conduct; and
entreated that he would exhibit the doses exactly as they were prescribed,
which he afterward punctually did. But in order to ensure a compliance, I
thought it best occasionally to vary the remedies, and to use such as should
fall in with the prejudices of the patient and his friend. Accordingly one
dram of jallap was immediately given. The warm bath was desired to be used
three times a day; and after the bath, two drachms of mercurial ointment to be
rubbed in each time. -- When the operation of purging should commence, after
the exhibition of the jallap, a pill, consisting of four grains of opium, and
six of calomel, was directed to be given every hour; and to be continued
through the night, in lieu of the draughts. -- 23d, in the course of the
preceding day and night, he had taken nine pills, consisting of four grains of
opium and six of calomel each. He slept well; had little purging; and was free
from pain. He only complained of weakness and thirst. The pills were reduced to
two grains of opium, and four grains of calomel, every two hours. The ointment
was continued; and the bath and glysters omitted. -- 24th, he was better. He
still passed some blood by stool, and had a difficulty in making water. He
complained that his mouth was sore. These symptoms I judged to have arisen,
either from the subduction of stimulus the day before having been two great, or
the patient having neglected to take the quantity that was prescribed. The
medicines were desired to be continued; and the patient was particularly
enjoined to take them regularly. -- 25th, his mouth was less sore, he had fewer
stools, and no blood in them; his skin was moist and his pulse 80. -- 26th,
pulse 88, and smaller. Purging and griping continued. By mistake, he had no
pills during the night. This fully accounted for the alteration since the day
before. He was ordered to have a quart of decoction of bark, with two hundred
drops of tincture of opium, to be taken in divided doses through the day. Two
drachms of mercurial ointment, and one dram of calomel, were rubbed in four
times in the day On the 26th and 27th there was an omission, in not prescribing
draughts or pills, sufficient to support the excitement in the night.
. On the 27th, he was rather better; the medicines were continued; on the 28th,
he was much the same; the decoction, with two hundred drops of tincture of
opium, was continued. -- He did not always take the whole of the decoction; but
generally more than two thirds of it. The ointment was diminished to one dram
four times in the day; and two draughts, with eighty drops of tincture of opium
in each, were ordered to be given in the night. -- 29th, he had taken the
draughts and slept well; had only one stool; pulse 84; -- tongue clean; he felt
some degree of oppression about the pit of the stomach; a blister was applied;
the ointment was omitted; the decoction of bark, with tincture of opium, was
ordered to be continued; and the draughts to be reduced to sixty drops. From
that period, he continued to get better. The stimuli were increased, or
diminished, according to circumstances; and on the 12th of December, he was
discharged without any complaint, excepting a little griping at times. At his
own request, he had a small phial of tincture of opium, and some pills, with
directions how to take them, if required, before he could join his ship at
Diamond Harbor.

WHEN, in consequence of consultations, as happened in this case, cathartics
were exhibited, I endeavored so to manage them, as regularly to support the
excitement; and to prevent, as far as possible, the state of indirect debility,
which constitutes vomiting and purging, by exhibiting other stimuli, on the
commencement of these operations. But this is generally very difficult to
accomplish, principally from the ideas, which patients traditionally imbibe, of
the utility of these operations.

ACCORDING to the hitherto uncertain state of the art, it is not surprising
that consultations, in which, to use the words of an elegant writer," learned
physicians neutralize their plans, Aikin's Letters to his Son.
" should seldom be productive of benefit to patients. They are too often scenes
of mutual complaisance, in which he, who has most to gain, sacrifices most of
his opinion. This has been a subject of much regret to sensible men of the
profession; and such scenes have consequently been avoided by many of them. It
is no mean proof of the truth of the medical principles, asserted in these
pages, that two persons, who thoroughly understand them, will differ, but in a
very small degree, in their application to practice. In this respect, I have
known a coincidence so perfect, that it could, in no other manner, be accounted
for. Their general adoption, then, would banish that vulgar adage, which, at
present, not undeservedly attaches a degree of ridicule to the cultivators of
the healing art, "doctors differ."

IN the report of the 24th of November, it is observed, that the patient had a
difficulty in making water, and a soreness of the mouth, which were judged to
have arisen, either from the subduction of stimulus, on the 23d, having been
too great, or his having neglected to use the quantity prescribed. This is not
hypothesis; but a clear induction of facts. It is certain, that a difficulty of
making water, is a symptom that arises from a state of indirect debility,
whether that succeeds the exhibition of cantharides, opium, or any other
stimulant power. It is also true, that it may be cured by opium, the warm bath,
or cantharides. The general mode of applying blisters is such, as often to
induce that state; and is therefore improper. Blisters of a small size,
frequently repeated, will produce a regular excitement, like successive
frictions of mercurial ointment. But they ought not to lay on the skin ten or
twelve hours; nor so long as to be succeeded by vesication, which is a state of
indirect debility. Neither is it necessary that ^hey should be applied, in
preference, to any particular spot. For, although they make the first, and a
somewhat greater impression, upon the part, with which they come immediately in
contact; yet, to whatever part of the body they are applied, their action will
extend to every other. The action of stimuli upon the excitability, may be
compared to an electric shock, which, seemingly at the same instant of time,
affects every person in company, -- the nearest and the most distant from the
phial. When the modus operandi of the one is ascertained, we may expect to
ascertain the modus operandi of the other.

IN the preceding, as well as in many other cases, medicines were often
exhibited improperly; sometimes from omissions in prescribing, sometimes from
negligence or mistakes of attendants, and sometimes from the prejudices of the
patient.

WITH any number of patients, there cannot be much difficulty in prescribing,
according to the old plan of practice, which consists in giving certain fixed
doses of medicines, in every disease, whatever be its degree. But justly to
proportion the application of stimulant powers, to the exhaustion of the
excitability of each patient, requires more exertion of judgment and
consideration, on the part of the practitioner, and a stricter conformity with
directions, on the part of the patient, and of the attendants. It is evident
then that, in an hospital, it requires an unusual degree of exertion to apply
these principles to practice, in from thirty to forty bad cases of disease,
daily. But it is their introduction only that is difficult. Once generally
admitted, their application would be attended with as much facility, and
certainly with more pleasure, because with more success, than any routine of
empiricism.

CASE XIII.
ISAAC HUDSON, aged 30, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta, on
the 31st of October, 1796, with the following symptoms: Pulse 132, and small.
He had for some time feverish paroxysms, at 11 o'clock, A. M. and 11 P. M.
which continued between two and three hours. Tongue foul; skin hot; his bowels
were quite irregular, sometimes extremely loose, at other times excessively
costive. He had a cough, with hoarseness; and pains of the bones and joints.
Together with these complaints, he had chancres of a fortnight's standing. --
One grain of opium and one grain of calomel were prescribed every hour; and two
drachms of mercurial ointment were ordered to be rubbed in, three times in the
day. November the 1st, pulse 96. The fever and purging continued. His pains
were rather less severe. His tongue was very white. Ten grains of calomel were
given every three hours. On the 2d, his pulse was 92. He had taken four doses
of the calomel. His tongue was less soul. Eight grains of calomel were ordered
every three hours, day and night. -- 3d, pulse 88; he had taken eight doses of
the calomel. He had a sore throat and hoarseness, with an incipient spitting.
The calomel was omitted, because it was deemed highly probable that he would
not have taken it, if prescribed. Three grains of opium were given every hour.
And three drachms of ointment were ordered to be rubbed in, three or four times
in the day. -- 4th, his mouth and throat were very sore, and he spit some
blood; from whence it was concluded, that he had omitted to take his medicines,
or that he had used them in an irregular manner. A blister was applied to one
of his cheeks; two grains of opium were given every two hours; and a glyster,
with one ounce of castor oil, was ordered every two hours. He was allowed four
glasses of wine in the day. On the 5th, his mouth became very sore, and there
was some increased flow of saliva. A blister was applied to the other cheek;
the pills and glysters were continued; and he was allowed six glasses of wine.
-- 6th, his mouth became exceedingly sore, and his face more swelled. He had no
stool; a blister Among patients, upon whose veracity there is not much
dependence, I prefer in these cases, the use of blisters, upon this principle,
that they cannot deceive.
was applied to his breast. The pills were ordered to be continued, and a
glyster, with two ounces of castor oil, to be given every second hour. -- 7th,
he was much in the same state; the medicines were ordered to be contined. On
the 8th, he had some difficulty of breathing, his pulse was exceedingly small,
and he had fainting fits. Upon enquiry, it was found that he had lately
neglected to take the medicines, which he himself confessed. In order to ensure
compliance in this respect, a change was made in the medicines. He was put into
the warm bath three times in the day. The glysters were continued. And he had
three draughts, with one hundred drops of tincture of opium in each, at regular
intervals in the night. 9th, he was better; his pulse was 108 and stronger.
Cough less severe; and swelling of the face abated. The bath, and glysters were
ordered to be repeated; and a draught, with forty drops of tincture of opium,
to be given every hour. -- 10th, he was much in the same state; the medicines
were continued. -- 11th, his breath was very foetid, and tongue much swelled;
which evinced that he had been irregular in taking his medicines. A blister was
applied to his neck, and the other medicines were continued -- 12th, he was
rather better; the medicines were continued; and two drachms of ointment were
ordered to be rubbed in, twice a day. This was too seldom. Wherever mercurial
frictions are necessary, they ought to be used at least four times in the day:
and it would also be attended with advantage to repeat them at night,
-- 14th, his mouth continued very sore, and he complained of weakness; one
dram of ointment was rubbed in three times in the day, and the other
medicines continued. -- 15th, he seemed better, but complained of weakness;
some blood was discharged from his mouth and fauces; he did not permit the
ointment to be rubbed in, the day before. The ointment and glysters were
continued; and he was enjoined to use his medicines regularly. The following
mixture was given, -- decoction of bark two poun^s, powder of bark one ounce,
tincture of opium one hundred and fifty drops; the whole of it was ordered to
be taken, in divided portions, in the day. The draughts were continued as
before. From that period, he got gradually better. His mouth became more or
less sore, in the exact proportion of the regularity, with which he took his
medicines. By that symptom, I could detect his irregularites. He continued, for
some time, subject to purging, and slight paroxysms of fever occasionally. But,
by a perseverance in the same plan of treatment, diminution of the medicines,
he remained, on the 13th of December, free from complaint, excepting a slight
soreness of the mouth. And on the 14th, when I discontinued attending him, he
was in an advanced state of convalescence.

THIS is one of those cases, which show that soreness of the mouth, and
salivation, do not arise from the action of mercury, when regularly applied,
and gradually decreased; but that these, and other symptoms of indirect
debility, arise in consequence of its irregular application, or sudden
subduction. This patient, like many others, was so sensible of the truth of the
above observation that, after there was a necessity for using the warm bath, he
took his medicines with much regularity, until he became convalescent. He was,
from repeated experience, convinced that the soreness of his mouth increased,
upon the subduction of the mercury, opium, or warm bath.

FROM the beginning, I was doubtful of a recovery. For, a small and quick
pulse, hoarseness and difficulty of breathing, and the very irregular state of
his bowels, indicated that some degree of local affection, both of the thoracic
and abdominal viscera, had taken place. From the issue, however, it appeared
that they were of such a degree, as to admit of a regeneration of organs.

CASE XIV.
ABRAHAM JACKSON, aged 23, was admitted into the General Hospital, at Calcutta,
on the 15th of November, 1796, with dysentery of a few days standing. -- 16th,
he had four doses, consisting of ten grains of calomel each, through the night.
Pulse 100; tongue white; skin hot. There was a considerable quantity of blood
in his stools. Ten grains of calomel and four grains of opium, were ordered to
be given every three hours; and a glyster, with two ounces of castor oil, every
two hours. On the 17th, he was rather easier; but had been much griped through
the night. Griping, purging, and restlessness, are frequently produced under a
course of opium, or mercury, in consequence of the doses not being properly
repeated through the night.
The glysters gave him ease. The pills were intended to have been continued
through the night; but as it was not particularly expressed in the report, they
were not given. -- The pills were omitted; a glyster was given every hour; and
common infusion of senna, with two grains of tartar emetic, in small doses,
frequently repeated through the day. Draughts, with eighty drops of tincture of
opium, were desired to ^e given at bed time; and to be repeated, according to
circumstances, through the night. -- 18th, he was rather better. One grain of
opium and four grains of calomel were given every second hour. Two drachms of
mercurial ointment were orde^^^ ^o be rubbed in, four times in the day. The
glys^^^s and draughts were continued. -- 19th, he had taken only one draught;
and his head became confused toward morning It cannot be too often insisted
on, that this symptom arises from medicines not being properly repeated. It is
what frequently happens, in the ordinary way of exhibiting opium; and for which
the medicine itself is by no means to blame.
. He was much griped. Pulse 80. The draughts were omitted, from a conviction
that he would not take them. The other medicines were continued; and warm
fomentations applied to the abdomen. -- 20th, he had not slept well, and was
much purged and griped. The pills were omitted; and a solution with ten drachms
of salcatharticus amarus, and two grains of tartar emetic, was given, in small
doses, through the day. -- 21st, from this period, he had a quart of decoction
of bark, with one hundred drops of tincture of opium, daily; one dram of
mercurial ointment was rubbed in, four times in the day; and three draughts,
with sixty drops of tincture of opium in each, were given at intervals during
the night. He continued to get better. On the 28th, he was so well, as to ask
leave to go to town. -- 29th, having committed excesses the day before, he had
pains and other feverish symptoms. His pulse was above 100. He was ordered to
have a mixture of sal cat^articus amarus; and the draughts were repeated. 30th,
he had a severe paroxism of fever in the night, and perspired profusely. Pulse
100. Two grains of opium and six grains of calomel, were given every second
hour. Two drachms of mercurial ointment were directed to be rubbed in, every
three hours It was a great omission, at this time, not to have given draughts,
or pills, through the night.
. December the 1st, he perspired profusely, and had a paroxysm of fever in the
night. Pulse 100. Three drachms of ointment, with one dram of calomel, were
ordered to be rubbed in, four times in the day. The pills were continued. And
three draughts, with 60 drops of tincture of opium in each, were ordered to be
given, in the course of the night. -- 2d, he was worse. His pulse was 112; he
had a paroxysm of fever, and some purging in the night. The ointment was
continued. A pill, with four grains of opium and eight grains of calomel, was
given every second hour in the day; and three draughts, with eighty drops of
tincture of opium in each, in the night. On the 3d, he was better. Pulse only
100. On the 4th, his pulse was 96, and his mouth a little sore. 4th, 5th, and
6th, his medicines were continued; he was better; and had no fever. On the 7th,
having discontinued his medicines the day before, his mouth became very sore,
and an increased flow of saliva commenced. The pills were ordered to be reduced
to six grains of calomel, and three grains of opium; the draughts to be
repeated; and the ointment to be omitted. But as I had no reliance on his
taking the pills regularly, a quart of decoction of bark, with a hundred drops
of tincture of opium, was ordered to be taken in the day, to prevent his mouth
from becoming excessively sore. -- 8th, did not take the pills on account, as
he said, of his having some difficulty in swallowing them; but took the
decoction and draughts; pulse 100; his mouth continued sore, and the flow of
saliva increased. Three drachms of mercurial ointment were ordered to be rubbed
in, four times in the day; and he was informed that, if he did not allow it to
be regularly applied, his mouth would become much sorer. The decoction and
draughts were continued; and the pills omitted. -- 9th, he spit freely; and
seemed much better. The decoction and draughts were continued; and the ointment
omitted. From that period, he was convalescent. And on the 14th of December,
when I discontinued attending him, he had no complaint, excepting the soreness
of his mouth; which, however, was rapidly decreasing.

WHEN the medicines were increased to a due degree, as on the 3d of December,
the patient speedily got better; and had he continued to take them with
regularity throughout, he would have got well much sooner. He had however taken
a sufficient quantity, to be succeeded by an increased flow of saliva. And
after that symptom occurred, he was considered as out of danger.

IN the foregoing cases, in general, the state of the pulse has been noted with
some care. The pulse in all its degrees of quickness, slowness, weakness,
irregularity, and intermission, may be considered as a kind of thermometer, by
which, together with the state of other functions, some judgment may be formed
of the state of the excitement. A deviation from health in the state of the
pulse, is one of the most constant symptoms of indirect debility. But the
surest criterion yet known, by which to estimate the degree of exhaustion, is
the effect produced, by the stimulant powers, applied for the cure.

WHEN the effects of the mercurial ointment were not deemed sufficiently
powerful, calomel was added. The ointment used was the strongest; but the
quicksilver was not always sufficiently triturated. It is almost unnecessary
to observe that, in dangerous cases, mercury may at the same time be used, both
internally and externally, with advantage.

THE explanations annexed to the cases will, perhaps, appear unnecessarily
copious; and, in some parts mere repetitions. But that was deemed the most
familiar, and therefore, in some respects, the best mode of illustrating the
subject. Examples will often place inferences in a clear point of view, when
they might not be obvious from general reasoning.

POSTSCRIPT.
By C. MACLEAN.
THE preceding cases, it will be observed, are not particularly selected from
such as terminated happily. Those only that were deemed most instructive, in
illustrating particular points, have been chosen. Many more of equal importance
might have been added; but the publication would thus have become too
voluminous. None of them are offered, as approaching to perfect examples; but
merely as conveying a general idea of the mode, in which, according to our
opinion, the principles of the doctrine should be applied to practice.

ALTHOUGH opium and mercury are the medicines, upon which we have placed most
dependence, in diseases of high degree, as being more intimately acquainted
with their powers; it is conceived that the doctrine, properly understood,
embraces the whole range of the Materia Medica. It does not admit, indeed, of
any other effect being produced, by the application of any power in nature, to
living bodies, than an increase or diminution of the vigor, with which they
perform their proper functions; i. e. an increase or diminution of their
excitement. With a view to the excitement solely is every medicine whatever
prescribed. And when the means employed are unsuccessful, the failure should be
attributed to a want of judgment in their application, rather than to any error
in the principles themselves.

IT ought not to be overlooked that, in most of the foregoing examples, the
diseases were those of the greatest exhaustion, occurring among a set of men
(soldiers, mariners, etc.) possessing robust constitutions, and accustomed to
the application of high degrees of stimulant power. In diseases of warm
climates, in general, the exhaustion is much greater than in those of cold
climates. Perhaps too, in the former, the medicines lose much of their
strength, before they come into use. So that a material difference will be
required in the practice. Another caution that deserves to be attended to, in
all countries, is to guard against the application of cold, during the
operation of high exciting powers. For, when the smallest degree of indirect
debility happens to take place, from irregularity in the application of these
powers, the application of cold, or, to speak more correctly, the subduction of
heat, will increase the exhaustion, and add to the force of the disease.

THE strenuous and authoritative manner, in which this doctrine has always been
opposed, renders a knowledge of its application to practice difficult to be
obtained, even by those who thoroughly understand its principles. The laws of
mechanics may be perfectly well understood. But if a body of artificers, who
had from time, immemorial conducted the operative part, in total ignorance of
those laws, were unanimously to declare, that the principals might indeed be
both ingenious and just, for aught they knew, but that they were dangerous in
their application to practice, it is certain that the public would for a time,
be deceived by the representations of these workmen; and the principles of
mechanics, however just or applicable, could not generally be reduced to
practice, until the deception ceased. Moral truths may be perfectly well
understood by a few; but the ignorance, prejudices, and passions of a great
majority of the human race, will long retard their complete application to
practice. Medical truths however have only to combat the prejudices and
interests of a particular, and but a small body of men. It may therefore be
permitted to hope, that their application to practi^^, cannot be much longer
delayed.

THOSE who have admired, and those who have opposed the new medical principles,
without being masters of the subject, must have been equally unsuccessful, in
their attempts to apply them to practice. By every succeeding case of failure,
the admiration of the one would be diminished, the opposition of the other
confirmed. The objection, therefore, is very just, that attempts to apply the
principles of the Brunonian Doctrine to practice, may be dangerous, in ignorant
hands. In other words, men cannot apply to practice principles, which they do
not understand. -- Let us suppose a person, wholly unacquainted with the laws
of living bodies, applying powers to them; how can he be expected to produce a
given effect? Overlooking the immense variety of degrees, between the state of
health, and the highest state of exhaustion, he would probably prescribe one
grain of a solid medicine, when he should have prescribed twenty; or twenty,
when he should have prescribed but one; he would give twenty drops of a fluid,
when he should have given two hundred; or two hundred, when he should have
given but twenty. He would repeat the medicine but once or twice in the
twenty-four hours, instead of every hour, or every half hour, according to the
duration of its action. He would use the strongest powers, instead of the
weakest; and the weakest instead of the strongest. He would not make any
distinction between the delicate female, and the robust male frame; between
childhood and youth, and youth and old age; between recent and long standing
diseases. He would not even know how to make allowances for inveterate habits.
In such hands, no success could be expected, any more than from a mechanic, who
should employ equal powers to raise unequal weights. He might sometimes indeed
be right by chance.

FAR otherwise is it with him who applies principles to practice. He
calculates, combines, and proportions his powers, according to known laws; and
applies them, in such a manner, as to produce certain and given effects. Nor is
the practice of medicine different, in this respect, from any other art, which
is founded upon principle, and requires a certain degree of mental exertion.

IN the preceding pages, some things may appear doubtful, the arrangement
occasionally inaccurate, and the whole requiring illustration. Was it not even
too late, I should not think myself at liberty, without the approbation of my
ingenious and esteemed friend, Dr. Yates, to make any material alter^^^^^^ in
the text. But, in the mean time, it may (...) proper to offer such remarks, as
(...) by subsequent reflection, and may perhaps lead to an arrangement somewhat
different, if ever an opportunity should occur of revising the subject.

IN the first place, diseases of accumulation, or of direct debility, appear to
be even more rare than we have supposed them. For if, to a body in a state of
accumulation, the ordinary stimuli be applied, a disease of exhaustion will
immediately ensue. But a body can never long remain in a state of accumulation,
without having the ordinary degree of stimulant power applied, and sometimes
even more. The accumulation, which is produced by the abstraction of heat,
food, or the mental passions, if it be not immediately removed, by the gradual
re-application of these powers, will be converted into a state of exhaustion,
as soon as the ordinary exciting powers, which support the healthy state, are
again applied. It is evident, them, that accumulation of the excitability, from
the abstraction, or diminution of one or more stimuli, must soon terminate in
the re-establishment of health, by the gradual re-application of these powers,
or in the establishment, of a state of exhaustion, or of indirect debility, by
their sudden and excessive re-application. But it is difficult to suppose, such
a complete abstraction of heat, food or mental stimuli, as to occasion death,
without the ^^tervention of some stimulant power, converting the state of
accumulation into a state of indirect debility. When food and drink have been
long withheld, even a draught of water will exhaust the excitability, and
occasion death. Let us suppose a person traveling through a sandy desert,
under the scorching rays of a vertical sun. If he was previously in a state of
accumulation, from the abstraction of the ordinary stimuli, that would
immediately be converted into a state of exhaustion This follows as a
consequence from Prop. V. I. although not so stated in the text.
. And a continuance of the abstraction, would still farther add to the
exhaustion, until it terminated in death. When heat has been long abstracted,
and to a considerable degree, a degree less than that which constitutes the
common temperature, suddenly applied, will produce mortification, or the death
of a part. The case of the Roman mother, so aptly quoted by Brown, will
exemplify the same principle, as applied to the mental stimuli. The state of
torpor in which some animals remain, during the winter, and the manner of their
resuscitation in the spring, even in a lower degree of temperature than that in
which they became torpid, at the same time that it affords a beautiful
explication of the principles of this doctrine, seems to show, that death does
not take place, from the mere abstraction of heat, or from accumulation of the
excitability. In this state of prolonged sleep, while respiration is languidly
performed, the other functions are diminished or entirely suspended. Thus in a
twofold manner, the excitability is accumulated, the susceptibility of
impression is proportionally increased, and a degree of heat lower than that
under which torpor took place in autumn, will produce healthy excitement in
spring This idea is, in part, taken from Dr. Girtanner.
. It seems very difficult to conceive, how death can ever take place from mere
accumulation. For while excitability remains, a due application of exciting
powers will produce healthy excitement; and when it is accumulated in an
unusual degree, it is only required that a diminution of exciting powers,
proportionate to the accumulation, or to the susceptibility of impression,
should be made, in order to produce the highest excitement. But in every case,
in which death seems to take place from accumulation, it is easy to conceive,
that it really happens from exhaustion. For, in the highest degrees of
accumulation, for instance, when a living body is nearly frozen, the smallest
degree of exciting power, although greatly below the force of the ordinary
stimuli applied in a state of health, will be disproportionate to the
susceptibility of impression, and will therefore produce a state of exhaustion.
And the farther subduction of heat, will increase the exhaustion so produced,
until it terminates in death. Upon the whole, it may, I think, be concluded,
that death never takes place directly from accumulation; but always from
exhaustion of the excitability. The state of accumulation, then, when it does
not terminate in health by the gradual re-application of exciting powers, must
always terminate in a state of exhaustion, by the application of exciting
powers, disproportionate to the state of the excitability. Scurvy therefore,
and the other diseases which have been mentioned as arising from the
abstraction of stimuli, would seem to be all diseases of exhaustion or of
indirect debility. In proof of this, every case, that I have met with at sea,
resembling what has been described by authors under the name of scurvy, yielded
to mercury. It was so certain a cure, that I never thought of using any other
remedy. Nor did it at all, when properly exhibited, increase the debility of
the patient. The reason why mercury has so often been found injurious in
scurvy, is, that it has seldom been given in a proper manner. The salvation, of
which authors complain, as being so easily excited, would never occur, if it
was exhibited in such a manner, as regularly to support the excitement. It is
now perfectly known, that this and every other symptom of indirect debility,
which succeed the use of mercury, arise from the subduction, not from the
immediate action of that medicine. But where salivation actually takes place,
after the applicati- of mercury, or other stimulant powers, many facts concur
in showing, that but a small degree of organic lesion exists; and if a patient,
in that state, ever dies, it must be from subsequent mismanagement. The
complaints, therefore, against mercury, in scurvy, and other diseases, are not
justly to be attributed to the medicine, but to the abuse of it. There does not
seem much difficulty in accounting for the bad effects, which have arisen from
the abuse of mercury in that disease. As the proper principle, upon which that
and every other medicine should be exhibited, as not being understood, the mode
in which it was applied in scurvy, must necessarily have increased the
exhaustion, or converted the original state of accumulation, into a state of
exhaustion; and the vicissitudes of weather, that usually occur on board of
ships, would increase still farther the exhaustion. It is in this way, and upon
the principles explained in the text, that cold proves so injurious, during the
application of mercury, or other high exciting powers, when they are
unskilfully exhibited. Scurvy, in fact, appears to be a disease merely general,
and in its origin of slight degree; at first arising from the subduction of
nourishment, and the mental stimuli, and afterward increased by an excessive,
or irregular application of other exciting powers, and a continued negation of
food sufficiently nourishing. Accordingly, the gradual re-application of food
sufficiently nourishing, and of the mental stimuli, is alone, for the most
part, sufficient to cure the disease. It is upon the principle of the gradual
re-application of nourishment, that vegetables have been found at first
preferable to animal food. And this fact it was, if the above reasoning be
right, that led to the error, committed in the text, of considering scurvy as a
disease of accumulation.

WITH respect to the excitement and excitability, a more elegant and just
arrangement of the propositions might, no doubt, have been made. This defect,
however, is not of material importance; as the principles of the doctrine are
still sufficiently intelligible; and every one, who understands them, as they
now are* will be able to judge what they ought to be.

AN early and sincere admirer of this doctrine, for whose judgment I entertain
a respect, having expressed some doubts in regard to the nonexistence of
diseases of excessive excitement, and requested me to re-consider the subject,
a deference for his opinion, and a wish to place the matter in a clearer point
of view, induce me to enter upon a detail, which seemed at first unnecessary.
As the entire rejection of diseases of excessive-excitement, is a great
deviation from the original doctrine, and one of very considerable importance
in its influence upon practice, I shall endeavor, by stating the grounds of it
at some length, to obviate all reasonable objections to the theory. In this
place, it may be proper to observe, that medical facts, as they have been
called, are too often nothing more than a loose relation of circumstances. A
fact, properly speaking, must be so evidently true, that every man, possessing
sound organs, may discern it. And the general facts, or principles, which are
inductions from partiular facts, may also be discerned by all men of ordinary
capacities, who will take the trouble of going through the necessary steps in
reasoning. But where are the facts of this description, which prove that some
diseases arise from what has been called, by Brown, a state of excessive
excitement, and, by others, a state of plethora? If they can be produced, I
will with much readiness acknowledge my error, in having denied the existence
of such a state. Until that happens, however, there is no good reason why it
should be taken for granted, upon mere ipse dixit. As in medicine, much useless
controversy might have been avoided, by attending to accuracy of expression, it
may not be improper to explain the sense, in which the term "excessive
excitement" is here understood. Excitement is meant to express the vigor, with
which the functions of life are performed, in all their different degrees. But
the functions of life can only be performed in a due, or in a deficient degeee.
To say that they can be performed in an excessive degree, is as great a
contradiction in terms, as excessive virtue, or excessive joy; the one is vice,
the other pain. When stimulant powers are applied in due proportion, the
excitement is at the degree which constitutes vigor, tone, or health. But when
they are applied, either in a deficient or an excessive degree, the power with
which the functions of life are performed, i. e. the excitement is diminished.
That power consists in a pleasant, easy, and exact use of these functions;
which is certainly not enjoyed in the diseases, that have been referred to a
state of excessive excitement. When a degree of stimulant power, higher than is
necessary to the state of health, is applied, the functions of life will be
performed with more than usual vigor, before they fall into a state of indirect
debility; but never with excessive vigor. The action of the fiber may be
excessive, but its power cannot. -- If we trace the progress of the living
functions, in a person exposed to the action of high stimulant powers, it will
be found, that their vigor is first increased to the highest point, and
afterward diminished in a degree proportionate to the excess. But if these
powers be gradually subducted, that diminution will not take place; or if they
be re-applied, it will be removed; unless the excess has been such as to
occasion the destruction of organs. It will not, I believe, be denied, that the
headache, sickness, etc. which arise after excessive drinking, constitute a
state of indirect debility, which might have been prevented by the gradual
subduction, and is to be removed by the re-application of stimulant powers.
That a certain quantity of spirits, a ride, etc. will remove these symptoms, is
a fact that is known, almost to every one. After excessive walking, or dancing,
that state of indirect debility constituting fatigue, is not immediately
induced. It becomes more severe the second and third day, unless, by a certain
degree of walking, or dancing, or the substitution of other stimuli, in the
intermediate time, it be prevented. After such an excess, rest is exceedingly
injurious. Dean Swift's mode of taking exercise, but in somewhat lower degree,
was good. The regulation of exercise and the passions, is at present almost
totally neglected, in the cure of diseases. They are subjects which seem to be
yet but little understood, although their importance to health and to morals
are evidently great.
-- It is equally true, that the delirium, fever, etc. which arise from
excessive exposure to the sun, from opium, ether, mercury, or any other
stimulant power, applied in too high a degree, depend upon indirect debility;
and that they may be prevented by a gradual reduction, or cured by a proper
re-application of the same powers, or of others equivalent in force. None of
these symptoms occur, during the action of the exciting powers; they always
commence after these powers have been withdrawn. If this be denied, it must be
supposed, that medicines lie dormant in the body for some hours, after having
been taken; and then, all at once, begin to act. But headache does not
instantaneously follow the application of spirituous liquors; delirium, or
fever, the application of opium, or the solar rays; vomiting, the application
of tartar emetic; salivation, the use of mercury; purging, the exhibition of
cathartics; sweat, of sudorifics; nor vesication, the application of a blister,
or of sire, to the skin. -- On the contrary, these symptoms always appear
sometime after the application of the exciting powers; and may be prevented by a
gradual reduction, or cured by a judicious re-application of the same powers,
or of others equivalent in force; excepting, indeed, when the force of the
noxious power has been so great, as to produce an immediate lesion of organs.
Let us take a familiar case, as an example. Suppose an arm, or a leg has been
exposed to the action of fire, no person, in his right senses, would think of
plunging it into cold water, or snow, or applying ice. It is a fact well known,
that ardent spirits, vinegar, and other stimuli of high degree, are the proper
remedies; and that, if applied in due time, and in sufficient quantity, they
will prevent the inflammation, vesication, pain, and fever that would otherwise
ensue. If the principle be established, in one case of excessive application of
stimuli, it must equally apply to all. Every fact concurs in proving, that the
bad symptoms which arise after an excessive application of the stimulant powers
already mentioned, or of others, depend upon a state of indirect debility, not
upon such a state as that of excessive excitement; and that they are to be
prevented or removed by the proper application, not by the subduction of
stimulant powers.

IF, to a person in health, a very high degree of heat has been applied, as in
exposure to the rays of a burning sun, would it not be as dangerous to remove
him suddenly into a cool, or even a temperate atmosphere, as it would, in the
case of a person, who had been exposed to a high degree of cold. In the one
case the fact is universally admitted, and the principle applied to practice:
Why not in the other? Is it more difficult to comprehend that, after an
application of extraordinary stimuli, a sudden subduction of them should
produce indirect debility, than that the same effect should follow a sudden
re-application of the ordinary stimuli, after they have been for any time
withheld? -- Upon principles equally clear, the excitability in the one case,
would not be accumulated; in the other, it would be exhausted. Hence it is
evident, why cases of coup de soleil are so frequently fatal. I should think
myself acting with equal propriety, in suddenly subducting, not only the high
stimulant power of the solar rays, after having been for some time applied, (at
least without substituting another stimulus nearly as powerful, and then
gradually reducing it) but farther taking away a quantity of blood, and
diminishing all the ordinary stimuli, as in plunging legs nearly frozen into
hot water, giving a pound of meat to one who had been long fasting, and farther
applying, to persons, in these states, opium, ether, or brandy. It is much to
be regretted that, in this, as well as in many other cases, practitioners who
are not themselves convinced of the efficacy of blood-letting, should think it
incumbent upon them, from a false desire of reputation, or a regard to
interest, to put it so frequently in practice. It is very true, that a
conformity with the common practice is safest in a prudential view. For, if a
patient dies of peripneumony, without the formalities of bleeding and purging,
he will be said to have lost his life, in consequence of these omissions. But
if he dies, after they have been duly performed, it is only from the necessity
of his fate.

PERIPNEUMONY, in reality, is seldom a dangerous disease, until, by
blood-letting and other debilitating means, inflammation and adhesion of
membranes, suppuration, and dropsy are produced. -- Has a person ever died in a
state of excessive vigor? No, nor ever will. No danger, then, need be
apprehended from such a state.

IF it be a certain fact that opium, judiciously repeated, will prevent or cure
those very symptoms, which an unskilful application of it may have produced;
if, by the proper exhibition of mercury, that medicine may be given, not only
without producing salivation, but so as to cure it; if the sickness and
headachs that occur, after excessive drinking, may not only be preven^ed by a
gradual diminution of the excess, but may be cured by the application of a
certain degree of the same power. If, I say, all these be facts (and they will
be found so by those who will give them a fair trial) the inevitable conclusion
is, that all the diseases in question, depend upon a state of exhaustion or of
indirect debility, and are to be cured, by the application of stimulant powers,
in a degree proportionate to the exhaustion.

FROM the general ignorance and neglect of this doctrine, the best adapted of
these powers, to particular cases and degrees of disease, have not yet been
well ascertained. But in proportion as it is more generally received,
physicians, instead of random empirical prescriptions, will apply powers to
living bodies, according to known principles, and with a view to particular
effects. They will consider the living body as a whole, upon the state of which
depends that of every particular part; and they will desist from the hopeless
task of prescribing for strangling symptoms. They will cooperate in
discovering the relative powers, the duration of their action, and the best
method of exhibiting, every substance that can be employed in medicine. While,
in diseases of the highest degree, they will all probably employ the most
diffusible stimuli, as opium, ether, camphor, volatile alkali, mercury, etc.
The powers of arsenic and other substances called poisons, are by no means well
ascertained. But we have implements enough, if we knew how to use them.
; in the lower degrees, each may with advantage give a preference to his
favorite medicine. And if he applies it, so as to support the excitement,
health will be re-produced, whether he uses bark, or wine, salts, aloes, or
gamboge; castor oil, rhubarb, or cream of tartar.

NOTHING perhaps has contributed more to increase the confusion in medical
doctrines, than the inaccurate language and loose reasoning, with which the
cultivators of the art have found it necessary to veil the absurdities of their
systems. The division of causes into proximate and remote, is a remarkable
instance of this. It shows evidently that, in medical reasoning, POWER has
uniformly been confounded with CAUSE. Many powers may combine to produce one
effect; but it is not any one of these powers, but the sum of the whole, that
constitutes the cause of that effect. Thus, excessive heat, It is always to be
understood, that excessive heat, or other stimuli applied in excess, relates to
the state of the excitability, not to any particular standard of heat, or any
degree of other stimulant powers.
fatigue, bad news, noxious air, may all combine to produce a state of indirect
debility. The cause of this state of indirect debility, is not excessive heat,
fatigue, bad news, or noxious air; but the sum of all these powers. Again,
indirect debility, in its various degrees, is the cause of all those symptoms
which constitute diseases, depending upon that state, each of which has, in
nosological systems, obtained a particular name. But, as there can be nothing
intermediate between a cause and its effect, and as there can only be required
one cause to produce one effect, remote cause is evidently a gross
contradiction in terms. To say that any of the powers, the application of which
will produce a state of indirect debility, is a cause of symptoms, which are
consequences of that state, appears to me as great a perversion of reasoning,
as it would be to affirm, that a man dies because he has been begotten. The one
event undoubtedly precedes the other; but they are not in the relation of cause
and effect, as these terms are generally understood.

ANOTHER circumstance, which has contributed to prolong the public delusion, in
respect to the uncertainty of medical principles is this. THEORY and
HYPOTHESIS, I hope and believe more through ignorance than design, have been
very generally confounded under the common name of OPINION; as if it were
impossible, that principles should exist, because they have not been discovered
by system makers; that, as all medical systems which have hitherto been framed
are erroneous, there cannot be a true one in nature; or that man alone is that
curious composition, that "fortuitous concourse of atoms," which nature, in a
frolicksome mood, had exempted from the operation of laws, fixed, immutable,
eternal. -- It will be difficult, without the aid of inspiration, to reconcile
assertions of successful practice, with a confession that it is founded upon
conjecture. It will be equally difficult to account, with decency, for an
opposition to a doctrine, of which the fundamental propositions are either
self-evident facts, or inductions from numerous facts; of which every
proposition has an evident relation to every other, and the whole to every
part. It might rather be supposed that the contention would be, who should
apply the principles most correctly to practice.

TO the ridiculous and vague objections, founded on the alleged danger of
giving large doses of medicines, the following remarks, it is presumed, will be
a sufficient reply. From the principles of the foregoing doctrine, it results
that, in every disease, a sum of stimulant power equal, or nearly equal, to
that which has produced the disease, must be applied, in order to effect a
cure. It is only when the sum of the powers so applied exceed that, which has
produced the disease, that the medicines can do harm. In that case, and in that
case only, they will produce a disease more dangerous, because higher in
degree, than that which had previously existed. Hence it appears that, while in
diseases of the highest degree, as plague, dysentery, and fevers, more
especially in those cases in which organic lesion has taken place, the common
doses of medicines is merely sporting with lives, in diseases, deviating but
little from health, they, for the most part, exceed the just proportion. While,
in some cases of the former, from four to five hundred drops of tincture of
opium will be too little, in some cases of the latter, the usual quantity of
from twenty to thirty drops, will be too much. Indeed in cases, deviating but
little from health, those high stimulant powers are unnecessary, and ought not
to be used. These conclusions will appear so evident, to all who understand the
principles of the new doctrine, that it would be superfluous, and might seem
impertinent, to dwell longer on that subject.

IN like manner, it is evident whence the disputes, which have arisen among
physicians, respecting the virtues of particular medicines, have derived their
source. From want of just principles as a guide, the same power which proved
useful in the hands of one man, from a particular mode of application, has been
found injurious by others, from a different mode of exhibiting it. Hence the
virtues of the peruvian bark, since its first discovery, have been
extravagantly extolled, and as unreasonably decried. Hence hemlock, which was
so successfully used by the judicious Dr. Stork, entirely failed with other
practitioners, and unjustly lost its reputatation. Hence electricity, which,
applied according to principle, I will venture to affirm, will be found a power
of superior efficacy in the cure of diseases, has been greatly neglected; and
when successful, has only been so by chance. I have some opinions regarding
electricity, as applied to living bodies, which I shall take an early
opportunity of verifying, or disproving by experiment. If they prove true, it
will throw much light on the principles of the doctrine.
And hence, more recently still, the inconclusive disputes concerning the
effects of opium, and other substances of high stimulant power, applied to
living bodies.

ONE of the most egregious mistakes which has been made, respecting the
doctrine of life, remains still to be mentioned. It has been understood, or
rather misunderstood, to consist entirely in the exhibition of opium, brandy,
and wine, in every case, and with no discrimination* To those who know it
better, it must appear evident, that these substances have no more relation to
the principles of the doctrine, than any other powers, that may be applied to
the excitability. The free use of them, in a state of health, is even contrary
to principle. But the laws of nature, as they respect living bodies, would
seem, in the ordinary routine of custom, to have been nearly reversed. In a
state of health, for the most part, too great a sum of stimulant power is
applied; in a state of disease, generally too little. Suppose opium, brandy,
and wine annihilated, the doctrine would remain entire. Provided the excitement
be supported, it matters not by what powers it is done. It is evident, then,
that those, who have rested their opposition upon objections to any particular
medicine, or the doses of medicines, could not have understood the subject.
Indeed to understand is to believe in it. As soon will eyes, in a sound state,
be unable to distinguish light from darkness, as a mind capable of
comprehending the terms, can disbelieve the fundametal propositions of the
doctrine of life. If this be true, can it be denied, that the doctrine has, by
all its opponents, been either prejudged or misunderstood?

THIS is not a question of party; but a contest between truth and error. It is
not the judgment, dignity, or character of this or that individual, that is in
dispute; but the truth or falsehood of a doctrine, whose principles embrace
every part of animated nature. Whether discoveries have been made by a man
named Brown, or a man named Cullen; whether they have issued from the obscurity
of a cottage, or the elevated desk of a professor, is of little consequence to
the world. But it is of essential importance, that they should know the nature
and extent of the discoveries. It is high time to bring the question to an
issue. If the doctrine be true, it behooves those, who consider themselves as
multis experimentis eruditi, avowedly to embrace it; if false, they should, by
reasoning, or a comparative trial, undeceive the rising generation, whose minds
are rapidly receiving the infection.

A TREATISE ON THE ACTION OF MERCURY, UPON LIVING BODIES; AND, ITS APPLICATION
FOR THE CURE OF DISEASES OF INDIRECT DEBILITY.

BY CHARLES MACLEAN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM YOUNG, BOOKSELLER, No. 52, SECOND-STREET,
Corner of CHESNUT-STREET.

M,DCC,XCVII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following "TREATISE," is rather a History of the Manner in which Mercury
has been applied, upon Principle, for the Cure of Diseases of indirect
Debility, than a strict logical Disquisition.

This mode was chosen in order to assert my Right, should the Theory hereafter
be universally applied to Practice, to such Share of the Merit of the
Discovery, as may appear to be justly due.

It is hoped that, in the present Form of the Treatise, the Proofs, although
more diffused, will not be found less convincing, than if adduced in a more
regular Series of Propositions.

A TREATISE, etc.
IN enquiring into the action of mercury upon living bodies, no attempt will be
made to investigate its modus operandi, of which we are totally ignorant. It is
the effects, whether salutary or noxious, that succeed the application of that
power to living bodies, which will form the subject of consideration.

WHATEVER be the mode in which mercury acts, like every substance in nature, it
can produce no other effect upon living bodies, than to increase or diminish
the power, with which they perform their proper functions; -- in other words,
to increase or diminish their excitement. All the substances in nature, which
are capable, when applied to living bodies, of increasing or diminishing their
excitement, are denominated stimulant or exciting powers. Should it, then,
appear that mercury will increase or diminish the excitement, -- that it will
both produce and cure diseases of indirect debility, -- may we not, nay, must
we not conclude that it is a stimulant or exciting power?

THIS theory I had adopted in 1789; since which period, I have applied it to
practice, in many cases, and with considerable success. The first trial was
made upon myself. In January, 1789, on the passage from Bengal to England,
having been seized with a quotidian intermittent fever, tartar emetic, and
afterward bark, with now and then a cathartic medicine, were, as usual,
exhibited. Under this mode of treatment, I daily became weaker, and in the
course of three weeks, during which the same plan was persisted in, my legs
became aedematous, the paroxysms of fever more severe, and I could, with
difficulty rise out of bed.

THE evacuant and antiseptic plans were now entirely abandoned; and between two
and three drachms of mercurial ointment, were rubbed upon my body, at bed time.
The alteration, which this single rubbing produced, was equally unexpected and
salutary. I slept the whole night; and in the morning, awoke in a gentle
perspiration, without fever, or pain, any disagreeable symptoms, excepting
aedema and general debility, remaining. The ointment was rubbed in, three or
four times; and I had no return of fever. My mouth was not affected; and I
speedily got well. The issue of this experiment made a deep impression on my
mind, and determined me, in future, to use mercury, in every case of
intermittent fever. Having obtained a slight knowledge of the Brunonian
doctrine, I thought myself in the state of the benighted traveller, to whom
Brown, with so much justice and elegance, compared himself, upon the first
discovery of his doctrine. *** veluti viatori, ignota regione, perditis viae
vestigiis, in umbra nocti^ erranti, perobscura quoedam, quasi prima diurna, lux
demum adfulsit Elementa Medicinae.
. I inferred that mercury, in common with many All, according to the present
ideas.
other medicines, was a stimulant power; and would, therefore, be useful in all
diseases of indirect debility. As, according to the same principles, it
appeared that other fevers differed from intermittents, only in degree; and as
mercury was found a certain cure for intermittents; I thence concluded that
fevers, whatever their nosological distinctions, were the proper cases, by
which to subject the theory to farther proof. One of the first instances, in
which an opportunity of trying the practice in other fevers occurred, was the
following. -- Having made a voyage to Jamaica, in the interval of two voyages
to Bengal, I was, early in 1790, on a visit to my friend, Dr. Hector Maclean,
of Russel Hall, in the parish of St. Mary's. During my residence there, an
European book-keeper upon the plantation, by name -- Macmillan, was seized with
typhus It is almost unnecessary to observe that nosological distinctions are
totally disregarded, as incompatible with the principles of the new doctrine.
Generic names are, for convenience, sometimes retained.
, or the common yellow fever of that country. When I first saw him, he was
comatose and picking the bed clothes; he had got some purges, and had been
taking bark. His pulse was quick and small; his tongue black and furred; and he
was supposed beyond the possibibility of recovery. I represented to Dr. Maclean
the good effects produced by mercury, in other cases of fever, and requested
that he would permit it to be tried in this; to which, with a liberality, not
always to be met with from established practitioners, he readily consented This
gentleman had been a practitioner of reputation. But had then retired from the
exercise of his profession, and resided on his estate.
. About an ounce of strong mercurial ointment was immediately rubbed on the
patient's body. But, as in typhus, this was a new experiment, I did not choose
wholly to trust to the mercury; and therefore desired that he might be allowed
a wine glassful of Madeira every hour This is but a small quantity of wine in
typhus fever. -- In some cases it may be necessary to give three or four
bottles, in the twenty-four hours. In others, wine, in any quantity, is not
sufficiently powerful. Recourse must then be had to the more diffusible stimuli.
.

THE next day he was still insensible; but sat up in bed, and searched, as it
were instinctively, for the Madeira bottle. When it was given him, he would not
consent to part with it; but held it firm, between both hands, as if something,
upon which depended his existence. The ointment was again rubbed in, by guess,
twice in the day, -- the quantity about half an ounce each time; and the wine
was continued. He was perceptibly getting better. The same treatment was
persevered in; and at the end of five days, from the commencement of it, he
walked in the verandah, in a state of convalescence. It was sometime, however,
before he entirely lost the fatuitous look, which has been noticed as a syptom
of yellow fever. His face was a little swelled, and his gums slightly affected
by the mercury. During convalescence, he took wine and bark freely.

This recovery, although it appeared surprising, was still only regarded as
accidental. The idea of using mercury in fevers was treated, by the generality
of medical men, as an extravagant chimera; or, at best, a mere ebullition of
Brunonianism, which they had learnt, at school, to consider as heretical. From
this it may be inferred, how well the doctrine has been understood, by those
who have pretended to sit in judgment on it. The use of mercury as a stimulant
power, results as an obvious inference from the medical principles of Brown.
But not more so than tartar emetic, or salts. He did not perceive these
inferences himself: from whence it will appear, that, instead of pushing the
consequences of his doctrine too far, he did not extend them far enough.
But these rebuffs by no means discouraged me from prosecuting my researches,
as will appear from the following remarks, extracted from a medical journal,
which I kept in the year 1790:

MERCURY is universally allowed to cure lues venerea. All writers on hepatitis
concur, in extolling its virtues in that disease. I have experienced its
efficacy repeatedly in intermittent fevers, once in typhus, twice in gout, and
once in bleeding discharges. A case is related in the London Medical Journal of
1786, (page 413) of obstructed menses, cured by calomel. Affections produced in
irritable habits, by the transplantation of teeth, have also been cured by
mercury; and hence, these diseases have, in my opinion, very erroneously been
supposed venereal.

THIS conclusion, which is certainly not just, must have been productive of the
most disagreeable consequences. The very idea would severely wound the feelings
of delicate and modest females; among whom diseases, from the transplantation
of teeth, have most frequently arisen. Besides the injury to the constitution,
from an excessive use of mercury, supposing the disease to be venereal. In that
disease, mercury is usually given, in much larger quantities than is necessary,
and very seldom in such a manner, as to produce the best possible effects. In
fact, ulcerations produced by the improper exhibition of mercury, may be cured
by such an application of the same power, as to support the general excitement.
-- The same journal proceeds thus:

At it must be allowed that mercury, like every other pow^er, can have but one
uniform operation upon living bodies, it may fairly be concluded, that all the
diseases, which it cures, are of the same kind. And as some of these are
certainly diseases of debility, the rest must be diseases of debility also This
proposition, although of easy comprehension, does not seem to be generally
understood. It means that all diseases, which can be cured by the same powers,
must depend upon a similar state of the body, by whatever powers that state may
have been produced. Thus the matter of smallpox, and the powers which produce
dysentery, and typhus, must occasion a similar state of the body, differing
only in degree; for they are all cured by the application of the same powers,
differing only in degree.
. I infer therefore, with as much confidence as analogical reasoning can
justify, that mercury is useful, in every disease of debility It should have
been indirect debility. These observations were originally written for my own
amusement, without any intention of publishing.
. But I would not be understood to prefer it in every case, nor totally to rely
upon it in any. For, even in lues venerea, where it is generally a certain
cure, it often requires the aid of other stimuli, particularly opium, wine, and
bark; or to be alternated with them, when from habit, it begins to lose its
effect.

THE following case, extracted from the same journal, is the instance alluded
to of gout and bleeding discharges, being cured by mercury.

MRS. E -- B --, of Kingston, Jamaica, aged forty years, had been accustomed to
live freely, and was subject to frequent attacks of gout. Having been
occasionally at her house, she sometimes asked my advice. In the course of a
short space of time (for she was subject to frequent paroxysms) she was cured
of two attacks of gout, by mercury, opium, and the warm bath; but mercury was
the principal power applied. On the 8th of August, 1790, she complained of an
incessant menstrual discharge, alternating with a discharge of blood from the
piles. These symptoms she said had commenced seven weeks before, occasioned, as
she thought, by fear; and, for some days, had been accompanied with headache,
pain of back, loins, and other feverish sensations. -- Her stomach was very
irritable, and could bear nothing liquid in the morning, excepting water,
accidulated with elixir of vitriol, or ginger tea. She had a troublesome cough,
and pain in her side, which she supposed to arise from the affection of the
liver. This idea she was rather encouraged to entertain, that an opportunity
might be got of trying the effects of mercury, in bleeding discharges. Two
drachms of mercurial ointment were rubbed on her body in the evening, and she
was desired to take a draught, with forty drops of tincture of opium, every
four hours, through the night. Her legs were immersed in warm water. She was
advised to take solid food only; and to use for drink, water strongly
accidulated with elixir of vitriol, or ginger tea. August the 9th, the ointment
and laudanum had been used as directed. She had no fever; her headache was less
severe; and she perspired freely. The menses ceased to flow, and discharge
commenced from the piles. She was still encouraged to believe that her liver
was affected; and the medicines were ordered to be continued. August the 10th,
she was in all respects better. The discharge from the piles was considerably
less. -- One dram of ointment only was rubbed in, and the tincture of opium
was omitted. 11th, the ointment was once more rubbed in. The discharge from the
piles entirely ceased; and she had no return of any of her symptoms.

THOSE who are inclined to question the efficacy of mercury, in diseases of
indirect debility, may object that, as other powers were, in this case,
combined with it, the cure cannot fairly be attributed to the mercury alone.
That is very true. All the other powers performed their respective parts. But,
from a thousand analogies, I think it may be affirmed, that mercury alone would
have been sufficient. In general, when several powers can be applied to
different parts of the body, either in concourse or succession, so as to
support the excitement regularly, and with equality, it is much better to have
recourse to many, than to trust entirely to one.

THE effects of mercury, in fevers and other diseases of indirect debility,
were mentioned in conversation with medical men, in many parts of the Island of
Jamaica; most of which I visited in 1789-90. The idea, as usually happens, was
endeavored to be ridiculed, and the facts to be discredited. It has since that
period, however, come into general practice in Jamaica, the other West India
Islands, and in America, as appears from Dr. Duncan's Medical Commentaries, for
1795 Page 348 to 354.
. By this history, it is not intended to claim any more merit for the
introduction of that practice, than each reader may be disposed to allow.
Provided the facts be admitted, the origin and progress of the discovery is of
little consequence. As the practice, in so far as it is good, is but a mere
application of the principles of Brown, the whole merit of it is, in my
opinion, justly and solely due to the doctrine of that most ingenious physician.

THE following extracts, from the Medical Journal of the English East India
Company's ship Northumberland, in the years 1791 and 1792, will farther show
the manner, in which the application of mercury, upon the same principles, was
extended to diseases, in which it had never, to my knowledge, been used before.

JOHN HURST's case A case of intermittent. The observations refer to particular
cases in the journal.
, is a proof of what I have experienced on several occasions, and first of all
tried upon myself, -- the efficacy of mercury in intermittent fevers. In all
the cases (not less than ten or twelve) in which the experiment was fairly
made, I have not known it to fail once, where the mercurial ointment was used
in such quantity as to affect the mouth. The soreness of the mouth, seems to be
a sign, that the system is sufficiently excited, to overcome diseases of
debility This is incorrect. The soreness of the mouth arises from a state of
indirect debility, in consequence of the sudden subduction, or irregular
application of mercury.
. A man in health, or in a state of high vigor, is much sooner affected, than a
person in a low, languid condition. In the case of John Hurst Intermittent --
, William Smith Jaundice --
, -- Cummins Ophthalmy --
, and Paul Harris Hectic fever -- These patients were prescribed for, without
any other rule, than to rub in a certain portion of mercurial ointment daily,
until the disease should cease, or the mouth become affected. But this as I
have since found, is not a proper mode of exhibiting mercury. As it was not
supposed to act in any specific manner, its operation was supported by opium,
camphor, wine, bark, the warm bath, and blisters, according to circumstances.
The principles, however, were not always correctly applied. Nor does it seem to
be any valid objection, that a knowledge of their application is not to be
acquired by intuitively.
, the quantity of mercury used before salivation was produced, seemed to be
inversely as their vigor. This proposition is farther confirmed by a fact well
known to practitioners -- that by premising blood-letting, more opium or
mercury may be safely thrown into the system.

ALTHOUGH it is rather deviating from the subject, it is worth while to pause a
moment in admiration of the rule of practice, founded upon this fact. First, to
draw blood, to have afterward the pleasure of introducing more opium, or
mercury into the system, than could otherwise have been done; to debilitate, in
order to strengthen; to accommodate the patient's habit to the quantity of
medicine that is to be given, rather than proportion the quantity of medicine
to the state of the patient; these are rules so wonderfully sublime, that they
can never be sufficiently admired! If it were permitted, upon such subjects, to
reason in a plain way, I would ask, if a patient's excitement be five degrees
below the healthy standard, how can any rational being think of lowering it
five degrees more, that he may afterward raise it, with the greater safety? He
will then require to apply double the force, that would at first have been
sufficient. The Journal goes on to observe, that mercury affects the mouth much
sooner, when opium, blisters, the warm bath, or any other of the more powerful
stimuli are used at the same time. In the case of Willian Kirk, the additional
stimulus of the warm bath speedily accomplished what opium, mercury, and wine
did not effect for a fortnight.

THIS patient had the usual symptoms of chronic diarrhoea, with a considerable
degree of hectic fever, emaciation, and entire loss of appetite. Externally he
used mercury, and internally opium and wine, according to circumstances. It was
found necessary to alternate these stimuli with others, such as blisters and
the warm bath. He used to remain a quarter of an hour in the bath, heated to as
great a degree as he could easily bear. It was not tried, until after he had
been a fortnight using mercury. After having used it twice, his mouth became
sore. There was an increased flow of saliva, and he recovered in a very short
space of time, to the great surprise of all who saw him; and, I confess,
contrary to my own expectations. It now, however, appears, as a case of
disease, by no means dangerous, if treated in a manner, but distantly
approaching to the exactness of scientific principles. The following remarks
are in prosecution of the same subject: -- In June, 1791, we had from thirty to
forty soldiers, ill of fevers, catarrhs, and rheumatisms, and many more with
various trifling ailments* whose cases were not entered in the Journal. The
similarity of their diseases and treatment, rendered it unnecessary to record
any, excepting the most dangerous. In every case in which mercury was given, so
as to produce salivation, the pulse rose, and all complaints gave way, as soon
as the mouth was thoroughly affected. But in some cases, that was found very
difficult to accomplish; and in others, I was afraid, although perhaps without
just grounds, to push the medicine to a great extent, particularly in diarrhoea
and dysentery.

THIS groundless apprehension, arose from a knowledge of the purging effects
that succeeded the use of calomel, and other mercurial preparations; and from
erroneously supposing that a medicine, which, exhibited in one way, produces
purging, cannot, if exhibited in another way, cure diseases, of which purging
is the principal symptom. But farther reflection and experience, soon banished
this remnant of scholastic prejudice.

I SHALL give one extract more, from the observations upon this subject, made
on board the Northumberland, in April, 1792. In every case of low fever, which
occurred among the soldiers, on the passage to India, from the moment the mouth
was effected By affection of the mouth, is meant an increased flow of saliva.
When a free and increased flow of saliva takes place, such as constitutes
salivation, a reeovery will always ensue, if the succeeding treatment be right.
But the mouth, gums, fauces, and tongue may be ulcerated, without an increased
flow of saliva being produced. In those cases, many facts authorize the
conclusion, that no recovery will take place. Internal locai disease, of the
thoracic or abdominal viscera, or both, will be found upon dissection. These
appearances have been so uniform, in many cases which I have opened, that I can
now venture nearly to predict, in what state the viscera will be found, where
the mouth cannot be affected, so as to produce an increased flow of saliva.
, a recovery commenced. But as the mercury was used externally only; and as, in
some cases, the mouth could not, in that manner, be affected (which cases never
terminated favorably) might not the internal use of that medicine prove more
effectual? And would it not be advisable to exhibit it, in small doses,
frequently repeated, until the desired effect is produced?

As the foregoing observations were not originally designed for publication, it
was found impossible to copy them literally from the journal. In many places,
therefore, words are altered to render them less unfit for publication; but no
alteration is any where made in the sense. The journal, from which they are
extracted, was examined by the English East India Company's physician, in
August or September, 1792, and afterward deposited in their warehouse.

From that period, my confidence in the powers of mercury, for the cure of all
diseases of indirect debility, became so decided, that I determined to apply it
in every case, in which the ideas of my patients would admit of the practice,
-- even in diarrhoeas, and dysentery, the diseases in which the theory seemed
most difficult of reconciliation. With respect to the diseases that were
considered as depending upon a state of excessive excitement, although I much
doubted the existence of such a state, yet my ideas were by no means
sufficiently clear in regard to it. An opportunity having soon occurred of
putting it to the test of experiment, in my own person, it was eagerly
embraced. In September, 1793, after having been exposed a whole day to the heat
of the sun, in an open boat, upon the river Hooghly, I was seized, in the
evening, with symptoms of high fever. According to the common practice, I
should immediately have lost blood, taken an emetic, or purgative, and
abstracted as far as possible, all the usual and ordinary stimuli. Instead of
that, a pill, consisting of one grain of opium and one grain of calomel, was
taken every hour, through the night. By this means, the excitement was
sufficiently supported, and I remained easy, with an abatement of all the
febrile symptoms. On the following morning, a considerable stiffness, swelling,
and pain, affected my left arm, from the shoulder downwards; and it had assumed
a kind of livid appearance, rather alarming. This arm, from the situation in
which I stood in the boat, had been more exposed to the direct rays of the sun,
than any other part of my body. It was bathed with tincture of opium, and
rubbed with mercurial ointment alternately; and the pills were continued. After
having taken about thirty pills, my arm began to return to its usual state, and
all the other symptoms disappeared. The pills were omitted; and I found myself
quite well. -- From eight to twelve hours, however, after the pills were
omitted, my mouth, all at once, became very sore. A discharge of blood from the
fauces and gums soon commenced, which continued troublesome for two days, and
ended in salivation. Had I then adverted to the fact, that a sore mouth and
salivation are not produced by a regular exhibition of mercury, but by the
irregular exhibition, or sudden subduction of it, these troublesome and
disagreeable symptoms might easily have been avoided; or if, by neglect, they
had been allowed to occur, they might as readily have been cured. The fever did
not return; and I was soon restored to health. This fever, after a bleeding or
two, would most probably have assumed the appearance of peripneumony, which,
according to the medical hypotheses of the schools, would have indicated still
farther bleeding, and other evacuations. And there is little doubt that, under
such treatment, it would have terminated, at the best, as so many cases of
acute diseases do, in this country, -- in adhesions of membranes, local
affections of the viscera, or a very lingering recovery In consequence of a
conversation that took place, after writing this treatise, the following note,
extracted from the 9th vol. of the Edinburgh Medical Commentaries, was sent me,
Dr. Robert Hamilton, of Lynne Regis, on eighteen years experience, recommends
mercury, joined with opium, in inflammation of the liver, peripneumony (even in
women far advanced in pregnancy) inflammatory gout, wounds of the head, thorax,
abdomen -- from one to five grains of calomel, and from to one grain of opium,
every six, eight, or twelve hours. This most excellent practice was, in all
probability, opposed at the time, in order to support some ridiculous
hypotheses of the Schools.
. But let me not be misunderstood. It is the bleeding alone which I condemn in
so unqualified a manner. The cathartics, sudorifics, etc. employed in these
diseases, although by no means given with the proper view, and therefore seldom
given in a proper manner, are, upon the whole, productive of more good than
harm. Their effect is always to increase excitement, and the state of indirect
debility, which succeeds their operation, constituting purging, sweating, etc.
arises from their not being repeated afterward in such a regular manner, as to
produce the highest excitement.

SOON after this period, an opportunity occurred of giving mercury a very fair
trial, in diarrhoea and dysentery, almost the only diseases in which I had not
yet ventured to apply it. Early in the year 1794, I was on board the English
East India Company's ship Houghton, composing part of a squadron on a cruize
against the French, and designed for the protection of Batavia. The crew of the
Houghton, in consequence of the ship's having been ill manned, some
peculiarities in the internal economy, and having been stationed, at the port
of Batavia, a month longer than the other ships, suffered much from sickness. A
very great proportion of the seamen were seized with diarrhoeas, fevers, and
dysenteries, the severest that I had ever seen. The European soldiers and
lascars We had on board a company of European infantry, and a company of gun
lascars, from Bengal.
, being subject to different regulations, enjoyed a tolerable exemption from
disease. Upon this occasion, the inefficacy of the treatment, recommended by
authors and teachers, in severe cases of dysentery, struck me in the most
forcible manner. The usual doses of medicines produced no perceptible effect.
In this dilemma, it was determined, as had been successfully practiced upon
other occasions, to use opium, camphor, mercury and other stimuli, both
internally, and externally, until the disease was cured, or a salivation
produced. In every case, in which the mouth was affected, a recovery with
certainty ensued But in those cases, in which the mouth could not be affected,
so as to produce an increased flow of Saliva, not one recovered. This remark
was omitted in the journal, having been supposed to follow as a necessary
conclusion from the other. But as, upon a more attentive consideration, that
does not appear to be the case, it is proper that both circumstances should be
explicitly stated. I was sometimes deceived by an appearance of soreness of the
mouth, and left off the medicine prematurely.
. Blisters and wine were used, with great advantage, as auxiliaries. These
remarks are taken, with some trifling alteration in the language, from a copy
of the Medical Journal, kept on board the Houghton, in 1793 and 1794 THE
Journal itself ought to have been d^posited, as usual, at the India House. But
I am informed, that it has either been mislaid, or, for private reasons,
wilfully suppressed, by the commander of the Houghton, on his passage to
Europe. A copy of the remarks, however, has been forwarded to the Court of
Directors.
.

THUS it appears, that the efficacy of mercury has been experienced in almost
every disease of indirect debility. In the East and West Indies, and in
America, it has been found a cure for the yellow fever of these climates. But
it has not been exhibited with the view, or in the manner, in which alone it
can produce the best possible effects, viz. so as to support the excitement.
Dr. Chisholm, indeed, has approached the nearest to the proper mode of
exhibiting this medicine, without however seeming to understand the principles.
It is more surprising that Dr. Rush, who appears to understand the fundamental
principles of the doctrine of life, should not have applied them, in the
treatment of the yellow fever of Philadelphia. His attributing the cure to the
purging operation, which succeeds the use of calomel, shows how difficult it is
to erase early impressions, however erroneous, even from the most vigorous mind.

IF opium, wine, and bark failed in cases of yellow fever oftener than mercury,
as is said to have happened at Philadelphia, it must have arisen from the
former having been exhibited in deficient quantities, while the latter was
given more freely. It will often happen that the prejudices of practitioners,
as well as of the multitude, will render the choice of one medicine more
eligible than that of another, when there is no difference in other respects.
The circumstance of calomel being succeeded by purging led, by chance, to a
proper practice. But I cannot admit, with Dr. Rush, that it was "the triumph of
a medical principle." The disease would have been cured by any mode of
treatment capable of supporting the excitement, in such a manner as to admit of
an accumulation of the excitability.

THAT the opinion is erroneous, needs no other proof than this fact, that, in
all diseases, a cure will be better effected, when the medicine is repeated at
such intervals, as not to produce purging; but to support the excitement in a
regular manner. A cure will also be performed, by the external application of
mercurial ointment, without producing purging, as well as by the internal
exhibition of calomel. Neither is salivation, sweating, or an increased
discharge of urine, necessary to the cure. On the contrary, these symptoms, all
of which in their different degrees depend upon a state of indirect debility,
should, as far as possible, be prevented. Salivation is, no doubt, an
unequivocal proof of the original disease having been removed; for, being
itself a disease of indirect debility, occasioned by the sudden subduction of
mercury, or its repetition at improper intervals, it cannot co-exist with any
other disease. Although, therefore, in diseases of very high degree, salivation
is so far a desirable symptom; yet as the disease, if not incurable, may be
cured without it, it ought as far as practicable, to be avoided. There are
however, two conditions necessary to this. The first is, that the practitioner
should know the principles, and the manner in which they are to be applied to
practice: the second, that the patient should conform exactly to his
directions. When these circumstances happily concur, according to any facts
that are yet known, there is not a single disease of indirect debility, in
which an organic lesion has not taken place, that may not be cured, without
producing either purging, or salivation Two ingenious papers, on the use of
nitric acid in the cure of diseases, were, some time ago, published at Bombay,
said to be written by Dr. Scot, of that place. Upon perusing them, I was led to
institute some experiments with that medicine. For reasons unnecessary to
mention, they were not completed. But there were sufficient grounds to infer,
that Dr. Scot's statement of its effects was faithful, and not overcharged. In
chronic cases of disease, of every kind, it produced good effects; and, in
several ca^^^, after the nitric acid was laid aside, a very small quantity of
calomel was succeeded by salivation. The inference is obvious. It produced an
effect upon the mouth, similar to that which arises from mercury; and, if a
considerable degree of salivation seldom ensued, in the cases in which I tried
it, that probably arose from its not having been given in sufficient quantity.
-- The ingenious author of the papers alluded to, it is hoped, will find
leisure to trace the analogy, between mercury and nitric acid, more in detail;
and to give his ideas to the public in a less perishable shape, than a
news-paper essay. The discovery is the more entitled to our respect, as it was
the result of reasoning, not of accident. Perhaps the large quantity of fluid,
necessary to dilute the acid, may be an objection, where the less bulky
preparations of mercury can be used with more convenience. But it will often be
found a pleasant drink: and may, with advantage, be alternated with the
preparations of mercury. I usually began by giving from sixty to a hundred and
twenty drops, of highly concentrated acid, in a quart of water, in the 24 hours.
.

ON the contrary, all evacuations, in so far as they exceed the degree that
takes place in the healthy state, are symptoms of indirect debility; and ought
therefore to be avoided.

FROM the cases annexed to the View of the Science of Life, and from the
preceding account of the application of mercury for the cure of diseases of
indirect debility, as well as from the history of some hundred cases which have
come within my knowledge, I think myself warranted in drawing the following

CONCLUSIONS:
I. THAT mercury applied to living bodies, in due proportion, will increase the
excitement, and thereby cure diseases of indirect debility, in their various
degrees.

II. THAT, applied in an excessive degree, or in an irregular manner, it will
induce a state of indirect debility, in its various degrees.

III. THAT this state is indicated by ulcerations of the throat, soreness of
the mouth, salivation, purging, sweat, an increased flow of urine, sometimes
strangury, and costiveness, etc.

IV. THAT in the exhibition of mercury for the cure of diseases, all these
symptoms should, as far as possible, be avoided.

V. BUT as in diseases of high degree, in which large quantities of mercury are
required, it will for the most part be difficult, and often impracticable to
conform to prescriptions, with the necessary exactness; If in the application
of mercury, the judgment of the physician, and the punctuality of the patient,
should even cooperate in ensuring a perfect conformity to principle; the
intervals of sleep will often be sufficiently long to occasion a sore mouth, an
increased flow of saliva, griping, purging, or any of the other symptoms of
indirect debility. Few patients, under a course of mercury, according to the
usual mode of exhibiting it, entirely escape these symptoms. But in proportion
as the principles and practice here inculcated are better understood, it will
be more in the power of practitioners and patients, so to regulate their
conduct, as to prevent, for the most part, those disagreeable occurences.
it is much safer in such cases, to run the risque of producing these symptoms,
than to give such an under proportion as not to remove the disease.

VI. THAT the duration of the action of each dose of mercury, upon the living
body, appears to be not less than one or more than two hours. This, however, is
not considered as a point yet established, with sufficient precision.

VII. BUT whatever be the duration of its action, such exactly is the period at
which the doses should be successively repeated, so as to support, in a regular
manner, the excitement.

VIII. ULCERATIONS of the throat, soreness of the mouth, salivation, purging,
strangury, costiveness, etc. arise, not from the immediate action of mercury,
but from its irregular application, or sudden subduction If any one affects to
doubt this fact, let him take one grain of calomel every hour, for twenty or
thirty hours, and then stop. He will find that his mouth does not become sore
while he is taking the calomel, at regular periods, but some hours after having
left it off; that the soreness will continue to increase for some time after
having desisted from taking the medicine; and may be diminished, or removed by
a proper re-application of the same power.
.

IX. WHEN, in consequence of an injudicious application, or sudden subduction
of mercury, these symptoms of indirect debility occur, they may be cured by the
same, or other exciting powers, applied in a degree proportionate to the
exhaustion of the excitability.

X. MERCURY may, upon these principles, be given in much greater quantity, and
with much better effect, than could have been done, according to the old mode
of exhibiting it; and without producing salivation, or any other symptom of
indirect debility.

XI. AS, in the cure of those high degrees of exhaustion, constituting
dysentery and fevers, mercury has been found to be one of the most useful
medicines; and as plague is a disease, depending also upon a very high state of
exhaustion, it is inferred, that mercury will be found proportionally useful,
in the cure even of that pestilential and fatal disorder.

XII. EVERY case of disease, in which an increased flow of saliva succeeded the
use of mercury, terminated in recovery.

XIII. EVERY case in which ulceration of the gums, fauces, and tongue, or a
discharge of blood from these parts took place, without being accompanied or
succeeded by an increased flow of saliva, terminated in death.

XIV. IN all the cases, which, under these circumstances, terminated fatally,
extensive local disease of the abdominal or thoracic viscera, or both, was
found upon dissection IN a word, infinitely the worst in the Calcutta General
Hospital, and perhaps in all India, I opened, during the most unhealthy months
of the year, the body of every patient that died under my charge. The
appearances were recorded on the books of the Hospital. In every case, there
was an extensive lesion of some of the primary organs. Several livers weighed
each between five and six pounds, and one nearly eight. Some of them contained
above a pint of thick pus; and that which weighed near eight pounds, contained
above a quart. In some cases, cartilaginous, in others boney substances, were
found in livers, in which there were no traces of recent suppuration. They
seemed to be concretions formed from purulent matter. There were generally, in
these cases, ulcerations of the coecum, colon, and rectum. In one case of
fever, the substance of the spleen was quite dissolved. It had the appearance
of dark colored mud, without a single trace of a blood vessel remaining. The
most urgent symptom, in that case, was a raging thirst. The treatment, in every
instance of disease of high exhaustion, was conducted on the same plan that was
pursued in the foregoing cases. And I have the satisfaction to say, that I did
not lose a single patient, who came under my charge in the incipient stage of
disease. But as it is not my design to set my own judgment in competition with
that of any other person, I will only affirm, that the practice resulting from
the principles of the new doctrine, was in general infinitely more successful,
than the common mode of practice, in like cases, has ever been in my own hands.
That of Dr. Yates, and Mr. Brydie, founded upon the same principles, was
attended with undeniable success.
.

XV. FROM all these facts I conclude, that lesion of particular organs, such as
to render them unfit for the performance of their proper functions, is the
state which constitutes an incurable disease, when the foregoing principles are
skilfully applied.

XVI. TO what degree a lesion of organs, of primary importance to life, may
take place consistently with the re-establishment of health, is a point that is
by no means ascertained. We have now, however, one criterion by which to judge,
with tolerable accuracy, when organic lesion actually exists.

THE prosecution of this subject, conducted upon the principles which have now
been explained, may be attended with important advantages to the practice of
medicine; and it is hoped will not be neglected by those, who wish to exercise
their intellectual powers upon subjects of real importance.

A DISSERTATION ON THE SOURCE OF EPIDEMIC AND PESTILENTIAL DISEASES; IN WHICH
IS ATTEMPTED TO PROVE, BY A NUMEROUS INDUCTION OF FACTS, THAT THEY NEVER ARISE
FROM CONTAGION, BUT ARE ALWAYS PRODUCED BY CERTAIN STATES, OR CERTAIN
VICISSITUDES OF THE ATMOSPHERE.

BY CHARLES MACLEAN.

WHITEHALL: PRINTED BY WILLIAM YOUNG, BOOKSELLER, No. 52, SECOND-STREET, CORNER
OF CHESNUT-STREET, Philadelphia.

1797.

SCIENCE has much to deplore from the Multiplicity of Diseases. -- It is as
repugnant to truth in Medicine, as Polytheism is to Truth in Religion. The
Physician who considers every different Affection of the different Systems in
the Body, or every Affection of different Parts of the same System, as distinct
Diseases, when they arise from one Cause, resembles the Indian or African
Savage, who considers Water, Dew, Ice, Frost and Snow, as distinct Essences:
while the Physician, who considers the morbid Affections of every part of the
Body (however diversified they may be, in their Form or Degrees) as derived
from one Cause, resembles the Philosopher, who considers Dew, Ice, Frost and
Snow, as different Modifications of Water, and as derived simply from the
Absence of Heat. See an Account of the Bilious Yellow Fever, By B. RUSH, M. D.
Page 177. DISSERTATION ON THE SOURCE OF EPIDEMIC AND PESTILENTIAL DISEASES, etc.
IN endeavoring to promote knowledge, it may sometimes be as useful to correct
ancient errors as to promulgate new discoveries. In medicine, doctrines of the
greatest importance have been handed down from generation to generation, which
although demonstrably false, have never once been called in question. The
supposed existence of contagion in plague, dysentery, and fevers, appears to
me, to be a very remarkable instance of this propensity in man, to pursue the
beaten tract, however unprofitable or unsafe. Is not this conduct often the
effect of selfishness, choosing to avoid the responsibility of innovation? And
is it not for the same reason, that erroneous doctrines generally remain longer
undisproved, in proportion to the extent of their influence upon practice?
However that may be, it is certain that contagious matter has, in all ages,
been considered, by the multitude, as the cause of plague, dysentery, and
fevers, -- by far the most destructive diseases that affect the human race. And
this hipothesis, upon the belief of which must have depended, and may yet
depend, the lives of millions of our fellow creatures, seems to have been
implicitly assented to, by every physician, from Hippocrates to the present day.

ALTHOUGH I had long entertained doubts upon this subject, it was not till very
lately, that I was led to consider it, with particular attention. Upon perusing
Dr. Rush's publication on the yellow fever, which desolated Philadelphia in
1793, all my former doubts recurred, with ten fold force; and the history of
that epidemic, served to complete my conviction, that no general disease, which
affects a person more than once during life, can ever be communicated by
contagion. But as this term may be variously understood, it may not be improper
to give a definition of it in this place. Contagion I conceive to be -- a
specific matter, generated in a person affected with disease, and capable of
communicating that particular disease, with or without contact, to another.

WAS it a matter of mere idle speculation to inquire into the truth of this
hypothesis, not less respectable from its antiquity than from the universality
of its adoption, I should have been entirely silent. But the frequent
recurrence and great mortality of epidemic and pestilential diseases, in many
parts of the globe, render it an object of the most essential importance to
ascertain, whether they are ever contagious. That they never arise from that
source, I shall endeavor to prove, in the following manner: --

1st -- BY showing that consequences would necessarily result from the
existence of contagion in epidemic and pestilential diseases, which do not
actually take place.

2dly. -- BY showing that the existence of contagion, has always been taken for
granted in these diseases, not only without any proof, but even cantrary to the
evidence of numerous and convincing facts.

3dly -- BY pointing out the real source of such epidemic and pestilential
diseases, as have usually been reputed contagious; viz. a certain state or
certain vicissitudes of the atmosphere, together with the casual application of
other powers, producing indirect debility When any reference is made to general
medical principles, in this Dissertation, they are understood to be those of
the Elementa Medicinae Brunonis, with the modifications of that doctrine,
contained in the preceding "View of the Science of Life."
.

I -- CONSEQUENCES would result from the existence of contagion, in epidemic
and pestilential diseases, which do not actually take place.

IF a person be affected with any contagious disease, it will necessarily be
communicated to every other person who comes within the infectious distance By
infectious distance, I do not mean to express any definite space, but merely
the distance at which contagion is supposed to act.
, and is not at the time laboring under some disease higher in degree Vide
prop. viii. View of the Science of Life.
. But it is well known, to every one conversa^^* in the subject, that in
plague, dysentery, and fevers, a very small proportion only of those, who come
within what may be supposed to be the infectious distance, or even in contact
with the sick, is seized with these diseases. In the most universal epidemic,
it does not appear that a tenth part of the whole inhabitants of a city, has
ever been, at one time, affected. But let it be supposed, that every sixth
person might have been seized; is it credible that the remaining five sixths
were, either, not within the infectious distance, or were at the time,
laboring under some disease higher in degree, than the prevailing epidemic? If
it even be admitted that, in a terrible pestilence, one half of the inhabitants
of a city, may possibly be affected, the supposition that the other half could
escape, if the disease was contagious, would be more extravagant; for the
greater the number affected, the less chance must any individual have, of being
exempted from contagion. Allowing that one person in ten may not have been
within the infectious distance; and that one in an hundred may have been
laboring, at the time, under a more severe disease, than the prevailing
epidemic; such is the exact proportion that would escape. The reverse, however,
is probably true. But whatever may be the proportion of the number seized, to
those that escape, it cannot be doubted that the application of powers, which
produced the disease, in the person first affected, is adequate to produce the
same effect, in all those, who are subsequently seized.

AS the fact cannot be denied, that a great majority have escaped, after
contact with persons ill of diseases supposed to be contagious, attempts may
perhaps be made to account for it, by supposing a certain peculiarity of
constitution, which exempts from, or disposes to disease. Is it the many, who
escape, that have this happy peculiarity of constitution; or the few, who are
seized, that are so unfortunate as to possess it? The former are evidently too
numerous to admit of such an hypothesis. The property must, therefore, I
conclude, be given to the latter. But a child, here and there, is exempted from
smallpox, although exposed to its contagion. In order to preserve a
consistency, th^s fact must be accounted for, by the same, or another
peculiarity of constitution. Peculiarities of constitution, then, exempt from
contagion in one case, and dispose to it in another* and thus a term, which in
reality means nothing, may be made to account for any thing. For my own part, I
must confess my inability to comprehend any other peculiarities of
constitution, or idiosyncrasies of habit than what are constituted, by the
different degrees of health and disease, -- the different states of the
excitability.

IT appears, therefore, wholly unnecessary, for any purpose that I know, to
suppose that, in epidemic and pestilential diseases, contagious matter is
generated in those individuals who are first seized, and from them communicated
to others; unless indeed, it be determined, at all events, to take (...)
existence of such a power for granted.

IT is a well known law of nature, that smallpox, meazles, and other general
diseases, which are unquestionably contagious, occur, in the same person, only
once during life. It is also acknowledged by every author, who has written upon
the subject, that plague, dysentery, and fevers affect the same person, as
often as the powers which produce them are appied. Dr. Alexander Russel,
affirms of the plague the having had this distemper once, does not prevent the
contracting it again. I have seen instances of the same person being infected
three several times, in the same season. A similar observation is made by Dr.
Rush, respecting the yellow fever of Philadelphia. Cases of reinfection," says
he, were very common during the prevalence of this fever.

SMALLPOX, meazles, and other general diseases, which occur only once during
life, never disappear, until the whole of those who have been within the
infectious distance, and were not, at the time, laboring under some disease
higher in degree, have received the infection. As these diseases are very mild
They are not diseases of excessive excitement, but of indirect debility, and
generally of a low degree.
, children sometimes resist the power of contagion, from the superior force of
other diseases, although they may be so slight as to escape common observation.
I will venture to assert that no person, in perfect health, ever was, or can be
exposed to the power of contagion, without receiving the specific disease,
which that contagion produces; excepting in small pox, meazels, etc. when the
person has previously the disease.

PLAGUE, dysentery, and fevers, then, as they are not subject to the same law,
would, if they were contagious, never disappear. The contagion, meeting with no
obstacle from other diseases, feverer in degree (for there are few indeed of
that description) would exercise an unlimited and fatal sway. No person could
escape. Those, who once recovered would, again and again, be seized. Infection
would proceed, in a continued circle, until the whole human race was
extinguished.

2. THE existence of contagion in plague, dysentery, and fevers, has uniformly
been taken for granted, not only without proof, but even contrary to the
evidence of numerous and convincing facts.

IT is well known, that, in hospitals, camps, and ships, a very small
proportion only of those, who sleep within a short distance of, are frequently
in conversation, or even in contact with, persons ill of typhus, dysentery, or
fever, is seized with these diseases. So far from infection being invariably
communicated in this manner, no instance of it has ever been distinctly traced.
If such cases had ever been recorded, we must either reject them as false, or
abandon one of the fundamental axioms of philosphy. For, whatever has happened
once, must happen often; it must happen always, in similar circumstances. But
in the situations alluded to, these circumstances constantly occur, and the
alleged effects do not follow. It is not fair to conclude, that dysentery is
contagious, because one person happens to be taken ill, while in the
neighborhood of another, who has got the disease. If the conclusion was just,
all within the infectious distance, not laboring under a disease higher in
degree, would be similarly affected. They would have the disease with as much
equality of force as children have the smallpox. In proportion to the number
affected, the power of contagion would increase. It would proceed in a
geometrical ratio, diverging from the center, to every point of the
circumference, of a city, a camp, an hospital, or a ship. It is evident then,
that in these situations, a contagion, which and the power of producing its
peculiar diease, in the same person, more than once during life, would never
disappear. But dysentery, fevers, and the plague itself cease, in all those
situations, without having affected perhaps a tenth part of the community. They
cease too when they are epidemic, according to some periodical law, which
evinces that they do not arise from any casual and uncertain source, like the
accidental application of contagious matter.

THE absurdity of the conclusions which result from admitting contagious matter
to be the cause of epidemic and pestilential diseases could not have been
overlooked till now, if the existence of such a source had not been so
implicitly taken for granted, that even to call in question the truth of it,
must, to many, have the appearance of successive skepticism. But I shall
endeavor to deduce my conclusions, from such numerous and undoubted facts, as
ought, perhaps, to exempt me from that imputation.

DURING the prevalence of epidemic and pestilential diseases, it is well known,
that nurses, and other attendants upon the sick, are not more liable to be
affected than other people, who undergo an equal degree of fatigue. It may
perhaps, be said, that they become habituated to the contagion. But how do they
escape the first application of it? They have not then got the habit. No person
of that description caught the infection from those who died, of what was
called the jail fever at the black assizes at Oxford; a case of alleged
contagion so generally known, and so frequently quoted by authors. That the
power, which occasioned disease at the Oxford assizes, was not contagious
matter, is proved by its producing diarhoea in some, while it produced fevers
in others. And further, no person was seized, who had not been directly exposed
to the influence of the noxious air. Specific contagion, I conceive, cannot
produce a disease less uniform in its appearance, than smallpox and meazles.
But every epidemic and pestilential disease, which has hitherto been reputed
contagious, assumes such various and dissimilar appearances, in different
persons, that they cannot be the effect of any power, equal and uniform in its
operation. The symptoms are not, in any two persons, exactly alike. Hence the
difference of opinion among the physicians of Philadelphia, during their late
epidemic; some asserting that every disease had resolved itself into yellow
fever, while others, certainly with more reason, affirmed that the diseases of
the city, were various. No epidemic can become so general, as to suppress all
other diseases; because all men, laboring under diseases of lower degree, are
not exposed to the powers which produce an epidemic. The same person indeed
cannot, at the same time, have both a dysentery and a dropsy; It is only meant,
in as far as they are general diseases; for, the local affections, which have
obtained these names, as they occur in different parts of the body, may readily
co-exist.
but every usual variety of disease may exist in a community, even in the time
of a powerful epidemic, although the epidemic be the most general disorder. The
dissimilarity of symptoms, which occasioned this difference of opinion at
Philadelphia, is, to me, a convincing proof, were there not many others, that
the yellow fever of that city, did not arise from any power, of such uniform
operation, as contagious matter. Like ^ine, opium, or mercury, specific
contagion must produce similar effects, upon all men, who are similarly
situated. It must act alike in Egypt and in America, in London and in
Constantinople. But, according to all accounts, the symptoms of epidemic
diseases, in different parts of the world, are very dissimilar; while those of
diseases that are undoubtedly contagious, such as smallpox, meazles, (...)
venerea, etc. are the same in all. Wine will intoxicate, cathartics will purge,
mercury will salivate in ^ll countries. They will produce these effects, upon
almost all men; certainly upon all men who are in health. Those only, who are
in a state of disease, higher in degree than these powers can produce, will
resist their operation. It is impossible, with the greatest quantity of mercury
that has ever been given, to salivate a person, whose liver is in a state of
supuration. No quantity of wine will intoxicate a person, ill of typhus fever,
without having first cured the disease.
But this proportion cannot be one in a thousand, perhaps not one in ten
thousand. Such also may be the proportion that would escape, from the effects
of a specific contagion, applied to them. It is common, however, for men in
health, to be exposed to contact with the sick, and to escape. In that case,
contagion, if the disease had been c^ntagious, must inevitably have been
applied; and without producing its imputed effects.

WAS not the typhus fever, by which so many of the unfortunate people, who were
imprisoned in the black hole of Calcutta, perished, attended with an endless
variety of symptoms? It does not appear that the disease was, in that case,
communicated to any person, who had not breathed the polluted air of the
dungeon. Will it be said, that the Nabob Surajeddoullah had previously ordered
contagious matter to be inserted into the black hole? If not, whence was it
imported, or where generated?

IN the history of these diseases, I think it may be remarked, that physicians
have been peculiarly exempted from their influence. Is it that there is a
principle of repulsion between medical skill and contagion? or is it not rather
for this plain reason, that these diseases depend upon some other power, which
the physician is better able to avoid? For, will any reasonable person assert,
that a medical practitioner (unless the structure of his body be supposed
different from that of other people) can visit a patient ten or twelve times,
feel his pulse, and converse with him, without receiving the infection, if the
disease of the patient be contagious, and the practitioner has not, at the
time, a disease of higher degree? Physicians, in perfect health, have attended
as many patients, ill of diseas^ ^itherto reputed contagious, as they could
visit in the day; and yet have escaped. But it is as absurd to believe, that a
person can be exposed to the influence of any power, capable of producing
plague, dysentery, or fever, without being affected, as that a large quantity
of spirituous liquors, or stimuli, still more diffusible, can be applied to
living bodies, without producing a correspondent effect. If it be at all
admitted, that contagion is the cause of these diseases; it must also be
admitted, that contagion, as in this case, may sometimes be applied, without
producing its effect, -- which is impossible.

ANOTHER fact worthy of notice is, that aged persons and children, are both
seldomer and less severely attacked by epidemic and pestilential diseases, than
the young and middle aged; and women seldomer and less severely than men. Now,
if contagion was the source of these diseases, the case would be exactly
reversed. Old people, women, and children, being more in the way of contagion,
would be more frequently and more severely attacked. But the young and middle
aged, being more exposed to the vicissitudes of the atmosphere, -- the
principal source, as I shall afterward endeavor to show, of those diseases,
than aged persons and children, and men more than women, they are consequently
more severely attacked. It has been a puzzling question to solve, why old
people and children have been less obnoxious to plague, dysentery, and fevers,
than the young and middle aged; and women less than men? But the solution will
no longer be difficult, if it should be proved that these diseases never arise
from contagion, but are always produced by certain states or certain
vicissitudes of the atmosphere, together with the application of other powers,
cooperating in the production of indirect debility. For, it is evident that,
to the influence of these states, or vicissitudes, and of these powers, the
young and middle aged are always more exposed than old people and children; and
men more than women.

LET a person, in the height of a pestilential disease, be removed from the
atmosphere which occasioned it, into one more pure, he will communicate the
infection to no one. It has been remarked, says Dr. Rush, speaking of the
yellow fever of Philadelphia that this fever did not spread in the country,
when carried there by persons who were infected, and afterward died with it.
In another place he observes, during four times that it occurred in Charleston,
in no one instance, according to Dr. Lining, was it propagated in any other
part of the state. Vide an account of the bilious, remitting, yellow fever, of
Philadelphia, by B. Rush, M. D. page 157.
Convincing proofs these, that the disease did not depend upon contagion, but
upon the state of the atmosphere at Philadelphia in the one case, and at
Charleston in the other. The various ways in which the College of Physicians of
Philadelphia and Dr. Rush attempted to account for the origin of the contagion,
which they supposed had produced the yellow fever of 1793. shows into what
inconsistencies the most sensible men may be betrayed, when they attempt to
reason upon false data. Having all taken the existence of contagion for
granted, they only differ with respect to the origin of it. The College was of
opinion, that it was imported; Dr. Rush affirmed, that it was generated in the
city. A better description cannot be given of the several hypotheses, which
distracted the faculty, upon this occasion, than in his own words, public
report had derived it (the contagion) from several different Islands; had
chased it from ship to ship, and from shore to shore; and finally conveyed it,
at different times, in the city, alternately by dead and living bodies; and
from these tales, all of which, when investigated, were proved to be without
foundation, the college of physicians composed their letter. Containing their
opinion respecting the origin and treatment of the Yellow Fever. Vide Rush,
page 21.
It would seem, from this conduct of the college, as if medical superstition
had changed its names, and that in accounting for the origin of pestilential
fevers, celestial, planetary, and demoniacal influence, had only yielded to the
term -- importation Vide an Account of the Yellow Fever, page 164.
. But it does not appear that Dr. Rush, in his attempts to trace the origin of
the contagion, was more successful than the college. He supposed it to arise
from putrid, vegetable exhalation, produced by a heap of damaged coffee, lying
on a wharf. But the progress of the disease was not traced, with any certainty,
to that focus. It is evident, indeed, from Dr. Rush's own account, that the
inhabitants of other streets had been as early and as generally affected, as
those of the streets in the immediate neighborhood of the coffee.

IN this, and every other case of epidemic and pestilential disease, the
existence of contagion would seem to have been uniformly taken for granted, not
only without examination, but even contrary to the evidence of numerous facts
-- a conduct certainly not less unphilosophical in medicine, than in any other
department of science.

3 -- CERTAIN states or vicissitudes of the atmosphere, together with the
application of other powers, producing indirect debility, are the cause of all
epidemic and pestilential diseases, which affect the same person more than once
during life, and have hitherto been reputed contagious,

EVERY country has its unhealthy season, corresponding with some particular
period of the year, at which the diseases, peculiar to that country, are more
general and severe than at other times. This is observed to happen, in those
months most remarkable for heat, calm weather, or sudden vicissitudes of the
atmosphere; and they are nearly the same in all parts of the world. In Europe,
Asia, Africa and America, from July to October, with little variation, includes
the most unhealthy portion of the year. In some places indeed, as Aleppo, that
happens from April to July; but always with a certain regula^^ty, coinciding
with periodical states of the weather. The diseases which anunally arise from
this source, are not always general or severe. It is only when the heat, calm
weather, or vicissitudes of the atmosphere, have been uncommon, that the
ordinary diseases of the season arise to a degree, which constitutes epidemic
and pestilential diseases.

FROM every record of epidemic and pestilential diseases, it would appear, that
they have their stated periods of recurrence; that these periods are such
months, as are most remarkable for vicissitudes of the atmosphere; that they
become general, only in years in which these vicissitudes are exteme; that they
do not occur in seasons when the degrees of heat or cold, however intense, are
equable; nor in years when the state of the atmosphere remains tempered
throughout; and that they uniformly cease, with the establishment of an equable
state of the atmosphere, whether the weather be hot or cold.

THE yellow fever in America appeared six different times about the 1st or
middle of August, and declined or ceased about the middle of October -- viz. in
1732, 1739, 1745, and 1748 in Charleston; in 1791 in New York; and 1793 in
Philadelphia. Rush on the Yellow Fever.
In 1793, the yellow fever appeared also in different parts of the West Indies.
Vide Chisholm on the Malignant, Pestilential Fever, etc.
Attempts were made, in the Islands, to trace the contagion to the continent.
On the continent it was traced back to the Islands. But why should we hesitate
to believe, that the same general causes which produced unusual vicissitudes of
the atmosphere, in the one country, should extend their influence to the other?
In the same year, and the same season, the English settlers, on the coast of
Africa, were siezed with a fever, which proved fatal to a great number of them.
It happened, at this period, that a ship arrived from Boullam, on the coast of
Africa, at Grenada, in the West Indies. And hence the contagion was supposed,
by Dr. Chisholm and others, to have been imported in that ship. Was it
necessary, it might easily be shown, that these suppositions were adopted upon
very slight grounds. But if the existence of contagion can be disproved upon
general grounds, it would be superfluous to investigate every particular
circumstance in its favor, that may have been hastily assumed as a fact.

IN Aleppo, according to Dr. Russell, the European inhabitants regularly shut
themselves up, in their houses, every year, at some period between April and
July. And the rich natives begin to adopt the same plan, as far as their
customs will permit them to do, without scandal. From this fact, it appears
that the plague occurs at Aleppo, in a state less or more mild, almost
annually, and that it commences and ceases at certain known periods. But it has
been remarked there that, in its most severe state, this disease recurs only at
periods of ten years, or there-abouts -- a regularity, which cannot, upon any
known principle, be attributed to a power of such casual application, as
contagious matter.

It has farther been observed of the plague, that the winter puts an end to it
at Constantinople; the summer destroys it in Egypt. In fact, what epedemic or
pestilential disease has been known to occur with severity at these periods of
the year? But, in order to account for this, will it be said, that contagion is
destroyed, both by heat and by cold? The assertion would certainly be absurd.
Besides the fact can be muhc better explained. At these periods, the body is
not so liable to disease, because it is not exposed to the effects of heat and
cold, dryness and moisture, tempestuous and calm weather, suddenly and
frequently alternated. These vicissitudes are most remarkable in spring and
autumn, which accordingly are the seasons, most fertile of diseases, in all
parts of the globe. It is a curious circumstance, and much to our present
purpose, that the belief of the Turks in the contagious nature of the plague,
has considerably increased, since their communication with Europeans has become
more extended. Formerly there was no want of servants, or relations, to
undertake every necessary office about the sick, the same as in any common
distemper; but now, it is difficult to procure even mercenary attendants. "I
have met," says Dr. Russell, speaking of the plague at Aleppo in 1760, with
several instances, even in Turkish houses, where the mistress of the family was
not only ill attended, but even abandoned through the timidity of her daughters
and slaves. I apprehend the dread of contagion gains ground among the
Mahommedans, in all parts of Syria, where the Europeans have much commerce.
Mahommed, having probably perceived the bad consequences that would result from
such a dread, condemned the belief of diseases being spread by contagion, as
impious. And this at least shows, that the plague has not always been supposed,
by the Turks, to arise from contagion; or if it has, that the belief was deemed
injurious. With the example of European credulity before them, the modern
followers of Mahommed may, in no long time, put more faith in contagion, than
in this law of their prophet. But in such a renunciation of faith, even a
Christian will have little cause to rejoice. If it should appear to be only a
substitution of one error for another, Europeans will not have much reason to
ridicule the former stupidity of the Turks; nor to boast of their own superior
penetration, in intoducing among them a belief in the contagious nature of
pestilential diseases.

PHYSICIANS, having observed the dependence of epidemic diseases upon the state
of the atmosphere, their uniform appearance under some states, and cessation
under others, could not well reconcile these facts with the hypothesis of
contagion. But a reconciliation was, at all events, determined upon. The state
of the atmosphere was made to act upon the matter of contagion, in such a
manner as to explain every phoenomenon. Is the weather hot, when an epidemic
commences, heat gives activity to contagion; is it cold, cold is favorable to
contagion; is it dry, the contagion is concentrated; is it wet, diluted: even
vicissitudes set it in motion. But should the epidemic happen to cease, during
any of these states of the atmosphere, this may with equal facility be
accounted for, by assigning to the same powers, as has frequently been done in
medical reasoning, different or even opposite modes of operation. Let the
existence of contagion be once admitted as a fact, and there is nothing more
easy than to trace its orign to some ideal source. The most obvious, and
therefore the most frequently insisted upon, is contact with some person, ill
of the same disease. But as the person, who happens to be first seized, could
not have received the infection in that manner, it was found necessary to refer
it to various sources. Even with those advantages, however, it was often
difficult, and exercised the ingenuity of the learned, to discover the origin
of particular epidemics. The imputed sources of those calamities became at
length so numerous, that it requires little labor to trace the origin of all
diseases to some one, or other of them. If, for instance, it cannot be traced
to actual contact, it will probubly be discovered, that the patient has, at
some recent period, been exposed to the effluvia of rotten hemp, flax, coffee,
cabbage, onions, black pepper, or potatoes; for all of these powers have been
said to produce epidemics. But in years, when these diseases are so highly
pestilential, that the effluvia, arising from a heap of rotten vegetables,
might seem too trifling a power to produce such important effects, recourse may
still be had to the importation of contagious matter, in bales of goods from
the Mediterranean; or, with the ingenious Gibbon, to the generation of it, by
swarms of putrid locusts, in Egypt. These hypotheses, were they not supported
by the authority of celebrated names, are almost too ridiculous for refutation.
That a parcel of rotten vegetables should produce a disease, that is
contagious, and capable of producing desolation and death, over a populous
city* ought not certainly to be credited without proof; and with respect to
proof, it does not appear that there is any, excepting that, during the
prevalance of epidemics, vegetables have become putrid. Was putrid vegetable
exhalation ever the cause of a contagious disease, it would spread in an
evident and regular progression, affecting first those who are nearest to its
source. There could be no possibitity of mistaking or overlooking the cause.
But as no such progress has ever been ascertained, and as it might have easily
been traced, had there been any truth in the opinion, it is every way
inconsistent with just reasoning to admit, that putrid vegetable exhalation can
be the cause of contagion. -- I mean not to deny, that putrid vegetable
exhalation may produce disease, but the disease will be contagious. There
cannot be a doubt that putrid vegetable exhalation is a power, capable of
producing disease, in its immediate neighborhood; but it is equally certain,
that it never can occasion an epidemic or pistilential disease, over a whole
country, or city. The putridity of vegetables, and the epidemic diseases of
animals, are probably occasioned by the same power, viz. a certain state or
certain vicissitudes of the atmosphere. That kind of weather or that
disposition of the surrounding elements, which occasions an uncommon mortality
among animals and vegetables, will also produce an uncommon degree of
putrefaction, among these substances, their dead state.

COULD the history of all epidemic and pestilential diseases of animals be
minutely traced, I am-well convinced it would be found that they have uniformly
been attended with correspondent diseases of vegetables, in that particular
part of a country, to which they have been confined. For, as all living bodies
are subject to the same laws, Vide prop. I. View of the Science of Life.
it is evident that any power, which can produce general disease in animals,
will have the same effect upon that portion of vegetable substances to which it
is applied; and vice versa. Accordingly those diseases of indirect debility of
vegetables, known to farmers by the terms rust and blast, have often been
observed to occur, at the same time with epidemic diseases among animals. And
the reason why such a coincidence has not always been expressly noticed, is
probably, that the subject has not been considered in this point of view. If
such a coincidence then should be found invariably true, will it be said that
contagion may be communicated from animals to vegetables, and from vegetables
to animals?

WHEN particular districts of a country, whole nations, or considerable
portions of a continent, are suffering from a scarcity of grain, will it be
said that the disease of vegetables, which is the cause of the scarcity, was
produced, not by the state of the atmosphere, but by contagion? In this case,
how is the contagious matter to be traced? Is it wafted, as it were by a magic
influence, from field to field, -- over mountains, rivers, lakes, and oceans?
The infectious distance would, in that case, be wide indeed! But I apprehend it
will scarcely be contended, that the epidemic diseases of vegetables are
contagious. And in regard to animals, the opinion does not appear at all more
probable; excepting from the single circumstance of their not being rooted to
the soil. Would it not be more rational to admit, that the diseases, in both
cases, as produced by the operation of some such general power as the states or
vicissitudes of the atmosphere, to the influence of which animals and
vegetables are equally exposed?

OF the numerous facts, by which this proposition is supported, it will suffice
to quote a few. As Dr. Rush's account of the yellow fever of Philadelphia is,
perhaps, the best history that has been given of any epidemic, it may be often
with propriety referred to. There was something in the "heat and drought of the
summer months," (1793) which was uncommon, in their influence upon the human
body. Laborers every where gave out, (to use the common phrase) in harvest,
and frequently too when the mercury in Farenheit's Thermometer was under 84***
**. The crops of grain and grass were impaired by the droughts.

IT appears, from several observations, that there was, that year, an uncommon
calmness of the weather.

IN the year 1762, the billious yellow fever prevailed in Philadelphia, after a
very hot summer, and spread like a plague, carrying off daily, for some time,
upwards of twenty persons. Can it be doubted, that these states of the weather
will produce disease, both among animals and vegetables? And if the operation
of such an obvious power, be adequate to explain the phoenomena of pestilential
diseases, what need is there of adopting an ideal one, like contagious matter,
to account for them?

MR. Potter, in a letter to Dr. Rush, dated from Caroline, county Maryland, 1st
November, 1793, says, it is an invariable maxim here, both among physicians and
farmers, that, if the wheat be damaged by rust or blast, a contagious dysentery
is soon to follow. Page 181.


PREVIOUS to the occurrence of every epidemic, something unusual, in the state
of the atmosphere, has always been remarked. A yellow fever appeared at Cadiz,
after a hot and dry summer in 1764; and at Pensacola, in similar circumstances,
in 1765. Was the contagion traced, in this case, from Cadiz to Pensacola, by a
direct or circuitous channel, or was it traced at all? -- That the yellow fever
of Philadelphia, in 1793, depended upon the states or vicissitudes of the
atmosphere, evidently appears from the following observations, communicated to
Dr. Rush, by a gentleman, who resided occasionally in southern and tropical
countries. He informed him, that he had observed, in the month of July, several
weeks before the yellow fever became general, a peculiar and universal
sallowness of complexion, in the faces of the citizens of Philadelphia, such as
he had observed to precede the prevalence of malignant bilious fevers, in hot
climates. Dr. Dick had observed the same appearance in the faces of people in
Alexandria, accompanied in some cases, by a yellowness in the eyes, during the
last summer, (1793) and some time before violent, bilious fevers became
epidemic, upon the banks of the Potowmac. Vide Rush, page 183.
A change so gradual and general in the appearance, both of animals and
vegetables, can never be explained by admitting contagion, but is easily and
satisfactorily accounted for, by supposing the states or vicissitudes of the
atmosphere to have been the noxious power. It appears farther, from the
register of the weather, that there was no rain between the 25th of August, and
the 15th of October, except a few drops, hardly enough to lay the dust of the
streets, on the 9th of September, and the 12th of October. In consequence of
this drought, the springs and wells failed in many parts of the country. The
dust, in some places, extended two feet above the surface of the ground. The
pastures were deficient or burnt up. There was a scarcity of autumnal fruits in
the neighborhood of the city. But while vegetation drooped or died from the
want of moisture in some places, it revived with preternatural vigor, from
unusual heat, in others. Cherry trees blossomed, and apple, pear, and plumb
trees bore young fruit, in several gardens in Trenton, thirty miles from
Philadelphia, in the month of October.

HOWEVER unoffensive uniform heat, when agitated by gentle breezes, may be;
there is, I believe, no record of a dry, warm, and stagnating air, having
existed for any length of time, without producing diseases. Hippocrates in
describing a pestilential fever, says, the year in which it prevailed, was
without a breeze of wind. The same state of the atmosphere, for six weeks, is
mentioned in many of the histories of the plague, which prevailed in London, in
1665. See Rush, pages 109 -- 110.


THUS all the facts stated by Dr. Rush, and many of his observations prove,
that the yellow fever of Philadelphia, in common with other epidemics, was
produced by the states or vicissitudes of the atmosphere, and not by contagious
matter, imported, or generated in the city.

PESTILENTIAL diseases are neither so frequent nor so fatal in modern, as they
were in ancient times. Cities are now more commodiously built; the mode of
living is improved; and every circumstance that can contribute to the
preservation of health better understood. Is it not from these changes, in the
state of society, that London, Paris, Madrid, Lisbon, and Marseilles are now
much less subject to epidemic diseases than formerly? And in the progress of
improvement, may not these diseases entirely disappear? The inhabitants of
Grand Cairo, according to Mr. Savary, are heaped together by thousands. Two
hundred citizens there occupy less space than thirty at Paris. Thirty citizens
at Paris occupy less space than ten citizens of London. Twenty citizens of
Grand Cairo, therefore occupy less space than one citizen of London. The manner
in which the citizens of Grand Cairo are thus crowded together, would alone
seem sufficient, in a stagnant state of the atmosphere, to produce pestilential
diseases of the highest degree.

THE large commercial cities, which have been most frequently ravaged by the
plague, are for the convenience of sea ports, built in low and unhealthy
situations. Their streets have generally been irregular, crowded, and dirty. In
these cities, therefore, pestilential diseases always commence. This
circumstance, together with that effect of self-love, which prevents us from
discovering the origin of any evil with ourselves, probably gave rise to the
idea, that contagion was imported in bales of goods, or even in parcels of old
clothes, from distant countries. The Epidemic of a season, appearing generally
in several places at a time, by enabling the inhabitants of one place to trace
it to another, has also served to strengthen the same opinion. But may not
similar states of the atmosphere occur in the same season, in Egypt and in
Syria, in Damascus and in Aleppo, in Grand Cairo and in Marseilles, in Smyrna
and in London, in the West India Islands and in America? And will not these
similar states produce pestilential diseases of a similar appearance? The
plague, indeed, will never appear with similar symptoms in London and in
Constantinople, because the states or vicissitudes of the atmosphere, in these
two places, can never be exactly alike. But if it depended upon a power, like
specific contagion, which must be the same in all places, the symptoms would
every where appear with a uniformity similar to those of smallpox.

CONTAGION then, it would seem, cannot explain the phoenomena of pestilential
diseases, without the assistance of the states or vicissitudes of the
atmosphere; but the states or vicissitudes of the atmosphere will explain them,
without the assistance of contagion. Here I will again avail myself of the
authority of Dr. Rush, as far as importation is concerned. The report of the
College of Physicians has served to confirm me in an opinion, that the plagues
which desolated most of the countries in Europe in former centuries, and which
were always said to be foreign extraction, were in most instances of domestic
origin. Between the years 1006 and 1680, the plague was epidemic 52 times all
over Europe. It prevailed 14 times in the 14th century. The state of Europe in
this long period is well known. Idleness, a deficiency of vegetable aliment, a
camp life from the frequency of wars, famine, an uncultivated and marshy soil,
small cabins, and the want of cleanliness in dress, diet, and furniture, all
concurred to generate pestilential diseases. The plagues which prevailed in
London every year, from 1593 to 1611, and from 1636 to 1649, I suspect were
generated in that city. The diminution of plagues in Europe, more especially in
London, appears to have been produced by the great change in the diet and
manners of the people; also by the more commodious and airy forms of the houses
of the poor, among whom the plague always makes its first appearance. It is
true these plagues were said by authors to have been imported, either directly
or indirectly from the Levant; but the proofs of such importation were in most
cases as vague and deficient as they were of the West India origin of our late
epidemic. The pestilentitl fevers, which have been mentioned, have been
described by authors, by the generic name of the plague. Page 265 -- 166.


WHY do pestilential diseases always make their first appearance among the
poor? Has contagious matter an instinctive attachment to this class of men? No.
But they are constantly more exposed than the rich, to the principal power,
which produces pestilential diseases, viz. certain states o^ certain
vicissitudes of the weather.

THE vicissitudes of the atmosphere constitute a power great, evident, and
extensive, in its effects upon the animal and vegetable world: -- a source, to
which the epedemic and pestilential diseases of living bodies may, with
certainty, be traced. Whereas contagious matter is a power that has uniformly
been taken for granted, without examination; of which the existence, in
epidemic and pestilential diseases, is even disproved by a numerous induction
of facts; and, if admitted, is incapable of explaining their phenomenon.

FROM all these considerations, I conclude that no general disease, excepting
such as occur only once during life, is contagious. And that all epidemic and
pestilential diseases, which occur more than once during life, and have
hitherto been reputed contagious, depend upon certain states, or certain
vicissitudes of the atmosphere, together with the application of other powers,
producing indirect debility.

VIEWING this as not merely a question of idle medical disputation, but as one
of the utmost practical importance, I regret that neither my abilities nor my
situation, enable me to do it that justice, which it certainly deserves. The
attempt, which I have made, may however, be the means of calling forth the
observations of others, better qualified to illustrate the subject. Whether the
existence of contagion, in epidemic and pestilential diseases, be ultimately
proved, or disproved, a discussion, and decision of the question must be
attended with considerable utility. Let us take a view of the pernicious
consequences which result from the opinion now received, supposing it to be
false; and contrast it with the benefits that would arise from a contrary one,
supposing it to be true.

THE consternation and mortality, occasioned by epidemic diseases, must always
be greatly increased, by a belief in their contagious nature. Those who are yet
well, will be the more readily affected; and those who are ill, will be in
greater danger of suffering, from the desertion of timid relations, or
mercenary attendants. What serious evils may not the dread of contagion
produce, among the uninformed multitude, when it can occasion such scenes as
the following, among sensible men of the medical profession? In 1665, we find
Dr. Hodges prescribing, from his parlor window, for patients in the streets of
London; and at a later period, Dr. P. Russell prescribing from a chamber
window, fifteen feet above the level of the streets at Aleppo. Dr. A. Russell's
candid account of the manner in which he prescribed, is worthy of note; both as
it tends to disprove contagion, and to show the pernicious consequences of
believing in it. In the two preceding years (he wrote in 1744) I had prescribed
for the sick, chiefly from the accounts brought me by a person, whom I employed
to visit them; for though before shutting up, I was often, in spite of all my
precautions, deceived by false representations of the case, and led to visit
some of the infected; yet I avoided it to the utmost of my power: but this year
the dread of contagion (like that of other dangers to which one has been long
exposed) being much worn off, I attended the sick in the plague in the same
manner as those laboring under ordinary fevers. Could Dr. Russell, or his
deputy, have attended the sick, with impunity, if the disease had been
contagious? In other words, can a power be applied, without producing its
correspondent effect? I know not by what refinement of sophistry the force of
this objection can be alluded. To come down to a period still more recent, some
of the physicians of Philadelphia are said to have fled the city, during the
prevalence of their late epidemic; a conduct that must have added both to ^he
consternation and mortality of their patients. The effects of a popular belief
in such opinions are, in my estimation, no less injurious to mankind, than they
are humiliating to the medical profession. What would be said of a military
officer, who deserted his post at the sight of an enemy, leaving his
fellow soldiers to fight the battle? During the rage of an epidemic, physicians
may be looked upon as general officers, in whom it is always regarded more
shameful to abandon the field of battle, than in private soldiers.

IF on the other hand, a belief in contagion was entirely laid aside, the
European inhabitants of Aleppo, and other places subject to the plague, would
no longer shut themselves up in their houses, for fear of contagion. They would
only remain at home occasionally, to avoid the influence of the sun, or
vicissitudes of the weather. Instead of a constant confinement for several
months, they would only think it necessary to refrain from going abroad during
the hottest part of the day; or to take precautions against the morning and
evening fogs. Thus the dread inspired by the apprehensions of infection, would
happily be banished from their minds; and that alone would be a powerful mean
of protecting them from disease. It is not supposed, however, that the custom
of shutting up is useless. The utility of it is evident; and it is as evidently
founded upon a principle very different from that of avoiding contagion. By
confinement, the inhabitants of Aleppo avoid exposure to heat, and the
vicissitudes of the weather, which are the real source of the plague. But their
confinement, if regulated upon principle, need neither be so constant nor so
anxious.

ANOTHER advantage that would result from rejecting the doctrine of contagion,
in pestilential diseases, is that the quarantines usually exacted of ships,
coming from places suspected of contagion, would no longer be considered
necessary. The hardship, or rather the cruelty of such ordeals, is too evident
to require a comment. Could the contagion be conveyed in the manner supposed,
the injury to individuals must of course be suffered, on account of the
community. But if it be proved that this cannot happen, the restriction must
appear exceedingly absurd. Is it probable, that London being exempted from
pestilential diseases, for many years past, will be imputed to the wonderful
strictness, with which Mediterranean ships have been made to perform this forty
days farce?

ABOVE all, the adoption of this theory, by recalling physicians from a wrong
tract of investigation, would probably be the means of enabling them to apply
principles to the cure of all epidemic diseases, hitherto so often fatal, which
would render them little more dangerous, than common fevers are at this day. --
Instead of wasting time in tracing contagious matter from city to city, they
would endeavor to discover what are the particular states or vicissitudes of
the atmosphere, which produce epidemic diseases; what are the causes of these
vicissitudes; and what are the best modes of counteracting their effects upon
the human body.

THIS subject is highly worthy of investigation. For though it may be said
that, as the stimulant powers, which are found to cure epidemic diseases,
afford a proof that they depend upon a very great degree of indirect debility,
and that therefore a minute acquaintance with the powers which occasioned them
is not necessary to guide the practice; yet it must also be admitted, that
every link, in the chain of knowledge, is a valuable acquisition. -- There is
not a fact in nature, from which some useful inference my not be drawn.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE CURE.
WHATEVER be the powers that produce epidemic diseases, it is evident, from
those which are found to cure them, that they all depend upon a high state of
indirect debility. Fevers and dysentery have of late, every where, yielded to
the powers of mercury, and other stimuli of the most diffusible kind. That is,
those medicines have been found more successful, than any that were ever used
before. If eight grains of calomel, and four grains of opium, repeated every
two, three, or four hours, will cure a fever, or a dysentery of a certain
degree, will not the same medicines produce the same effect in plague* if given
in quantities proportionate to the force of the disease? Ought not the
physicians of Aleppo to give a fair trial to a medicine in plague, which has
been found so successful in other epidemics? As plague, however, is a disease,
by all accounts, of a very high degree of exhaustion, it may sometimes be
necessary to go the length of, from fifteen to twenty grains of calomel, or
even more, in repeated doses. The duration of the action of each dose, should
regulate their repetition; but that does not seem to be yet accurately
ascertained. It appears, as far as I have been able to observe, that the
intervals, between the doses of mercury, ought not to be longer than two or
three hours. -- In exhibiting this medicine, it is a fact worthy of remark, and
deserves to be particularly remembered when large doses are required, that by a
sudden subduction of it, the patient is apt to have a very sore mouth, a
violent salivation, and sometimes an alarming discharge of blood from the
fauces. When any of these symptoms unexpectedly occur, it will be found, that
the patient has suddenly left off his medicine, or has taken it in such an
irregular manner, as to produce similar effects. This will often happen, from
the imprudence of patients, in the hands of the most skilful physicians; but it
perhaps more frequently occurs, from an ignorance of the fact. Although it has
already been noticed in my "Treatise on the Action of Mercury," yet it appears
proper to insist upon it, in a more particular manner, when that medicine is
proposed to be given in a disease, that will probably require its exhibition in
unprecedented quantities. Suppose a case of plague to require the exhibition of
a scruple of calomel every two or three hours, if it was suddenly left off, an
alarming hemorrhagy would in most cases ensue. It would be of considerable
advantage to the practitioner, to know that this effect was produced by the too
sudden subduction of the high stimulant power, which had been for some time
previously applied to the body; and that it may be prevented by the regular
exhibition and gradual reduction; or removed by the re-application of the same
power, or the substitution of others equivalent in force. Vicissitudes in the
application of substances, used in medicine, will produce disease, as well as
vicissitudes in the state of the atmosphere, or in the force of any other
exciting power. But an application of the same powers, in a due degree, will
remove the diseases which an excessive or deficient application, or alterations
in the force of them may have occasioned.

THE terms excess and deficiency, in the application of external powers to
living bodies, do not relate to the sum of stimulus usually applied in a state
of health, but to the state of the excitability at the time.

BOOKS Published and Sold, Wholesale and Retail, by W. YOUNG No. 52,
Second-Street, corner of Chesnut-Street.
BELL's Surgery, 4 vols. 8vo. 8. Doll. 50 Cts. -- do. London edition 12. Doll.
-- upon Ulcers 1. Doll. 50 Cts. Buchan's Domestic Medicine -- do. do. improved
by J. Cathrall 2. Doll. Brown's Elements of Medicine 1. Doll. 50 Cts.
Cheselden's Anatomy of the Human Body, 40 Copperplates, 1 vol. 8vo. 2. Doll.
Culpepper's Family Physician, or Medical Herbal enlarged, improved by Hill and
Hamilton, 2 vol. 8vo. 4. Doll. Cullen's Practice of Physic, with Rotherham's
notes 4. Doll. -- Materia Medica, 2 vols. 3. Doll. 33 Cts. -- Institutes of
medicine, boards 50 Cts. Chaptall's Chemistry, 3 vols. 8vo. 7. Doll. -- do. 1
do. 3. Doll. Chemical Nomenclature, boards, 1. Doll. 25 Cts. Chemical system,
extracted from the Encyclopedia, 4to. boards 2. Doll. Cavallo on electricity,
4th edition, 3 vols. with plates, third volume contains new discoveries and
improvements made since the 3d edition 6. Doll. Evidence relative to Gout 50
Cts. Gardner (John) on the Gout 75 Cts. Hunter on the Venereal, with plates 2.
Doll. 50 Cts. Innes on the Muscles 80 Cts. Lewis's Materia Medica 4. Doll.
Lavosier's Chemistry, new edition 3. Doll. 50 Cts. -- Essays 2. Doll. 60 Cts.

