AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THOMASTON, JULY 4th, 1797. AT THE REQUEST OF THE
FRIENDLY SOCIETY, AND IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY SAMUEL S. WILD, A. M.

HALLOWELL, PRINTED BY HOWARD S. ROBINSON, 1797.

At a Meeting of the FRIENDLY SOCIETY, July 4th, 1797. VOTED,
That the Reverend Messrs. WHITING and HUSE, and JAMES H. HEAD Esquire. be a
Committee to wait on SAMUEL S. WILD Esquire. and report the thanks of the Society
for his elegant and spirited Address this day delivered to them, and to request
a copy of the same for the Press.

Attest, JAMES MALCOLM, Sec. pro tem.

To the Committee of the Society.
GENTLEMEN,
A disposition to meet the wishes of the Society, so obligingly expressed by
their Committee, induces me to forget the defects of a hasty production, so far
as to submit it to their disposal; hoping to experience from the public a
larger share of candor than criticism.

I have the pleasure to remain with due regard,

Your Friend and Brother, SAMUEL S. WILD.

AN ORATION.
ON this day, fellow citizens, which ought to be commemorated as the birth day
of American Liberty, it may be proper to indulge the remembrance of those
brilliant events, in which she originated; and to refresh in our minds those
ardent principles of Patriotism, and that fervid love of our Country, which,
under divine protection, have hitherto cherished and supported her.

To the man who delights in the happiness of man, the true Philanthropist; to
those who can estimate the blessings of liberty, and who feel the importance
and dignity of national Independence, this employment must afford the sweetest
satisfaction, the most endearing consolation.

When the Tyranny of man, the persecuting spirit of Intollerance, and the
barbarity of religious fanaticism, had veiled the face of Europe with the thick
darkness of ignorance and superstition; when slavery groaned under the hand of
power, and the iron rod of oppression; when the dearest rights of the People
were sacrificed to the ambition of an unfeeling Despot, or the subtle policy of
a designing and prostituted ministry: at this gloomy period of public and
private misery, the very existence of civil liberty must soon have been
extinguished, had not an asylum been discovered in the new world, where the
poor and oppressed inhabitants of the old might find a retreat, secure from the
frowns of Tyrants, and the untold miseries which flow from a system of
oppression*

Our high spirited and noble minded Ancestors, disdaining the yoke of slavery,
and the chains and setters which bound them in disgraceful vassalage, embraced
with a degree of ardor and enthusiasm the prospect which opened through the
wilderness of America, to the blessings of Freedom and Independence. With a
spirit and fortitude, which few could emulate, and none surpass, they readily
renounced the sweets of social intercourse, the friends, relatives and
connections, whom time, nature and habit had rendered dear to them, the country
which gave them birth, and the high cultivated fields of their Forefathers;
undaunted by the dangers of the mighty deep, an ocean untried and unexplored,
alike fearless of a farce and barbarous race of savages, they bravely assumed
the mighty hazard: and here in the bosom of a wilderness, first engrafted that
scion, which has since flourished as the tree of Liberty, and whose branches
overshadow our great and rising Empire. Untainted by the vices, and luxuries of
the old world; actuated by the sublime virtues of Fortitude, Patience,
Christian Humility, and clothed with the garb of innocence and simplicity,
they meekly submitted to the allotments of Providence: and without a murmur at
their cruel destiny, endured and survived such accumulated hardships, and
misfortunes, as would wound the soul of humanity even to relate.

Being thus cruelly banished and expelled from their native country, and
without assistance or protection, exposed to a fierce and vindictive enemy, to
hunger, nakedness, penury and the long list of human calamities and wants, they
might with propriety feel themselves exonerated from all homage, fealty or
obligation to their parent state, and at liberty to form and establish a
government, such as their situation, habits and necessities might require.

But the principle, however just, was not allowed us by Great Britain: her
lengthened arm of tyranny stretched over the vast ocean, which divided us, and
basely attempted to rivet her chains on her free born American descendants. The
disgraceful edicts of her corrupt and venal Parliament, and that uniform system
of oppression, which governed her King and Ministry, at length roused us to a
sense of inquiry, and awakened in a nation of Freemen, the fervid and exalted
spirit of Independence.

We were still, however, desirous of peace: it was our first wish, and the
dearest object of our toils and counsels, and we suffered the most wanton
oppressions, the grossest insults, and the most barbarous injuries before we
could even admit the idea of a rupture with a nation, whom we had been taught
to love and honor, whom early habits of intimacy had endeared, and whose
language and manners so nearly assimilated with our own: we even prostrated
ourselves at the feet of our inexorable tyrants, and humbly sued and implored
for "peace liberty and safety;" but we sued in vain. A mistaken notion of the
American character, led the haughty tyrant of England, to impute our humility
to cowardice, and our love of Peace to a mean and debased spirit: after adding
insult to insult, indignity to wrong, and cruelty to oppression, a haughty
Parliament and an insolent Ministry, as a proof of our debasement, imperiously
demanded a deriliction of our dearest rights, "unqualified submission" and
"passive obedience."

The spirits of our Forefathers now swelled the bosoms of their descendants.
Indignant at a demand, as tyrannical as it was insolent and base, we solemnly
appealed to the God of justice for protection; and with a firmness and
decision, which expressed our abhorrence of slavery, and an ignominious
dependence, rejected their insolent terms of reconciliation; and without arms
or ammunition, the arts or implements of war: without money and without friends
to assist us, we dared the mighty contest, and bravely prepared for those
scenes of horror and cruelty, which marked the progress of an unnatural war.

Europe and the world stood astonished at the firmness and magnanimity of the
American character. The genius of liberty smiled on our efforts, and the God of
conquest, after leading and supporting us through untold dangers and bloody
conflicts, finally confirmed us in the secure possession of peace, liberty, and
independence.

The present occasion will not permit a full display, or minute detail of those
brilliant and mighty events. They exist, however, in the minds and memories of
Americans; stand recorded on the brightest page of history, and shall never
cease to be commemorated, while liberty shall be considered as a blessing, or
bravery a virtue; nor shall we I trust cease to remember, with a grateful
sensibility, the exalted talents and virtues of those patriot statesmen and
heroes, who planned and executed the birth of our Empire: Their names shall be
transmitted to posterity, with the brightest deeds of their lives, and with the
warmest acknowledgments of a grateful country: And on this day, and each
succeeding anniversary, the tear of sensibility shall stream unchecked for
those heroic patriots, who, in the cause of freedom, bravely struggling for the
rights and liberties of their country, fought and bled on the day of battle,
and fell undaunted in the crimsoned fields of glory.

Happy and heroic spirits! renowned by your toils and labors, your bravery,
sufferings and deaths; your bright examples shall animate the young warrior in
the footsteps of danger and the road which leads to glory!

Placed now in an equal rank with the nations of the earth, and secure in the
possession of independence and liberty, it remained for us to guard and protect
them by equal laws, and an equitable and vigorous administration. The few years
which succeeded the peace, prior to the adoption of the Federal Constitution,
formed a striking but miserable contrast to the bright annals which preceeded.
Divided in our councils, without regulations to commerce, or encouragement to
the arts, sciences or manufactures; with a government merely nominal, without
the powers of protection, or energy to enforce a due execution of the Laws, we
at once realized the wishes, and almost justified the presages of our ancient
foe.

But the formation and adoption of our present happy Constitution, effectually
removed those obstacles which impeded our prosperity, and formed an era in the
American history, from which we may date our increasing greatness and
importance: Under the protection of that bulwark of our liberties, we have
risen to a pitch of national splendour and happiness, which has become the
astonishment and envy of the world.

The fertility of our soil, the excellence of our climate, the rapid increase
of population, the various embellishments and inventions in the mechanic arts,
the improvements in agriculture, the growing importance of the produce of our
country, the unbounded extension of commerce, the general diffusion of
information and science, the security of property, the majestic freedom of our
government, and the firmness and equity of its administration, render America
at the present period, if not the richest, at least the most flourishing,
happy, and best informed nation on the globe.

But the picture remains to be completed. Our relative situation with the
nations of Europe in some measure obscures the brightness of our prospects, and
casts a gloom over our rich and various blessings. At the commencement of the
present cruel and destructive war, which has drenched Europe in blood, ravaged
and despoiled her fair fields of industry, and hurried millions of our fellow
creatures into the presence of their maker, we gratefully acknowledged the
goodness of God in our exemption from such awful calamities. The great
transmarine distance of our situation, our love of peace and the impartial
equi^y of our government, rendered the expectation not unreasonable that we
might still escape them.

A line of strict neutrality toward the contending nations, was at an early
period, marked out and enjoined by our government. To guard our neutral rights
and privileges, to render justice to all and injury to none, seems to have
been the first wish, and the governing object of the chief Executive of the
union. At that eventful period, the helm of our government was happily
entrusted to one of our wisest and best of citizens; to the beloved and
immortal WASHINGTON; one whose life had been covered with glory; whose exalted
virtues envy could never tarnish, nor calumny pollute; whose active benevolence
and disinterested regard for his country, had raised him a name on the earth,
which the present and future generations will never cease to revere. The
firmness and impartiality of his administration for a time secured our
tranquillity; but restless spirits were not wanting to excite a jealousy between
our own and the English nation, which soon led to the most serious complaints.

The wanton depredations committed on our commerce; the violence and insults
offered to our citizens in the peaceful employments of active industry, raised
our wounded spirits to a just sense of indignation; but the wisdom of our
Executive soon pointed out a remedy, and a successful negotiation ended in a
Treaty of Amity, which promised indemnification for our past wrongs, and
remained as a pledge of our future tranquillity.

At our last happy anniversary, perhaps our country never assumed a more
flourishing and majestic aspect. We had buried the hatchet with our cruel and
vindictive neighbors. By a treaty more favorable than could be expected from
the tyrant of Algiers, he released to us our brethren from slavery. Our
negotiations with the Court of Madrid were not unfavorable. The trade of the
Mediterranean was open, and invited the enterprise of our citizens; our flag
was displayed in the four quarters of the globe, and the prospect of peace with
the nations of the earth appeared neither delusive nor improbable.

But this calm, like most others, was but the prelude to a storm. Trusting to
the flattering expectation of a continued peace, and splendid prosperity, the
Father of his country and the Friend of man, to the deep regret of his fellow
citizens, signified his desire and intention to retire from the weight of
public cares and trusts, and to conclude a life, which had been devoted to his
country, in the peaceful retreat of domestic tranquillity. Having fought the
battles, which had established our liberties; having guarded and preserved them
by a firm, wise and equitable administration; having baffled the efforts of the
enemies of our prosperity -- and raised us to a high pitch of national
splendour; he calmly retired, loaded with the thanks and blessings of a grateful
country.

In choosing his successor, the views of the French government, which before
had been merely suspicious, assumed an alarming and menacing appearance. A
daring attempt to establish a French party and French influence in the decision
of this important election, appeared too evident to remain unnoticed. At this
moment of interesting expectation, their Minister, to the astonishment of
America, announced a Decree of the French Directory, authorizing the most
wanton depredations on our commerce, the express violation of a solemn treaty,
and those national obligations, which had hitherto been deemed sacred and
inviolable; this he accompanied with a long list of unsounded complaints, and
concluded, by announcing to our government, or rather the people, a final
suspension of the powers of his mission.

A conduct so unjust and arbitrary, and officially communicated, could hardly
be credited in America. How could we even imagine that a Decree made up of the
compound of tyranny and injustice, should proceed from a nation, professing a
fraternal attachment to us, and an enthusiastic devotion to liberty, and the
rights of man? But the events which succeeded did not permit us to doubt.

To our grief, surprise and indignation, we have been the spectators of scenes,
which have outraged the feelings of humanity, and which even despotism itself
would blush to acknowledge. We have seen for these eight months past an
uninterrupted spoliation on our commerce; our peaceful mercantile brethren
robbed of their property to the amount of millions; men of the first affluence
reduced with their families to poverty, bankruptcy and ruin; our brave and
enterprising mariners stripped even of their apparel, loaded with chains, and
confined to dungeons; while the sighs, groans and complaints, which might
escape from their wounded spirits, have been interdicted under the pains of
death, and the terrors of the Guillotine. And all this even without pretext or
provocation; for I maintain with confidence, that our govenment has been fairly
and impartially administered; that our chief Executive has been invariably
guided by a strict regard to the faith of treaties, our relative duties as a
neutral power, and an equity unknown and unrecorded in the history of nations.
Prepossessed with a friendship and partiality to France, and the cause of
Freedom in which she professed to be engaged, we turned our eyes with sympathy
and solicitude on the bleeding pages which traced her Revolution; and whether
fortunate or unfortunate, in prosperity or adversity, conquering or retreating,
we steadily manifested the warmth of our feelings, and a disposition to afford
her every favor and assistance which might not militate with our obligations to
other nations, or the known duties of neutrality.

To this national attachment, this friendly disposition, may be imputed the
patience and forbearance, with which we have endured the wrongs and indignities
offered us by her citizens; and the extreme solicitude which we have discovered
to "remove jealousies, obviate complaints," and restore a "friendly and lasting
union." Though greatly injured, we did not hesitate to make the first advances,
and though our Minister, commissioned for this purpose, has been rejected with
indignity, we are now attempting a fresh negotiation.

May it be our present and constant wish, fellow citizens, that these renewed
efforts, may prove successful; that returning justice in the French nation, may
restore us to a due exercise of our rights, and grant us such terms of
indemnification as may with safety and honor be accepted.

The possession of peace carries with it, such various, rich and important
blessings, as may well justify many and great sacrifices: It holds forth the
most solid benefits, the most alluring charms: it is the hot-bed from whence
spring the finer feelings of benevolence and humanity, and in which grow the
arts and sciences, which perfect our natures, and that national opulence which
secures our happiness and greatness. But I trust, however, we are not yet so
debased, so poor in spirit, as to purchase it at the expense of the dignity,
freedom and independence of our country: if it is only to be bought with
slavery "who is he so base" as to covet the possession!

No, Americans! if all our efforts to preserve this invaluable blessing should
prove abortive, and we should again be forced (which God forbid) into the
horrors and distressing calamities of war, let us once more rally round the
POLE OF LIBERTY -- once more cast our eyes to Heaven for protection -- and with
the assistance of the Almighty we may justly defy the arm of oppression, and
the efforts of human power.

We have already fought and bled in the cause of freedom; and let us not cease
by every effort to preserve her inviolate; let us, with unremitting care,
nourish and support knowledge and virtue, the two great pillars on which she
stands. Without virtue a free government cannot exist; and without knowledge
and general information, she remains exposed to the grossest corruptions and
abuses.

Despotism, oppression, intollerance and priestcraft, have ever found their
sure and only support in ignorance. Let mankind be enlightened; let them know
the rights which the God of nature has bestowed upon them, and the thrones of
despotism and the tyrants of the earth shall be crumbled to dust. Wherever
knowledge, escaping from the monopoly of a few, has extended to, and
enlightened the great mass of the people, there has freedom flourished --
there has liberty erected her standard.

Under these impressions, it must afford every true friend of his country, the
most lively satisfaction to observe the extension of knowledge among the
various classes of our citizens. The free and general circulation of
newspapers, the increased and growing establishments of schools and seminaries
of learning, and the encouragement offered to every improvement in literature,
has served to remove that mist of ignorance, which obscures the faculties and
enslaves the mind.

And here my brethren of "THE FRIENDLY SOCIETY," The FRIENDLY SOCIETY was first
instituted in 1787 -- principally for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining a circulating Library. -- It consists of upwards of seventy Members
-- the Library contains from three to four hundred volumes; generally well
chosen and useful.
permit me to notice our laudable and flourishing Institution, as one wisely
calculated to promote these important objects. To extend useful knowledge, to
remove ignorance and prejudice, and to tighten the bands of friendly union and
intercourse, are, if I mistake not, the principal, if not the sole views of our
Institution. In a new country, where the sources of information are few, and
where books, the keys of knowledge, are with difficulty procured, the
advantages resulting from a well chosen circulating Library, are almost
incalculable. To enlighten and lead the mind through the paths and intricacies of
science, without books, is as difficult, perhaps, as to navigate a vessel
without helm or compass. Our warmest thanks are therefore due to those Founders
of our Institution, who have opened to the rising generation these invaluable
privileges; let it be our remaining care, brethren, that we neither neglect or
abuse them; with such rich treasures before us, let them not remain unexplored;
with such opportunities to improve and extend our talents, let them not remain
clouded by Ignorance.

It is not my intention, brethren, nor will the present occasion allow me to
enter into a minute consideration of our various and relative duties: give me
leave, however, to observe, that in purchasing and choosing our books, we are
called to the exercise of an important duty, in the discharge of which, we
ought to feel the highest responsibility. The consequence of an injudicious or
incautious selection, is not merely a waste of property; it involves in it a
far more alarming danger; it tends to mislead the mind, and to produce in the
rising generation, a vicious, false and depraved taste in science, which time
and after observations may never eradicate; and the perusal of a book,
containing false principles, erroneous conclusions, or romantic notions, is not
merely a loss of time; it too often infects the heart, marks the future
character of the young reader, and encumbers the mind with a mass of rubbish,
which precludes the admission of more useful information.

Let us therefore select with caution. Let us be diligent, constant and wary,
in guiding our children and young friends in the road to true knowledge. Let us
furnish their tender minds with none but useful information, and let us guard
against the admission of false principles, as we would against a pestilence.
Then, my friends, shall you deserve and receive the thanks and acknowledgments
of your country; "your children shall rise up and call you blessed," and latest
posterity shall render you a tribute of praise; in the secure possession, of
LIBERTY, HAPPINESS, VIRTUE and KNOWLEDGE.

FINIS.

