AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798; THE
ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY SAMUEL AUSTIN, A. M.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, BY LEONARD WORCESTER. 1798.

WORCESTER, July 4, 1798.
At a Meeting of a large number of Gentlemen, of this and the neighboring
Towns, to celebrate the Anniversary of AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE: --

VOTED, That JOSEPH ALLEN, Esquire. SAMUEL FLAGG, Esquire. Col. DANIEL CLAP, EDWARD
BANGS, Esquire. and WILLIAM STEDMAN, Esquire. be a Committee to wait on the Rev. Mr.
AUSTIN, to thank him for the animated and patriotic ORATION, delivered by him,
this day, and to request a copy thereof for the Press.

The Committee waited on him accordingly, and received the following ANSWER:
WORCESTER, July 6th, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE the honor of acknowledging the letter of attention, received from you,
dated July the 4th. The candor and politeness of my fellow citizens have made a
deep impression on my mind, which will not be easily obliterated. If I have
contributed to their satisfaction; to the perpetuity of that patriotism, which
is already extensively diffused; or to the convalescence of any individual, who
is fortunately emerging from a political paroxysm, the satisfaction will
certainly be mutual.

Accept, Gentlemen, of my compliments, and permit me to assure you, that I am,
with respectful consideration,

Your obliged, and very humble servant, S. AUSTIN.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, JULY 4th, 1798.
I CANNOT but mingle my regret with yours, Fellow Citizens, that the
expectations you have indulged, of entertainment, from the ingenuity of a
Gentleman Hon. DWIGHT FOSTER, detained at Congress.
of distinguished abilities, and high official respectability, to whom an early
application was made to address you publicly on this occasion, are
disappointed. The disappointment cannot be removed: It must be patiently borne.
It is some consolation to me, that, while I appear as a substitute, your
expectations will be formed on a lower scale, and that I shall have an
equitable claim, upon an uncommon portion of your candor. The little dexterity,
which will appear, in the management of subjects, to which it would be
unpardonable not to direct your attention, will be venial in one, who is
trammeled by professional pursuits, public indeed; but fereign, and confined.

We are assembled, on this anniversary festival, my Countrymen, to commemorate
the memorable epoch of the Birth of our Nation. The fourth of July, in the year
of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy six, was the day of the
Political Nativity of the United States of America. It was then, that we
emerged from the minuteness, and dependence, of a colonial existence, to the
majesty of a consolidated, and formidable Nation. It was then, that we took our
rank, as one, among the independent sovereignties of the world. For our will to
be FREE; our public and solemn declaration that we would be so, a declaration,
founded in principle, the effect of necessity, and utterly irrevocable, was,
under God, the guarantee of our freedom. We entered not upon a work, which we
meant pusillanimously to abandon. Our energy we determined should be effectual,
or that, like the Greeks at Thermopylae, we would leave no triumph in the hands
of our oppressors. In this resolution, we have not been frustrated, and the
present day completes two and twenty years of our national existence.

As this is the most solemn, and the most general political festival of our
country, as it is the great day of the United States of America, a day of
peculiar gladness, which we celebrate with the ardor of extensive hilarity, it
seems requisite to be sure of its propriety, and to possess a confidence, if
such a confidence may be rationally indulged, that there are no considerations
whatever, which the adversaries, or the semipatriotic friends of our
Independence, and of our National Government, can justifiably allege, to
obscure its splendour, or damp its joys. No wise man will abandon himself to an
indecent hilarity, founded on an immoral, and indefensible basis. He will yield
himself to the government of reason; and proceed no farther, than he feels
himself supported by her indubitable decisions.

Have we, then, reason to glory in the events, which this day celebrates, or
have we not? Do the rise, the progress, the local effects, and extensive
political consequences of our independent national existence, justify the
public celebrity we give to this Anniversary? Are we acting like children,
pleased with their toys, and playful with the instrument which is to correct
them; or like men of solid sense, pleased with a solid advantage, and capable
of submitting, unblushingly, their conduct to the narrowest scrutiny?

Revolutions, it must be confessed, are not always justifiable, or prudent.
They are often incumbered with complicated sufferings, and not unfrequently
terminate in accumulated wretchedness. And the spirit of revolutionism seems to
be now the political, and moral mania of the day. We must take care of our
creed, then, in this respect. Much reverence is unquestionably due to
prescription. And in taking down a vast building, we have reason to proceed
cautiously, lest we be overwhelmed in its fall. Yet, neither prescription on
the one hand, nor the hazard of revolution on the other, will justify
ignominious forbearance, under notorious, and insupportable abuses.

There were those, who, when the language of Independence was assumed; when the
doctrine of subjection was about to be publicly and authoritatively abjured;
when the HANCOCKS, the ADAMSES, the SHERMANS, the FRANKLINS, and the RUTLEDGES
of our country, stepped forward, with the intrepidity of veterans, and hazarded
their heads, by signing the instrument of our eternal separation from the
English government, shrunk back from the imaginary gulf, into which they
supposed us to be plunging. Holden by prepossessions in favor of the then
mother country, or trembling at the most distant sound of a drum, they
preferred inglorious ease, in the bed of unresisting submission, to the honor
of counteracting the machinations of Despots, and giving birth to an
independent, and flourishing Republic. There are those, at the present day, who
think, that our situation would have been more eligible, had we remained mere
colonies. And there are, perhaps, a few, who are yet of the opinion, that our
revolution was the infringement of compacts, which ought never to have been
broken. If moral principle have been prostrated, we admit, that we ought to
proceed hesitatingly, in exalting this day into the supreme festivity of our
nation. But, what compact existed; where is it to be found; in what page of
what book is it printed, or written; by what law of Nature, of Nations, or of
God, is it supported, which bound us unresistingly to endure to be judged, in
questions of property and life; to have modes of government imposed; officers
and troops quartered upon us; to have our commerce shackled in every direction;
and to be taxed, to any amount, without our consent; in connection with a
government, too, partly elective, and wholly so in a department, which extends
a control over the national finances? By what compact were we bound
unresistingly to see our principal maritime places blockaded; ships of war
hovering on our coasts, to hold us in terror; our flourishing towns, and
defenseless villages, reduced to ashes; our citizens unhoused, and slaughtered;
the savages excited to sound the war whoop around our frontiers; in short, to
be tied down, hands and feet, and pressed to a political death, under the
weight of a government, with respect to us at least, absolutely arbitrary, and
flagrantly cruel? Had the original appointments of Nature, and the radical
principles of Liberty, the most familiar of which is, the doctrine, that power
originates with the people, and is subject to their modification, ever been so
completely reversed, as that a territory so remotely situated, so extensive, so
evidently destined to a future uncontrollable greatness, the nursery of an
independent yeomanry, wholly unacquainted with the monopolies of the feudal
vassalage, should be holden, by any moral bond, to yield to such unbounded
aggressions? Do not the waves of the Atlantic, the varieties of our climate,
the productions of our soil, the strata of our mountains, and our unmeasurable
forests, presenting the amplest materials of an immense future opulence, and a
perfect national security, proclaim, even in the ears of infancy itself, a
different language? If resistance here, then, were unlawful, it must always be
unlawful; and to indulge a thought of opposition to the most perfect despotism,
must ever be a crime. On this principle, the long repudiated doctrine of
passive obedience and nonresistance, the darling doctrine of high churchmen,
and political bigots, is incontrovertibly established: Nay, is established
beyond its original pretensions.

But we were children. Be it so. Is it a violation of filial duty to escape the
clutches of despotic, and cruel fathers?

With respect to those who doubt the policy, or public utility of our
Independence in fact, it might be sufficient to ask, whether it be better to be
a child or a man; an apprentice, or a master; a pupil, or an adept in all
knowledge; a slave, who has his task set, and his pint of rice given him, or
the irresponsible manager of an extensive property? To what a strange political
incredulity are these men subject? By what kind of political arithmetic do they
calculate? To appreciate the utility of our National Independence duly, we must
not look through the jaundiced eye of prejudice, or of foreign attachments;
but, with the clear vision of unbiassed, and extensive observation, we must
justly estimate the progress of arbitrary power, when unresistingly admitted;
its effects on the body politic, in cramping every effort of genius,
discouraging enterprise, and exhausting the springs of public prosperity; we
must look at facts, as they exist in regions of absolute colonial dependence;
we must review all the past pages of our own political history, during the
period which has elapsed since the declaration of our Independence; consider
the unparalleled increase of our population, our commerce, and our improvements
in arts, and learning, the incomparably excellent nature of our political
institutions, and the spirit of enterprise, which is diffused even to the
extremities of our country; and with the eye of all the prophecy we possess,
which may be somewhat conjectural, but considerably certain, at least probable,
plunge into far distant periods, and see a growing prosperity, correspondent to
what we have already experienced.

With respect to what is past we have more than conjecture. We have indubitable
fact. On a general estimate of the progress of our national affairs, during the
two and twenty years which have elapsed, it will appear, that public prosperity
has been in fact advancing, with an accelerated speed, exceeding the most
sanguine predictions of our warmest political calculators. We have exhibited a
phenomenon, which the world never saw, a nation deliberately constructing,
adopting, and executing, under singular auspices, without blood, almost without
the quarrel of words, a form of government, fraught with wisdom, and
administered with firmness. We have moved forward, with our swords in one
direction, and under the guidance of one Captain. We have followed HIM with
blessings, into the retirements of a tranquil old age, and have attached
ourselves, save a few restless partisans, with equal zeal, and confidence, to
his venerable successor. This is the past.

And what is the future? Here, I am sensible, political enthusiasm has
sometimes soared, till it became dizzy. But, unless our divisions, our
cowardice, or our libertinism obscure it, what hinders, but that the eye of
political faith terminate in a prospect of unbounded, and irradiated glory, as
the triumphant sequel of our national struggles? What else can intercept the
foresight of future cities rising, with unequalled grandeur, to view, superb
monuments of human art and industry erected, distant forests converted into
fruitful fields, rivers meeting rivers by navigable canals, and our innumerable
ships, waving their striped pendents over all oceans, and in every district of
the globe? What else can prevent our seeing, beforehand, future universities
founded, and amply endowed; future WASHINGTONS rising to defend; future ADAMSES
to illuminate their country; and a genuine and rational Christianity, rising
superior to malignity, and sophism, to moralize, and felicitate the whole?

Let none talk, then, of its having been better for us to have remained mere
colonies. Let us spurn such narrow, and inglorious conceptions. Feeling that we
ARE, let us resolve that we WILL BE a Nation, and never lose sight of the
moment which gave us birth, nor of the illustrious characters, who led the way,
in the adventurous flight, from the wing of delusive protection, to soaring on
our own pinions, as we pleased.

But see, say the lukewarm advocates, or mere spectators of our Independence;
see whither you are now posting. See how the more prudent calculations of the
wiser sort are about to be realized. See how you have been tortured by one
nation, and are now the mere sport and plaything of another. Observe your
commerce broken, your national dignity precipitated down to the deepest
degradation, and your country like to be assailed by the irresistible phalanxes
of an all conquering Republic. Observe to what your revolution has given birth,
in the massacres of revolution upon revolution in Europe, and the collision of
parties, the increase of corruption, and the blast of calumniating faction, in
the United States themselves.

We should be unwilling to admit, from these suggestions, a conclusion
dishonorable to our Independence, or extensively so to our country; nor shall
we, without the most substantial evidence. We deny, that we gave example, or
furnished patronage, to that endless ringing of changes, which is heard on the
other side of the Atlantic; or to that restless spirit of faction, which
pollutes the streams of our own public prosperity. It was not pride, impatient
of a rational obedience; it was not delight in blood; it was not infidel
aversions, or unbounded libertinism, which impelled us to take our stand, and
retain it. It was the principle of self preservation. It was the genuine love
of our country, taking such a step with reluctance, and counteracting a
thousand opposite attachments. It was cruel necessity. And are the factious
among ourselves, the demagogues of a party, or the retailers of their
infidelity, and calumny; are these the legitimate children of our country, as
an independent, and consolidated Republic? No. They are a spurious offspring.
Like mushrooms, they have a recent, and unsolid existence. The proper course of
our national energy will make them fade, and wither, like the leaves in autumn.

And are not the public arrangements of our government, under its recent
administrations, capable of a fair and honorable vindication? The United States
have been so far from furnishing an example of disturbing the order of the
world, that ours has been uniformly the suffering, and the pacific lot. We have
been merely the objects of aggression; aggression, indeed, which would have
provoked any other sovereignty on earth to a violent retaliation. We have been
spoiled of our property, when pursuing a fair, and neutral commerce. The very
power from which we revolted, in a moment of temporary success, groundlessly
indignant at our partialities for the French nation, then struggling for
liberty; partialities which we confess as general, and fervent, but righteous;
broke in upon our honest trade, and ingloriously stripped us of the earnings of
our toil, and enterprise. But, extensive as these violations of our property
were, though resolvedly tenacious of the rights and dignity of an independent
government, we did not immediately gird on the sword of vengeance, as the
Madisons, the Gileses, and Livingstons of the country, would have had us done.
We did not, without the more moderate means of negotiation, rush at once, and
precipitately, into the ocean of carnage. With greater wisdom, and more
dispassionate policy, we first talked with our oppressor. We demanded
indemnity, and obtained it. Our differences we settled, by a bloodless
accommodation, and an amicable adjustment. Some, instead of imputing to us an
excessive sensibility, insist that, in this instance, we dishonored ourselves,
by servile concessions. To them we answer, that, if to act the part of
firmness, mingled with moderation, be to be dishonored, we were dishonored. Let
the lovers of an English war take that side of the question, if they choose it.
Facts, which no reasoning can overthrow, amply vindicate, at once, our
morality, and our policy.

Short, alas, much too short, was the interval of our repose. No sooner had we
repelled the attacks, which were made on us on the one hand; than we were
assailed, with more intolerable, and ungrateful annoyance, on the other. The
French Republic, to whom we had been so warmly, and so generously partial, even
in days when her struggle was most convulsive; when her political fate hung in
the poize of excessive danger, rather than of uncertainty; when she had not
even put herself into the posture of an orderly existence; a Republic, which
has heretofore taken us by the hand, with expressions of peculiar fraternity;
which has ordered our colors to hang suspended in the very chamber of her
Legislative Assembly; and which has so frequently given us the vows of eternal
alliance; forgetting her vows, and her friendship, proud with recent victory,
and vaunting in the preeminence of her martial glory, has made inroads upon us,
of the most pernicious, and flagrant nature. She has not only committed the
most predatory ravages on our commerce, but maltreated the persons of our
countrymen, and contemplated the entire excision of our government.
Relinquishing, totally, her first ostensible; and, as I imagine, real object,
LIBERTY; and, in her internal agitations, having jostled out, or exterminated,
her men of moderation, and virtue; her Fayettes, and her Barthelemys; exalted,
almost to madness, by libertine sentiments, and accumulated power, she has
become, not only to others, but to us, the haughty aggressor. Sporting with the
first principles of justice; insatiable, beyond all decency; not ashamed to
rank herself with the most ferocious barbarians on earth; and, while she talks
of fraternity and liberty, really respecting nothing but the ultima ratio
regum; she pushes aside all, who stand in the way of her omnipotent will.
Holding half Europe, which she has revolutionized, but miserably exhausted,
under the terrors of her vindictive arm, she is now exerting her utmost
efforts, directly or indirectly, to overwhelm her most formidable rival. The
island of Great Britain, she would, if possible, precipitate to the lowest
abyss of the ocean. And, exasperated that we are even on terms of peace, and
commerce, with this her hated foe, she is ready to exterminate us also.

I am not an adept in political tactics; and it would not comport with the
nature of the present business, were I able, to descend to a discussion of the
points in dispute, between France, and the United States. Several complaints,
as the ground of displeasure, have been brought forward, by the French
Ministers. But, were they well founded; could they be substantiated by
incontestible proofs, would they all be equal to the single, sordid,
contemptible, revolutionizing act of Adet, in his appeal to the people of the
United States; spreading among them combustible materials, and in a moment of
popular wavering, on purpose to burn down the fair edifice of our country's
liberty; aiming, while generously fostered in the bosom of the country, utterly
to subvert its most invaluable interests? But these complaints, it appears to
me, and I think the opinion will be supported by the suffrages of all men of
candor, have been shown, by Mr. Pickering, Mr. Harper, and our Envoys to the
French Republic, to have no foundation. Our escape from war, by the treaty of
London, which has made such noise on each side of the Atlantic, has been drawn
into view, as peculiarly offensive, and as the principal, and justifying reason
of French depredations. Go, says the haughty Directory, a body of despots, now
the concentration of all authority in France, and as ambitious, and imperious,
as Louis the XIVth, at least; go, and undo the contracts, into which you have
entered, without advising with us, with the cabinet of St. James's, and then we
will talk with you. But not a word before. What, then! are we amenable, in the
management of our public interests, to the Directory of France? Have we no
right to negociate terms of security, and commerce, without the consent of this
domineering Republic? Must our diplomatic transactions be subjected to her
scrutiny, before they can go into effect? May we not be at peace with a
formidable nation, without her permission? Then let us bow down our necks under
the yoke patiently. Let us submit to be rocked in the cradle, or turned out of
it, just as her Ladyship pleases. But let us no longer talk of being an
independent nation.

Whatever opinion may be formed of this treaty with the Court of London;
whether, on the whole, it have been a judicious, or an injudicious political
measure, one thing is certain, that it cannot be the least justification of
French aggressions. Because there is a specific clause, in that treaty, which
utterly excludes its operation, in cases interfering with preexisting treaties.
But, that this is not the cause of the injuries heaped on us, even in the
feelings of France herself, is evident, from innumerable posterior events. It
is evident, from her correspondent treatment of other neutral nations. It is
evident, from all her revolutionizing measures. It is evident, from her policy,
and her avowed principles. It is evident, from her making out to us the price
of her friendship, and from her own wanton disrespect to the most solemn
existing compacts. No: There is another cause of her depredations. And it is
her rancor against England, and her determination to crush the English power,
united with the most insatiable thirst for self aggrandizement. It is this
diabolic, (for I can call it by no softer a name) it is this diabolic
disposition, which is interdicting all the commerce of Europe, and draining the
strength of surrounding countries. It is this, which directs her clandestine
intrigues, and her public operations. And it is this, which will reduce thee, O
my country! to the most ignominious subjection: It is this, which will bring
thee to tell a tale of woe, to Venice, Genoa, Holland, and Switzerland, as thy
sorrowing sisters, unless thou have a will to be independent, and unless
Providence preserve thee.

How mild, how tolerant, how amicable, how condescending, on the other hand,
has been our own government? Disliking war, reluctant to retalliate, fond of
peace, and wishing, above all things, for the privilege of existing, and of
reducing to the most extensive advantage, the legitimate powers of our country,
in a fair neutrality, we have again sought indemnity, and peace, by
negotiation, on a basis perfectly accommodating. Not satisfied with ample
discussions; with examining closely every point of pretended grievance; with
waiting on the government of France in the person of one Minister; nor
resenting the repulsive manner, in which he has been treated; we have sent a
triumvirate of Ministers, clothed with adequate powers, and instructed to
descend to every point of pacification, of which our national dignity can
possibly admit; while, with unparalleled forbearance, we are sustaining
injuries, without measure, and without redress. But, lo! what obstacles are
raised to frustrate our measures, and to throw us into utter despondency, with
respect, both to national redress, and repose! Our Ministers, forsooth, are
called upon to deposit a douceur of fifty thousand pounds sterling; and to
abandon to the uncertain, and probably fallacious, responsibility of Holland
rescriptions, thirty millions of florins more, before the government of France
will even deign to hear our complaints. To the subjects of liquidations,
commutations, and loans, as suggested by the agents of the French government,
and detailed by our Ministers, the Orator has not descended; because they were
not of easy comprehension to him, and are, in his view, of no great moment. The
question is, Whether we shall add to the immense spoliations, and insults, we
have already sustained, a voluntary payment, to a large amount, for the
unspeakable mercy of escaping being rent to pieces, under the Harpy fangs of
this aspiring government? It is not material, in what mode this payment is
made. Though this is a hard condition, it is no more than what we ought to be
compelled to perform, if we will listen to it half an instant.
The quondam Bishop of Autun, the infamous Talleyrand, blushes not, openly to
vindicate the aggressions of his government; and, while he dissembles a fair
exterior, scruples not, by base instruments of disorganization in our own
country, to practice upon the people, to attempt to separate them from their
government, and to throw them into convulsions, and at the very moment that our
negociations are going forward; meditating, like Judas Iscariot, to betray, and
destroy us, by the luscious embrace of the most insatiable rapacity. Here,
indignity becomes insupportable; and French policy, too infamous to be courted.
I will proceed no farther, in a detail so wounding to the true lover of liberty.

This view of things seems to me to issue in the conclusion, that we ought to
refer the origin of our calamities, to the perverseness of our adversaries, and
not to any departure from prudence, or duty, in our own political arrangements;
and that we may, and ought, notwithstanding, to celebrate the birth of our
Nation, and rally round the standards of our national government, this day,
without blushing. Our Independence, in its origin, in its operations, and in
its effects, stands completely exonerated, may I not say? from every
imputation. That our government, or its administrations, are without an error,
we do not contend. But, its adversaries, from without, and from within, may be
challenged to produce a notorious evil in either.

Let us, then, Fellow Citizens, caress our national Independence; and resolve
with joined hands, and solemn appeals to almighty protection, that we will not
part with it. Have we not reason to value it as highly, as when we fought on
the plains of Saratoga? And are we not summoned to be as solicitous to wrest it
out of the hands of French, as of English Despots?

We have now arrived, my Countrymen, to an awful, a most interesting, a most
serious crisis. Defeated in our attempts to negociate an accommodation with the
French government, we seem to be left, or, at least, to be rapidly
approximating, to the only alternative of war. It appears, that all our
patriotism, our wisdom, and our valor, are to be summoned to a most serious
trial. It appears, that we are to be reduced to the necessity, either of
resigning our Independence, or of consenting to defend it. Which shall we
choose? With such a precious object in view, on the security of which the
felicity of unborn millions so intimately depends; the dear purchase of years
of public suffering; for which WARREN, MONTGOMERY, MERCER, and thousands of our
intrepid countrymen, have bled; and for which the bosom of female tenderness
has so often heaved with maternal, and conjugal sighs; what is our duty? Is
there one person in this house, is there one person in all New England, or
throughout the whole extent of the United States, who will hesitate what
decision to make? Is there one individual to be found, who will ignominiously
withhold his property, or his life, when so vast, and so solemn an interest is
depending?

Permit me here to recite to you a passage, from an eminent Civilian.
BURLIMAQUI, on the Principles of Natural, and Politic Law.
"The law of GOD no less enjoins a whole nation, to take care of their
preservation, than it does private men. It is, therefore, just, that they
should employ force against those, who, declaring themselves their enemies,
violate the law of sociability toward them, refuse them their due, seek to
deprive them of their advantages, and even to destroy them. It is, therefore,
for the good of society, that people should be able to repress the malice, and
efforts of those, who subvert the foundations of it; otherways the human
species would become the victims of robbery, and licentiousness; for the right
of making war, is, properly speaking, the most powerful means of maintaining
peace. Hence, it is certain, that the sovereign, in whose hands the interest of
the whole society is lodged, has a right to make war; but, if it be so, we
must, of course, allow him the right of employing the several means for that
end. In a word, we must grant him the power of levying troops, and obliging
them to perform the most dangerous duties, even at the peril of their lives.
And the obligation under which subjects are, in this respect, is so rigorous,
and strong, that, strictly speaking, no man can be exempted from taking up
arms, when his country calls upon him for his assistance; and his refusal would
be a just reason not to tolerate such a person any longer in the society."

Having taken this review of the past; having vindicated the attachments you
ought still, and with as great zeal as ever, to entertain for your
Independence, and for your Country; and pointed you to that station of
valorous, and determined resistance, which you are bound to take; permit me,
now, though I can claim no preeminence in wisdom, to solicit your attention to
a few interesting, practical, and prudential principles, which are intimately
connected with our duty, and our safety, as individuals, and as a community.

A resolute defense of our national rights, against the unbounded violences of
France, by resorting to arms, when regularly summoned by the voice of our
government, by no means comprehends all that we have to do, as good citizens.
There are, in connection with this, other points of duty, which the pressure of
circumstances renders equally indispensable, and obligatory.

And, first: Does it not behove us, and especially at this crisis, when the
spirit of intrigue is so insinuating, when faction is so daring, and
convulsions are so frequent, to extend the eye of the most unremitted
vigilance, over our established, and fortunate Constitution of Government? The
absolute necessity of a judicious, and permanent form of government, usually
denominated a Constitution, as the grand bulwark of Liberty, is among the
radical principles of a rational jurisprudence. A constitution of government,
is the primitive consent of the people, in the mode of their political
existence; and is, therefore, the cream of freedom. Being the concentration of
their authority, which, in a free government, is paramount to all other, nay,
the comprehension of all authority; it determines the limits of all public
transactions, is the basis of all law, and a constant check against every act
of usurpation. It is the anchor of the political vessel, without which, she is
liable to be driven, convulsed, and overwhelmed in the billows of faction. A
government, without a constitution, must be a despotism. It must be a
government of the existing supreme power; whether in the hands of one, or of
many, is of no moment; and not a government of law. It must exclude all system,
and confidence; and is, therefore, destructive of the very object it professes
to pursue, the happiness of the people. A constitution, on the other hand, to
which all posterior laws are reducible; and which holds all departments, and
officers, and even the legislative assembly itself, under a wholesome control;
which, therefore, is the supreme voice of the people, ever pronouncing,
"Hitherto shall ye come, and no farther," as it is the guarantee of the public
freedom, is the spring of public confidence. It consolidates the society,
instead of rending it asunder; and gives that peculiar energy to public
measures, which experience of happiness, and an unwavering confidence, only,
can inspire.

The smallest acquaintance with the English history will obtrude on the mind,
from a thousand incontestible facts, the evidence of this political theory. In
the English government, through its whole progress, prerogative has been
restrained, and the rights of the Commons, which constitute what public liberty
exists, have been secured, almost only, by establishing, or resorting to,
confessed, and permanent principles, of the nature of a constitution. Hither, I
imagine, we are to trace the peculiar wisdom of our own country, which has
determined, that the very first step toward government, is the deliberate, and
voluntary establishment of a form of government. The excellency of that
particular constitution, which has become the bond of our civil connections,
experience has demonstrated, beyond cavilling. This is our chief national
glory, and the predictive oracle of our future greatness. We may depend upon
it, therefore, that the enemies of our happiness, foreign and domestic, will
level all their machinations to destroy it. And need I observe, that symptoms
of designs, of this nature, have actually existed? Have we not been witnesses
to the most flagitious attempts, to break through the outworks, and gradually
to undermine the foundations, of this bulwark of our security? So long as this
is preserved inviolate, my Fellow Citizens, we are safe; but, the moment this
is wrested from us, we are undone. Let us, then, fasten the eye of peculiar
jealousy on the man, who insidiously directs his cunning, or his eloquence,
against this palladium of our public liberties. Let us consider, what freedom a
foreign nation has used with exterior governments. Let us consider the crafty
nature of her policy; how artfully, but destructively, its poison is
transfused; and stand abreast, by prudence, as well as by valor, of her
enormous ambition.

Again: Does it not behove us to rid ourselves, entirely, of all corruptive
foreign influence; of all groundless predilection for, or antipathy against,
this nation, or the other? It is unimaginable, what extensive, and pernicious
effects, these principles have wrought, in this country. Their consequences
have been extremely mischievous. Antipathy, on one occasion, came near to
precipitating the United States, needlessly, and irretrievably, into a
destructive implication in the struggles of Europe. And a groundless partiality
is now disposed to resign, without the least defense, the public liberties.
Foreign influence has detached multitudes from a proper adherence to the rights
of their country; and some it has seduced to a traitorous imitation of an
Arnold. Nor is this influence confined to public measures, and direct
corruption; but it diffuses itself, with a malignant contagion, into all the
ramifications of society. It issues in a servile adoption of foreign
principles, and manners. It lays us open to intrigue, and to a dissociating
power. It pollutes our religion, and our honor; and subjects us to an
inundation of imported follies. It bows us down, from the erect posture of
honest, and independent Americans, to the cringing meanness of slaves. We
should be benevolent, Fellow Citizens, to all the world; but be the tools, and
dupes of no part of it.

Farther: Is it not a matter of infinite importance, that, relinquishing all
personal resentments, and ungenerous criminations, we sink down into one
formidable whole; that we make union the order of the day; and concentrate all
the energies of the country, to the one great point, -- the security of all? If
there be those, indeed, who, against every dictate of duty; against every
sentiment of fraternity; against every challenge of conscience* against the
demands, which are thundered in the ears of sensibility, from the public
sufferings, will persist in their determined adherence, to the schemes of a
foreign government, to the utter sacrifice of the most invaluable interests of
our own, I confess, I see not how we can embrace them. They are not the less
our enemies, because they walk in our streets. But, it is to be hoped, that
there are few of this character. Men of the least moderation will, in this hour
of danger, and distress, listen to argument, and to fact. And it is a pleasing
consideration, that this is is an obvious effect of recent events.
Notwithstanding the skill of French diplomacy, it is an unquestionable truth,
that, in this country, it is defeating its own purposes; and that the union of
our citizens is growing, with an accelerated speed, proportionate to the
efforts, which are made, to destroy it. As Republics are, in their nature,
essentially democratic, union, to them, is of supreme importance. Divisions,
indeed, contravene, in all cases, the very nature of society. They disarm it of
the possibility of defense, exhaust its energy, inspire its enemies with
confidence, and invite their aggressions. " Divide et impera," DIVIDE AND
GOVERN, was the darling maxim, of the most artful usurper, the finest scholar,
and the greatest military character, that the world ever saw. JULIUS CAESAR.
See his Commentaries, and the testimony of Tacitus.
A maxim, which a modern usurpation has evidently placed at the head of its
political creed. Let us, then, feel the importance of UNION; and sink down into
one vast column, moving whither the call of our government directs us, and
impelled by one resolution, THAT WE WILL LIVE INDEPENDENT, OR DIE.

Permit me to add: Is it not important, that, as friends to a deliberate,
immovable patriotism, we repel, with all our influence, and with avowed
detestation, that spirit of calumny, which, like Pandora's box, is scattering
mischief in every direction; which loves to traduce virtue, which it cannot
resemble; and which can find consolation, only in the prostration of all
principle, and order? That our illuminated country can be extensively
corrupted, by disorganizing efforts, however insidious; or, that the people of
the United States, can ever be guilty of the enormous folly of supposing, that
they, and their government, have a divided interest; until some total
revolution be effected, I have, indeed, no idea. Equally confident I am, that,

"As the pure limpid stream, when foul with stains,
"Of rushing torrents, and descending rains,
"Works itself clear, and, as it runs, refines,
"Till, by degrees, the floating mirror shines,
"Reflects each flower, that on the border grows,
"And a new heaven, in its fair bosom, shows:" ADDISON'S CATO.

So, as the administration of the former, did, that of the present, Supreme
Executive, will, in its progress, completely cleanse itself from all the stains
of a slanderous imputation; and appear, eventually, with unborrowed, and
unpolluted purity. Yet, the calumny, which is poured forth, and most
unrestrainedly, from some of the presses, in this country, is an injury, a
mischief, and a pestilence, which the lovers of our country, and of virtue,
cannot but repel.

Finally: Let us feel the importance of a deep respect for the infinite moral
Governor of the world; cultivate an unalterable reverence for the institutions
of his worship; and adopt, in our practice, that virtue, which the laws of the
universe prescribe; giving full credence to the maxim of wisdom, that
"Righteousness exalts a nation; but, that sin is the reproach of any people."
Under his auspices, we may gird on the armor of a resolved self defense, and
rest confident, that nothing can destroy us, but our crimes, or that divided
cowardice, which is prepared to resign the most enviable enjoyments, liberty,
property, conscience, yea, the last drainings of the cup of comfort, to the
mandate of a merciless tyrant. A cowardice, which, thanks to Providence, is
scarce in America; and, where it exists, is an exotic weed, not the indigenous
production of our generous soil. May an opposite patriotism swell every breast!
May the name of WASHINGTON make us ashamed to retreat from the ramparts of our
country's security! And, though danger may be before us, let us meet it with
firmness; always remembering, that "Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori;"
HORACE.
that IT IS A GLORY FOR A FREEMAN, AND A CHRISTIAN, TO DIE FOR HIS COUNTRY!


