MR. BACKUS's ELECTION SERMON, May 10, 1798.

ABSALOM's CONSPIRACY: A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE GENERAL ELECTION, AT HARTFORD
IN THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, MAY 10th, 1798.

BY AZEL BACKUS, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN BETHLEM.

HARTFORD, PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1798.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A. D. 1798.
ORDERED, That the Hon. HEMAN SWIFT and Mr. DAVID LEAVIT, jun. present the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend AZEL BACKUS, for his Sermon delivered
before the General Assembly of the State at the anniversary Election, on the
second Thursday of May, instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may be
printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, BY SAMUEL WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

ELECTION SERMON.
II SAMUEL XV.4. -- OH that I were made judge, in the land, that every man
which has any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice!
THE perfection of a government will not save it from the evils of faction and
party spirit. The divine government itself has long had its opposers.
Immediately after its introduction on earth, as we learn from the book of
Genesis, the chief of those rebellious spirits, who by a restless ambition had
raised a war in heaven, visited the new creation, to sow sedition, and divide
its happy inhabitants from their allegiance. He chose the serpent for his
craftiness and subtilty, as the fittest instrument to scatter the poison of
seduction, and to thwart the designs of wisdom. A temptation, most dangerous
and alluring to man in his exalted and happy state, was propounded to the most
susceptitible of the family of paradise. To artful intimations that they were
unreasonably abridged in happiness, and held in ignorance by the tyranny of
their Creator, were added the enticing promises of increased freedom, the
enlargement of knowledge, and sensitive pleasure. The temptation was fatally
successful, and a rebellion hence arose against God on earth, that has raged
with awful virulence for almost six thousand years. It called forth the strong
arm of power in the flood; on Sodom and its neighboring cities; in Egypt and
at the Red Sea, on a leader that arrogantly questioned, "Who is the Lord that I
should obey his voice;" and against Korah and his accomplices, who dared to say
to Moses and Aaron, the accredited ministers of a polity ordained by God
himself, "Ye take too much upon yourselves, and wherefore lift ye up yourselves
above the congregation of the Lord." The same restless and ungovernable spirit,
raised the Jews against the prophets, to put them to death; it brought the
Savior of men to the cross, and persecuted his followers, until the divine
government, in justice to itself, sent an army to sack Jerusalem, and to
disperse a wicked, a stiff-necked, and a gainsaying people to all the winds of
heaven. What it has done in later ages, may be learned from the encrimsoned
page of history, and seen in every apartment of the mighty Bedlam, the great
Lazarhouse of man: Of man naturally anarchial, disorganized, and seduced by the
promise of the father of lies, "Ye shall be as gods."

AS one object will be kept in view in the following discourse, it will not be
necessary to descant on the excellency of one form of government above another;
it is enough for our present purpose, that this truth be acknowledged, that
faction is, and has been, the lot of every government. The government of kings
and nobles has its evils and dangers, which I need not repeat, as they have
been the theme of the friends and foes of real liberty. And enthusiastic
theorists alone will assert, that elective governments can be so pure in their
principles, and so perfect in their administration, as to be perfectly secure
from turbulence and insurrection. "As heaven's best beams turn vinegar more
four," we must acknowledge, however degrading it may be to the human character,
that faction has thriven most in the mildest governments; and that republics in
particular, have been proverbially stormy and tempestuous.

IF it is asserted by respectable authority, that, "It is yet in experiment
whether human nature can bear so free a government as our own;" he is not the
enemy of liberty and of the people who would meet its difficulties, but he who
would sedulously conceal and keep them out of sight.

THIS is my apology for selecting a passage of holy writ, that may lead to
matter so unusual on this anniversary occasion. It is a religious duty that we
owe to our good government, to be armed against these wiles of faction, these
"depths of Satan;" wiles, grown common by frequent repetition; but so flow of
heart are men to understand, that they are until this day little considered by
the great body of mankind.

DIVINE inspiration informs us, that the Jewish nation, during the reign of
David, were prosperous and happy. When he died it is recorded of him, "that he
died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honors." The same truth is
also apparent from many passages in the Psalms, in which, the glories of
Christ's future kingdom are undoubtedly shadowed forth, in the real prosperity
of Israel, under the wise administration of the son of Jesse: "Out of Zion the
perfection of beauty has shone." It pleased God, however, for a particular sin
of David, to send into his family the scourge of domestic discord. An unhappy
event took place that awoke, and called into action, the worst of passions, in
Absalom the king's son, the passion of revenge. With a temper soured by an
incident, well known to all who read the word of God, he was soon the cause of
serious trouble to his father, and the people he governed. When the viler
passions are once roused in the human heart, it is with difficulty they are
laid. Chagrin, and disappointment, easily agree to acts of desperation.
Possessed of personal accomplishments, and the arts of address, young Absalom
aspired at no less than the dethroning of his father, and usurping the
government. To obtain these, he went through the usual process of every
demagogue, and insinuated himself into the favor of the people. As parade and
novelty are pleasing to the great body of mankind, "he prepared him chariots
and horses, and fifty men to run before him:" An essay at show, borrowed from
the wicked heathen nations, as unusual as it was unlawful in Israel. But a
custom being unusual and unlawful, is often alone sufficient to recommend it to
a race of creatures, whose "hearts are continually set in them to do evil." To
administer justice between man and man, in a great nation, is an Herculean
task. It seems at this time that the judiciary department of his father's
government, was unusually crowded with business, and as it is easier to fault,
than to mend the measures of our rulers, this furnished a favorable
opportunity to an unprincipled and aspiring young man. "He rose up early and
stood beside the way of the gate, and it was so, that when any man that had a
controversy, came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him and
said, of what city art thou? and he said, thy servant is of one of the tribes
of Israel. And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right, but
there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee. Absalom said moreover, Oh
that I were made judge in the land, that every man which has any suit or cause
might come unto me, and I would do him justice! And it was so, that when any
man came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand and took him
and kissed him. And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the
king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel." The
avenues to the human heart are numerous, with which designing men most commonly
are pretty thoroughly acquainted. As men have refined in manners, they have
refined in villainy. The state of manners with the Jews in this age, was
comparatively rude; such open solicitation might now give offense. So bare a
hook, might now be unsuccessful in the popular stream. But the essentials of
matter and manner in this business have ever been similar, and have rarely
failed, when adapted to the taste and biasses of a people. By "the way of the
gate," we are to understand, either the entrance of the city, or the door of
the court where justice was wont to be administered: Here he harangued the
litigious, the choicest materials of a demagogue. Told them that his father had
become a child and incapable of managing his kingdom; that the judges whom he
had appointed were either negligent of their duty, or corrupt, and that
bribery, and not justice, ruled in their decisions. And, that he might cover
his ambition under apparent humanity, he was indiscriminately familiar with all
his father's subjects. If any man had a controversy, let it be just or unjust,
he showed himself his patron and friend. On condition they would raise him to
office, he not only promised them more liberty, with a regular and impartial
administration of justice, and decried the neglects, wickedness, and tyranny of
their lawful prince; he could descend farther, when any of the multitude did
him obeisance as the king's son, he proclaimed his equality, and gave them the
fraternal kiss. Thus he stole the hearts of the men of Israel, and a more
proper metaphor than theft, cannot be applied to those who seek to weaken
public confidence in legitimate government, to answer their own vile purposes.
For the people were bound to David his father by the constitution, by oaths of
allegiance, and by his divine election and anointing as king. -- When God in
his providence is about to scourge a nation with such characters as Absalom, a
train of incidents seems to be laid, to ensure the accomplishment of their
purposes. It appears of astonishing that a youth should stir up so great a
portion of the people, against a king distinguished for religion, the love of
his subjects, and the well earned same of many victories. But it must be
considered, that many of the partisans and favorites of Saul his predecessor,
were still living, and out of place at court, who had been in the interests of
Ish-bosheth, Readiness son, and who either were fearful of their personal safety,
or certainly despaired of being benefited by the present administration.

THE haughtiness of Joab, the captain of the king's hosts, his impunity in
atrocious wickedness, and his being suffered to march against his fellow
citizens, had lessened the character of David in the eyes of the people. Other
public officers probably did not excel in prudence, as a long continuance of
power and prosperity, is rarely supported with dignity by the greatest
characters. And what was more than all the rest; the sin of the king in the
matter of Uriah, was fresh in the minds of his subjects, and had a tendency to
make them anxious for their dearest possessions, and their lives. The name and
infamy of Bath-sheba, was the topic of her sex, and her power was dreaded.

AS an anvenging God had laid all these circumstances in a train, the way was
prepared for an explosion of the same passions, as were awoke by the conduct of
Pisistratus in Athens, and Tarquinius in Rome.

THE seeds of rebellion being thus sown in Jerusalem, Absalom, to conceal his
designs from his father, could appear religious if occasion required. With
apparent filial submission, he requested the liberty of going to Hebron, a
place about sixteen miles distant from the seat of government, to pay a vow.
Meanwhile, his creatures were dispatched to every part of the kingdom, who,
upon an agreed signal, were to proclaim him king.

THE conspiracy soon grew so strong, that even Ahithophel, the king's
counselor, made "precious confessions" and joined it. When the intelligence
arrived, that "the hearts of the men of Israel were after Absalom," the court
and family of the king were filled with consternation. It was resolved to leave
the city of Jerusalem, and take refuge in the wilderness. An aged monarch
flying with a remnant of his tried friends, before an unprincipled pa rricide
must have afforded a moving spectacle. As they passed the brook Kidron, it is
recorded, "that all the country wept with a loud voice. David went up by the
ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and
he went up barefoot, and all the people that were with him covered every man
his head, and they wont up, weeping as they went up." The good king in his
troubles did not give vent to passionate language, or attempt suicide, like an
unsuccessful philosopher in modern revolutions. Feeling that this scourge was
raised up for his own, and his people's sins, his heart was soft and penitent.
He pitied and forgave his enemies, and with the enlarged views of a christian,
looked up through second causes, to God the first cause. When the priest, from
attachment to their aged prince, were bearing the Ark of God in his fugitive
train, that it might prove his defense, he bid them carry it back into the
city, with these dignified sentiments. "If I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, he will bring me again and show me both it, and his habitation. But
if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold here am I, let him do to me
as seems good unto him." On being informed that his friend Ahithophel had
joined the conspirators, no terms of reproach escaped from his mouth, But a
modest and humble ejaculation, that "the Lord would turn the counsel of
Ahithophel into foolishness." The same amiable temper also marked the character
of the suffering and afflicted king on his arrival at Bahurim, a village in the
tribe of Benjamin. Shimei a descendant of Saul, David's predecessor, took this
occasion to express his family antipathy, by publicly cursing the king, and
casting stones and dirt. Those who stood round his royal person, felt as all
natural men would feel on such an occasion: they begged the liberty to go and
take off his head; "no," replied the king, "let him curse. Behold my son which
came forth of my bowels seeks my life: how much more now may this Benjamite
do it? let him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him." During
these transactions, Absalom and his accomplices had entered Jerusalem, with the
shouts of "God save the King." But an unprincipled man, who is base enough to
pay obsequious address to the people, that he may in this way raise himself to
places of power and trust, rarely fails either to betray them, or to become
licentious in his prosperity. With Ahithophel as his oracle, he immediately did
an act, that rendered him despicable in the eyes of all those whose favorite
he had been. This counselor, whose wisdom was literally turned into
foolishness, told the young usurper, that it was important to establish it in
the minds of the people, that the ancient regimen was never to return, and that
he and his father were never to be reconciled, and that to accomplish this end,
it was politic to maintain a public incestuous intercourse with his father's
wives, and choose a select number of assassins, who might pursue, overtake, and
dispatch his father and associates. The first part of the counsel pleased, and
was put into execution in the sight of all Israel; and although the latter met
his approbation, Absalom was over-persuaded by another designing counselor not
to adopt it, but to gather the people, en mass, and pursue his opposers, and
wipe them from the face of the earth.

AHITHOPHEL, seeing that his counsel was not taken, with all the factitious
dignity of a modern philosopher, who cannot brook contradicton, "arose, saddled
his ass, got home to his house, and hanged himself." As the crisis approached,
in which the fate of the kingdom was to be decided in battle, we find our young
demagogue rash, precipitate, and parricidal. But on the other hand, the king
was cool, deliberate, and affectionate. With all the father in his eye and
voice, he bid the commanders of his forces, to "deal gently for his sake with
the young man, even with Absalom." The armies encountered in the wood of
Ephraim, and twenty thousand men fell by the sword on the spot, and a still
greater number was slaughtered in the retreat of the insurgents. While Absalom
on a mule was fleeing from his pursuers, the hair of his head, of which he had
a remarkable quantity, caught in the thick boughs of an oak, "And he was taken
up between the heavens and the earth, and the mule that was under him went
away."

INTELLIGENCE of his situation was brought to Joab, the king's commander in
chief, who took three spears and thrust them through his heart, "while he was yet
alive in the midst of the oak." The trumpet was blown, and the people ceased
pursuing. Absalom's body was taken down from the tree, thrown into a pit, and
covered with an huge pile of stones. "And all Israel fled every one to his
tent." Thus ended the life of an unprincipled, and aspiring young man, who
stole the hearts of a great people. Similar causes ever have, and ever will,
produce similar effects.

THE doctrine of human depravity can be proved by the history of every nation,
without the aid of the holy scriptures. "A dispassionate view of human events,
affords demonstration, that the fiery and destructive passions of enmity and
contention, are more congenial to the natural human heart, than the mild and
benevolent sentiments of peace and love." Hamilton.
All are by nature greater lovers of their own dear selves, than of their
neighbors, and the public good. And as with this, temper, there cannot fail to
be different interests, and different tastes and faculties, the latent causes
of faction, are the hereditary, and perpetual inheritance of mankind. That a
human government should ever be so constructed, as to obtain universal support
and suffrage, until God has radically and universally changed the human heart,
may be a pleasant dream to a philosopher, but it cannot be a reality. I hope,
therefore, that I shall not be severely censured, as trespassing on ground that
does not belong to my profession, while I attempt to throw in my mite, to check
a spirit of disorder and indiscipline, that like a giant, seems to be
bestriding the nations, and laying prostrate their government, religion, and
happiness. In doing this, I wish not to be thought an enemy of necessary
reform, or as unfriendly to the principles of rational liberty. "There is a
time to break down, and a time to build up." As the former, as it relates to
government and religion, is more pleasing to human nature, and the latter more
applicable to this country, I have; on deliberation, determined to risk the
popularity of the following sentiments.

THE sacred story to which we have been attending, may naturally lead us to
consider the materials, of which factions and conspiracies have usually been
composed in free governments -- By what methods these materials have been
brought into action -- And what has been the general issue; -- With the
practical inferences thence arising.

I. THE materials of all conspiracies against good government, have always been
composed of ignorant, or wicked, subjects and citizens. "It is easy and natural
for weak, and uninformed minds, to construe zeal for efficient government, as
evidential of a heart fond of despotic power and hostile to the principles of
civil liberty." Hamilton.
Hence, much opposition has made its appearance from the honest errors of minds
led astray by preconceived jealousies and fears. But there would be little
danger from the ignorant, were they not spurred to action by the ambitious,
aspiring, and abandoned. An ignorant man can only be pitied, who is the mere
puppet of a sly intriguer, that, like a mountebank, sets behind the skreen, and
manages him before the spectators for his own emolument. The wicked, and
unprincipled, are much the most formidable class of citizens, which all good
governments are in danger of having arrayed against them. While the ignorant
may be enlightened and reformed, the unprincipled rarely, yield to the force of
truth, but are obstinate in error, and will not be persuaded "although one rose
from the dead." These desperate characters, always increase in proportion to
the ease with which the means of wealth and luxury, can be obtained, and are
the same in all ages and countries. Perhaps a more perfect description cannot
be given of them, than that of the Roman Orator, when informing the Roman
Senate, what characters had joined Cataline's conspiracy. Although the
description is familiar to the schoolboy, it may not be improper to repeat it.

"THE first class, consists of those, who having great debts, but still greater
possessions, are so passionately fond of the latter, that they cannot bear the
thoughts of infringing them. This, in appearance, is the most honorable class,
for they are rich: but their intention and aim are infamous. The next consists
of those, who though oppressed with debt, yet hope for power, and aspire at the
chief management of public affairs; imagining they shall obtain those honors by
throwing the state into convulsions, which they despair of during its
tranquillity. The third; those who coming to the sudden and unexpected
possession of great wealth, have run into all the excesses of luxury and
profusion. These, by building fine houses, by affluent living, splendid
equipages, numerous attendants, and sumptuous entertainments, have plunged
themselves so deeply in debt, that in order to retrieve their affairs, they
must recall Sylla from his tomb. The fourth; a mixed, motley, mutinous tribe,
who have been long ruined beyond hopes of recovery, and partly through
indolence, partly through ill management, and extravagance, are persecuted with
arrests, judgments, and confiscations. The fifth are parricides, assassins, and
ruffians. The last are debauched with city extravagance, such as you see with
curled locks, neatly dressed, whose whole labor of life, and industry in
watching, are exhausted upon midnight entertainments. Under this class we may
rank all gamesters, and the lewd and lustful of every denomination. These slim
delicate youths, practiced in all the arts of hollowhearted politeness, not
only know to sing and dance, but on occasion can aim the murderous dagger, and
administer the poisonous draught." Cicero.
Such characters, with few exceptions, are the natural enemies of all
governments, and readily embrace revolutionary principles. In short -- every
government that has for its object, "the punishment of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well;" to parody the sentiments of the same author, is a
contest of integrity with treachery, of piety with profaneness, of honor with
baseness, of moderation with unbridled licentiousness, of sound reason with
depraved understanding and phrenzy. In a word, it is a struggle of equity,
temperance, prudence, and magnanimity, with iniquity, luxury, idleness, and
rashness. In a wicked world, the materials are always at hand, to revolutionize
for the worse, and with a few fanatics or theoretic philosophers as pioneers,
are easily brought to attack the fortresses of public tranquillity, of national
happiness and security.

II. IN the second place as proposed, let us spend a moment in showing how the
materials of faction and conspiracy, are, and have been marshalled, against
order, and the empire of the laws. And here I would premise, that where the
great body of a people are vicious, and there is a weak executive, it is no
great achievement to overturn, or check the progress of the best civil
constitution. A foolish Greek could burn a spacious temple, in which the
highest skill of architecture was displayed, and the wealth and labor of many
nations was collected. A very weak hand may throw down that, which it requires
wisdom and strength to rear, and a very boy, by casting a stick or stone, can
stop a piece of mechanism, which, it required ages to invent and mature. A
French writer boasted that one Voltaire was sufficient to overthrow a system,
which it required twelve apostles, and an host of martyrs to establish. To
which bishop Horn replies in the following striking similitude. "When a candle
burns, and gives light to a house, many wonderful things contribute to the
phenomenon. The fat of an animal is the work of the Creator, or the wax of a
be is made by his teaching, the wick is from the vegetable wool of a singular
exotic tree, much labor of man is concerned in the composition, and the
elements that inflame it are those by which the world is governed. But after
all this apparatus, a child or a fool may put it out, and then boast that the
family are left in darkness, and are running one against another. Such is the
mighty atchievment of Mr. Voltaire; but with this difference that what is real
darkness, he would call illumination." Horne's Voltaire dissected.
The same may be applied to government. In the history of republics in
particular, how often have we found the great interests of society, sacrificed
to the conceit, the ambition, and obstinacy of individuals, who have had credit
enough to make their passions and caprices, interesting to mankind. While we
peruse their annals, we are ready to exclaim with the Apostle, "behold how
great a matter a little fire kindles."

THE materials of faction and conspiracy, have usually been marshalled against
order and the empire of the laws, in one or all of these three ways. By
addressing men's passions and flattering their prejudices -- By mistating and
discoloring facts -- And by humouring the taste of the age.

1. AMBITIOUS and designing men commonly addresses men's passions and flatter
their prejudices. This was abundantly the case with the aspiring young man, to
whose history we have been attending. In his exile with the king of Geshur, he
had learned the style of a vicious court, and the pomp of royal magnificence.
And as the Jews passionately desired a king, like other nations, his first
appearance, as heir apparent, was with a profusion of chariots and footmen, and
his first address to the prejudices of the soured, discontented, and litigious.
Error always address the passions and prejudices; truth scorns such mean
intrigue, and only addresses the understanding and the heart. The worst enemies
of free governments are scarce discernible, they dip in the same dish, and like
a distinguished member of an ancient and innocent family, talk much of the
poor, and wonder at the waste of ointment, even on their Savior's head; not
that they care for the poor, but have their own vile purposes to serve, by this
show of benevolence and humanity. So long as the world exists, there will be an
inequality in personal talents, and property, which will be a source of
continual envy and jealousy to those who do not possess them. He who on every
occasion, seeks to increase this envy, and spread this natural jealousy of the
great body of mankind, against talents and wealth, will rarely fail to meet
with success. To defend, on every occasion, the supposed privileges of such
characters, as were marked by the Roman orator, to embrace, not only their
interests, but adopt their capricious passions, cherish their presumption,
indulge their rapacity, gratify their taste for pleasure without expense, and
feed their antipathy to all governmental restraints, is one of the grand
secrets of revolutionizing. The specious mask of zeal for the rights of the
people, is a favorite dress of lurking and dangerous ambition, and the
turbulent, and aspiring, always reproach their government. "Such as walk after
the flesh," says the Apostle, "despise government, presumptuous are they,
self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities." "With a show of
humility," says the Psalmist, "they lie in wait secretly as a lion in his den;
they lie in wait to catch the poor; they crouch and humble themselves, that the
poor may fall by their strong ones."

THERE are but few recorded in the annals of mankind, who have destroyed
liberty, and prostrated free governments, who did not begin their career, is
these obsequious arts of demagogy, and end in tyranny. The exact point, between
power and liberty, never was, and perhaps never will be found, in this
imperfect state; this is a precious circumstance to the unprincipled, as it
affords a plausible pretense for perpetual change.

FROM the disorders hence arising, that have disgraced republics, the advocates
of despotic power, have drawn arguments, not only against republicanism itself,
but against the very principles of civil liberty. As instability, injustice,
confusion, and foreign influence, introduced into public councils, have been
the mortal diseases, under which popular governments have every where perished:
tyrants have taken heart; and nations, to be more safe, have often been willing
to be less free. Such general joy, perhaps, never pervaded Great Britain, as at
the restoration. Charles II. with all his vices, was esteemed a blessing,
compared to the tyranny of an unstable parliament, and the lordliness of the
Protector.

BUT, says a writer, whose words I have already used, "If liberty is to
faction, what air is to fire, an aliment, without which it expires, it would be
as foolish to wish to destroy liberty, because it nourishes faction, as it
would be to wish the annihilation of air, which is necessary to animal life,
because it imparts to fire its destructive agency." Hamilton.
Although that liberty, which at present is contended for in Europe, would be
better resembled by a tiger, than a goddess, there is yet such a thing as
rational liberty, which, it is to be hoped, the nations will not be discouraged
from attempting, by the madness of the present times; and, that oceans of blood
will not be shed in vain. It is one of the curses of the apostasy, that men can
never rest satisfied with the mean of all extremes. The most popular writers on
government, in this age, have taken almost the directly opposite ground, of
those in former ages. Instead of attempting to define the portion of power,
necessary for the very existence of any government, their whole genius is
spent, in inquiring into the possible consequences of power. It is easier to
discolor, and disfigure, and by the dextrous arts of political legerdemain, to
transform real existences, into hydras and gorgons, than to traverse the wide
field of experiment. And, as obscurity, is much oftener in the passions and
prejudices of the reasoner, than in the subject, many, through their untoward
biasses, have become so entangled by words, and names, that, "while they
promise liberty, they themselves are the servants of curruption."

2. AMBITIOUS and designing men, accomplish many of their purposes, by
mistating, and discoloring facts. As the government of Israel, was established
by God himself, there is little reason to suppose, that the vile suggestions of
Absalom, had any more foundation, than those of the first great disorganizer,
"the liar from the beginning." Aspiring men, of all sinners, have the greatest
antipathy to light. Their counsels, like those of pandemonium, must be held in
that light, which in scripture is called great darkness, to be successful. In
the terrible convulsions, that have happened in ancient republics, and
kingdoms, the true causes were rarely apparent to the great mass of the people,
till after their effects were produced. As a harpooner more easily draws the
heart's blood of the monarch of the deep, by setting him a flouncing at a cork,
or buoy, than by an open and direct attack, there have been few instances of
successful demagogy, where some cork, or buoy, has not been thrown out, on
which the populace might flounce, and spend their rage and strength, until they
might be taken at pleasure. When Pausanias, of Lacedemon, thought himself too
great to remain a subject to his government, he flattered the Helots and
Missinians -- slaves that were ever ready to rebel against their masters -- and
secretly corresponded with the enemies of his country. While he was inviting
the assistance of the Persian monarch, to help him enslave his fellow-citizens
he was visibly the poor man's friend, and wept over the evils of aristocracy.
The same methods of self-aggrandizement, with little variation, were pursued by
Pericles and Alcibiades of Athens; by the Gracchi, Sylla, Marius Cataline, and
Caesar, in Rome; by Oliver Cromwell, in England; by Marat, and that succession
of decapitated villains, who, of late, rode on the whirlwind, and directed the
storm of a national mob. Some cunningly devised pretense of public good, or
some imaginary monster of despotic power, has always been the standard, to
rally men from their ordinary occupations, to butcher one another, and wallow
in blood.

TAUGHT to view with awe, or admiration, those in public stations; the merit or
odium of measures, to which numerous unforeseen causes may have contributed,
has ever been imputed to men, and not to circumstances. "Party spirit," says an
anonymous writer, "rarely rushes to the front of the stage, brandishing his
bloody arm over the affrighted crowd, but he wanders behind the scenes,
presents his dark lantern, aims the assassinating dagger, cuts the sinews of
public confidence, and poisons the fountain of social life." Under this head
may be ranged the forging of private correspondencies, the fabricating of
offensive anecdotes, and obnoxious innuendoes, mutilating and distorting the
measures of the men in authority. Like the cry of Fire! or, Stop thief! set up
by felons in populous cities, private plunder and emolument, has been the
object of those who sound an alarm, "that your liberty is menaced," in
countries constitutionally free and happy.

3. DEMAGOGUES always humor the taste of the age. The love of pre-eminence is
one of the strongest principles in man. And it is curious to trace this love in
all its effects. Though the tastes and pursuits of different ages, may be
different, we shall always find the original principles in man, the same, and
designing men, like bubbles, ever riding on the top of the popular stream. In
the ruder ages of the world, the darling pursuit of mankind, was war, military
glory, and conquest, and the most successful madman was the idol of the people.
When heathenism was swept away by the power of the christian religion, even the
innocent, and meek religion of Jesus, became the instrument to obtain popular
applause. The love of pre-eminence, led some to climb mountains, and build
towers, on which they might stand, and show their extraordinary devotion.
Others shut themselves up in monasteries, and nunneries, to evince their
deadness to the world, and the nighness, in which they lived to God, or went to
drive infidels from the holy land. In another age, the same spirit sought a
reform, and really altered many abuses, but hastened into the opposite extreme,
until even reformation itself wanted reforming. The singular revival of
religion, in this country, half a century since, in which, no doubt, the spirit
of God was remarkably poured out, and much good accomplished, is also,
illustrative of the same idea. Men, for pre-eminence sake, were affected in
their bodies, as well as their minds, saw extraordinary appearances, cried out
in high transports, preached, prayed, and exhorted loud and earnestly, sang
through the streets, and were indiscreetly and hastily zealous. But, because
the taste and manners of the times, are altered, we are not to suppose, that
the spirit, which led in the extravagancies of those days, is now asleep. The
same love of pre-eminence, that once made zealots, and crusaders, now makes
skeptics. Decent irreligion, now assumes to itself, the same airs, and indulges
the same rancorous censure. When Absalom would go to Hebron, to pay a vow,
religion was made the stalking horse, and sacrifice, the shouting horn, of
sedition and usurpation.

BUT, demagogues are not now to be looked for, in the seats of religion; for
this has not now the chief seat in the synagogue. The tide of the world, is not
setting this way; and, men whom the sin of Diotrephes, easily besets, always
follow the tide. It is not in fashion to kneel before crucifixes, but to
worship, and adore human reason, falsely so called; and, the rage for relics,
is now spending itself on testacia, in search of Mammoth bones, making
experiments on air, or casting the age of the world from the lava of burning
mountains. "Where the carcass is, the eagles will be gathered together. The
paraphernalia of the naturalist and chemist, is now substituted for the cowl,
by the modern disciples of Ignatius Loyola. Were the scales of prejudice taken
from our eyes, we should see, that this reading of human nature, is just; and
that he who once believed in legends, and he who now doubts of self-evident
propositions, are the same characters. The taste, and favorite pursuits of
every age, has had its uses, but their extremes have been highly vicious. The
desire to have our thoughts our own, and to be independent in sentiment, is
commendable. But when we carry this desire of independence too far, it is as
fallacious, as it is dangerous and criminal. There is no such commanding
dignity of mind, in a man's trying to differ from his progenitors, as to
government and religion, as some suspect. The unnatural productions of a hard
and stupid heart, often lead a man to mistake his own restlessness, for
activity of genius, and his own captiousness for sagacity of understanding. The
world probably progresses in knowledge; but the analogy between the natural,
and intellectual systems, evinces that new thoughts, are as rare as comets, and
other new appearances in nature. A little acquaintance with antiquity may
convince us, "that there is no new thing under the sun." From the days of the
schoolmen, to to the present time, a great portion of enthusiasm has mixed
itself with science, as well as with religion. Every age has been overstocked
with imagined original genuises, who have scourged mankind with their theories,
and blinded them with new discovered light. Had the philosophers amused
themselves with their categories, and predicaments, they might have been
innocent, and harmless lunatics. But now, unfortunately for mankind, they have
turned their whole attention to the fabricating of new theories in government,
and religion. Being unwilling to learn wisdom from what is past, and like
anatomists make experments on the dead, they seem to demand the world for a
museum, and the living for dissection, and like the "restless iron tongue of
death, to call for millions at a meal." Nay more, they seem to be waging the
war of the Titan's, and piling the earth in heaps, to climb at heaven. They
will undoubtedly meet with the same success as their fabled predecessors, and
be buried by the mountains they have set in motion. In these monstrous efforts,
the world has already found that "the little finger" of philosophy, "is thicker
than the loins" of superstition; and that the "tender mercies" of modern
liberality in religion "are cruelty."

IF Cromwell had to affect experimental religion to accomplish the toils of his
ambition, by the imperious taste and manners of his day; from the prevailing
taste of this age, we must expect similar characters to boast of their
philosophic christianity, of their deism, and atheism; as these are the most
prevalent sentiments of the once christian world. It is not said now, "Stand by
thyself and come not near to me, for I am holier than thou;" but "stand by
thyself and come not near to me," for I know more "than thou." The
infallability of the Pope, and the divine right of kings, seems to have
translated itself from the conclave of superstition, to the stoa of philosophy
-- From the courts of intriguing despots, to the secret, self-created created
societies of modern illuminati.

HAVING considered the materials of which factions and conspiracies have
usually been composed, and the methods by which they have been brought into
action: we are guided by the passage of sacred history, to which we have been
attending, to inquire the general issue.

III. WHEN Absalom, to human appearance, had nigh accomplished his purpose, a
nation afflicted with his daring ambition, and unnatural crimes, roused to
oppose him. He was defeated in battle, and in the confusion of his retreat, his
hair caught in the branches of an oak, and his mule went from under him,
leaving him between the heavens and the earth. He died by the hand of violence,
was thrown into a pit, and covered with a pile of stones, and his followers, in
the true style of a mob, noisy and turbulent when successful, but mean-spirited
and cowardly in defeat, "fled every one to his tent." In like manner the great
deceiver and disorganizer, who, "from the beginning, abode not in the truth, is
to be cast into the bottomless pit, that he may deceive the nations no more."
Although "he has now great wrath, because he knows that his time is short,"
blessed be God, his chain has an end. Those whom he now "leads captive at his
will," shall turn against him, and aggravate his future condemnation. The pride
of Korah, and his accomplices, set up the holiness of the congregation of
Israel, against its priesthood, and the power of the people, against the civil
magistrate, although supported by a well authenticated divine commission. The
earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up. The Jews refusing to submit to
legitimate government, and wasted of the partisans of faction, have ceased to
be a nation, are dispersed through the world, and are hated and despised of all
men. The history of the Grecian, Roman, and French republics, those Vesuviuses
of impassioned man, to which allusions have already been made, might here be
read. It is distressing to a benevolent mind, to survey the struggles of
parties, the proscriptions, the massacres, and assassinations, that have been
guided by popular villains, ever issuing in their own, and their country's
ruin. Not an instance can be found, of one, who flattered and misled the
people, but either he perished in the storm he had raised, or ended in the
fallacious glory of a Ceasar. Indeed,

It Is in common proof,
That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
Whereto the climber upward turns his face:
But when he once attains the upmost round,
He then into the ladder turns his back,
Looks into the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend.
Shakespeare.
WHEN Absalom got into precarious power, we find him no more the fawning
sycophant of the majesty of the people. We hear no more of his kissing and
bowing, or tender wishes to redress the wrongs of his injured fellow citizens.
He forgot his ladder, grew giddy with its height, and fell. And an instance is
challenged, where the leaders of factions and conspiracies, under mild
governments, or those simple ones that are led by the magic sounds of visionary
liberty, have ever gained any thing by change. Both have always lost. Even
where a nation has been considerably oppressed, when they have attempted to
break their shackles at the instance of popular courtiers, they have ever
resembled the man, who took "seven other spirits more wicked than himself;"
their last state, has ever been worse than their first. In a word -- of
demagogues it may be said universally, with Mr. Pope, as of man whose self-love
has lost reason's comparing balance.

They Have "meteor like," flamed "lawless through the void,"
"Destroying others; by" themselves "destroyed,"
HAVING considered the materials, of which factions and conspiracies have
usually been composed, in free governments; by what methods they have been
brought to act; and what has been the general issue. Your patience is craved,
while a few practical inferences are made from the subject.

1. PERSONAL accomplishments, and brilliant talents, are no infallible
evidences, that' a man will make a good ruler. We read nothing of Absalom's
wisdom, virtue, or learning, in the laws of his country, or of any
distinguished, disinterested, and patriotic achievement. His first
introduction in the sacred memoirs is on this wise; "In all Israel there was
none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his
foot, even to the crown of his head, there was no blemish in him." Personal
accomplishments, and brilliant talents, have in a few solitary instances, made
an happy assemblage with distinguished virtues. But more generally, they have
been the scourge of their possessors, and of the world. The moment a man is
conscious of them, he is undone; for he immediately thinks himself born to
command; walks with fastidious contempt over the ashes of his ancestors; and
growing delirious with his own supposed originality, he sees "luminous
periods," and the "splendors of a bright and glorious day," marching before him.

BUT. after all, brilliant talents have imposing charms, and will command
respect, and this is not one of the lesser evils of elective governments. In
giving our suffrages, we insensibly forget, that a sound mind stored by
industry, and fortified by religious principles, is always the most useful in
church and state.

IT does not occur that belles lettres and legislation have little connection,
and that popular assemblies have ever suffered more for the want of candid, and
dispassionate hearers, than dashing, and imposing speakers. The former,
commonly bear the heat and burden of the day, while the latter are rarely seen
in their seats, but on subjects, in which they can pronounce their own
eulogiums to the gallery, or flatter the prejudices, and humor the taste, of
the age.

2. AND, with equal certainty, we may infer, that those who are most ambitious
of preferment, are the least fitted for it; as the best qualified, are the most
modest, and self-diffident. The love of honor and preferment, when kept within
due bounds, may animate the patriot, and fire the hero. Still, however, more
sacred and venerable principles, than the praise of men, claim the chief
direction of human conduct. When the respect we pay to the opinions of men,
encroaches on that reverence, which we owe to the Deity, to the voice of
conscience, and the sense of duty, it becomes criminal, and highly dangerous.
The Jewish rulers were charged, not with loving the praise of men; but, that
they loved it "more than the praise of God." When vain glory, usurps the throne
of a man's heart, the eye of his mind is turned from the ends, which it ought,
chiefly, to keep in view, and there is no crime which he will not commit, to
insure his own aggrandizement. While such a character, will set himself up for
sale, to do evil, virtue and worth, will never cry themselves, like courtezans,
in market; they blush at the thought of soliciting notice. If the splendour of
office, dazzles the unthinking, and unprincipled, it has, in itself, few charms
to the upright, and contemplative. The freedom of retirement, was long sighed
for by that faithful servant of the public, who has justly been denominated,
"the father of his country." The pious, and humble, are more anxious to improve
the talents they have, than to be credited with more; they connect the
retributions of eternity, with the use, or abuse of a post of honor. Hence they
are ever modest, and diffident, and go into place from a sense of duty, rather
than from the thirst of distinction. And, while aspiring thistles are trod
down of every wild beast, these choice cedars, cleave to their native soil,
and, either gloriously keep their station in the storm, or fall with all the
leafy honors of the forest at their side.

3. THOSE who speak of great reforms in governments, already free and happy,
are dangerous characters. "While we set under the shade of our own laws," says
a nervous writer, The Looker-On. Passim.
"and feel all the cherishing benignity of our own government, it is fair
almost to look with distrust and prejudice, on all projects of change whatever.
When the caprice of innovation, and the indefinite love of political novelty,
gets abroad, it always ends in blood. The mildest professions and projects of
reform, are, at this time, only the first steps of the scale of destruction,
the initiative forms of that towering fabtic of mischief, of which they
meditate in their hearts. That liberty, which has been the state pretense of
change in free governments, has been subversive of all freedom: as it affords
to factious leaders, a language unintelligibly imposing, and rich in the
unideal terms of raving philosophy. In times of seditious machinations, let us
cleave to our religion, and our constitution, as the refuge of our hopes, as
the haven and anchorage of freedom. The present moment calls rather for
restraints on licentiousness, than control of power. If we are virtuous and
firm, little is to be feared from those knots of speculating politicians, who
would open the floodgates of foreign intrigue, and whelm us in the billows of
tempestuous liberty.

4. FROM the striking resemblance between the first author of faction, and his
subordinates, among men; we learn, that the objections against good human
governments, and the divine government, are the same, of course, that the
interests of pure christianity, and real civil liberty, are intimately blended.
The grand object of the great seducer, is to weaken the confidence of
creatures, in the Divine Executive. To make them believe, that "he is an hard
and austere master, reaping where he has not sowed, and gathering where he has
not strawed." That he has no right, to do so absolutely, "as he will with his
own."

THAT, his governing by plan, or "fore-ordaining whatsoever comes to pass," his
taking the praise to himself, of their formation to good subjects, and
citizens, and not leaving it to the strength of their own natural principles,
abridges human liberty. They think they cannot be free, while the head of
government, by an exertion of power gives complexion to their habits, and keeps
them through confidence in his rectitude unto salvation.

THAT he errs as to what ought to be supremely loved and worshipped. God
declares, as he is the sum of public good, he has the sole and unalienable
right to the supreme affection of his creatures, and that it is highly sinful
in them to bestow it on themselves. But creatures, mistaking the habits of
rebellion, for nature and reason, lay claim to an equal prerogative, and
affirm, that "the potter has" not "power over the clay, to make a vessel" to
any thing but "honor." And that they have a natural right, to say "What do
thou? and, Why do thou thus?" It seems a stretch of power in God, to "give
none account of any of his matters." And it is the united decree of all his
discontented subjects; "We will not have" God "to rule over us," in this
imperious and sovereign manner. Luke xix. 14.
Nay, it is carried without a dissenting voice, by all the partisans of the
father of lies, that there shall be "No God:" Psalm. xiv I.
No supremely perfect, and unalterable law; no penalties of perpetual
imprisonment for men's doing as they please; Hell, like a Bastile of despotism,
has public consent to be demolished, or be converted into a penitentiary, and
all the lusts are to be manumitted by the majesty of the people. I should not
dare treat these grave truths in this manner, did I not feel it to be of
importance, to impress this audience with the striking resemblance there is
between the objections that are made, against that system of divine government
revealed in the scriptures, and good human governments. The popular notions of
opposing human governments, although in many instances just, need not pass for
any thing new, or originally pure in the heart of man. However, I hope none
will construe this, as evidencing a heart unfriendly to civil liberty. No, let
every tyrant, whatever name or garb he may assume, be brought to the dust, and
the oppressed of every nation, hew the chains unnecessarily imposed, "link from
link." But let them take heed how they strike at the prerogatives of the Most
High. Contending with the Almighty, will not "instruct him." And he that
reproves God, must answer it. That which has been done by wicked men, ever
since the apostasy, against the king of heaven, is now doing against good
government. Satan, in every shape, still appears "an angel of light," and
would, if it were possible, deceive the very elect. The grand object of that
fungous growth of mock patriotism, which is generated and nourished by the
benevolent sunshine of real liberty, has been to destroy systems of human good,
and to arm vice against virtue, confusion against order, and licentiousness
against law. To cut the nerves of wholesome restraint, to bring into contempt
those, who are "ministers of God for good," to the righteous, and lead "all the
world a wondering after some beasts" of human imagination. The materials of
opposition, the manner in which they have been brought to act, and the general
issue in both instances, as it respects God, and the good ruler, always have,
and always will be the same. And although,' "order will eventually spring out of
confusion, and light out of darkness;" these addresses to men's passions, this
flattery of their prejudices, this mistating and discoloring of facts, this
humouring the taste of the age, are exclusively, those engines of Apollyon,
which "brought death into our world and all our woe." These have made the
earth, an Aceldema, and a Golgotha, and portend the torments of the factious
and seditious, in a world, where mad, ferocious, and unchecked democracy, will
forever reign in all its fiery horrors.

5. IF the divine government, and free, benevolent, human institutions, are so
connected in principle and practice, if they have the same objects, and the
same enemies, infidels in religion, to be consistent with themselves, should
they become the enemies of good government; and those who profess christianity,
and oppose such government, ought justly to be numbered with infidels. For,
"What concord has Christ with Belial? or, What part has he that believes,
with an infidel? and vice versa. Those who oppose governments of energy, ground
their theories on the innocence, and perfectibility of human nature, on the
sufficiency of man's natural light, for the purposes of attaining virtue and
happiness, without external aid; and attribute all the ills, that have befallen
men, to government and religion. If this be true, government, that has power,
is an evil, and religion, that aids such power, is a scourge.

To uphold government, while infidels at heart, and revere religion, only as an
engine of civil policy, is a severer censure of human nature, than is given in
the scriptures. Although men, in the sacred canon, are called fools in a moral
sense, they are never called so in a natural sense. But the infidel, upholding
energetic government, and praising religion, only, as its convenient beast of
burden, brands the whole race as idiots, of course, saps his own favorite
dignity of human nature, and the sufficiency of human light. Indeed, whatever
way we turn, there will be a palpable absurdity, between the love of strength
in government, and the hatred of religion; and the love of religion, and the
hatred of strength in government. As a sense of moral obligation, must be
greatly impaired before men are fitted to oppose such a government of their own
making, we hence find all zealous disorganizers, somewhere on that climax of
error, that begins, in what is called, modern liberality in religious
sentiment, and ends in Atheism. And, with very few exceptions, we find all
those who understand, and embrace the religion of the fathers, or what have
been called the leading doctrines of the christian church, "obedient to the
powers that are," reverencing good magistrates, loving, and cleaving to their
country, "for conscience sake." Why every infidel does not oppose a government
of restraints, must be, that he either does not know its tendency, or is
ignorant of his own heart, and what manner of spirit it is that actuates him.
He is bewildered, and has lost the company congenial to his soul; or he is a
living argument in favor of the worth, and truth of christianity, by wishing to
live under the mild influence of its habits, and principles.

I AM called to speak, on this occasion, at an eventful period, and at an
eventful crisis, with this country. Although I glory in the character of the
state which gave me birth, admire the diffusion of her knowledge, her habits of
order, and her blessed institutions, I dare not defy the fascinating charms of
innovation. Vice, and irreligion, have earth, and hell on their side, and are
the mortal foes of that symmetrical edifice, which was reared by the painful
labors, and has continued, hitherto, by the prayers of our ancestors.
Infidelity, with a zeal that would become a better cause, and with the rigor
of St. Dominic, is encompassing sea, and land, to make its proselytes; of whom,
when made, it may be truly said, as of those converted to a proud and haughty
Jewish sect, they are "two fold more the children of hell."

IF the mountains, and uninviting soil of Switzerland, have not been sufficient
"walls and bulwarks," to save her from the rapacity of marauding strangers, let
us not boast of safety from an intervening ocean. Satan, intent on mischief,
could spread a bridge on chaos, to mar the happiness of paradise, and sow
sedition. Were we virtuous, and united, we should, under providence, have
nothing to fear. But the shameful secret, that our country has its parricides,
is out, and our enemies cast it in our teeth. A military despotism, under the
vile pretense of giving freedom to mankind, has once plundered the world, and
may again. If our most intelligent divines, have understood the prophecies,
little is to be expected for a century, or more, than "the distress of nations,
with perplexity, the sea, and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing them for
fear; as the Lord, in his glory, and majesty, has arisen to shake terribly the
earth." After looking to God, the eyes of good men are next turned to virtuous
rulers, the genuine, tried, and approved friends of the government, religion,
and happiness of their country.

No lover of his country's true glory, can turn his eye to yonder empty seat,
without exclaiming, "Help Lord, for the Godly man cease: for the faithful
fail from among the children of men." While every breeze from the Atlantic,
bears on its wings the increased rumor of war, and trouble, this state have
had to lament, in quick succession, the death of a worthy Governor, an able
Chief Justice, and a venerable Father in the gospel ministry.

Those suns are set; O! rise some other such,
Or all that we have left, is empty talk
Of old achievements, and despair of new.
BUT, I trust in God, that he has still left us some faithful helmsmen, who,
for a time at least, will steer us from the shores, whitened with human bones,
and guide us through the rocks of Siren liberty. Of modern liberty; that harpy,
who, like the fabled daughters of Oceanus, and Terra, has hooked claws, and
looks pale for plunder; that prophetess of evil, who takes her seat on
desolation, taints the viands of social life with her defiling touch; than
which, no monster is more fell, no plague, or scourge of gods more cruel, ever
issued from the Stygian waves. Virgil.
But hold! "Michael disputing with the devil, durst not bring against him a
railing accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee." While all the horrors of
faction, and conspiracy, are developed by the sacred story to which we have
been attending, we have a counterpart in the conduct of David, and his friends.
They submitted to the hand, which, in such an awful manner, chastized a
nation's, and its ruler's sins. They wept aloud, not for the fear of man, but
through reverence and fear of that God, who was visibly punishing them. Their
hearts were soft and penitent. They pitied and forgave their enemies, and, with
the enlarged views of christians, looked up to God, "who makes the wrath of man
to praise him," and will suffer it proceed no farther, than is compatible with
his wise, and holy counsels. Instead of humouring the thirst of innovation,
they clung to their ancient institutions, for political order, and safety.

SUBMITTING to the stones, and dirt, the railing, and slanderous curses of
apostate, and discontented Shimeis, it behooves both rulers, and ruled, with all
modesty, to inquire, wherefore it is, that "the Lord has bidden" them. Have we
not reason to fear, that these are the fruits of secret infidelity, in the
desk? and of secret, and open infidelity in the senate? Is it not owing to
breaches, plausibly made in our ancient habits, and customs, those walls of our
sheepfold, that these wolves are entering? Have we no Joabs, grown haughty, and
negligent, by long continuance in office, no negligent, subordinate ministers
of justice? I pray God, that the proposed day of fasting, humiliation, and
prayer, may be devoutly kept. And that all good citizens, for once, with Godly
sorrow for sin, will bend their knees around the altar of prayer, for their
country. If "God is for us who can be against us?" And if he is against us who
can be for us? His protection alone, is a nation's strength. He is "the God of
wisdom" and the God of battles. Let our honorable legislators remember, that
it is emphatically true of men in high stations, that, "one sinner destroys
much good," and much depends on them, whether dignity, and influence, are to be
given to vice, and irreligion. Although the mouth of discontented ambition can
never be stopped, and the querulous tongue of licentiousness, will never rest,
until the grandeur of a government shall be unveiled, which will impose silence
on all lips, it is important, that you "let not your good be evil spoken of,"
and give none "occasion to the enemies of the Lord, to blaspheme." The cause of
Christianity has been more ably argued by recent events in Europe, than it can
be by the pen, or tongue of man. While infidelity has been writing its
inferences in blood, we must view it as an happy omen, to this and the
neighboring States, that so many young rising characters, have been driven
from the open and exposed fields of skepticism, to the fastnesses of moral
institutions. May their speculative conversion, be followed by a change of
heart, and they experience those consolations in the religion of Jesus, which
have ever proved a support, a light, and a shield to pious rulers, under the
honor and dignity, as well as the sufferings and reproaches of office. As the
christian religion is the genius, the life, and spirit of real liberty, and the
true foundation of national happiness and greatness, let its ministers glory in
their profession. If many of us are straitened in temporalities, and yet
reproached as hirelings by the licentious, let us not be discouraged.
Patriotism, as well as love to God and men, call us to fidelity in our noble
employment. Liberty, exiled from Europe, crossed the Atlantic with our
predecessors in office, and under their tutelage, she here erected her
standard. Our rulers can frame free constitutions, and enact mild and wholesome
laws, but they must apply to us, as instruments in the hands of providence, to
make wholesome inhabitants, and form a free people. Sin stains the glory,
darkens the luster, and degrades the rank of rational creatures. All men, who
know not the glorious "liberty of the sons of God," are by nature slavish, and
will have a master. A knight errant may strike from the hands and feet of our
body, the shackles of despotic power, or the Conqueror of Italy can say a
nation is free; and yet, they may be bound in chains, which defy the steel of
valor to sever, and the united "wisdom of this world' to unloose. The chains of
the soul, the fetters of the mind and heart, do not melt at human touch; the
Lord has anointed us alone, to proclaim liberty to such captives, and the
opening of the doors to these vassals imprisoned of their sins. "Seeing that
many glory after the flesh, I trust good men will bear with us a little in our
folly, if we glory also."

2 Cor. xi. 17, 18.
FINALLY, and to close -- The whole subject may with propriety be addressed to
those who "despise government, and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities."
And of these, I hope, there are few in this numerous assemby. It is to be
acknowledged, that many plausible things can be said in favor of error, and
that man is, by nature, fonder of darkness than light. Still, can you suppose,
granting that you can inflate the world with the temporary phrenzy of infidel
fanaticism, that it will be lasting; or that human nature, will of itself, lay
aside a character it has uniformly maintained for six thousand years, of
finally "turning and rending," those who impose on its credulity. There may be
countries where nothing would be lost, and every thing gained by subverting and
palsying the government. But no man whose conscience is not "seared as with a
hot iron," can apply this to our own. If the first great enemy of government,
and all who have followed his steps, have lost themselves in the mists of
enchantment they have raised, it is worth while to count the cost, before that,
with industrious malignancy, you attempt to raise one in this enlightened
State. Should you, as Vreede and Hooffe, those exclusive Dutch patriots, fawn
like spaniels at the feet of our oppressors, for troops to strangle your
country with liberty: See the Herald of March 10, 1797.
we are neither a nation vitiated by long continued commerce, nor effeminate
Italians. It would be attended with not a little difficulty, to make us, like
wretched Venice, the mere cents and milles of partitioning powers. If you have
any possessions that are dear to you, can you expect them to be inviolate,
amidst the jarring elements of universal uproar? As you may yet fail, to spring
up Tetrarchs and Proconsuls, from the ashes of your humbled and divided
country, and the blood of her citizens, leave that low and base thirst of fame,
that craves those honors from foreigners, which you are too vicious and too
indolent to merit from your own fellow-citizens. Pray be as honorable as
ambitious Caesar, who had rather be first in a village, than second in the city
of Rome -- cast away the bitter leaven of party spirit. "Repent of this thy
wickedness" toward thy mother country, on whose lap thou have been dandled,
and from whose breasts thou have drawn the stamina of life; "and pray God if
perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. -- "Now to the God of
peace;" -- "to the God of order, and not of confusion" -- Be glory forever.

AMEN.

