OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. GALLATIN's SPEECH, ON THE FOREIGN INTERCOURSE BILL.

PRICE TWENTY-FIVE CENTS.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE SPEECH OF ALBERT GALLATIN, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OF THE UNITED STATES, ON THE Foreign Intercourse Bill.

By ALEXANDER ADDISON

WASHINGTON: PRINTED BY JOHN COLERICK. 1798.

OBSERVATIONS ON Mr. GALLATIN's SPEECH, etc.
WHEN a Speech of a Representative is published in a pamphlet, and transmitted
by its author through the country, it becomes a fair subject for a free candid
examination. It is addressed, not to the house, but to the people; to convince,
not his fellow members, but his fellow citizens: and invites a discussion, not
within but without doors. In my opinion, no subject better deserves discussion,
than that which this Speech embraces. It supports a principle, which, as I view
it, must be destroyed, or it will destroy the government: for, if my judgment
be right, both cannot survive. Yet the opinion which I am about to support, is,
by the author of the Speech, even while he professes to disclaim political
infallibility, bluntly declared to be palpably absurd, and as novel as it is
absurd. Many things in the Speech will satisfy us, that the victory of the
Constitution over the House of Representatives, on the subject of the
appropriations for the British Treaty, is affected to be considered by this
speaker, as but half won; and this Speech, on a more popular subject, is spread
over the country, to prepare the minds of the people for a more popular, and
perhaps more successful opposition to Constitutional principles, on a future
occasion. The past disappointment, the time for reflection, the character of
the speaker, and the humility with which his colleagues in opposition
compliment him with the palm, as the coryphaeus of the party; induce a belief,
that his doctrine is now displayed in all its force, and to the utmost
expectable advantage. If the opposite doctrine can be made to appear neither
absurd nor novel, it will be gaining a point; and if, on investigation, it
shall appear to be rational and constitutional, it will be gaining a great
point, for the security of the Government, and the happiness of the people of
the United Sates.

As the incidental topics of the Speech are less or not essential, I shall
confine my observations to the constitutional principle involved in the debate
which occasioned the Speech.

The Constitution, which vested the executive power in the President of the
United States, declared that he shall nominate, and, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, shall appoint, ambassadors, other public ministers, and
consuls.

In July, 1790, Congress passed a law, authorizing the President to draw from
the treasury a sum not exceeding forty thousand dollars annually, for the
support of such persons as he shall commission, to serve the United States in
foreign parts; and providing, "that the President shall not allow to any
minister plenipotentiary a greater sum, than at the rate of nine thousand
dollars per annum, as a compensation for all his personal services and other
expenses; nor a greater sum for the same, than four thousand five hundred
dollars per annum to a charge des affairs." This law, as is often done when
power is wished to be retained, Congress limited to a duration of two years and
the end of the subsequent session 1 United States Laws, 175.
. In February, 1793, it was continued for other two years 2 U. S. L. 151.
; and in May, 1796, it was continued for one year; still with the addition of
the subsequent session of Congress 4 U. S. Law 115.
.

Of the different grades of public ministers known to the law of nations, these
laws provided for the compensation of two; the grade of minister
plenipotentiary, and that of charge des affairs. Before May, 1796, the higher
of these grades, a minister plenipotentiary, had been appointed only to
Britain, to France, and to Spain; to any other court a minister of the inferior
grade had been appointed. In May, 1796, the President thought proper to appoint
a minister plenipotentiary to Lisbon; and, in 1797, to appoint a minister
plenipotentiary to Berlin: and correspondent appropriations were provided by
Congress, in May, 1796, and July, 1797, for those years 4 U. S. L. 116. -- 5 U.
S. L. 41.
.

The limitation of the former laws rendered it necessary to bring the subject
of foreign intercourse again before Congress, in the present session, and
continue the law of 1790. In discussing this clause of the law, "That the
President shall not allow to a minister plenipotentiary a greater sum than at
the rate of nine thousand dollars per annum, as a compensation for all his
personal services and other expenses; nor a greater sum for the same than four
thousand five hundred dollars per annum to a charge des affairs." Mr.
Nicholas, an opposition member, proposed to depart from the manner of
expression used in the law of 1790, and ever since; by striking out the word
"plenipotentiary," and inserting, in lieu thereof, the words "to Great Britain,
France and Spain;" and striking out the words "charge des affairs," and
inserting, in lieu thereof, the words "any minister to any other foreign
nation."

This was an artful way of keeping the constitutional question out of view, by
seeming only to fix salaries. -- It seemed to say, that only ministers to
Britain, France, and Spain should have a salary of nine thousand dollars; and a
minister to any other court, a salary of but four thousand five hundred. But as
it fixed the salaries, not as heretofore, according to the princiles of the law
of nations, by the grade of the minister, but by the court to which he is sent;
it really said, that the President should not appoint a minister
plenipotentiary to any other court than Britain, France, and Spain. It
acknowledged the stated salaries to be justly proportioned to the grades, but
restrained the grades. It limited the power of the President not only in
compensating but in appointing ministers. This is admitted in this speech of
Mr. Gallatin, in support of Mr. Nicholas's amendment. He avows, "that the
effect of the amendment will be to prevent an extension of our political
connections with foreign nations; and though this amendment will not annihilate
that establishment, it will effectually check its extension." Limitation of
compensation will be a limitation of appointment; and though the Constitution
has vested the President with the power of appointment, and the power of
conducting foreign intercourse; Mr. G. contents, that it has vested Congress
with a power to defeat this power. This is the great point of his Speech.

He premises a doubt, "whether, although the President may appoint ambassadors,
a law may not be necessary to create the office, before an appointment takes
place." On the justice of this doubt he will not rely, and he discards it as
useless. What more proper introduction to an argument, professing to show a
doctrine insupportable, novel, and absurd, could a man use, who endeavored to
prove what he did not believe; than to begin with raising a doubt of a
doctrine, acknowledged to be neither improbable nor novel; and not venturing to
deny the doctrine, nor assert the doubt?

He thus states and reasons on it. "The section of the constitution empowering
the President to appoint ministers, etc. recognizes only the possible existence
of ministers, and does not create the office; the office to any foreign court,
where we have not had any before, is created by the President's appointment.
And it may even be doubtful, whether a law be not necessary to create the
office, before an appointment takes place. This clause recognizes also the
existence of judges of the supreme court, and not only does it declare, that
they, like foreign ministers, may exist, but another declares, that they shall
exist Art. iii. Sect. 1.
; yet it has not been contended, that the office of judges of the supreme court
was created by the Constitution, or could be created by the mere appointment of
the President, without the previous authorization of a law, or that he had
discretion to appoint an unlimited number, or that he can now appoint more than
the number limited by law: yet, if the Constitution, in the case of judges,
gave the power contended for, in the case of ministers, the law limiting the
number of judges would be unconstitutional; for Congress cannot divest the
President of any of his constitutional power. -- "Still" says he, "it is not my
intention to lay any stress on this argument; a discrimination may be drawn
between the offices, and a different construction has prevailed; -- and it is
not necessary to prove the constitutionality of our doctrine."

Nothing contributes more to error in reasoning, than ambiguity of words, and
the use of words, now in one sense, now in another, or applying different words
to the same thing. By this use of language, any falsehood may be made to appear
like truth. I am mistaken if the speech be not throughout a remarkable instance
of this. It is stated in the above reasoning, that the office of a minister, or
that of a judge of the supreme court, is not created by the Constitution; that
the office of a minister, to any foreign court, where we have not had any
before, is created by the President making the appointment; and that the office
of a judge of the supreme court, is created by Congress.

Why, but to bewilder the judgment, the words, "where we have not had any
before," were added, unless it be meant to confound office with officer, I do
not see. The appointment of a minister to a court, where we have not had any
before, will, by this reasoning, be creating an office; but, if it were to a
court, where there ever was a minister before, it would not be creating an
office; that is multiplying officers is creating offices. On the same
principle, increasing the number of judges of the supreme court, is making new
offices; it would look too absurd to say it was making a new judiciary, or a
new supreme court; yet, the office and the authority is the same thing, and
officer and the person who executes the authority is the same thing, but the
person and the authority is not the same thing. The office exists, when there
is no officer, as in the interval between the death, resignation, or dismission
of a sole officer, and the appointment of a successor: the office is then said
to be vacant, not to cease. The powers of a sole officer may be exercised only
occasionally, as the office of lord high-constable, or lord high-steward of
England, or a dictator in Rome; in the intervals between their exercise, the
office is not abolished, but suspended; and the next appointment is not the
creation of an office, but of an officer. The same may be the case with
offices, whose powers are exercised not by one, but by several; and adding to
the number is not multiplying offices, but officers. This is the case of the
office of foreign intercourse, of agency, or commission to serve the United
States in foreign parts U. S. L. 175.
. The foreign intercourse, the President's agency or commission in foreign
parts, is the office; the ministers are the officers; and the appointment of
one or more, as occasion requires, is not the creation of an office, but of
officers. The constitution of Pennsylvania authorizes the Governor, to appoint
a competent number of justices of the peace, in each district; if, where there
is but one, he should add another, is this creating a new office, or only a new
officer?

Before the Constitution or any law of the United States existed, there were
ministers, and there were judges. -- There are many offices, as judges,
sheriffs, coroners, justices of the peace, and constables, whose authority is
not specially defined, only by a written Constitution or Law, but also by
customs and established opinions. When it is intended by a Constitution or a
Law, to adopt any of these offices, the Constitution or Law does not go back to
all the previous established definitions or limitations of authority, but
conceiving them to exist, unless restrained, modifies them to the situation of
the country or the principles of the government. In all nations, there is a
legislative authority, a judicial authority, an executive authority, and an
authority of foreign intercourse. These offices resulting from their internal
and relative circumstances, are created in each, whenever the nation takes its
sovereign rank; and are exercised according to the several modifications of
their government. While these states were in a subordinate condition, they had
not office or authority of foreign intercourse, they had no right to foreign
intercourse, for they were not sovereign states. The Declaration of
Independence, by separating the United States from Britain, and establishing
them as a nation, created in the United States the office of foreign
intercourse. The Confederation declared Congress the organ of this foreign
intercourse. The Constitution changed this modification, and declared the
President the organ of the United States in their foreign intercourse; and,
from this declaration of the Constitution, the management of foreign
intercourse became a part of the President's constitutional authority. From the
exercise of this authority and all agency in it, Congress was excluded; and
ministers to foreign nations were no longer the agents of Congress, but of the
President.

The Constitution was a new modification of the government of the Union; and a
federal judiciary, acting upon individuals, was a new power introduced into it.
Whatever was given to it, was taken from the state judiciary. It therefore
became necessary "to fix its jurisdiction," to define what part of the state
judiciary was taken, and vested in the federal judiciary. The Constitution only
established a supreme court, -- and a power in Congress to establish inferior
courts, and limited the extent of federal judiciary, which Congress could take
from the supreme court, and vest in the inferior courts. This last was
necessary, lest Congress, in the organization of inferior courts, should affect
that part of jurisdiction, which is attached to the President, foreign
intercourse. The constitution therefore excludes the inferior courts to be
established by Congress from all jurisdiction "affecting ambassadors, other
public ministers, and consuls Art. iii. Sect. 2.
." The first limitation was necessary, to prevent any federal court from
incroaching on the state judiciary.

But none of these reasons, and no reason existed, to induce the framers of the
constitution, to define the limits of foreign intercourse. It was not a new
principle, in the government of the union, for it existed under the
confederation. It could not incroach on any state jurisdiction, for no state
ever had it. It resulted from the nature of the case, and existed immediately
after the declaration of Independence made the thirteen states, as to all
others, one nation.

I will go farther and say, that the framers of the Constitution could not
define or limit it. For it rested on principles over which the United States
had no control; but in concurrence with other nations. The Constitution could
dictate the relations of one state to another, but it could not dictate the
relations of the United States with other nations. Those relations are defined
by a power paramount, the law of nations -- the constitution of the civilized
world. This law of nations is to the Constitution of any nation, as the
Constitution of the United States, to the Constitution of any state of America.
This law, therefore, cannot be altered by the act of any one nation, without
the concurrence of the others. The Constitution, therefore, is not so absurd as
to meddle with fixing its jurisdiction, and contents itself with establishing
its organ. Instead of the Congress of the Confederation, the Constitution
establishes the President, restrained only by the Senate, as its organ of
foreign intercourse, and to him, so restrained, leaves all the authority on
this subject, which the Congress of the Confederation had, or the law of
nations gives to the organ of foreign intercourse in any other nation. Part of
this the law of nations establishes to be, a power to send ministers of
different grades according to the importance of the subject or the parties. The
compensation to these grades must be determined, by what is necessary to
support the views of the law of nations. And if any other branch of the federal
government, in which the power of compensation is vested, in whole or in part,
so far exercise this power, as to defeat the lawful discretion of the organ of
foreign intercourse, that branch usurps a power not given it by the
Constitution, exercises the power, or, which is the fame thing, restrains the
exercise of the power, of the organ of foreign intercourse, and violates not
only the Constitution of the United States, but the Constitution of the great
Confederation of the civilized world.

How far a law was necessary, to establish a Supreme Court, may not be
necessary in the present discussion. I have stated that, though the office of a
judiciary had existed in all states, a judiciary in the federal government over
individuals was (let me adopt the word) "created" by the Constitution. That a
law was necessary to create a Supreme court, cannot be inferred from the words
of the Constitution, that the President shall appoint "Judges of the Supreme
court, and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not
herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law U. S.
Constable. Art. 2, sect. 2.
;" for these words expressly refer to other officers, than judges of the
supreme court; nor from the words "The judicial power of the United States
shall be vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the
Congress may from time to time ordain and establish Art. 3, sect. 1.
;" for these words expressly refer to other courts, than the supreme court.

That where the Constitution does not, as in the case of the President and the
two Houses of Congress, minutely describe the organization, a law is necessary
to organize, is an idea more favored by many than by me. Suppose now, (since
much of the opposition argument rests on the supposition of the President
acting extravagantly and absurdly) that Congress had acted so extravagantly and
absurdly, as not to have organized a supreme court; and suppose that I were to
contend for more than was contended for in the debate on the foreign
intercourse bill; and to assert that the President could, without a law, have
appointed such a number of judges of the supreme court, as in his discretion
were competent for the duties prescribed by the Constitution; I wish to know by
what arguments from the Constitution my assertion could be opposed. I should
have on my side, the constitutional authority, as stated in the Speech, "that
there shall be a supreme court" with a jurisdiction fixed by the Constitution;
and the constitutional authority of the President to "appoint judges of the
supreme court." I might be answered, that Congress would furnish no salary. I
would reply that Congress will not assist, but they will defeat a
constitutional authority.

That when Congress organized the court, and fixed the number of judges, the
President in the exercise of his constitutional authority of appointment,
should not exceed that number, is constitutional and proper, for their number
is properly a matter of internal legislation.

But "not to lay any stress on this argument;" for really the question is not,
how the office of foreign intercourse was created, but to whose management the
Constitution has committed it; I will state what I conceive to be the true
limits of the constitutional authority. -- To Congress the Constitution has
committed the management of internal relations; to the President, checked only
by the Senate, the management of external relations. The President, so checked,
is the constitutional organ of all intercourse between this and foreign
nations. Congress, checked only by the qualified negative of the President, is
the organ of all federal authority operating only on ourselves.

On the subject of foreign intercourse, the President, checked only by the
Senate, has all legislative powers, and Congress has only executive authority.
Congress has power in its descretion to make such laws, establish such offices,
and appropriate such salaries for their support, as our internal circumstances
require; and the President is positively bound to execute them, and appoint
suitable officers. The President has power in his discretion to make such
treaties, and appoint ministers of such grades, as our circumstances relative
to foreign nations require; and Congress is positively bound to make suitable
provisions and appropriations for salaries, etc. If either the President or
Congress fail in the execution of the authority thus given by the Constitution
to each, their is a failure in duty, and the Constitution is violated: -- And
the President would not act more unconstitutionally and absurdly, in refusing
to appoint officers, or in appointing incompetent officers; than Congress, in
refusing to appropriate salaries, or in appropriating incompetent salaries.

Why should not the Constitution so distribute the legislative authority,
according to the subjects on which it is to operate? Is not the Constitution
the expression of the will of the people? Is not the President the
representative of the people. And if safety require, that the power of making
laws over only ourselves should be given to many; may not wisdom require, that
the power of making contracts, the management of all agency with other nations,
be given to one? What chance is there, that the best knowledge of our true
interests should be found in a majority of the House of Representatives, rather
than in the President? What nation would treat with us, if the House of
Representatives were part of the organ of foreign intercourse? The House of
Representatives, with all its popular passions, would spend more time and money
in discussing any foreign transaction, and with a result less wise, than the
President with all his agents, in conducting and concluding it. I know not what
others may think, and my opinion may be wrong, but I think, that communications
of our proceedings, in our foreign intercourse, have been too freely made, and
have opened discussions and excited passions, which have little favored our
peace and prosperity.

I know, and could answer, what may be said of other nations. No nation is like
ours: and I rest on constitutional principles. The Constitution is the standard
by which this question must be tried, and to it, therefore, must we appeal.

I say, therefore, that the Constitution has vested in the President, checked
only by the Senate, the sole management of foreign intercourse Let me, to avoid
frequent repetitions, once for all observe, that when I say this authority is
vested in the President, I always mean the President checked, as the
Constitution directs, by the Senate.
; and, I support this opinion by the words of the Constitution. "The President
shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make
treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall
nominate, and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls; he shall receive ambassadors
and other public ministers. All treaties made, or which shall be made, under
the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land Art.
2. Sect. 2, 3. -- Art. 6.
." The Constitution having established an organ of foreign intercourse, and
declared the efficacy of its acts, it was not necessary nor proper, that it
should go farther; the law of nations, a Constitution paramount, would regulate
the rest.

I say, also, that it is a general rule, that wherever, in the constitutional
exercise of this authority, of managing the intercourse of the United States
with foreign nations, there is a necessity for the President to call on
Congress for money, they are bound to grant such a sum, as is adequate to the
purposes, which he, in such exercise of his authority, thinks proper to adopt
and execute. And I further say, that it is a general rule, that no department
of the government can execute or defeat the constitutional acts of another; and
that, when any department has constitutionally concluded an act, and the
exercise of the authority of any other department is necessary for its
execution, every other department is bound to exert its lawful authority, so
far as is necessary for a competent execution of the act; and has no discretion
to refuse such exertion of its authority. I support this opinion on the
principles of the Constitution.

The sovereignty of the United States is not vested in one man, or in one body
of men; to be exercised by that man or that body, or by the agents appointed
and removeable by either. The whole sovereignty is broken into portions or
shares, and each portion or share is vested in a certain department; that each
department exercising the whole of its own share of the sovereignty, and no
department exercising any of the share of any other, the several departments
may mutually check each other, and no department may engross the whole
sovereignty. -- Thus we have a legislative department, a judicial department,
an executive department. There is no superiority or control in any of those
departments or shares of sovereignty, over the other; though one may appoint,
and another pay, a third; all are equal and uncontrolled within the limits of
their power. The executive may pardon or remit a sentence of the judiciary, for
that is within its share of sovereignty; but it has no power to restrain the
judges from passing a similar sentence, when they next pass sentence on a
similar offense. The legislature may alter a law, for that is within its share
of sovereignty, but it has no power without altering the law, to direct the
judges to alter their construction of it. When the legislature has enacted a
law, it cannot also construe it, or judge of any man's conduct or rights by it;
but must leave that authority to the judiciary. When the judges have construed
a law, or judged of any man's conduct or rights by it, they cannot execute
their judgment; but leave that authority to the executive. The executive
cannot exercise any of the powers given to the legislature or to the judiciary;
the judiciary cannot exercise any of the powers given to the executive or to
the legislature; and the legislature cannot exercise any of the powers given to
the executive or to the judiciary; except in so far as the Constitution may
trust either with a portion of another power, and then it becomes in that
respect a part of that other. Thus the departments mutually check each other,
and (while none can encroach on the authority of another) mutually restrain
each other from engrossing the whole of the sovereignty, and exercising
arbitrary power. And all the departments are checked by the Constitution, and
by the removing power of the elective branch. If the legislature or the
executive exceed their several jurisdiction, the judiciary will declare the act
void. If the judiciary exceed its jurisdiction, the executive may refuse its
execution. Besides these checks of each department over the others, each
department has checks within itself, over the exercise of its own power, to
prevent its acts from being rashly conclusive. Thus the Constitution of the
United States gives the legislative power to a Congress, composed of a Senate
and House of Representatives, and directs, that no bill or resolution shall be
considered as an act of the legislature, unless it have obtained the assent of
both Houses, and also of the President; or, if he refuse his assent, it must
again pass through both Houses with the assent of two-thirds of each. Until it
be passed in this solemn manner, it is not an act of the department.

The judicial power is vested in a supreme court, established by the
Constitution, and circuit and district courts established by law. The judiciary
department has its checks in courts and juries; courts determining law, juries
determining facts. Courts cannot determine law, till juries have determined
facts; and the verdict of a jury is of no avail, without the judgment of the
court. Thus courts and juries mutually check each other, and the superior
courts check the inferior. The judgment of any court, acquiesced in, is an act
of the department; if carried to a superior court it becomes not an act of the
department, till the judgment of the supreme court is given, or till a judgment
of an inferior court is acquiesced in.

The executive power is vested in the President, and in most cases, in the
President and the Senate. In those cases in which the concurrence of the Senate
is necessary, the act of the President only is not an act of the department,
till it acquires the sanction of the Senate. The concurring sanction of both
makes an act of the department.

To this department is entrusted the management of foreign intercourse; but, as
it is variously modified, I shall take the liberty to make a subdivision of
this department, under the name of the department of foreign intercourse. --
The management of this department of foreign intercourse is entrusted to the
President. All who are employed in it, on the part of the United States, are
his agents. He generally, but without any law to direct him, uses the agency of
the Secretary of state, in his correspondence with foreign ministers here, or
our ministers abroad: and all our ministers abroad are his agents. He may
receive ambassadors and other public ministers from foreign states. But he
cannot appoint any ambassador, other public minister, or consul, of the United
States, without the advice and consent of the Senate. And he cannot, even by
and with the advice and consent of the Senate, make a treaty, unless two-thirds
of the Senators present concur U. S. Constable. Art. 2, Sect. 2, 3.
. These are the constitutional checks within itself, on the department of
foreign intercourse. The President may, by his own act, receive a minister from
a foreign court, but he cannot appoint a minister to a foreign court, without
the consent of the Senate; nor make a treaty, though he have the consent of a
majority, without the consent of two-thirds of the Senators present. In
determining therefore, what is an act of the department of foreign intercourse,
we must consider what is the subject of the act. If it be the receiving of an
ambassador, it is an act of the department, on the reception by the President.
If it be the appointing of an ambassador, other public minister, or consul, it
is an act of the department, on the appointment of the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate. If it be the making of a treaty, it is an
act of the department, on the ratification by the President, with the advice
and consent of the Senate, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur.

Such then are the checks provided by our Constitution; a power of some other
department to prevent any act of any department from exceeding its
constitutional jurisdiction; and a power within every department to prevent any
of it acts from being rashly conclusive on any other department. Thus the whole
sovereignty is exercised by all; but the whole sovereignty is not exercised by
any; and so an arbitrary power is effectually prevented: provided the
Constitution be equally respected by all, or the removing power of the elective
department be faithfully exerted. The authority entrusted by the Constitution,
to one department, must not be influenced, directed, controlled, or defeated by
any other; or there will be an usurpation of power, and the constitutional
authority will not be exercised by the department, to which the Constitution
intrusts it, but by it and some other, or by some other only, or by it under
the control of some other.

The check provided by our Constitution is not a power of any one department,
to exercise any of the powers of another, or to restrain another in the
execution of its powers, or to defeat their execution. One branch of a
department may prevent the concluding of its own act; but one department cannot
prevent or defeat the act of another. No department can either interrupt the
proceedings of another to a constitutional act of this other department, nor,
after this other department has concluded its act, defeat its execution, by
refusing the exertion of constitutional power necessary for its execution.

What was the intention of the Constitution in distributing the sovereignty
into portions or departments? -- Was it that each or any should have a
communication with the others or any of them? Surely not: for then no
separation would have been made, and all the sovereignty would have been left
in one body, and thus an arbitrary power given to it. To prevent an arbitrary
power the separation was made, and the communication must lead to an arbitrary
power; to prostrate first one department, and then another, under the feet of
the department acquiring a communication of the powers of any other. The idea
of communication is inconsistent with the idea of separation; separation is
necessary to prevent arbitrary power; communication tends to make the will of
one department defeat that of all the others; and discretion in one, with
communication with the others, is but another word for arbitrary power.

While the proper department was proceeding to its act, could any other have
restrained the exertion of its constitutional powers? Can Congress make a law,
that the supreme court shall not give judgment in an action depending therein?
If any one department cannot prevent another to complete its act, after the act
is complete, can it defeat it? All departments are the agents of the
Constitution; and the Constitution, which authorizes the act, certainly
requires its execution; and its intrusting the direction to one, and the
execution to another agent, cannot be supposed to have been intended, that the
powers be set against each other, and so nothing be done. Does not the
prohibition to prevent the act, necessarily presume a prohibition to defeat its
execution? Can it be a constitutional act, and yet an act not to be executed?
Can the check of the one on the other, without this presumption, be effectual?
Without this, will not the department entrusted with the act, possess merely a
shadow without a substance, and be like those philosophers who suppose there is
nothing in nature but ideas; and worse than they, as wanting power even in
imagination?

I may be told, that there is a department, which possesses power to defeat the
act of another: for the President may, by a pardon, defeat the judgment of a
criminal court. This power is expressly given by the Constitution. In England,
the court of chancery can defeat the judgment of a civil court. The court of
chancery is part of the judiciary department. There and here the supreme
executive can, by pardon, defeat the judgment of a criminal court. I consider
the power of pardon, in criminal cases, as analogous to the chancery power in
civil cases; a power to mitigate the rigor of the law, and give relief, where
law could not relieve. In this respect, I consider the executive as acting in a
judicial capacity, and concluding the act of that department. And I consider
his discretion as a judicial discretion, and like the court of chancery, bound
by rules drawn from experience, in the exercise of this discretion. As this
idea has not perhaps been sufficiently attended to, I will not undertake to lay
down rules for the exercise of the discretionary power of pardoning. But
something like this may be suggested: that this power ought not to be exerted,
where, according to the rules of law, a jury could have acquitted, or a court
have discharged; but it may be exerted, where greater mischief may accure to
the community from the execution, than from the pardon of the judgment. Such
exercise of discretion will not interfere with the constitutional power of the
ordinary judiciary; for it is bound by rules, and cannot regard consequences.
Fiat justitia ruat caelum.

My idea of true discretion is this: where the Constitution, or where a
constitutional act of any other department does not interfere, every department
has a discretion to proceed or not to proceed, in a particular exertion of its
authority. But where the Constitution, or a constitutional act of any
department, requires an exertion of the authority of any other department, this
other department has no discretion to proceed, or not to proceed, to the
necessary exertion; has no authority to examine, whether the department whose
act requires its exertion, has exercised its constitutional discretion right or
not. Every act legally concluded by any department, must, by every other
department, be considered as rightly concluded; and, like a mathematical maxim,
be received without proof. And in this case, it is not one department that
abridges the power of another; but as Mr. G. says, 'it is the Constitution,
which abridges the powers of both:" -- The first cannot proceed -- the other
cannot look back.

Such are my ideas of the uncontrolled power of the departments, their mutual
checks, and their several discretion. And I hope it will appear to every
candid, intelligent and attentive reader, that this doctrine "will stand the
test of investigation, and leads to no palpable absurdity;" and, so far from
being "novel," will to every reader who has studied the principles and
modification of the Constitution of the United States, appear familiar and
just; and as old as the Constitution itself.

I shall now proceed to examine the reasoning of Mr. G. on these principles;
and I hope I shall show, that it is founded on a misapplication of words, and a
misconstruction of principles.

He founds his reasoning on this position; -- "The Constitution has expressly
and exclusively vested, in Congress, the power of raising, granting, and
directing the application of money." For this he states his authority in the
Constitution. "The 8th section of the first article declares, that Congress
shall have power to levy and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, and
to borrow money on the credit of the United States. The 1st section
emphatically states, that all legislative powers herein granted shall be vested
in Congress; and the 9th section provides, that no money shall be drawn from
the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law."

From his position so supported, he draws this conclusion, "that Congress are
judges of the propriety or impropriety of making a grant, and have a right to
exercise their discretion therein."

I would observe that his position is not stated in the words of the
Constitution; and it is no uncommon thing, by changing the words of the
Constitution, into words conveying the same sense, and something more, to draw
from them a conclusion which the words of the Constitution do not warrant. For
instance, the 7th section of the 1st article of the Constitution says, that
"All bills for raising a revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives." One would think in reasoning on this section, there would be
no harm in substituting the words money bills, instead of the words bills for
raising a revenue. But besides bills for raising a revenue, there are
appropriation bills, which are bills fixing a sum of money, and declaring an
object to which it shall be applied, and a fund from which it shall be drawn.
These may also be called money bills. Now by substituting, in the 7th section,
the words money bills, instead of the words bills for raising a revenue, the
section, so read, will be considered as restraining the Senate from originating
an appropriation bill; -- though the Constitution restrains the Senate only
from originating bills for raising a revenue. Yet an appropriation law may be
made, without a law for raising a revenue, or without occasioning any such law.

I shall not dispute, whether the words of his position, raising, granting, and
directing the application of money, do not sufficiently express the powers of
Congress, as stated in his quotations from the Constitution; but, in the course
of these observations, I shall have occasion to dispute, whether Mr. G. does
not use them, to express those powers, and something more, which the words of
the Constitution neither express nor imply.

Not content with the words of the Constitution, "All legislative powers herein
granted, shall be vested in a Congress;" Mr. G. says, that this is
"emphatically" stated. Perhaps he inserted the word emphatically, thence to
support his doctrine, by a conclusion, that the Constitution gives no
legislative power but to Congress, and excludes the department of foreign
intercourse from all legislative power.

The Constitution does not vest all legislative power in Congress; for it
declares that the President shall have power, by and with the advice and
consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators
present concur Art. 2. Sect. 2.
; and it declares, that this Constitution, and the laws of the United States
which shall be made in pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall
be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of
the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in
the Constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding Art. 6.
.

It has been admitted that the House of Representatives claims no agency in
making treaties; and even Mr. G. has admitted, that where a treaty needs no law
to carry it into effect, or is not contradicted by any previous law, no
interference of the House of Representatives is necessary; the Constitution
declares a treaty to be a law of the United States; and the House of
Representatives is an essential part of Congress; there is therefore other
legislative powers granted by the Constitution, than those vested in Congress.

In laying down his position, having substituted words of his own, instead of
the words of the Constitution, on which only his argument must rest, he thus
reasons from it. "We say, that Congress, having the sole power of granting
money, are judges of the propriety or impropriety of making a grant, that they
have a right to exercise their discretion therein, and that the power of
granting money, for any purposes whatever, belongs solely to the legislature,
in which it is literally vested by the Constitution. The power of determining
the amount of an appropriation is a legislative power, the power of doing what
is within the province of law, the power of fixing the rule by which a certain
act is to be executed. The Pesident may appoint as many ministers as he thinks
fit, and if Congress, without having any right to exercise discretion, be bound
to make provision for them, the amount of money necessary for their support,
would also depend upon him; and the power of granting money, in that instance,
would be transferred from the legislature to the executive, and also the power
of raising money; for it is immaterial to me, whether he does it directly, or
whether the legislature are bound to do it, according to his discretion."

In order to determine, whether his reasoning be fair, and his conclusion just,
we must examine the justice of his position, by comparing it with the sections
of the Constitution, by which he supports it. He supports it by his quotations
from the 8th, the 1st, and the 9th sections, of the 1st article of the
Constitution. Taking it for granted (and I believe it is true) that these
quotations are the only parts of the Constitution, on which he could found his
reasoning to draw his conclusion; if his position, taking the words of it in
the sense which his reasoning puts on them, be not supported by his quotations
from the Constitution; his reasoning, and his conclusion must fall to the
ground.

Presuming that he supports his power of raising money, by the 8th section; his
power of granting, and directing the application of money, by the 9th; and the
exclusive vesting of these powers in Congress, by the 1st; I shall take the
liberty to substitute in his position, the words of the Constitution, instead
of his words. The position and conclusion will then stand thus: -- All
legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress; Congress shall
have power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, and to
borrow money, on the credit of the United States; and no money shall be drawn
from the Treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law; therefore,
says he, Congress are judges of the propriety or impropriety of making a grant,
and have a right to exercise their discretion therein. -- STRANGE LOGIC!

In his short quotation from the 8th section, he has omitted some words,
immediately after the power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and
excises, and before the power to borrow money. I shall restore them to their
place. "Congress shall have power

"To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts, and
provide for the common defense, and general welfare of the United States: --

"To borrow money, on the credit of the United States."

From the manner in which this part (and the whole) of this section is printed,
I consider the word to before the words pay the debts, as synonymous with the
words in order to, and the clauses omitted by Mr. G. not as giving two new
powers, but as pointing out the objects to which the money raised by taxes,
etc. shall be applied. So that Congress takes this power of raising money,
coupled with the duty of applying it to these purposes.

Let me observe also, that this section which defines the powers of Congress,
gives to it a power "To make all laws, which shall be necessary and proper, for
carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers, vested, by
this Constitution, in the government of the United States, or in any department
or officer thereof." I say that Congress takes all its powers, coupled with the
duty of applying them to the purposes, for which they were given by the
Constitution.

That the Constitution determines, that Congress has the exclusive "power to
lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, and to borrow money"; and
that "no money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law," and by a law made by Congress; I admit. But before
Mr. G. can draw a conclusion, that Congress may, in every case, determine,
whether it be proper or improper, to lay taxes, or to appropriate money, he
must establish something more: he must establish, from the Constitution, that
Congress has in every case, a power to refuse to lay taxes, or to appropriate
money. This he cannot establish either from his quotations or any other part of
the Constitution: for it may be the duty of Congress to lay taxes, in order to
pay the debts, and provide for the common defense, and general welfare of the
United States.

Taking his position in his own words, "the Constitution has expressly and
exclusively vested in Congress, the power of raising, granting, and directing
the application of money;" before he can draw his conclusion, "that Congress
are judges of the propriety or impropriety of making a grant, and have a right
to exercise their discretion therein;" he must establish something more: he
must establish, that in all cases, the man who has the sole power of granting
money has a power to refuse. This he cannot establish from any principles of
reason; for a man may have the sole power to do a thing coupled with an
absolute obligation to do it; as the President to appoint judges of the supreme
court; and the supreme court to give judgment in a case before it affecting an
ambassador; or a man to pay his debt. Mr. G. therefore draws a conclusion
without the necessary premises; and his conclusion has not foundation to rest
on, and must fall to the ground,

If, by laying emphasis on the word all, he means to prove that no legislative
power is vested in any other department of government, except Congress, the
ordinary legislature; I have shown, that this is inconsistent with a fair
construction of the Constitution. To found any reasoning on one expression of
any instrument, when there are, in it, other expressions, which would destroy
that reasoning, is taking a contracted view, and making an unfair and imprudent
use of that instrument. The whole must be taken together, and if there be any
contradictory expressions, they must if possible be reconciled, by applying
them severally to the respective objects in the contemplation of its author.

If Mr. G. considers discretion, as synonymous with legislative power, and
asserts, that in every case, in which an act of the legislature is called for,
they have a discretion to act or to refuse, according to their discretion; his
reasoning will stand thus: -- The power of raising, granting, and directing the
application of money, is a legislative power; but every legislative power is
coupled with a discretion in the legislature, to exercise or refuse its power;
therefore the legislature may, in every case, refuse to raise, grant, or direct
the application of money. I have said in every case, not only because the
discretion, which Mr. G. contends for, is co-extensive with the power, which
extends to all cases; but because there are some cases, in which I admit the
discretion to refuse. And I have used the words may refuse to raise, grant,
etc. instead of his words, "Congress are judges of the propriety or impropriety
of the grant, and have a right to exercise their discretion therein; because I
admit, and therefore we both agree, that Congress has a right to refuse in some
cases, and unless the dispute is stated, as I have stated it, there would be no
dispute; and because a right to exercise discretion to grant, without a power
to refuse, is no right: there can be no discretion, where there is no power to
refuse.

Mr. G. admits, that where the Constitution, as in the case of salaries to the
President, and the judges of the supreme court, declares, that Congress shall
grant; Congress is bound not to refuse. But he seems to hold this opinion,
"that the discretionary power of the legislature, to grant money, is limited
only by the Constitution, and is not transferred to any other department;" and
stating that, "when the Constitution means to impose a duty, it positively
directs the act to be done," he says "we may safely conclude, that where it
gives no such direction, where it empowers, instead of commanding, the reason
is, that it meant to leave a discretion."

This conclusion he seems to support, by distinguishing between the word shall,
and the word may, and he seems to consider this, as the distinction between
legislative power, and executive power; considering legislative power as
coupled with discretion, and executive power as coupled with obligation; and as
the Constitution, in some cases, positively directs, by the word shall, there
is no obligation on the legislature but in those; and that, in all other cases
where the Constitution uses the word may, or the words shall have power, the
legislature has discretion.

It is well established and understood, that may is often construed shall, and
that shall is often construed may. No man conversant in the legal construction
of language, will require proof of this.

The Constitution declares, that "the President shall nominate, and, by and
with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other
public ministers, and consuls;" the President has never appointed an
ambassador; will Mr. G. recommend an impeachment for this breach of duty? Or,
if the President should think proper to decline to appoint any public minister,
would Mr. G. recommend an impeachment? "The President shall receive ambassadors
and other public ministers:" if he have reason to reject, has he not
discretion?" "The President may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both
houses, or either of them." Suppose an occasion requiring him to convene either
or both houses, and he wilfully refuse; is he not impeachable?

It appears then, that a positive duty may, without any express command, be
imposed by the nature of the case. In many cases, the word may imposes as
strong an obligation as the word shall, and the word shall imposes no stronger
obligation than the word may. The Constitution of Pennsylvania declares, "that
the legislature shall, as soon as conveniently may be, provide by law, for the
establishment of schools throughout the state." Do the words, as soon as
conveniently may be, weaken the obligation; or suppose them struck out, would
the obligation be strengthened? Or, is the establishment of schools better
provided for, by the word shall, than if the Constitution had used the word may?

Mr. G. admitting, that where the Constitution declares, that Congress shall
grant money, there is no discretion to refuse; observes, that if "declares,
that the President and Judges shall have salaries, etc. Had the framers of the
Constitution also intended, that Congress should be bound to make provision for
ministers, they would have introduced a similar clause in respect to them. The
Constitution is explicit in one case, and declares, that salaries shall be
given: it is silent in the other, and does not declare, that salaries shall be
given." He concludes, therefore, that "the objection, that Congress cannot, in
every case, exercise the discretionary power to grant money, cannot reach
farther than the specific case on which it is grounded."

I will observe, that the object of those clauses in the Constitution, is not
so much to bind Congress to grant money, as to prevent them from altering their
grant. Its object is, to make the executive and judiciary independent of the
legislature, and to deprive Congress of a power of influencing those
departments to succumbency to the will of the legislature, and thereby of
acquiring all power, and becoming arbitrary. This is evident, from the
difference of expression in the two cases. The compensation of the President
"shall neither be increased nor diminished, during the period for which he
shall have been elected." The compensation of the judges "shall not be
diminished during their continuance in office." The judges continuing in office
during life, it is evident, that from the gradual sinking of the value of
money, which accompanies the increase of agriculture, manufactures, and
commerce, there might, during his continuance in office, be a necessity to
increase the salary of a Judge: therefore, it is only said, that the salary of
a Judge shall not be diminished. But the duration of the President's authority
being only four years, the necessity is not so great, as to induce the
Constitution, to submit the President to the influence of hope from the
legislature. Therefore, his salary can neither be increased nor diminished,
during the period of his appointment. If Congress could diminish the salary of
the other departments, or, as the Pennsylvania Assembly, in the year 1796, did,
in the case of Judges, when there was a necessity for an increase, limit the
increase to a less time than their continuance in office; the Constitution
would be violated, the other departments would be influenced to a succumbency
to the legislature, and a separation of power, the guard against despotism,
would be removed. The other departments would become the mere puppets of the
legislature, and be reduced to that state of dependency, in which the English
judges were, before continuance for life was attached to their office: for it
is the same thing whether you take away the office, or take away the salary, or
make it incompetent.

It would have been extending but a little farther, the same principle of
reasoning, if Mr. G. had denied, that Congress is bound to grant money, even to
the President or Judges; for the Constitution does not expressly say, that
Congress shall grant, but only that the President and Judges shall receive: and
the obligation to grant is only implied. Had it been expressed, Congress,
without a sense of duty, could easily have evaded the words, by making an
incompetent grant, or establishing it on incompetent funds. The duty of
granting arises out of the power to grant, and the obligation to promote the
views of the Constitution. The Constitution lays down only the out lines of the
government, and leaves to the departments the power, with the obligation to
finish the rest. -- The Constitution does not descend to little matters. The
Constitution does not provide, that salaries should be given to all the
officers of the government. But surely, if there be an officer necessary for
the regular operation of the Constitution, and that officer cannot be obtained
without a salary, Congress are as much bound by the Constitution, to grant a
salary, as if the Constitution expressly required it to be done.

Mr. G. will perhaps allow this, but contend that Congress is to judge of the
necessity, and that the power of acting is accompanied with the power of
refusing. "Congress is, upon all occasions, under a moral obligation to act
according to justice and propriety. We do not claim the absurd privilege of
acting without sufficient motives, but we wish every proper motive to have its
due weight. The opinion of the Executive, and where he has a partial power, the
application of that power to a certain object, will ever operate as powerful
motives upon our deliberations." Whether it be to embarrass the argument, or to
give it a specious appearance, in the more harmless names of right of
discretion, and giving every motive its due weight; he avoids expressing the
power to refuse; though that be the only power really to be contended for. That
Congress alone has the power to grant, is clear. A power to judge, without a
power to refuse, is nothing. And to contend for such power in the House of
Representatives, with respect to transactions of the other departments, is to
contend for an idle and useless curiosity into transactions, which they have no
authority to conduct or control. To contend for that, and the power to refuse,
is to give the House of Representatives a complete control over all the other
branches, and vest all power in the House of Representatives. For, as Congress
only can grant money, if, where money is necessary to execute the measures of
the other departments, the House of Representatives may judge of the propriety
or impropriety of making a grant, and have a right to exercise their discretion
therein; though they may grant, if they approve, they may refuse, if they
dislike. If the acts of other departments are to be weighed as a motive, not
respected as an obligation, there will never be wanting pretenses for
considering the motive as light. They will never grant the money, unless they
approve the measure. A right to judge of the propriety of the grant, is a right
to judge of the propriety of the measure. And thus every department, to whom
the Constitution has entrusted the management of power, must exercise it
according to the will of the House of Representatives; that is, the House of
Representatives will have all power: all the barriers of separation will be
removed, and the complete sovereignty lodged in one house.

I say the House of Representatives, because though Mr. G. in making this claim
for the House of Representatives, affects to claim nothing more for them than
for the Senate; yet, in fact, this claim increases only the power of the House
of Representatives, and adds nothing to the power of the Senate: for the
Senate, as part of the department of foreign intercourse, has already all
control over these measures, which the establishment of this claim could give.

The doctrine which I would establish, is, that all powers of Congress are
coupled with an obligation to exercise them; that having a power to make all
laws necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers of Congress,
and all powers vested by the Constitution in the government of the United
States, or in any department or officer thereof; Congress is bound to make all
such laws; that in all other cases, Congress are judges of the necessity or
propriety of such law, and are bound to make it, only when they judge it
necessary or proper; but that, where a law is necessary or proper, to carry
into execution a constitutional act of any other department, this other
department is the sole judge of the necessity and propriety of passing such
law; and that, when this department declares the necessity or propriety of
passing such law, Congress is bound to pass it, and has no discretion, but in
choosing the best law, to give effect to the act of the other department. That,
where the Constitution expressly requires a law, Congress has a discretion to
refuse, Mr. G. will not assert. Every one knows, that an implied obligation
imposes a duty as strong as an express obligation; and, that, to obstruct the
authority derived from the Constitution, is, in effect, to obstruct the
Constitution itself; for the Constitution was made, for the purpose that its
several authorities should be administered by the departments, to which they
were severally entrusted; and be carried into execution by the several
departments, to which the means were entrusted. If the House of
Representatives, therefore, refuse to pass a law, which the constitutional act
of any department has rendered necessary; the Constitution is as effectually
violated, as if they had refused to pass a law, which the Constitution itself
declared to be necessary.

Surely a claim which would defeat all the views of the Constitution, in
establishing a separation of power, a claim, so absurd as to counteract the
Constitution, must have very express words indeed to support it. Mr. G. is
sensible of this, and, without proving, asserts, "that it is evident that where
the Constitution has lodged the power, there exists the right of acting and the
right of discretion." But, to support his assertion, he cannot appeal to any
express words of the Constitution. There are none such. He must rest upon
general principles of construction. But I have already observed that general
principles will not support his doctrine; for there may be power coupled with
obligation, or power without any discretion.

It is not necessary for me, to diminish the force of the clause respecting
appropriations, by considering it as a matter of form. It is substantial, that
no money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of a law. But this
does not establish, that Congress is free to refuse to pass a law for that
purpose; or has, in all cases, a right to enquire into the propriety of the
measures, which have occasioned the necessity for raising money. The
limitation, to two years, of appropriations for raising armies, is not imposed
as a restraint of Congress over the Executive, but as a restraint of one
Congress over another. It may be observed, from this clause, that the power of
appropriating money gives a control over the subject; and, if this power be
coupled with discretion in all cases, gives a control in all cases. If there be
no limitation to the exercise of this discretion, but the judgment of the House
of Representatives, as there is no power to control their judgment, they only
will judge of the weight of their motives, and will always think they judge
right; and there will be no limitation to the power of the House of
Representatives. Thus all separation of power will be removed, and arbitrary
power will be vested in one branch of the legislature.

Who gave the House of Representatives a right to set itself up as the sole
organ of sovereignty, as the sole judge of propriety; over its compeers in
authority, "erecting itself into a high priest of the Constitution, assuming
the keys of political salvation, and damning, without mercy, whosoever differs
with it in opinion?" Is it any thing more than a fellow servants with the other
departments, like them, by the Constitution, the lord of all, limited to its
own portion of authority, and, by the Constitution, bound to lend its
assistance to them, whenever their constitutional authority calls for it; as
much as each of them is bound toward it? Whenever a law is made, the judiciary
is bound to carry into execution the view of the legislature; by lending their
power to determine on it. -- They have no discretion whether they will do so or
not, for the Constitution, by giving them the sole power of determining,
positively binds them to determine, and the only discretion left with them is
the choosing of the best manner of determining, so as best to accomplish the
views of the legislature. When the judiciary have given judgment, the executive
has no discretion, whether it will lend its power to execute the judgment; for
the Constitution, by giving it the sole power of executing judgments, has
positively bound it to exert its power, for this purpose; and the only
discretion left is the choice of the most convenient and lawful means for the
execution. Whenever Congress establishes an office, the Constitution, by giving
the President the power of appointing, binds him to appoint a competent
officer, and he has no discretion but to judge of the most proper person.
Whenever an act of any of the other departments requires a grant of money, in
order to give it effect, the Constitution, by giving Congress the sole power of
granting money, has positively bound it to grant a sum competent for the due
execution of the act of the other department; and the only discretion left to
it is a choice of the best means of raising the money, or the best fund whence
to draw it. Suppose a judgment against the United States in any of its courts
for a sum of money; is not Congress bound by the duty arising out of their
power, to provide funds for the payment of this judgment; or can it enter on
the judiciary province, and enquire into the merits of the judgment? Just so,
in any act of any other department creating, on the subject committed to it, a
necessity for a grant of money, there arises, out of their power, a duty on
Congress to make a competent grant. The competence of the grant is to be
measured by the nature of the act, the execution of which is to be provided
for; and the means of raising the money are to be directed by the discretion of
Congress; for the direction of the means of raising money is exclusively vested
in Congress. Whenever an act of another department interferes not, Congress may
grant or refuse, according to its discretion, restrained only by the
Constitution: for the Constitution vests in Congress the residue of all powers
of administration, not distributed to other departments; subject, like every
department, to the duty of exerting its powers for promoting the views of the
Constitution, and giving effect to the measures of the other departments. Every
department, whose power is wanted in the execution of a measure, may judge of
the authority of another, but not of its discretion; of its having acted within
its constitutional limits, but not of its having well acted. The discretion,
the power of determing the propriety or impropriety of any constitutional
measure, is exclusively committed, by the Constitution, to the proper
department. When it has determined, all other departments are bound by it. It
is the Constitution which binds them all.

The judiciary may judge of the constitutionality of a law; but not of its
propriety: the legislature alone can determine this -- The executive may judge
of the constitutionality of a judgment, of the jurisdiction of the court over
the subject, but not of the merits of the judgment. So, respecting any act or
measure of the department of foreign intercourse, the Constitution gives
Congress no power to judge of the propriety of the measure; if it cannot judge
of the propriety of the measure, it cannot judge of the propriety of the grant,
any farther than under a sense of duty, to fix the amount, and choose the means
of raising it. Even Mr. G. admits that Congress has no right to divest the
President of any of his constitutional powers. And he considers the limitation
of appropriations for an army, by any one Congress, to a term equal to its own
duration, as sufficiently divesting any one Congress of a power of raising an
army, so as not to be under the control of another Congress. The power of
withholding appropriations, for the acts of any department, is, on this
principle, a power of restraining from acting, and of divesting this department
of its constitutional power. The President has power to make treaties, and to
appoint and receive ambassadors. To deprive him of the means of sending public
ministers, is depriving him of the power of making treaties. On his own
principles, Mr. G. must admit, that this power is coupled with a discretion of
judging with what nation, or in what manner, to form a treaty, or carry on an
intercourse by means of ambassadors. Yet he avows it to be the object and
effect of this claim of the House of Representatives, though not to annihilate
the establishment, "effectually to check its extension." The House of
Representatives then say, "Though the Constitution has vested the President
with a discretion, we will not permit him to execute it; but will divest him of
his constitutional power. It is true, we do not now, annihilate the
establishment, we choose only to retrench it; but when we have succeeded in
this, the same arguments will enable us to annihilate. Surely, if we may now
tell the President, he shall send but three plenipotentiaries, we may, next
year, tell him, he shall send but one; and the year following, none: and we
will manage the foreign intercourse ourselves as well as the powers of internal
legislation. Whoever has the sole and exclusive command of the purse, is the
sole master; and if we can cast off the constitutional limitations of our
power, we shall be sole masters. Are not we the Representatives of the People?"

I consider the People as the proprietor of a great estate, the different
departments as his agents for the management of it; and the Constitution as the
instructions given them for their conduct, and the limitations of their
authority. -- He gives no predominancy of one over another; nor the whole of
his own power to any; but a part of it to each. To one he gives power to manage
his buildings, gardens and fields; to another of managing his lawsuits, his
disputes about his boundaries, or any claims of neighboring proprietors of
rights on his estate; and to another he gives the power of collecting his rents
and debts, and paying out his money. Now, if this money agent, because he has
power to raise and pay money, has a right in all cases, before he grant, to
enquire into the propriety or impropriety of the grant; it is clear that he has
the sole management of the estate, and that nothing can be done respecting the
buildings, gardens, fields, boundaries, of disputes of the proprietor, without
the approbation of the money agent; and that he will have all the power of the
proprietor, and be sole agent. The proprietor never meant this. He meant only,
that this money agent should take care, that his building agent should not draw
money, for conducting lawsuits; nor his law agent, for conducting the
buildings, gardens or farms; but never meant, that when either of the other
agents wanted money for the purpose of his agency, the money agent should have
power to refuse; or, before he granted, enquire whether the other agent had
conducted his own business right. Every agent, for the purposes of his own
department, is to every other, as the proprietor; and for those purposes, has
the same right as the proprietor, to call on the money agent for money; and a
refusal of the money agent, to furnish any other agent with the necessary money
to accomplish his purposes, is a refusal to obey the instructions of the
proprietor, and amounts to a refusal to furnish the proprietor himself with
money: for this other agent has, for his purposes, all the authority of the
proprietor. The Constitution is the will or instructions of the proprietor; the
departments are the agents; Congress is the money agent. Every constitutional
act of any of the departments, being a regular exertion of the authority of the
Constitution, has the same authority over the other departments, as the
Constitution itself; and if it limit the power of the others, it is not this
department, but the Constitution which limits the power of the others. An
authoritized act of the agent is an act of the principal. Therefore, if the
constitutional act of any department require money to give it effect, Congress
is as much bound to grant it, as if the Constitution itself required the grant.
Every act concluded under the authority of the Constitution, is as binding as
the Constitution; and if an act of the legislature, of the judiciary, or of the
department of foreign intercourse, requires a grant of money, the House of
Represcutatives are as much bound to raise and grant it, as if the Constitution
required it. They can no more examine the propriety of the act, than the
propriety of the Constitution. They are but fellow agents with the department
to whose discretion their common lord, the Constitution, has exclusively
entrusted the judgment of the propriety or impropriety of the act, and have no
power paramount over this department to judge of its discretion. If the other
department has, according to its authority from the Constitution, regularly
concluded an act, the House of Representatives has no discretion, whether or
not, to give it effect. What then is the discretion of the House of
Representatives? A discretion to enquire, whether the act be within the
jurisdiction of the other department, and how best to give it effect; a
discretion, under a sense of duty, to determine the sum necessary to give it
effect, and to devise the best ways and means to raise that sum. Each
department has discretion, within its own jurisdiction, of exercising its
powers, as it pleases, agreeably to the Constitution; or, if the Constitution,
or any other department, do not require it, under a sense of duty, to decline
the exercise of its powers; but no department can, in the exercise of its own
powers, defeat the constitutional authority of another. An act of the
department of foreign intercourse may be considered as a law or a contract, and
as there is no power in the House of Representatives to annul, they must
execute it, like any other law or contract.

To show, that this doctrine will not stand the test of investigation, Mr. G.
says, "Whenever the powers vested in any one department are sufficient to
complete a certain act, it would be unconstitutional in any of the others, to
control it. But whenever the powers have been so distributed between two
departments, in relation to another certain act, that neither of the two can
complete the act, by its own power; each department is controlled by the
other." This reasoning seems to be founded on a misapplication of words; by not
distinguishing between a right of determining on a measure, and the power of
directing the means of giving it effect; calling the first an act, and the
other a complete act. The first is surely, so far as the word act can be
applied to it, a complete act; and the refusal of the means of giving it
effect, is not a refusal to complete, but a power to defeat or render useless;
and the department which has completed the act, though it may not have the
power itself to apply the means, may have a right to require the department,
which has the means of giving it effect, to apply those means for that purpose,
and not, by denying the means, defeat the act. A judgment of a court is a
complete act; but the court has not the means of executing it; those are
entrusted to the proper officers, the sheriff, etc. but though the court itself
cannot exert those means; it has a right to require the officer to exert them,
and it would be unconstitutional in him to refuse. Suppose a bill should pass
both Houses of Congress, be approved by the President, and become a law; it is
a complete act, yet it cannot be carried into execution without the aid of the
executive and the judiciary. They only have the constitutional power of
executing it: have they also a constitutional discretion to refuse? Suppose, in
the adjournment of the House of Representatives, the President perceives an
emergency requiring a new minister to be instantly dispatched, without waiting
for appropriations. The minister is dispatched, and executes the commission.
Has the House of Representatives a discretion to refuse a compensation?

The absurdity which Mr. G. sees, in the doctrine for which I contend, is an
absurdity of his own making, and arises from begging the question, and
supposing, that the department, which has the means of executing the complete
act of another department, has a right to refuse those means. I say it has no
such right; and it is only he who says it has, who occasions the absurdity.

The novelty of this doctrine is no better proved than its absurdity. I have
shown how consistent it is with the Constitution. If tradition has made void
the law, if political Scribes and Pharisees have introduced their glosses
instead of the text; no wonder if, when the true gospel shines out, it should
be received by those blind guides as novelty. To compare it to the state
constitutions, furnishes no evidence, for either there will be no resemblance,
or the same dispute will exist. To compare it with the government of Britain,
gives no evidence; since it is not principles of a Constitution, but principles
of corruption, which preserve the form of that government, and support the
authority of the King against the authority of the House of Commons. Aided by
corruption, the King, who has the power of making treaties, may safely trust to
Parliament the discretion of executing them; if as Mr. G. says, "a progressive
patronage and a systematic corrupting influence have sunk Parliament to a
nominal representation, a mere machine, the convenience used by government for
the purpose of raising supplies; the medium through which the executive reach
with ease the purse of the people. And now when the farce of obtaining even the
nominal consent of Parliament is sufficiently understood, the ministry dispense
with the ceremony." The use of corruption proves, that, without it, the King
could not preserve his prerogatives against the encroachments of the House of
Commons. But, armed with this corruption, the King has as little to fear from
the discretion of the Parliament, as Robespierre or the French Directory, armed
with terror, could have to fear from the legislative Councils. But surely
either the one or the other model is unfit for our imitation. We want neither
an Anglo-monarchico-aristocratic faction, nor a Gallo-demo-mobocratic faction,
to destroy the structure of the American Constitution. Nor ought we to derive
its construction, from the errors and corruptions of other governments, but
from its own principles and organization.

The great fallacy in the reasoning of Mr. G. arises by substituting the words
raising and granting money, instead of the words of the Constitution; and
confounding the power of raising and granting money, with a power of creating a
necessity for raising and granting, and determining the reality and extent of
that necessity, and making the words raising and granting, mean creating a
necessity or determining the reality and extent of a necessity for granting.
These are powers essentially different from the powers of raising and granting.
They are not, and consistently with the views of the Constitution, they could
not be, vested in Congress. To say, that they are implied in the powers of
raising and granting, is reasoning without premises, and therefore
inconclusively. They are not implied; and often exist separate from each other.
To say that they are given to Congress, is taking a very narrow and imperfect
view of the Constitution.

They are also given in many instances to other departments. It cannot be
inferted, from the power of laying taxes, and appropriating money, that this
power is always free from an obligation to exert it; or that this obligation
cannot be imposed, but by the discretion of Congress. To judge of the propriety
or impropriety of a grant for any object, in any other sense, than as to judge
of the proper amount of the grant, and the proper means of procuring and
applying the money, is to judge of the propriety or impropriety of the object;
and the management of this may, in many cases, be committed to another
department with discretion exclusive and equal, as derived from the same
source, the Constitution. A man is only free to judge of the propriety or
impropriety of the grant, in the sense contended for, when he has an arbitrary
power over the money. For, if he have it in trust from the owner, to apply it,
as not only he, but his fellow agents may determine; he may often have no
discretion to refuse. Congress is but a fellow agent with the other
departments, and like every other organ of power, takes all its powers couple
with duties; its power to make, therefore, coupled with a duty to make all laws
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers of the
Constitution, and all other powers vested in the government, or in any
department or officer thereof. The discretion of Congress to judge of the
necessity or propriety of any law, is bounded by the discretion of every other
department, in the execution of their constitutional authority. Where either
the Constitution itself dictates the necessity or propriety of a law, or gives
to any other department, or officer, the discretion to judge of the necessity
or propriety of a law, Congress has no discretion left to judge of the
necessity or propriety of making the law, but only of choosing the best law to
accomplish the object of the other department. Its power is abridged by the
Constitution. A claim of Congress then, to a discretion to judge of the
propriety of a law which the Constitution, or any department with authority
derived from the Constitution, may have declared to be necessary, is a claim of
all power in the government, or a power to refuse what the Constitution, or the
constituted authorities, may have declared necessary. When nature may create a
necessity, or the Constitution or any department may make an engagement or
legal declaration; a claim in Congress, to a right to judge of the propriety or
impropriety of the grant, is not, and consistently with the views of the
Constitution, cannot be vested in Congress, for it is a claim to assume
universal power, or a claim to assume a power over the principles of the
Constitution, a power over the principles of nature and morals, and therefore a
power over God himself.

I have now examined the reasoning of Mr. G. on the constitutional principle;
and as we know, that motives as pure as his, are no security against danger, I
think it will appear, that judgment, as clear as his, is no security against
error. -- The fact is, that it is not from a want of obligation on the House of
Representatives to appropriate money, but from a want of power to compel
compliance, if they choose to disregard this obligation. Impunity is often
confounded with discretion, Suppose the judiciary refuse to decide on a law;
how can they be compelled? They may be impeached and removed. But suppose the
same obstinacy should exist in their successors; the government would be
dissolved: for no other department can exercise their authority. If an inferior
court refuse the exercise of its powers, a superior court may compel it, by
mandamus. No mandamus can go to the House of Representatives. We have no
Parisian mob to surround their hall with pikes and cannon. They cannot be
impeached; for they have the sole power of impeaching. -- And the only
compulsive force on them, is the removing power of the people, the elective
branch. This is the tribunal before which they are tried; but, as saving money
is generally popular, and the people is often ill informed, the Representatives
take means to escape from judgment, by prejudicing the judges, by incessantly
and widely spreading among them misrepresentations of all the measures, which
they oppose, and of all the acts of the administration. Though there be
therefore a positive obligation, there being no compulsive power to enforce it,
impunity is construed as discretion; and the "moral obligation" of a sense of
duty, can alone enforce the exertion of "the constitutional power." And this it
seems is "a metaphysical subtlety!"

Of all public officers, we have the least hold, by means of a sense of duty,
on representatives accountable to none but to the people: especially in
granting money not to be expended by themselves. The confederation directed
that all charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be incurred for the
common defense or general welfare, and allowed by Congress, shall be defrayed
out of a common treasury, which shall be supplied by the several states; and
also directed that every state shall abide by the determination of Congress on
all questions submitted to them; and shall inviolably observe the articles of
Confederation Art. 8.1
. -- Here was positive and moral duty united. Yet, when danger ceased, were
both positive and moral duty sufficient to persuade the state legislatures to
comply with the requisitions of Congress?

Presuming the cordial concurrence of each department, to carry into effect the
constitutional acts of any other; as Solon made no law against parricide,
apprehending it impossible, that any one should be guilty of so unnatural a
barbarity, the Constitution forbears to command any department to abstain from
a resistance to the authority of any other, which would destroy their common
parent.

To the policy of extending or abridging foreign intercourse, I say nothing.
Resting on the constitutional principle, it is sufficient for me, that the
Constitution has excluded the House of Representatives from all management of
foreign intercourse; and thought it safe, to trust the whole discretion of
managing it, to the President, acting under the check of the Senate. The
Constitution has considered the President, as a safe depositary of this
authority, and the Senate as a sufficient check; and to the acts of this
authority, as to the authority of the Constitution, it behooves the House of
Representatives to bow! as it behooves the President, in his turn, to bow to the
authority of Congress as expressed by law.

Every act done under the authority of the Constitution is, till it be annulled
by the department which gave it existence, as binding on every department, as
the Constitution itself: thus not only the Constitution, but the laws and
treaties of the United States are declared the supreme law. And the question is
not, whether any department may, in the exercise of its own authority, exercise
discretion; but whether it may also exercise discretion over the authority of
another department: whether the House of Representatives be free to do as it
pleases, and, uncontrolled by the constitutional acts of any other department,
set itself up as paramount over all, and absorb, in itself, the authority of
all the departments. It is a question of pride, of ambition in the House of
Representatives, to possess a power to prevent any thing being done, by any
other department, without their approbation; that is, to acquire arbitrary
power. And this they justify, under a pretense of preventing extravagance and
abuse of authority.

It is possible to suppose cases, of a nature so extraordinary, as to justify
one department, in assuming a power not given it, to defeat the acts of
another. Personal liberty is a constitutional right; but if a man use it
dangerously, it may be abridged. An emergency so critical may exist, that, to
encounter it, a violation of the Constitution itself may become a duty. No
argument can be drawn from this: for abuse of power is a supposition which may
be made in all departments, and is surely not less presumable, in the House of
Representatives, than in the President and the Senate. So far as the
Constitution intends, that the House of Representatives should have this power
to prevent extravagance, it is not disputed with them. They have the
discretion, controlled only by a sense of duty, to adjust the amount of the
grant to the nature of the object, and to choose the means of raising and
applying the money. To give them more, would be giving them all power: and if
this be necessary, to preserve us from abuse in other departments; who, if they
obtain this, shall preserve us from abuse in them? What security have we, that
the House of Representatives may not act as extravagantly as the President and
Senate? Are large popular bodies less liable to extravagance, passion,
partiality, and ambition, than an individual, or a small select body,
responsible for their conduct? Have they not their favorites? Have they not
their masters? Give them the power claimed, would the other departments have
any chance of preserving the shadowy fragment of remaining authority? Would not
the House of Representatives soon render odious the other departments, and
render it impossible for the people to know the truth? The House of
Representatives would be erected into a national convention, the center of all
authority; its opinions, its agents, its influence would spread ramifications
of its power, and receive nourishment, in every part of the nation; and all its
power would center in a Mirabeau or a Robespierre.

How tyranny or ruin may have come on other nations, unless in so far as their
circumstances resemble ours, it is not material to enquire. Our Executive has
not, and cannot have, an uncontrolled command of the purse of the people. Nor
is there any kind of resemblance between the power of appointing ministers, and
the case of shipmoney. That case was a claim of exercising, not only the power
which the King had, but the power which he had not; a power of laying and
collecting taxes, as well as declaring their necessity, a power to fix the sum
necessary, as well as to declare the object. And whatever deductions may be
made from history, it will be found, that tyranny has arisen from the
turbulence and refractory conduct of the people, or the other departments; from
an abuse of liberty or discretion; from contentions for power, creating a
pretense, and from the circumstances of the Executive furnishing the means, of
acquiring a predominancy; and from the satisfaction arising, when any
government has superseded the anxiety of distractions, justifying the success,
and favoring the establishment, of this predominancy.

"The events of the reign of Charles the first" are indeed "a proof of the
danger to be apprehended from the encroachments of the legislature. They were
the result of an unsettled Constitution. The precise boundaries of power were
not ascertained: Convulsions, a civil war, a revolution ensued." Very natural
consequences, from a case exactly like the present! Where is the difference
between an unsettled constitution, and a constitution, the construction of
which, by those who administer it, is unsettled? If the precise boundaries of
power be ascertained, what is the ground of dispute between the department of
foreign intercourse, and the House of Representatives? The cases are the same,
let us take warning by the consequences.

In the contrast, which Mr. G. draws, between the President's speech to
Congress, and the late President's address to the people; he cites the
following sentence of the President's speech. "However we may consider
ourselves, the maritime and commercial powers of the world will consider the
United States of America, as forming a weight in that balance of power in
Europe, which never can be forgotten or neglected." Mr. G. recites the last
clause of this sentence thus, "As to that balance of power in Eu^^^^ the word
"weight," the essential word in the President's sentence, and the only word
expressing the idea which, he says, was never to be forgotten or neglected. The
President's meaning plainly is that the maritime and commercial powers of the
world will never forget or neglect the weight, which the United States of
America form, in the balance of power in Europe. Mr. G. seems to cite this, as
if the President thought, that the United States ought never to forget or
neglect the balance of power in Europe, but "involve itself in the destinies
and wars of Europe."

I should not have made this observation, had it been altogether unconnected
with the principles and consequences of the point in dispute. But as the
members who oppose this constitutional principle, in order to justify their
opposition, and render the principle odious, loudly and widely clamor, that
there is a war party in the administration, and that the President is at the
head of this war party; and as the quotation of Mr. G. might convey the same
idea; thinking this idea false, I made this observation. But not intending to
digress from the CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLE; "here let us stop."

FINIS.

