

AMELIA; OR, THE FAITHLESS BRITON. AN ORIGINAL AMERICAN NOVEL, FOUNDED UPON
RECENT FACTS. TO WHICH IS ADDED, AMELIA, OR MALEVOLENCE DEFEATED; AND, MISS
SEWARD'S MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY W. SPOTSWOOD, AND C. P. WAYNE. 1798.

COPY RIGHT SECURED, AGREEABLY TO LAW.

AMELIA: OR THE FAITHLESS BRITON.
THE revolutions of government, and the subversions of empire, which have
swelled the theme of national historians, have likewise, in every age,
furnished anecdote to the biographer, and incident to the novelist. The objects
of policy or ambition are generally, indeed, accomplished at the expense of
private ease and prosperity; while the triumph of arms, like the funeral
festivity of a savage tribe, serves to announce some recent calamity -- the
waste of property, or the fall of families.

Thus, the great events of the late war, which produced the separation of the
British empire, and established the sovereignty of America, were chequered with
scenes of private sorrow, and the success of the contending forces was
alternately fatal to the peace and order of domestic life. The lamentations of
the widow and the orphan, mingled with the song of victory; and the sable
mantle with which the hand of friendship clothed the bier of the gallant
MONTGOMERY, cast a momentary gloom upon the trophies his valor had achieved.

Though the following tale then, does not exhibit the terrible magnificence of
warlike operations, or scrutinize the principles of national politics, it
recites an episode that too frequently occurs in the military drama, and
contains a history of female affliction, that claims, from its authenticity, at
least, an interest in the feeling heart. It is the first of a series of novels,
drawn from the same source, and intended for public communication, but as the
author's object is merely to glean those circumstances in the progress of the
revolution, which the historian has neither leisure nor disposition to
commemorate, and to produce, from the annals of private life, something to
entertain, and something to improve his readers, the occasion will yield little
to hope from the applause of the public, and nothing to dread from its candor.

HORATIO BLYFIELD was a respectable inhabitant of the state of New York.
Success had rewarded his industry in trade with an ample fortune; and his mind,
uncontaminated by envy and ambition, freely indulged itself in the delicious
enjoyments of the father and the friend. In the former character he
superintended the education of a son and a daughter, left to his sole care by
the death of their excellent mother; and in the latter, his benevolence and
council were uniformly exercised for the relief of the distressed, and the
information of the illiterate.

His mercantile intercourse with Great Britain afforded an early opportunity of
observing the disposition of that kingdom with respect to her colonies; and his
knowledge of the habits, tempers, and opinions of the American citizens,
furnished him with a painful anticipation of anarchy and war. The texture of
his mind, indeed, was naturally calm and passive, and the ordinary effects of a
life of sixty years duration, had totally eradicated all those passions which
rouse men to opposition, and qualify them for enterprise. When, therefore, the
gauntlet was thrown upon the theater of the new world, and the spirit of
discord began to rage, Horatio, like the Roman Atticus, withdrew from public
clamor, to a sequestered cottage, in the interior district of Long Island; and
consecrating the youthful ardour of his son, Honorius, to the service of his
country, the fair Amelia was the only companion of his retreat.

Amelia had then attained her seventeenth year. The delicacy of her form was in
unison with the mildness of her aspect, and the exquisite harmony of her soul,
was responsive to the symmetry of her person. The pride of parental attachment
had graced her with every accomplishment that depends upon tuition; and it was
the singular fortune of Amelia, to be at once the admiration of our sex, and
the favorite of her own. From such a daughter* Horatio could not but receive
every solace of which his generous feelings were susceptible in a season of
national calamity; but the din of arms that frequently interrupted the silence
of the neighboring forests, and the disastrous intelligence which his son
occasionally transmitted from the standard of the union, superceded the
cheerful avocations of the day, and dispelled the peaceful slumbers of the
night.

After a retirement of many months, on a morning fatal to the happiness of
Horatio's family, the sound of artillery announced a battle, and the horsemen
who were observed gallopping across the grounds, proved that the scene of
action could not be remote. As soon, therefore, as the tumult of hostility had
subsided, Horatio advanced with his domestics, to administer comfort and
assistance to the wounded, and to provide a decent interment for the mangled
victims of the conflict. In traversing the deadly field, he perceived an
officer, whose exhausted strength just served for the articulation of a groan,
and his attention was immediately directed to the preservation of this
interesting object, who alone, of the number that had fallen, yielded a hope
that his compassionate exertions might be crowned with success. Having bathed,
and bound up his wounds, the youthful soldier was borne to the cottage; where,
in a short time, a stronger pulse, and a freer respiration, afforded a
flattering presage of returning life.

Amelia, who had anxiously waited the arrival of her father, beheld, with a
mixed sensation of horror and pity, the spectacle which now accompanied him.
She had never before seen the semblance of death, which therefore afflicted her
with all the terrors of imagination; and, notwithstanding the pallid
countenance of the wounded guest, he possessed an elegance of person, which,
according to the natural operations of female sensibility, added something
perhaps, to her commiseration for his misfortunes. When, however, these first
impressions had passed away, the tenderness of her nature expressed itself in
the most assiduous actions for his ease and accommodation, and the increasing
symptoms of his recovery, filled her mind with joy and exultation.

The day succeeding that on which he was introduced to the family of Horatio,
his servant, who had made an ineffectual search for his body among the slain,
arrived at the cottage, and discovered him to be Doliscus, the only son and
heir of a noble family in England.

When Doliscus had recovered from the senseless state to which he had been
reduced (chiefly, indeed, by the great effusion of blood) the first exercise of
his faculties was the acknowledgment of obligation, and the profession of
gratitude. To Horatio he spoke in terms of reverence and respect; and to Amelia
in the more animated language of admiration, which melted at length into the
gentle tone of flattery and love. But Doliscus had been reared in the school of
dissipation! and, with all the qualifications which allure and captivate the
female heart, he had learned to consider virtue only as an obstacle to
pleasure, and beauty merely as an incentive to the gratification of passion.
His experience soon enabled him to discover something in the solicitude of the
artless Amelia beyond the dictates of compassion and hospitality; and even
before his wounds were closed, he conceived the infamous project of violating
the purity and tranquillity of a family, to which he was indebted for the
prolongation of his existence, and the restoration of his health. From that
very innocence, however, which betrayed her feelings, while she was herself
ignorant of their source, he anticipated the extremest difficulty and danger.
To improve the evident predilection of her mind into a fixed and ardent
attachment, required not, indeed, a very strenuous display of his talents and
address; but the sacrifice of her honor (which an insurmountable antipathy to
the matrimonial engagements made necessary to the accomplishment of his
purpose) was a task that he justly foresaw, could be only executed by the
detestable agency of perfidy and fraud. With these views then he readily
accepted the solicitations of his unsuspecting host, and even contrived to
protract his cure, in order to furnish a plea for his continuance at the
cottage.

Amelia, when, at length, the apprehensions for his safety were removed,
employed all the charms of music and conversation to dissipate the languor,
which his indisposition had produced, and to prevent the melancholy, with which
retirement is apt to affect a disposition accustomed to the gay and busy
transactions of the world. She experienced an unusual pleasure, indeed, in the
discharge of these benevolent offices; for in the company of Doliscus she
insensibly forgot the anxiety she was wont to feel for the fate of her absent
brother; and the sympathy which she had hitherto extended to all the sufferers
of the war, was now monopolized by a single object. Horatio's attachment to the
solitude of his library, afforded frequent opportunities for this infatuating
intercourse, which the designing Doliscus gradually diverted from general to
particular topics -- from observations upon public manners and events, to
insinuations of personal esteem and partiality. Amelia was incapable of deceit,
and unacquainted with suspicion. The energy, but, at the same time, the
respect, with which Doliscus addressed her, was, grateful to her feelings; his
rank and fortune entitled him to consideration, and the inestimable favors
that had been conferred upon him, offered a specious security for his truth and
fidelity. The acknowledgment of reciprocal regard was, therefore, an easy
acquisition, and Doliscus triumphed in the modest, but explicit avowal, before
Amelia was apprized of its importance and extent. From that moment, however, he
assumed a pensive and dejected carriage. He occasionally affected to start from
the terrors of a deep reverie; and the vivacity of his temper, which had never
yielded to the anguish of his wounds, seemed suddenly to have expired under the
weight of secret and intolerable affliction. Amelia, distressed and astonished,
implored an explanation of so mysterious a change in his deportment; but his
reiterated sighs, which were for a while, the only answers she received, tended
equally to increase her curiosity and her sorrow.

At length he undertook to disclose the source of his pretended wretchedness;
and, having prefaced the hypocritical tale with the most solemn protestations
of his love and constancy, he told the trembling Amelia that, were it even
possible to disengage himself from an alliance which had been early contracted
for him with a noble heiress of London, still the pride of family, and the
spirit of loyalty, which governed his father's actions, would oppose a union
unaccompanied by the acclamations of dignity, and formed with one whose
connections were zealous in the arduous resistance to the authority of Britain.
"While he lives," added Doliscus, "it is not in my power to choose the means of
happiness -- and yet, as the time approaches when it will be inconsistent with
the duty and honor of a soldier to enjoy any longer the society of Amelia, how
can I reflect upon my situation without anguish and despair!" The delicate
frame of Amelia was agitated with the sensations which this picture had
excited; and, for the first time, she became acquainted with the force of love,
and the dread of separation from its object. Doliscus traced the sentiments of
her heart in the silent, but certain indications of her countenance, and when
tears had melted the violence of her first emotion into a soft and sympathetic
grief, the treacherous suitor thus prosecuted his scheme against her peace and
innocence.

"But it is impossible to resolve upon perpetual misery! One thing may yet be
done to change the scene without incurring a father's resentment and reproach:
-- can my Amelia consent to sacrifice a sentiment of delicacy, to ensure a life
of happiness?" Her complexion brightened and her eye inquisitively turned
toward him. "The parade of public marriage" he continued, "neither adds
strength or energy to the obligation: for, form is the superfluous offspring of
fashion, not the result of reason. The poor peasant whose nuptial contract is
only witnessed by the hallowed minister that pronounces it, is as blessed as the
prince who weds in all the ostentation of a court, and furnishes an additional
festival to a giddy nation. My Amelia has surely no vanity to gratify with idle
pageantry; and as the privacy of the marriage does not take from its sanctity,
I will venture to propose -- nay, look not with severity -- at the neighboring
farm we may be met by the chaplain of my regiment, and love and honor shall
record a union, which prudence fetters with a temporary secrecy."

Hope, fear, the sense of decorum, and the incitements of a passion pure, but
fervent, completed the painful perturbation of Amelia's heart, and in this
critical moment of her fate, deprived her of speech and recollection.

Any anxious interval of silence took place; but when, at length, the power of
expression returned, Amelia urged the duty which she owed to a parent, the
scandal which the world imputed to clandestine marriages, and the fatal
consequences that might arise from the obscurity of the transaction. But
Doliscus, steady to his purpose, again deprecated the folly of pursuing the
shadow in preference to the substance, of preserving fame at the expense of
happiness, and of relinquishing the blessings of connubial life, for the sake
of its formalities. He spoke of Horatio's inflexible integrity, which could not
brook even the appearance of deception, and of his punctilious honor, which
could not submit even to the appearance of intrusion upon the domestic
arrangements of another, as insurmountable arguments for denying him the
knowledge of their union. Finally, he described, in the warmest coloring of
passion and fancy, the effects of Amelia's refusal upon the future tenor of his
life, and bathing her hand with his obedient tears, practiced all the arts of
flattery and frenzy. The influence of love supercedes every other obligation:
Amelia acknowledged its dominion, and yielded to the persuasion of the exulting
Doliscus. The marriage ceremony was privately repeated -- but how will it
excite the indignation of the virtuous reader when he understands, that the
sacred character of the priest was personated by a soldier whom Doliscus had
suborned for this iniquitous occasion! Ye spirits of seduction! whose means are
the prostitution of faith, and whose end is the destruction of innocence, --
tremble at impending judgment, for "there is no mercy in heaven for such
unheard of crimes as these!"

But a short time had elapsed after this fatal step, when the mandate of the
commanding officer obliged Doliscus to prepare for joining his corpse. A silent,
but pungent sense of indiscretion, added to the anguish which Amelia felt in
the hour of separation; and not all his strong assurances of inviolable truth
and attachment, with the soothing prospect of an honorable avowal of their
union, could efface the melancholy impressions of her mind. The farmer at whose
house the fictitious marriage had been rehearsed, was employed to manage their
future correspondence; and Doliscus, finally, left the cottage with vows of
love and gratitude at his lips; but schemes of fraud and perjury in his heart.
The small distance from New York, where he was quartered, rendered it easy to
maintain an epistolary intercourse; which became, during its continuance, the
only employment, and the only gratification of Amelia's existence. Its
continuance, however, exceeded not a few weeks. Doliscus soon assumed a formal
and dispassionate style, and the number of his letters gradually diminished,
and every allusion to that marriage, which was the last hope and consolation of
Amelia, he cautiously avoided.

But an event, that demanded the exercise of all her fortitude, now forced
itself upon Amelia's thoughts. She was pregnant; yet could neither resort for
council and comfort to the father whom she had deceived, or obtain it from the
lover by whom she had been seduced. In the tenderest and most delicate terms
she communicated her situation to Doliscus, emphatically called upon him to
rescue her reputation from obloquy, and solicitously courted his return to the
cottage, or, at least, that he would disclose to Horatio the secret of their
union. To prevent any accident, the farmer was prevailed upon to be the bearer
of the paper which contained these sentiments, and, on his return produced the
following epistle.

MADAM,
THE sudden death of my father will occasion my embarking for England
tomorrow. It is not therefore possible to visit the cottage before my
departure; but you may be assured, that I still entertain the warmest gratitude
for the favors which were there conferred upon me by the virtuous Horatio, and
his amiable daughter.

Although I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of some expressions you
have employed, I perceive that you stand in need of a confidential person, to
whom you may reveal the consequence of an indiscreet attachment; and from my
knowledge of his probity (of which you are likewise a judge) no man seems more
conveniently situated, or better calculated for that office than the worthy
farmer who has delivered your letter. To him, therefore, I have recommended
you; and, lest any pecuniary assistance should be necessary on this occasion, I
have entrusted him with a temporary supply, directing him in what manner he
may, from time to time, obtain a sum adequate to your exigencies.

The hurry of package and adieus compels me abruptly to subscribe myself,

Madam, Your most devoted, humble servant, DOLISCUS.


"Gracious God!" exclaimed Amelia, and fell senseless to the ground. For a
while, a convulsive motion shook her frame, but gradually subsiding, the flame
of life seemed to be extinct, and all her terrors at an end. The poor farmer,
petrified with horror and amazement, stood gazing on the scene: but the
exertions of his homely spouse, at length, restored Amelia to existence and
despair.

It has often been observed, that despondency begets boldness and enterprise;
and the female heart, which is susceptible of the gentlest sentiment, is,
likewise, capable of the noblest fortitude. Amelia perceived all the baseness
of the desertion meditated by Doliscus; she foresaw all its ruinous
consequences upon Horatio's peace, her own character, and the fate of the
innocent being which she bore; and wiping the useless tears from her cheek, she
resolved publicly to vindicate her honor, and assert her rights. Animated
then, with the important purpose, supported by the presumption of her marriage,
and hoping yet to find Doliscus in New York, she immediately repaired to that
city -- but alas! he was gone! This disappointment, however, did not defeat,
nor could any obstacle retard the prosecution of her design; a ship that sailed
the succeeding day wafted her to Britain, friendless and forlorn.

Innumerable difficulties and inconveniences were encountered by the
inexperienced traveller, but they vanished before the object of her pursuit;
and even her entrance into London, that chaos of clamor and dissipation,
produced no other sensations than those which naturally arose from her approach
to the dwelling of Doliscus.

Amelia recollected that Doliscus had often described the family residence to
be situated in Grosvenor-place; and the stage, in which she journeyed, stopping
in the evening at a public house in Picadilly, she determined, without delay,
to pay him her unexpected and unwelcome visit. The embarrassed and anxious
manner with which she inquired for his house, exposed her to unjust surmise and
senseless ribaldry; but her grief rendered her incapable of observation, and
her purity was superior to insult.

Doliscus had arrived about a fortnight earlier than Amelia. The title,
influence, and fortune, which devolved upon him in consequence of his father's
death, had swelled his youthful vanity to excess, and supplied him with a
numerous retinue of flatterers and dependants. At the moment that he was
listening in extacy to that servile crew, the victim of his arts; the deluded
daughter of the man to whom he was indebted for the preservation of his life,
stood trembling at his door. A gentle rap, after an awful pause of some
minutes, procured her admission. Her memory recognized the features of the
servant that opened the door; but it was not the valet who had attended
Doliscus at the cottage she remembered not where or when she had seen him.

After considerable solicitation, the porter consented to call Doliscus from
his company, and conducted Amelia into an antichamber to wait his arrival. A
roar of laughter succeeded the delivery of her message, and the word
assignation, which was repeated on all sides, seemed to renovate the wit and
hilarity of the table. The gay and gallant host, inflamed with champagne, was
not displeased at the imputation; but observed, that as a lady was in the case,
it was unnecessary to apologize for a short desertion of his friends and wine.

At the sight of that lady, however, Doliscus started. Amelia's countenance was
pale and haggard with fatigue and sorrow; her person was oppressed with the
burden which she now bore in its last stage, and her eye, fixed steadfastly
upon him, as he entered the room, bespoke the complicated anguish and
indignation of her feelings. Her aspect so changed, and her appearance so
unexpected, added to the terrors of a guilty conscience, for a moment, Doliscus
thought the visitation supernatural. But Amelia's wrongs having inspired her
with courage, she boldly reproached him with his baseness and perfidy, and
demanded a public and unequivocal acknowledgment of their marriage. In vain he
endeavored to sooth and divert her from her purpose, in vain to persuade her
to silence and delay, -- his arts had lost their wonted influence, while the
restoration of her injured fame and honor absorbed every faculty of her mind.

At length he assumed a different tone, a more authoritative manner. "Madam,"
exclaimed he, "I am not to be thus duped or controuled. I have a sense of pity,
indeed, for your indiscretion, but none for your passion: I would alleviate
your afflictions, but I will not submit to your frenzy." "Wretch!" retorted
Amelia, "but that I owe something to a father's peace, I should despise to call
thee husband." -- " Husband" cried Doliscus, with a sneer, "Husband! why truly,
I remember a rural masquerade, at which an honest soldier, now my humble
porter, played the parson, and you the blushing bride -- but, pr'ythee, do not
talk of husband." --

This discovery only was wanting for the consummation of Amelia's misery. It
was sudden and fatal as the lightning's blast -- she funk beneath the stroke. A
deadly stupor seized upon her senses, which was sometimes interrupted with a
boisterous laugh, and sometimes with a nervous ejaculation.

Doliscus, unaffected by compassion or remorse, was solicitous only to employ
this opportunity for Amelia's removal, and having conveyed her into a coach, a
servant was directed to procure lodgings for her, in some obscure quarter of
the city. She spoke not a word during the transaction, but gazing with apparent
indifference upon the objects that surrounded her, she submitted to be
transported whither soever they pleased to conduct her. After winding through a
dreary and dirty passage in the neighborhood of St. Giles's, the carriage
stopped at a hovel which belonged to a relation of the servant that accompanied
her, and, he having communicated in a short whisper the object of his visit, an
old and decrepid beldame led Amelia into a damp and narrow room, whose scant
and tattered furniture proved the wretchedness of its inhabitants.

A premature birth was the natural consequence of the conflict which had raged
in Amelia's mind. She had entered the apartment but a few moments, when the
approach of that event gave a turn to her passions, and called her drooping
faculties once more into action. Without comfort, without assistance, in the
hour of extreme distress (save the officious services of her antiquated host)
she was delivered of a son; but the fond sensibility of the mother obtained an
instantaneous superiority over every other consideration. Though, alas! this
solitary gratification too, continued not long; -- her infant expired after a
languid existence of three days, serving only to increase the bitterness of
Amelia's portion.

Amelia cast her eye toward heaven as the breath deserted the body of her
babe: -- it was not a look of supplication, for what had she to hope, or what
to dread? -- neither did it indicate dissatisfaction or reproach, for she had
early learned the duty of reverence and resignation -- but it was an awful
appeal to the throne of grace, for the vindication of the act by which she had
resolved to terminate her woes. A phial of laudanum, left by a charitable
apothecary, who had visited her in her sickness, presented the means, and she
wanted not the fortitude to employ them. Deliberately, then, pouring the
baneful draught into a glass, she looked wistfully for a while upon the infant
corpse that lay extended on its bed, then bending on her knee, uttered, in a
firm and solemn voice the melancholy effusions of her soul, -- "Gracious
Father! when thy justice shall pronounce upon the deed which extricates me from
the calamities of the world, let thy mercy contemplate the cause that urged me
to the perpetration. I have been deluded into error; but am free from guilt: I
have been solicitous to preserve my innocence and honor; but am exposed to
infamy and shame. The treachery of him to whom I entrusted my fate, has reduced
me to despair -- the declining day of him from whom I received my being, has
been clouded with my indiscretions, and there is no cure left for the sorrows
that consume me, but the dark and silent grave. Visit me not then, in thy
wrath, oh! Father, but let the excess of my sufferings in this world, expiate
the crime which wafts me into the world to come -- may thy mercy yield comfort
to Horatio's heart, and teach Doliscus the virtue of repentance!"

She rose and lifted the glass. At that instant, a noise on the stairs
attracted her attention, and a voice anxiously pronouncing -- "It must be so!
-- nay, I will see her -- " arrested the dreadful potion in its passage to her
lips. "It is my Amelia!" exclaimed Horatio, as he hastily entered the room.

Amelia started, and looked for some moments intently on her father, then
rushed into his arms, and anxiously concealed the shame and agony of her
countenance, in that bosom, from which alone she now dreaded reproach, or hoped
for consolation. He, too, beheld with horror the scene that was presented to
his view: he pressed his deluded, miserable daughter, to his heart, while a
stream of tears ran freely down his cheeks; till, at lenghth, his imagination,
infected with the objects that surrounded him, conceived the dreadful purpose
of the draught, which had fallen from Amelia's hand, and anticipated a sorrow,
even beyond the extremity of his present feelings. When, however, he collected
sufficient courage to resolve his fears, and it was ascertained, that the
meditated act had not been perpetrated, a momentary sensation of joy
illuminated his mind, like the transient appearance of the moon, amidst the
gloomy horrors of a midnight storm.

When the first impressions of this mournful interview had passed away, Horatio
spoke comfort to his daughter. "Come my child, the hand of Heaven, that
afflicted us with worldly cares, has been stretched out to guard you from
everlasting wretchedness: -- that Providence which proves how vain are the
pursuits of this life, has bestowed upon us the means of seeking the permanent
happiness of that which is to come. Cheer up, my Amelia! The errors of our
conduct may expose us to the scandal of the world, but it is guilt alone which
can violate the inward tranquillity of the mind." He then took her hand, and
attempted to lead her to the door. "Let us withdraw from this melancholy scene,
my love!" -- "Look there!" said Amelia, pointing to the corpse. "Look there!"
"Ah!" said Horatio, in a faultering accent-"but it is the will of Heaven!"
"Then it is right," cried Amelia -- "give the poor victim a little earth --
sir! is it not sad to think of? -- but I am reconciled." She now consented to
quit the room, and was conveyed in a carriage to the inn, at which Horatio (who
immediately returned to superintend the interment of the child) had stopped on
his arrival.

It is now proper to inform the reader, that after Amelia had left the Cottage,
and the alarm of her elopement had spread around the neighborhood, the Farmer
hastened to communicate to Horatio the transactions which he had witnessed, and
the suspicions which his wife had conceived of Amelia's situation. The wretched
father sickened at the tale. But it was the sentiment of compassion, and not of
resentment, that oppressed his soul. There are men, indeed, so abject in their
subjection to the opinion of the world, that they can sacrifice natural
affection to artificial pride, and doom to perpetual infamy and wretchedness, a
child, who might be reclaimed from error by parental admonition, or raised from
despair by the fostering hand of friendship. Horatio, however, entertained a
different sense: he regarded not the weakness of human virtue as an object of
accusation, but liberally distinguished between the crimes and the errors of
mankind; and, when he could not alleviate the afflicted, or correct the
vicious, he continued to lament, but he forebore to reprobate. "My poor Amelia!
how basely has her innocence been betrayed! -- But I must follow her: -- it may
be her injuries have distracted her, and she has fled, she knows not whither!
Come! not a moment shall be lost: I will overtake my child, wherever her
sorrows may lead her: for, if I cannot procure redress for her wrongs, I will,
at least, administer comfort to her miseries." Such was the language of
Horatio, as soon as he could exercise the power of utterance. A few days
enabled him to arrange his affairs, and having learned the route which Amelia
had taken, he embarked in the first vessel for England. The peculiar object of
his voyage, and the nature of his misfortunes, determined him to conceal
himself from the knowledge of his friends and correspondents; and a lucky
chance discovered the wretched abode of his Amelia, the very instant of his
arrival in London.

"Can you tell me, my good host, where Doliscus the lord --, resides?" said
Horatio as he entered the inn. "Marry, that I can," replied the landlord:" his
servant is just now talking with my wife; and if you will step into the next
room, perhaps he will show you the way to the house." Horatio advanced toward
the room door, and, upon looking through a glass panel in the door, he beheld
the identical servant that had attended Doliscus at the Cottage, in eager
conversation with the hostess. He paused. "She is delivered; but the child is
dead:" -- said the servant. Horatio started; his imagination eagerly
interpreted these words to have been spoken of Amelia, and he could scarcely
restrain the anguish of his feelings from loud exclamation and complaint. --
"My lord's conscience grows unusually troublesome" continued the servant; "he
has ordered me again to inquire after her health, and to provide for the
funeral of the child -- would she were safe in America! for, to be sure, her
father is the best old man that ever lived!" "It Is well!" cried Horatio. "Did
you call, sir?" said the hostess, opening the door. The servant took this
opportunity of withdrawing, and Horatio silently followed him, at a distance,
till he arrived at the habitation of Amelia, in the critical moment which
enabled him to save the life he had given, and to rescue his deluded daughter
from the desperate sin of suicide.

When Horatio returned to the inn, after discharging the last solemn duties to
the departed infant, the landlord presented a letter to him, which a servant
had just left at the bar, and asked if he was the person to whom it was
addressed. As soon as Horatio had cast his eye upon the superscription, he
exclaimed, "What mystery is this? -- A letter left for my son Honorius at an
inn in London." He eagerly seized the paper, and retiring into an adjoining
chamber, he perused its contents with increased amazement and agitation.

SIR,
I AM sensible that the injuries of which you complain, will neither admit of
denial or expiation. A few minutes after, your note was delivered; some
circumstances had been communicated to me respecting the unhappy Amelia, that
awakened a sentiment of remorse, and prepared me for a ready compliance with
your summons. Tomorrow morning at five o'clock, I shall attend at the place
which you have appointed.

DOLISCUS.


The voice of Honorius, inquiring for the letter, roused Horatio from the
reverie into which its contents had plunged him. The honor of his son, the
villainy of his antagonist, and Amelia's sufferings, contending with the
feelings of the father, and the forbearance of the christian, at last prevailed
with him to suffer the hostile interview to which Doliscus had thus consented.
When therefore Honorius entered the room, and the natural expressions of
tenderness and surprise were mutually exchanged, they freely discoursed of the
lamentable history of Amelia, and warmly execrated that treachery which had
accomplished the ruin of her peace and fame. Nor had Doliscus confined his
baseness to this object. The chance of war had thrown Honorius into his power
shortly after his departure from the cottage, and discovering his affinity to
Amelia, the persevering hypocrite artfully insinuated to the commander in
chief, that Honorius meditated an escape, and obtained an order for his
imprisonment on board a frigate, which sailing suddenly for England, he was
lodged upon his arrival, in the common gaol, appropriated for the confinement
of American prisoners. Here it was, however, that he acquired the information
of Amelia's elopement, and heard the cause to which it was imputed from the
captured master of an American vessel, who had formerly been employed in the
service of Horatio, and had received the communication from the lips of his
ancient patron, in the first moments of his grief. The fate which had
unexpectedly led him to Britain, Honorius now regarded as the minister of his
revenge. He frowned away the tear which started at the recital of his sister's
wrongs, as if ashamed to pity 'till he had redressed them; and feeling, upon
this occasion, an additional motive for soliciting his freedom, he employed the
interest of Horatio's name, which notwithstanding the political feuds that
prevailed, was sufficient, at length, to procure his discharge upon parol.
Having easily learned the abode of Doliscus, he immediately addressed that note
to him which produced the answer delivered to Horatio.

When Honorius was informed that Amelia was, at that time, beneath the same
roof, he expressed an eager desire immediately to embrace his afflicted sister;
but Horatio strongly represented the impropriety of an interview 'till the
event of the assignation with Doliscus was ascertained, and it was, therefore,
agreed for the present, to conceal his arrival from her knowledge.

Absorbed in the melancholy of her thoughts, Amelia had not uttered a syllable
since the removal from her dreary habitation, but suffered the bufy attentions
of the servants of the inn, with a listless-indifference. The agitation of her
mind, indeed, had hitherto rendered her insensible to the weakness of her
frame; but exhausted nature, at length produced the symptoms of an approaching
fever, and compelled her, reluctantly, to retire to her bed. When Horatio
entered the room, the fever had considerably increased, he therefore requested
the assistance of a neighboring physician, who pronounced her situation to be
critically dangerous. In the evening, the unusual vivacity of her eyes, the
incoherence of her speech, and repeated peals of loud and vacant laughter,
proved the disordered state of her understanding, and increased the
apprehensions of her attendants. "A few hours will decide her fate," said the
Doctor, as he left the room. "My poor Amelia!" cried Horatio, raising her hand
to his lips -- she looked sternly at him for a moment, then relaxing the
severity of her features, she again burst into a boisterous laugh, which
terminated in a long and heavy sigh, as if her spirits were exhausted with the
violence of her exertions.

The task which Horatio had now to perform, was difficult indeed! The virtue
and fortitude of his soul could hardly sustain a conflict against the grief and
passion that consumed him; whilst on the one hand, he beheld the distraction of
his daughter, and, on the other, anticipated the danger of his son. He
resolved, however, to keep Amelia's indisposition a secret from Honorius, with
whom he arranged the dreadful business of the morning, and, having fervently
bestowed his blessing there, he returned to pass the night in prayer and
watching by Amelia's side.

Honorius retired to his chamber, but not to rest. It was not, however, the
danger of the approaching combat, which occasioned a moment's anxiety or
reflection; for his courage was superior to every consideration of personal
safety. But that courage had hitherto been regulated by a sense of obligation
consistent with the precepts of religion he had often exerted it to deserve the
glorious meed of a soldier, but he scorned to employ it for the contemptible
reputation of a duellist; it had taught him to serve his country, but not to
offend his God. "If there is a cause which can justify the act, is it not mine?
It Is not a punctilious honor, a visionary insult, or a petulant disposition
that influences my conduct:" said Honorius, as he mused upon the subject. "A
sister basely tricked of her innocence and fame, a father ungratefully
plundered of his peace and hopes, in the last stage of an honorable life, and
myself (but that is little) treacherously transported to a remote and
inhospitable land -- these are my motives; and Heaven, Doliscus, be the judge
between us!"

As soon as the dawn appeared, Honorius repaired to the place of appointment,
where a few minutes before the hour, Doliscus had likewise arrived. He was
attended by a friend, but perceiving his antagonist alone, he requested his
companion to withdraw to a distant spot, from which he might observe the event,
and afford assistance to the vanquished party.

"Once more we meet, Sir," said Doliscus, "upon the business of death; but that
fortune which failed you in your country's cause, may be more propitious in
your own." "What pity it is," exclaimed Honorius, that thou should be a
villain, for thou art brave! "Nay, I come to offer a more substantial revenge
for the wrongs I have committed, than merely submitting to the imputation of so
gross an epithet -- take it, Sir, -- it is my life." They instantly engaged.
Doliscus for awhile defended himself with superior address, but laying himself
suddenly open to the pass of his antagonist, he received his sword in the left
breast, a little below the seat of the heart!

"Nobly done," cried Doliscus as he fell, "it is the vengeance of Amelia; and
oh! may it serve to expiate the crime of her betrayer." His friend who had
attentively viewed the scene, advanced, when he saw him on the ground: and
assisted by Honorius, bore him to a carriage which had been directed to attend
within call. He was then conveyed to the house of an eminent surgeon, who
having ordered the necessary accommodations, examined the wound, and pronounced
it to be mortal." "Fly, sir," said Doliscus, turning to Honorius, at this
intelligence -- "your country will afford you an asylum, and protect you from
the consequences of my fate. I beseech you embitter not my last moments with
the reflection of your danger -- but bear with you to the injured Amelia, the
story of my repentance, and, if you dare, ask her to forgive me." The
resentments of Honorius were subdued; he presented his hand to the dying
Doliscus, in whose eye a gleam of joy was kindled at the thought, but it was
quickly superceded by a cold and sudden tremour; he attempted, but in vain, to
speak; he seized the offered hand; he pressed it eagerly to his lips, and in
the moment of that expressive action, he expired.

Honorius now hastened to inform Horatio of this fatal event, and to contrive
the means of escape. But when he returned to the inn, confusion and distress
were pictured on every face; a wild, but harmonious, voice, occasionally broke
forth into melancholy strains, and the name of Doliscus was repeatedly
pronounced in accents of tenderness and compassion. -- "How is it my son?"
cried Horatio eagerly. "Doliscus is no more!" replied Honorius. "Would he had
lived another day! I wished not the ruin of his soul." "But he repented, sir."
"There heaven be merciful!" exclaimed Horatio.

Here their conversation was interrupted, by the melodious chauntings of Amelia.

I Will have none of your flowers though so blooming and sweet;
Their scent, it may poison, and false is their hue;
I tell you begone! for I never shall forget,
That Doliscus was lovely and treacherous too.
Honorius listened attentively to the song; it vibrated in his ear, and swelled
the aching artery of his heart. "Come on!" said Horatio leading him to Amelia's
chamber. They found her sitting on the bed, with a pillow before her, over
which she moved her fingers, as if playing on a harpsichord. Their entrance
disturbed her for a moment, but she soon resumed her employment.

He said and he swore he loved me true: -- was it a lover's part,
To ruin good Horatio's peace and break Amelia's heart?
A heavy sigh followed these lines, which were articulated in a wistful and
sympathetic tone, and she sunk exhausted on her bed. -- In a few minutes,
however, she started from this still and silent state, and having gazed with a
wild and aching eye around the room, she uttered a loud and piercing cry -- it
was the awful signal of her dissolution -- and her injured spirit took its
everlasting flight.

The reader will excuse a minute description of the succeeding scenes. The
alarm raised by the death of Doliscus compelled Honorius to quicken his
departure, and he joined the standard of America a few hours before the battle
of Monmouth, in which, for the service of his country, he sacrificed a life
that misfortune had then taught him to consider of no other use or estimation.

As for the venerable Horatio -- having carried with him to the cottage the
remains of his darling child, in a melancholy solitude he consumes the time;
his only business, meditation and prayer; his only recreation a daily visit to
the monument, which he has raised in commemoration of Amelia's fate; and all
his consolation resting in this assurance, that whatever may be the sufferings
of virtue HERE, its portion must be happiness HEREAFTER.

HISTORY OF AMELIA, OR MALEVOLENCE DEFEATED.
MRS. Winifrid Wormwood was the daughter of a rustie merchant, who, by the
happy union of many lucrative trades, amassed an enormous fortune. His family
consisted of three girls, and Winifrid was the eldest: Long before she was
twenty, she was surrounded with lovers, some probably attracted by the splendid
prospect of her expected portion, and others truly captivated by her personal
graces; for her person was elegant, and her elegance was enlivened with
peculiar vivacity. Mr. Wormwood was commonly called a kind parent, and an
honest man; and he might deserve, indeed, those honorable appellations, if it
were not a profanation of language to apply them to a narrow and a selfish
spirit. He indulged his daughters in many expensive amusements, because it
flattered his pride; but his heart was engrossed by the proffits of his
extensive traffic: He turned, with the most repulsive asperity, from every
proposal that could lead him to diminish his capital, and thought his daughters
unreasonable, if they wished for any permanent satisfaction above that of
seeing their father increase in opulence and splendour. His two younger
children, who inherited from their diseased mother a tender delicacy of frame,
languished and died at an early period of life, and the death of one of them
was imputed, with great probability, to a severe disappointment in her first
affection. The more sprightly Winifrid, whose heart was a perfect stranger to
genuine love, surmounted the mortification of seeing many suitors discarded;
and by the insensate avarice of her father, she was naturally led into habits
of artifice and intrigue. Possessing an uncommon share of very shrewd and
piercing wit, with the most profound hypocrisy, she contrived to please, and to
blind, her plodding old parent; who perpetually harangued on the discretion of
his daughter, and believed her a miracle of reserve and prudence, at the very
time when she was suspected of such conduct as would have disqualified her, had
it ever been proved, for the rank she now holds in this essay. She was said to
have amused herself with a great variety of amorous adventures, which eluded
the observation of her father; but of the many lovers who sighed to her in
secret, not one could tempt her into marriage, and, to the surprise of the
public, the rich heiress of Mr. Wormwood reached the age of thirty-seven,
without changing her name. Just as she arrived at this mature season of life,
the opulent old gentleman took his leave of a world, in which he had acted a
busy part, pleased with the idea of leaving a large fortune, as a monument of
his industry, but wanting the superior satisfaction, which a more generous
parent would probably have derived from the happy establishment of a daughter.
He gained, however, from the hypocrisy of Winifrid, what he could not claim
from her affection, the honor of being lamented with a profusion of tears. She
distinguished herself by displaying all the delicate gradations of filial
sorrow; but recovered at a proper time, all the natural gaiety of her temper,
which she now had the full opportunity of indulging, being mistress of a
magnificent mansion, within a mile of a populous town, and enabled to enliven
it with all the arts of luxury, by inheriting such accumulated wealth, as would
safely support the utmost efforts of provincial splendour. Miss Wormwood now
expected to see every bachelor of figure and consequence a suppliant at her
feet; she promised to herself no little entertainment in sporting with their
addresses, without the fear of suffering from a tyrannical husband, as she had
learned caution from her father, and had privately resolved not to trust any
man with her money; a resolution the more discreet, as she had much to
apprehend, and very little to learn, from so dangerous a master! The
good-natured town, in whose environs the rich Winifrid resided, very kindly
pointed out to her no less than twenty lively beaux for her choice; but, to the
shame or the honor of those gentlemen, they were too timid, or, too honest, to
make any advances. The report of her youthful frolics, and the dread of her
sarcastic wit, had more power to repel, than her person and her wealth had to
attract. Passing her fiftieth year, she acquired the serious name of mistress,
without the dignity of a wife, and without receiving a single offer of marriage
from the period in which she became the possessor of so opulent a fortune.

Whether this mortifying disappointment had given a peculiar asperity to her
temper or whether malevolence was the earlier characteristic of her mind, I
will not pretend to determine; but it is certain, that from this autumnal or
rather wintry season of her life, Mrs. Wormwood made it her chief occupation to
amuse herself with the most subtle devices of malicious ingenuity, and to
frustrate every promising scheme of affection and delight, which she discovered
in the wide circle of her acquaintance. She seemed to be tormented with an
incessant dread, that youth and beauty might secure to themselves that
happiness, which she found wit and fortune were unable to bestow; hence she
watched, with the most piercing eye, all the lovely young women of her
neighborhood, and often insinuated herself into the confidence of many, that
she might penetrate all the secrets of their love, and privately blast its
success. She was enabled to render herself intimate with the young and the
lovely, by the opulent splendour in which she lived, and by the bewitching
vivacity of her conversation. Her talents of this kind were, indeed,
extraordinary; her mind was never polished or enriched by literature, as Mr.
Wormwood set little value on any books, excepting those of his counting house;
and the earlier years of his daughter were too much engaged by duplicity and
intrigue, to leave her either leisure or inclination for a voluntary attachment
to more improving studies. She read very little, and was acquainted with no
language but her own; yet a brilliant understanding, and an uncommon portion of
ready wit, supplied her with a more alluring fund of conversation, than
learning could bestow. She chiefly recommended herself to the young and
inexperienced, by the insinuating charm of the most lively ridicule, and by the
art of seasoning her discourse with wantton inuendos of so subtle a nature,
that gravity knew not how to object to them: She had the singular faculty of
throwing such a soft and dubious twilight over the most licentious images, that
they captivated curiosity and attention, without exciting either fear or
disgust. Her malevolence was perpetually disguised under the mask of gaiety,
and she completely possessed that plausibility of malice, so difficult to
attain, and so forcibly recommended in the words of lady Macbeth:

"Bear welcome in your eye,
"Your hand, your tongue; look like the "innocent flower,
"But be the serpent under it!"
With what success she practiced this dangerous lesson, the reader may learn
from the following adventure. --

It was the custom of Mrs. Wormwood to profess the most friendly solicitude for
female youth, and the highest admiration of beauty; she wished to be considered
as their patroness, because such an idea afforded her the fairest opportunities
of secretly mortifying their insufferable presumption. With a peculiar
refinement in malice, she first encouraged, and afterward defeated, those
amusing matrimonial projects, which the young and beautiful are so apt to
entertain. The highest gratification, which her ingenious malignity could
devise, consisted in torturing some lovely inexperienced girl, by playing upon
the tender passions of an open and unsuspecting heart.

Accident threw within her reach a most tempting subject for such fiend-like
diversion, in the person of Amelia Nevil, the daughter of a brave and
accomplished officer, who, closing a laborious and honorable life in very
indigent circumstances, had left his unfortunate child to the care of his
maiden sister. The aunt of Amelia was such an old maid as might alone suffice
to rescue the sisterhood from ridicule and contempt. She had been attached, in
her early days to a gallant youth, who unhappily lost his own life in
preserving that of his dear friend, her brother: she devoted herself to his
memory with the most tender, unaffected, and invariable attachment; refusing
several advantageous offers of marriage, though her income was so narrow, that
necessity obliged her to convert her whole fortune into an annuity, just before
the calamitous event happened, which made her the only guardian of poor Amelia.
This lovely, but unfortunate girl, was turned of fourteen on the death of her
father. She found, in the house of his sister, the most friendly asylum, and a
relation, whose heart and mind made her most able and willing to form the
character of this engaging orphan, who appeared to be as highly favored by
nature, as she was persecuted by fortune. The beauty of Amelia was so striking,
and the charms of her lively understanding began to display themselves in so
enchanting a manner, that her affectionate aunt could not bear the idea of
placing her in any lower order of life: she gave her the education of a
gentlewoman, in the flattering and generous hope, that her various attractions
must supply the absolute want of fortune, and that she should enjoy the delight
of seeing her dear Amelia happily settled in marriage, before her death exposed
her lovely ward to that poverty, which was her only inheritance. -- Heaven
disposed it otherwise. This amiable woman, after having acted the part of a
most affectionate parent to her indigent niece, died before Amelia attained the
age of twenty. The poor girl was now apparently destitute of every resource;
and exposed to penury, with a heart bleeding for the loss of a most indulgent
protector. A widow lady of her acquaintance very kindly afforded her a refuge
in the first moments of her distress, and proposed to two of her opulent
friends, that Amelia should reside with them by turns, dividing the year
between them, and passing four months with each. As soon as Mrs. Wormwood was
informed of this event, as she delighted in those ostentatious acts of apparent
beneficence, which are falsely called charity, she desired to be admitted among
the voluntary guardians of the poor Amelia. To this proposal all the parties
assented, and it was settled, that Amelia should pass the last quarter of every
year, as long as she remained single, under the roof of Mrs. Wormwood. This
lovely orphan had a sensibility of heart, which rendered her extremely grateful
for the protection she received but which made her severely feel all the
miseries of dependence. Her beauty attracted a multitude of admirers, many of
whom, presuming on her poverty, treated her with a licentious levity, which
always wounded her ingenuous pride. Her person, her mind, her manners were
universally commended by the men; but no one thought of making her his wife.
"Amelia (they cried) is an enchanting creature; but who, in these times, can
afford to marry a pretty, proud girl, supported by charity?" Though this
prudential question was never uttered in the presence of Amelia, she began to
perceive its influence, and suffered a painful dread of proving a perpetual
burden to those friends, by whose generosity she subsisted; she wished, a
thousand times, that her affectionate aunt, instead of cultivating her mind
with such dangerous refinement, had placed her in any station of life, where
she might have maintained herself by her own manual labor: she sometimes
entertained a project of making some attempt for this purpose; and she once
thought of changing her name, and of trying to support herself as an actress on
one of the public theaters; but this idea, which her honest pride had
suggested, was effectually suppressed by her modesty; and she continued to
waste the most precious time of her youth, under the mortification of
perpetualy wishing to change her mode of life, and of not knowing how to effect
it. Almost two years had now elapsed since the death of her aunt, and without
any prospect of marriage, she was now in her second period of residence with
Mrs. Wormwood. Amelia's understanding was by no means inferior to her other
endowments: she began to penetrate all the artful disguise, and to gain a
perfect and very painful insight into the real character of her present
hostess. This lady had remarked, that when Miss Nevil resided with her, her
house was much more frequented by gentlemen, than at any other season. This,
indeed, was true; and it unluckily happened, that these visitors often forgot
to applaud the smart sayings of Mrs. Wormwood, in contemplating the sweet
countenance of Amelia; a circumstance full sufficient to awaken, in the
neglected wit, the most bitter envy, hatred and malice. In truth, Mrs. Wormwood
detested her lovely guest with the most implacable virulence; but she had the
singular art of disguising her detestation in the language of flattery: she
understood the truth of Pope's maxim,

"He hurts me most who lavishly commends." and she therefore made use of lavish
commendations, as an instrument of malevolence toward Amelia; she insulted the
taste, and ridiculed the choice, of every new-married man, and declared herself
convinced, that he was a fool, because he had not chosen that most lovely young
woman. To more than one gentleman she said, you must marry Amelia; and, as few
men choose to be driven into wedlock, some offers were possibly prevented, by
the treacherous vehemence of her praise. Her malice, however, was not
sufficiently gratified by observing that Amelia had no prospect of marriage. To
indulge her malignity, she resolved to amuse this unhappy girl with the hopes
of such a joyous event, and then to turn, on a sudden, all these splendid hopes
into mockery and delusion. Accident led her to pitch on Mr. Nelson, as a person
whose name she might with the greatest safety employ, as the instrument of her
insidious design, and with the greater chance of success, as she observed that
Amelia had conceived for him a particular regard. Mr. Nelson was a gentleman,
who, having met with very singular events, had contracted a great, but very
amiable singularity of character: -- he was placed early in life, in a very
lucrative commercial situation, and was on the point of settling happily in
marriage with a very beautiful young lady, when the house, in which she
resided, was consumed by fire. Great part of her family, and among them the
destined bride, was buried in the ruins. Mr. Nelson, in loosing the object of
his ardent affection by so sudden a calamity, lost for some time the use of his
reason; and when his health and senses returned, he still continued under the
oppression of the profoundest melancholy, till his fond devotion to the memory
of her, whom he had lost in so severe a manner, suggested to his fancy a
singular plan of benevolence, in the prosecution of which he recovered a great
portion of his former spirits. This plan consisted in searching for female
objects of charity, whose distresses had been occasioned by fire. As his
fortune was very ample, and his own private expenses very moderate, he was able
to relieve many unfortunate persons in this condition; and his affectionate
imagination delighted itself with the idea, that in these uncommon acts of
beneficence he was guided by the influence of that lovely angel, whose mortal
beauty had perished in the flames. Mr. Nelson frequently visited a married
sister, who was settled in the town where Mrs. Wormwood resided. There was
also, in the same town, an amiable elderly widow, for whom he had a particular
esteem. This lady, whose name was Melford, had been left in very scanty
circumstances on the death of her husband, and resided at that time in London,
where she had been involved in additional distress by that calamity, to which
the attentive charity of Mr. Nelson was forever directed: he more than repaired
the loss which she sustained by fire, and assisted in settling her in the
neighborhood of his sister. Mrs. Melford had been intimate with the aunt of
Amelia, and was still the most valuable friend of that lovely orphan, who paid
her frequent visits, though she never resided under her roof. Mr. Nelson had
often seen Amelia at the house of Mrs. Melford, which led him to treat her with
particular politeness, whenever he visited Mrs. Wormwood; a circumstance on
which the latter founded her ungenerous project. She perfectly knew all the
singular private history of Mr. Nelson, and firmly believed, like all the rest
of his acquaintance, that no attractions could ever tempt him to marry; but she
thought it possible to make Amelia conceive the hope that her beauty had melted
his resolution; and nothing she supposed, could more effectually mortify her
guest, than to find herself derided for so vain an expectation.

Mrs. Wormwood began, therefore, to insinuate, in the most artful manner, that
Mr. Nelson was very particular in his civilities to Amelia, magnified all his
amiable qualities, and expressed the greatest pleasure in the prospect of so
delightful a match. These petty artifices, however, had no effect on the
natural modesty and diffidence of Amelia; she saw nothing that authorized such
an idea in the usual politeness of a well-bred man of thirty-seven; she pitied
the misfortune, she admired the elegant and engaging, though serious manners,
and she revered the virtues of Mr. Nelson; but, supposed his mind to be
entirely engrossed, as it really was, by his singularly charitable pursuits;
she entertained not a thought of engaging his affection. Mrs. Wormwood was
determined to play off her favorite engine of malignity, a counterfeited
letter. She had acquired, in her youth, the very dangerrous talent of forging
any hand that she pleased; and her passion for mischief had afforded her much
practice in this treacherous art. Having previously and secretly engaged Mr.
Nelson to drink tea with her, she wrote a billet to Amelia, in the name of that
gentleman, and with the most perfect imitation of his hand. The billet said,
that he designed himself the pleasure of passing that afternoon at the house of
Mrs. Wormwood, and requested the favor of a private conference with Miss Nevil
in the course of the evening, intimating, in the most delicate and doubtful
terms, an ardent desire of becoming her husband. Mrs. Wormwood contrived that
Amelia should not receive this billet till just before dinnertime, that she
might not show it to her friend and confidant, Mrs. Melford, and by her means,
detect its fallacy before the hour of her intended humiliation arrived.

Amelia blushed in reading the note, and, in the first surprise of unsuspecting
innocence, gave it to the vigilant Mrs. Wormwood; who burst into vehement
expressions of delight; congratulated her blushing guest on the full success of
her charms, and triumphed in her own prophetic discernment. They sat down to
dinner, but poor Amelia could hardly swallow a morsel; her mind was in a
tumultuous agitation of pleasure and amazement. The malicious imposter,
enjoying her confusion, allowed her no time to compose her hurried spirits in
the solitude of her chamber. Some female visitors arrived to tea; and, at
length, Mr. Nelson entered the room. Amelia trembled and blushed as he
approached her; but she was a little relieved from her embarrassment by the
business of the tea-table, over which she presided. Amelia was naturally
graceful in every thing she did, but the present agitation of her mind gave a
temporary awkwardness to all her motions: she committed many little blunders in
the management of the tea-table; a cup fell from her trembling hand, and was
broken; but the politeness of Mr. Nelson led him to say so many kind and
graceful things to her on these petty incidents, that, instead of increasing
her distress, they produced an opposite effect, and the tumult of her bosom
gradually subsided into a calm and composed delight. She ventured to meet the
eyes of Mr. Nelson, and thought them expressive of that tenderness which
promised a happy end to all her misfortunes. At the idea of exchanging misery
and dependence for comfort and honor, as the wife of so amiable a man, her
heart expanded with the most innocent and grateful joy. This appeared in her
countenance, and gave such an exquisite radiance to to all her features, that
she looked a thousand times more beautiful than ever. Mrs. Wormwood saw this
improvement of her charms, and, sickening at the sight, determined to reduce
the splendour of such insufferable beauty, and hastily terminate the triumph of
her deluded guest. She began with a few malicious and sarcastic remarks on the
vanity of beautiful young women, and the hopes, which they frequently entertain
of an imaginary lover; but finding these remarks produced not the effect she
intended, she took an opportunity of whispering in the ear of Amelia, and
begged her not to harbor any vain expectations, for the billet she had
received was a counterfeit, and a mere piece of pleasantry. Amelia shuddered,
and turned pale: surprise, disappointment, and indignation, conspired to
overwhelm her. She exerted her utmost power to conceal her emotions; but the
conflict in her bosom was too violent to be disguised. The tears, which she
vainly endeavored to suppress, burst forth, and she was obliged to quit the
room in very visible disorder. Mr. Nelson expressed his concern; but he was
checked in his benevolent inquiries by the caution of Mrs. Wormwood, who said,
on the occasion, that Miss Nevil was a very amiable girl, but she had some
peculiarities of temper, and was apt to put a wrong construction on the
innocent pleasantry of her friends. Mr. Nelson observing that Amelia did not
return, and hoping that his departure might contribute to restore the
interrupted harmony of the house, took an early leave of Mrs. Wormwood, who
immediately flew to the chamber of Amelia, to exult, like a fiend, over that
lovely victim of her successful malignity. She found not the person whom she
was so eager to insult. Amelia had, indeed, retired to her chamber, and passed
there a very miserable half hour, much hurt by the treacherous cruelty of Mrs.
Wormwood, and still more wounded by reflections on her own credulity, which she
condemned with that excess of severity so natural to a delicate mind in
arraigning itself. She would have flown for immediate consolation to her
friend, Mrs. Melford, but she had reason to believe that lady engaged on a
visit, and she therefore resolved to take a solitary walk for the purpose of
composing her spirits; but neither solitude nor exercise could restore her
tranquillity; and, as it grew late in the evening, she hastened to Mrs.
Melford's, in hopes of now finding her returned. Her worthy old confident was,
indeed, in her little parlour alone, when Amelia entered the room. The eyes of
this lovely girl immediately betrayed her distress; and the old lady, with her
usual tenderness, exclaimed, "Good heaven! my dear child, for what have you
been crying?" "Because," replied Amelia, in a broken voice, and bursting into a
fresh shower of tears, "because I am a fool?" -- Mrs. Melford began to be most
seriously alarmed, and, expressing her maternal solicitude in the kindest
manner. Amelia produced the fatal paper -- "There," says she, "is a letter in
the name of your excellent friend, Mr. Nelson; it is a forgery of Mrs.
Wormwood's, and I have been such an idiot as to believe it real." The
affectionate Mrs. Melford, who in her first alarm, had apprehended a much
heavier calamity, was herself greatly comforted in discovering the truth, and
said many kind things to console her young friend. "Do not fancy," replied
Amelia, "that I am foolishly in love with Mr. Nelson, though I think him the
most pleasing as well as the most excellent of men; and though I confess to
you, that I should certainly think it a blessed lot to find a refuge from the
misery of my present dependence, in the arms of so benevolent and so generous a
protector." -- "Those arms are now open to receive you," said a voice that was
heard before the speaker appeared. Amelia started at the sound, and her
surprise was not a little increased in seeing Mr. Nelson himself, who entering
the room from an adjoining apartment, embraced the lovely orphan in a transport
of tenderness and delight. Amelia, alive to all the feelings of genuine
modesty, was for some minutes more painfully distressed by this surprise, than
she had been by her past mortification: she was ready to sink into the earth,
at the idea of having betrayed her secret to the man, from whom she would have
labored most to conceal it. In the first tumult of this delicate confusion,
she sinks into a chair, and hides her face in her handkerchief. Nelson with a
mixture of respect and love, being afraid of increasing her distress, seizes
one of her hands, and continues to kiss it without uttering a word. The good
Mrs. Melford, almost as much astonished, but less painfully confused than
Amelia, beholds this unexpected scene with that kind of joy which is much more
disposed to weep than to speak: -- And, while this little party is thus
absorbed in silence, let me hasten to relate the incidents which produced their
situation.

Mr. Nelson had observed the sarcastic manner of Mrs. Wormwood toward Amelia,
and, as soon as he had ended his uncomfortable visit, he hastened to the worthy
Mrs. Melford, to give her some little account of what had passed, and to
concert with her some happier plan for the support of this amiable, insulted
orphan. "I am acquainted," said he, "with some brave and wealthy officers, who
have served with the father of Miss Nevil, and often speak of him with respect;
I am sure I can raise among them a subscription for the maintenance of this
tender unfortunate girl: we will procure for her an annuity, that shall enable
her to escape from such malignant patronage, to have a little home of her own,
and to support a servant." Mrs. Melford was transported at this idea; and,
recollecting all her obligations to this benevolent man, wept, and extolled his
generosity; and, seeing Amelia at some distance, through a bow window, which
commanded the street in which she lived, "thank Heaven," she cried, "here comes
my poor child, to hear and bless you for the extent of your goodness." Nelson,
who delighted most in doing good by stealth, immediately extorted from the good
old lady a promise of secrecy: it was the best part of his plan, that Amelia
should never know the persons to whom she was to owe her independence. "I am
stiil afraid of you, my worthy old friend," said Nelson "your countenance or
manner will, I know betray me, if Miss Nevil sees me here tonight." -- "Well,"
said the delighted old lady, "I will humor your delicacy; Amelia will,
probably, not stay with me ten minutes; you may amuse yourself, for that time,
in my spacious garden; I will not say you are here; and, as soon as the good
girl returns home I will come and impart to you the particulars of her recent
vexation." -- "Admirably settled," cried Nelson; and he immediately retreated
into a little back room, which led into a long slip of ground, embellished with
the sweetest and least expensive flowers, which afforded a favorite occupation
and amusement to Mrs. Melford. Nelson, after taking a few turns in this
diminutive garden, finding himself rather chilled by the air of the evening,
retreated again into the little parlour he had passed, intending to wait there
till Amelia departed; but the partition between the parlours being extremely
slight, he overheard the tender confessions of Amelia, and was hurried toward
her by an irresistible impulse, in the manner already described.

Mrs. Melford was the first who recovered from the kind of trance into which
our little party had been thrown by their general surprise; and she enabled the
tender pair, in the prospect of whose union her warm heart exulted, to regain
that easy and joyous possession of their faculties, which they lost for some
little time in their embarrassment. The applause of her friend, and the
adoration of her lover, soon taught the diffident Amelia to think less severely
of herself. The warmhearted Mrs. Melford declared that these occurrences were
the work of Heaven. "That," replied the affectionate Nelson, "I am most willing
to allow; but you must grant, that Heaven has produced our happiness by the
blind agency of a fiend; and, as our dear Amelia has too gentle a spirit to
rejoice in beholding the malignity of a devil converted into the torment of its
possessor, I must beg, that she may not return, even for a single night, to the
house of Mrs. Wormwood." Amelia pleaded her sense of past obligations, and
wished to take a peaceful leave of her patroness; but she submitted to the
urgent entreaties of Nelson, and remained for a few weeks under the roof of
Mrs. Melford, when she was united to the man of her heart. Nelson had the
double delight of rewarding the affection of an angel, and of punishing the
malevolence of a fiend: he announced in person to Mrs. Wormwood, his intended
marriage with Amelia, on the very night when the treacherous Old Maid had
amused herself with the hope of deriding her guest; whose return she was
eagerly expecting, in the very moment Nelson arrived to say, that Amelia would
return no more.

The surprise and mortification of Mrs. Wormwood arose almost to frenzy; she
racked her malicious and inventive brain for expedients to defeat the match,
and circulated a report for that purpose, which decency will not allow me to
explain. Her artifice was detected and despised. Amelia was not only married,
but the most admired, the most beloved, and the happiest of human beings; an
event which preyed so incessantly on the spirit of Mrs. Wormwood, that she fell
into a rapid decline, and ended, in a few months, her mischievous and unhappy
life, a memorable axample, that the most artful malignity may sometimes procure
for the object of its envy, that very happiness which it labors to prevent!

THE END.
MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.

BY MISS SEWARD.

FOURTH AMERICAN EDITION.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY W. SPOTSWOOD, AND C. P. WAYNE. 1798.

MONODY ON MAJOR ANDRE.
LOUD howls the storm! the vexed Atlantic roars!
Thy Genius, Britain, wanders on its shores!
Hears cries of horror wafted from afar,
And groans of Anguish, mid the shrieks of War!
Hears the deep curses of the Great and Brave,
Sigh in the wind, and murmur on the wave!
Over his damp brow the sable crape he binds,
And throws his Victor Garland. -- Alluding to the conquest by Lord Cornwallis.
victor garland to the winds;
Bids haggard Winter in the drear sojourn,
Tear the dim foliage from her drizzling urn;
With sickly yew unfragrant cypress twine,
And hang the dusky wreath round Honor's shrine,
Bids steel-clad Valor chase that dove-like Bride,
Enfeebling Mercy, from his awful side;
Where long she sat and checked the ardent rein,
As whirled his chariot over the embattled plain;
Gilded with sunny smile her April tear,
Raised her white arm, and stayed the uplifted spear;
Then, in her place, bids Vengeance mount the car,
And glut with gore the insatiate Dogs of War!
With one pale hand the Bloody scroll -- The Court Martial decree, signed at
Tappan, for Major Andre's execution.
bloody scroll he tears,
And bids his Nation blot it with their tears;
And one, extended over the Atlantic wave,
Points to his Andre's ignominious grave!
And shall the Muse, that marks the solemn scene,
"As busy Fancy lifts the veil between,"
Refuse to mingle in the awful train,
Nor breathe, with glowing zeal the votive strain!
From public fame shall admiration fire
The boldest numbers of her raptured lyre
To hymn a Stranger? -- and with ardent lay
Lead the wild mourner round her Cook's morai;
While Andre fades upon his dreary bier,
And Julia. -- The name by which Mr. Andre addressed the Author in his
correspondence with her.
Julia's only tribute is her tear?
Dear, lovely Youth! whose gentle virtues stole,
Through Friendship's softening medium on her soul!
Ah no! -- with every strong resistless plea,
Rise the recorded days she past with thee,
While each dim shadow of o'er-whelming years,
With glance reverted Eagle-memory clears.
Beloved Companion of the fairest hours
That rose for her in Joy's resplendent bowr's,
How gaily shone on thy bright morn of Youth!
The Star of Pleasure and the Sun of Truth!
Fall from their source descended on thy mind
Each generous virtue and each taste refined;
Young Genius led thee to his varied fame,
Bade thee All his gifts -- Mr. Andre had conspicuous talents for Poetry,
Music, and Painting.
ask all his gifts, nor ask in vain;
Hence novel thoughts, in every luster dressed
Of pointed Wit that diamond of the breast;
Hence glowed thy fancy with poetic ray,
Hence music warbled in thy sprightly lay;
And hence thy pencil, with his colors warm,
Caught every grace, and copied every charm*
Whose transient glories beam on Beauty's cheek,
And bid thy glowing Ivory breathe and speak.
Blessed pencil! by kind Fate ordained to save
Honora's semblance from her Early grave -- Miss Honora S. to whom Mr. Andre's
attachment was of such singular constancy, died in a consumption a few months
before he suffered death at Tappan. She had married another gentleman four
years after her engagement with Mr Andre had been dis^^^^ed by parental
authority.
early grave.
Oh! while on Julia's arm -- Mr. Andre drew two miniature pictures of Miss.
Honora S. on his first acquaintance with her at Buxton, in the Year 1769, one
for himself, the other for the author of this Poem.
Julia's arm it sweetly smiles,
And each lorn thought, each long regret beguiles,
Fondly she weeps the hand which formed the spell,
Now shroudless mouldering in its earthly cell!
But sure the Youth, whose ill-star'd passion strove
With all the pangs of inauspicious Love,
Full often deplored the fatal art that stole
The jocund freedom of its Master's soul!
While with nice hand he marked the living grace
And matchless sweetness of Honora's face,
The enamored Youth the faithful traces blessed,
That barb'd the dart of Beauty in his breast,
Around his neck the enchanting Portrait hung,
While a warm vow burst ardent from his tongue,
That from his bosom no succeeding day,
No chance should bear that talisman away.
'Twas thus 'Twas thus Apelles -- Prior is very elegant upon this circumstance
in an Ode to his Friend Mr. Howard the Painter.
Apelles bask'd in Beauty's blaze,
And felt the mischief of the steadfast gaze;
Traced with disordered hand Campaspe's charms,
And as their beams the kindling Canvas warms,
Triumphant Love, with still superior art,
Engraves their wonders on the Painter's heart.
Dear lost Companion! ever constant Youth!
That Fate had smiled on thy unequaled truth!
Nor bound the ensanguin'd laurel on that brow
Where Love ordained his brightest wreath to glow!
Then Peace had led thee to her softest bowers,
And Hymen strewn thy path with all his flowers;
Drawn to the roof, by Friendship's silver cord,
Each social Joy had brightened at thy board;
Science and soft affection's blended rays
Had shone unclouded on thy lengthened days;
From hour, to hour, thy taste, with conscious pride,
Had marked new talents in thy lovely Bride;
Till thou had owned the magic of her face
Thy fair Honora's least engaging grace.
Dear lost Honora! over thy early bier
The muse still sheds her ever sacred tear! --
The blushing rose-bud in its vernal bed,
By Zephyrs fanned and murmuring fountains fed,
In June's gay morn that scents the ambient air,
Was not more sweet, more innocent, or fair.
Oh! when such Pairs their kindred, spirits find,
When Sense and Virtue deck each spotless mind,
Hard is the doom that shall the union break,
And Fate's dark pinion hovers over the wreck.
Now Prudence in her cold and thrifty care,
Frowned on the Maid, and bade the Youth despair;
For Power Parental sternly saw, and strove
To tear the lilly-bands of plighted Love;
Nor strove in vain; but while the fair one's sighs
Disperse, like April-storms in sunny skies,
The firmer Lover, with unswerving truth,
To his first passion consecrates his youth;
Though four long years a night of absence prove,
Yet Hope's soft Star shone trembling on his love;
Till Busy Rumor -- The tidings of Honora's marriage. Upon that event Mr.
Andre quitted his profession as a merchant, and joined our army in America.
busy Rumor chased each pleasing dream
And quenched the radiance of the silver beam.
"Honora lost! -- my happy Rival's Bride!
Swell ye full sails! and roll thou mighty tide!
Over the dark waves forsaken Andre bear
Amid the vollying thunders of the War!
To win bright Glory from my Country's Foes,
Even in this ice of Love, my bosom glows.
Voluptuous LONDON! where thy turrets blaze,
Their hundred thrones the frolic Pleasures raise;
Bid proud Expense, Sabean odours bring,
Nor ask her roses of the tardy Spring;
Where Music floats the glittering roofs among,
And with meand'ring cadence swells the song;
Where Painting burns the Grecian meed to claim,
From the high temple of immortal Fame,
Bears to the radiant goal, with ardent peace,
Her Kauffman's beauty, and her Reynolds' grace;
Where Sun-clad Poetry the strain inspires,
And foils the Grecian Harps, the Latian Lyres.
"Ye softening Luxuries! ye polished Arts!
Bend your enfeebling rays on tranquil hearts!
I quit the Song, the Pencil, and the Lyre,
White robes of Peace, and Pleasure's soft attire,
To seize the Sword, to mount the rapid Car,
In all the proud habiliments of War --.
Honora lost! I woo a sterner Bride,
The armed Bellona calls me to her side;
Harsh is the music of our marriage strain!
It breathes in thunder from the western plain!
Wide over the watery world its echos roll,
And rouse each latent ardour of ^^y soul.
And though unlike the soft melodious lay,
That gaily waked Honora's nuptial day,
Its deeper tones shall whisper, ever they cease,
More genuine transport, and more lasting peace*
"Resolved I go! nor from that fatal bourn
To these gay scenes shall Andre's steps return!
Set is the star of Love, that ought to guide
His refluent bark across the mighty Tide! --
But while my country's foes, with impious (...)
Hurl over the subject plains the livid brand
Of dire Sedition! -- Oh! let Heaven ordain
While Andre lives, he may not live in vain!
"Yet without one kind farewell, could I roam
Far from my weeping friends, my peaceful home,
The best affections of my heart must cease,
And gratitude be lost, with hope, and peace!
"My lovely Sisters! who were wont to twine
Your Souls soft feelings with each wish of mine,
Shall, when this breast beats high at Glory's call,
From your mild eyes the showers of Sorrow fall? --
The light of Excellence, that round you glows,
Decks with reflected beams your Brother's brows!
Oh may his Fame, in some distinguished day
Pour on that Excellence the brightest ray!
"Dim clouds of Woe! ye veil each sprightly grace
That used to ^^^rkle in Maria's face. --
My Tuneful Anna. -- Miss Anna Andre has a poetical talent.
tuneful Anna to her lute complains,
But Grief's fond throbs arrest the parting strains. --
Fair, as the silver blossom on the thorn,
Soft as the spirit of the vernal morn,
Louisa, chase those trembling fears, that prove
The ungoverned terrors of a Sister's love.
They bend thy sweet head, like yon lucid flower,
That shrinks and fades beneath the summer's shower.
"Oh! smile my Sisters, on this destined day,
And with the radiant omen gild my way!
And thou, my Brother, gentle as the gale,
Whose breath perfumes anew the blossomed vale,
Yet quick of Spirit, as the electric beam,
When from the clouds its darting lightnings stream,
Soothe with incessant care our Mother's woes,
And hush her anxious sighs to soft repose. --
And be ye sure, when distant far I stray
To share the dangers of the arduous day,
Your tender faithful amity shall rest
The Last dear record, -- "I have a Mother, and three Sisters, to whom the
value of my commission would be an object, as the loss of Granada has much
affected their income. It is needless to be more explicit on this subject, I
know your Excellency's goodness.' -- See Major Andre's last letter to General
Clinton, published in the Gazette.
last dear record of my grateful breast.
"Oh! graceful Priestess at the fane of Truth,
Friend of my Soul! and guardian of my Youth!
Skilled to convert the duty to the choice,
My gentle Mother in whose melting voice
The virtuous precept, that perpetual flowed,
With Music warbled, and with Beauty glowed,
Thy tears! -- ah Heaven! -- not drops of molten lead,
Poured on thy hapless Son's devoted head,
With keener smart had each sensation torn!
They wake the nerve where agonies are born!
But Oh! restrain me not! thy tender strife,
What would it save? alas! thy Andre's life!
Oh! what a weary pilgrimage 'twill prove
Strewn with the thorns of disappointed Love!
Never can he break the charm, whose fond control,
By habit rooted, lords it over the soul,
If here he languish in inglorious ease,
Where Science palls, and Pleasures cease to please.
It Is Glory only, with her potent ray,
Can chase the clouds that darken all his way.
Then dry those pearly drops, that wildly flow,
Nor snatch the laurel from my youthful brow! --
The Rebel Standard blazes to the noon!
And Glory's path is bright before thy So^^!
Then join thy voice! and thou with Heaven ordain
While Andre lives, he may not live in vain!"
He says! -- and sighing seeks the busy strand
Where anchored Navies wait the wished command.
To the full gale the nearer billows roar,
And proudly lash the circumscribing shore;
While furious on the craggy coast they rave,
All calm and lovely rolls the distant wave;
For onward, as the unbounded waters spread,
Deep sink the rocks in their capacious bed,
And all their pointed terror's utmost force,
But gently interrupts the billow's course.
So on his present hour rude passion preys!
To smooth the prospect of his future days!
Unconscious of the Storm, that grimly sleeps,
To wreck its fury on the unshelter'd Deeps!
Now yielding waves divide before the prow
The white sails bend, the streaming pennants glow,
And swiftly waft him to the western plain,
Where fierce Bellona rages over the slain.
Firm in their strength opposing Legions stand,
Prepared to drench with blood the thirsty Land.
Now Carnage hurls her flaming bolts afar,
And Desolation groans amid the War.
As bleeds the Valiant, and the Mighty yield,
Death stalks the only Victor over the field.
Foremost in all the horrors of the day,
Impetuous Impetuous Andre. -- It is in this passage only that fiction has been
employed through the narrative of the poera. Mr. Andre was a prisoner in America,
soon after his arrival there, but the Author is (...) with the cirumstances of
the action in which he was taken.
Andre leads the glorious way;
Till, rashly bold, by numbers forced to yield,
They drag him captive from the long-fought field. --
Around the Hero crowd the exulting Bands,
And seize the spoils of War with bloody hands;
Snatch the dark plumage from his awful crest,
And tear the golden crescent from his breast;
The sword, the tube, that wings the death from far,
And all the fatal implements of War!
Silent, unmoved the gallant Youth surveyed
The lavish spoils triumphant Ruffians made.
The idle ornament, the useless spear
He little recks, but oh! there is a fear
Pants with quick throb, while yearning sorrows dart
Through all his senses to his trembling heart.
"What though Honora's voice no more shall charm!
No more her beamy smile my bosom warm;
Yet from these eyes shall Force for ever tear
The sacred Image of that Form so dear?
Shade Shade of my Love. -- The miniature of Honora. A Letter from Major Andre
to one of his Friends, written a few years ago, contained the following
sentence. "I have been taken prisoner by the Americans and stripped of every
thing except the picture of Honora, which I concealed in my mouth* Preserving
that, I yet think myself fortunate."
of my Love though mute and cold thy charms,
Never have thou blessed my happy Rival's arms!
"To my sad heart each Dawn has seen thee pressed!
Each Night has laid thee pillow'd on my breast!
Force shall not tear thee from thy faithful shrine!
Thou never were his, and shall be ever mine!
"'It Is fixed! -- these lips shall resolute enclose
The precious Soother of my ceaseless woes.
And should relentless Violence invade
This last retreat, by frantic Fondness made,
One way remains! -- Fate whispers to my Soul
Intrepid Intrepid Portia. -- BRUTUS.] Impatient of my absence,
And grieved that young Octavius, with Mark Antony
Had made themselves so strong, she grew distracted,
And, her Attendants absent, swallowed fire.
CASSIUS.] And died so?
BRUTUS.] Even so!
See Shakespeare's Play of Julius Caesar, Act iv. Scene iv.


Portia and her burning coal!
So shall the throbbing Inmate of my breast
From Love's sole gift meet everlasting rest!"
While these sad thoughts in swift succession fire
The smothered embers of each fond desire,
Quick to his mouth his eager hand removes
The beauteous semblance of the Form he loves.
That darling treasure safe, resigned he wears
The sordid robe, the scanty viand shares;
With cheerful fortitude content to wait
The bartered ransom of a kinder fate.
Now many a Moon in her pale course had shed,
The pensive beam on Andre's captive head.
At length the Sun rose jocund to adorn
With all his splendour the enfranchised Morn.
Again the Hero joins the ardent Train
That pours its thousands on the tented plain;
And shines distinguished in the long Array,
Bright as the silver star that leads the Day!
His modest temperance, his wakeful heed
His silent diligence, his ardent speed,
Each warrior duty to the Veteran taught,
Shaming the vain Experience Time had brought.
Dependence scarcely feels his gentle sway,
He shares each want, and smiles each grief away;
And to the virtues of a noble Heart
Unites the talents of inventive Art.
Thus from his swift and faithful pencil flow
The Lines, the Camp, the Fortress of the Foe;
Serene to counteract each deep Design,
Points the dark Ambush, and the springing Mine;
Till, as a breathing Incense, Andre's name
Pervades the Host, and swells the loud acclaim.
The Chief no virtue views with cold regard,
Skilled to discern, and generous to reward;
Each towering hope his honored smiles impart,
As near his Person, and more near his heart
The graceful Youth he draws, -- and round his brow
Bids Rank and Power their mingled brilliance throw.
Oh have thou seen a blooming Morn of May
In crystal beauty shed the modest ray?
And with its balmy dews refreshing shower
Swell the young grain, and open the purple flower?
In bright'ning luster reach its radiant Noon,
Robbed in the gayest mantle of the Sun?
Then 'mid the splendors of its azure skies,
Oh! have thou seen the cruel Storm arise?
In sable horror shroud each dazzling charm,
And dash their glories back with icy arm!
Thus lowered the deathful cloud amid the bla^^
Of Andre's Destiny, -- and quenched its rays! --
Ah fatal embassy! -- thy hazards dire
His kindling Soul with every ardor fire;
Great Clinton gives it to the courage proved,
And the known wisdom of the Friend he loved.
As fair Euryalus to meet his Fate,
With Nysus rushes from the Dardan gate,
Relentless Fate! whose fury scorns to spare
The snowy breast, red lip, and shining hair,
So polished Andre launches on the waves,
Where Hudson's tide. -- Major Andre came up the Hudson River to meet General
Arnold. On his return by Land he fell into the hands of the Enemy.
Hudson's tide its dreary confine laves.
With firm intrepid foot the Youth explores
Each dangerous pathway of the hostile shores;
But no one Veteran Chief his steps attends,
As silent round the gloomy Wood he wends;
Alone he meets the brave repentant Foe,
Sustains his late resolve, receives his vow,
With ardent skill directs the doubtful course,
Seals the firm bond and ratifies its force.
It Is thus AMERICA, thy Generals fly,
And wave new banners in their native sky!
Sick of the mischiefs artful Gallia pours,
In friendly semblance on thy ravaged shores --
Unnatural compact! -- shall a Race of Slaves
Sustain the ponderous standard Freedom waves?
No! while their feigned Protection spreads the toils,
The Vultures hover over the destined spoils!
How fade Provincial glories, while You run
To court far deeper bondage than you shun!
Is this the generous active rising Flame,
That boasted Liberty's immortal name!
Blazed for its rights infringed, its trophies torn,
And taught the Wise the dire mistake to mourn,
When haughty Britain, in a luckless hour,
With rage inebriate, and the lust of power,
To fruitless conquest, and to countless graves
Led her gay Legions over the western waves!
The Fiend of Discord, cow'ring at the prow,
Sat darkly smiling at the impending woe!
Long did my soul the wretched strife survey,
And wept the horrors of the dreadful day;
Through rolling Years saw undecisive War
Draw bleeding Wisdom at his iron Car;
Exhaust my country's treasure, pour her gore
In fruitless conflict on the distant shore;
Saw the firm Congress all her might oppose,
And while I mourned her fate, (...) her Foes.
But when, repentant of her prouder aim,
She gently waves the long disputed claim;
Extends the charter with your rights restored,
And hides in olive wreaths the blood-stained sword.
Then to reject her peaceful wreaths, and throw
Your Country's Freedom to our mutual Foe!
Infatuate Land! -- from that detested day
Distracted Councils, and the thirst of Sway,
Rapacious Avarice, Superstition vile,
And all the Frenchman dictates in his guile
Disgrace your Congress! -- Justice drops her scale!
And radiant Liberty averts her sail!
They fly indignant the polluted plain,
Where Truth is scorned and Mercy pleads in vain.
That she does plead in vain, thy witness bear,
Accursed Hour! -- Oh! darkest of the Year!
That with Misfortune's deadliest venom fraught
To Tappan's Wall the gallant Andre brought,
Snared in her fatal Maze, and borne away
Of fell Revenge, in all its guilt the Prey!
Oh Washington! I thought thee great and good, This apostrophe to General
Washington possesses more sentiment than truth. The author seems to be very
imperfectly acquainted with the circumstances attending the unfortunate event.

AMERICAN EDITOR.

Nor knew thy Nero-thirst of guiltless blood!
Severe to use the power that fortune gave,
Thou cool determined Murderer of the Brave!
Lost to each fairer Virtue, that inspires
The genuine fervor of the Patriot fires!
And You, the base Abettors of the doom,
That sunk his blooming honors in the tomb,
The opprobrious tomb your hardened hearts decreed,
While all he asked was as the Brave to bleed!
Nor other boon the glorious Youth implored
Save the cold Mercy of the Warrior-Sword!
O dark, and pitiless! your impious hate
O'er-whelm'd the Hero in the Ruffian's fate!
Stopped with the Felon-cord -- As I suffer in the defense of my Country, I must
consider this hour as the most glorious of my life. Remember that I die as
becomes a British Officer, while the manner of my death must reflect disgrace
on your Commander.

See Major Andre's last words, inserted in the General Evening (...), for
Tuesday November 14, 1780.


Felon-cord the rosy breath!
And venomed with disgrace the darts of Death!
Remorseless Washington! the day shall come
Of deep repentance for this barbarous doom!
When injured Andre's memory shall inspire
A kindling Army, with resistless fire;
Each falchion sharpen that the Britons wield,
And lead their fiercest Lion to the field!
Then, when each hope of thine shall set in night,
When dubious dread and unavailing flight
Impel your Host, thy guilt-upbraided Soul
Shall wish untouched the sacred Life you stole!
And when thy Heart appalled and vanquished Pride,
Shall vainly ask the mercy they denied,
With horror shall thou meet the fate they gave
Nor Pity gild the darkness of thy grave!
For Infamy with livid hand shall shed
Eternal mildew on the ruthless head!
Less cruel far than thou, on Illion's plain
Achilles, raging for Patroclus slain!
When hapless Priam bends the aged knee
To deprecate the Victors dire decree,
The Nobler Greek, in melting pity spares
The lifeless Hector to his father's Prayers,
Fierce as he was; -- it is Cowards only know
Persisting vengeance over a Fallen Foe.
But no entreaty wakes the soft remorse
Oh murdered Andre! for thy sacred Corse;
Vain were an Army's, vain its Leader's sighs! --
Damp in the Earth on Hudson's shore it lies!
Unshrouded welters in the wint'ry Storm!
And gluts the riot of the Tappan. -- The place where Major Andre was executed*
Tappan-Worm!
But Oh! its dust, like Abel's blood, shall rise
And call for justice from the angry skies!
What though the Tyrants, with malignant pride,
To thy pale corfe each decent rite denied!
Thy graceful limbs in no kind covert laid,
Nor with the Christian-Requiem soothed thy shade!
Yet on thy grass-green Bier soft April-Show'rs
Shall earliest wake the sweet spontaneous Flowers!
Bid the blue Hair-bell, and the Snow-Drop there
Hang their cold cup, and drop the pearly tear!
And often, at pensive Eve's ambiguous gloom,
Imperial Honor, bending over thy tomb,
With solemn strains shall lull thy deep repose,
And with his deathless Laurels shade thy brows!
Lamented Youth! while with inverted spear
The British Legions pour the indignant tear!
Round the dropped arm the Funeral-scarf. -- The whole British Army in America
went into mourning for Major Andre, a distinguished tribute to his merit.
funeral-scarf entwine
And in their hearts' deep core thy worth enshrine;
While my weak Muse, in fond attempt and vain,
But feebly pours a perishable strain,
Oh ye distinguished Few! whose glowing lays
Bright Phoebus kindles with his purest rays,
Snatch from its radiant source the living fire,
And light with Vestal flame. -- The Vestal fire was kept perpetually burning
and originally kindled from the rays of the Sun.
Vestal flame your ANDRE'S HALLOWED PYRE!

