Doctor BELKNAP's SERMON OF THE NATIONAL FAST, MAY 9th, 1798.

A SERMON, DELIVERED ON THE 9th OF MAY, 1798, THE DAY OF THE NATIONAL FAST,
RECOMMENDED BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.

BY JEREMY BELKNAP, D. D. MINISTER OF THE CHURCH IN FEDERAL-STREET, BOSTON.

Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1798.

PREFACE.
A PROCLAMATION of the President of the United States, appointing a day of
prayer or thanksgiving, is not to be considered as an act of legislative or
executive authority; because no power is delegated, by the Constitution, to any
person to direct us in matters of religion; neither is it an assumption of
power or an act of imperfect authority, which needs the interposition of
another power to give it effect. But it is a letter of advice, or a friendly
call, from a man, whom the people have placed at their head, inviting us to
join with him and with one another, in an act of national piety and devotion.

THE propriety of such a call, from such a person, is so evident, that nothing
can be said to make it more evident. Every man who has a sense of his duty to
GOD as our preserver, benefactor and Supreme Governor, must, at once, approve
it, and be pleased with it. Had this friendly notice been given in any other
way; had it been communicated by a private letter to each religious society or
minister, it would have had the same effect as when it comes in the form of a
public proclamation.

IN the same light, I have always viewed the public calls of the Chief
Magistrate of any particular State, to keep days of fasting and thanksgiving.
The proclamation is not an act of authority; but of friendship, of piety and
gratit^^^^; and derives all its efficacy from the reasonableness of the duty
recommended, and from our own consent. Our Chief Magistrates are so convinced
of this, that, though in some instances, formerly, the words enjoin, require
and forbid, may have been used; yet now we hear nothing but the language of
recommendation and advice. The voice of authority in matters of religion is not
assumed by American rulers; and if assumed, would not be approved, by American
people.

IF there be any instances of opposition to a compliance with so rational a
duty, as is thus recommended, it is not a subject of wonder. We are assured,
that, in the most happy times, there will be a disappointed party, who, though
silenced and incapable of doing mischief, will secretly blaspheme. The old
serpent, when bound and cast into the bottomless pit, will retain his
serpentine disposition, and take the first opportunity, when permitted, again
to deceive the nations. So it must be expected that his emissaries will rebel
in their hearts, and gnaw their tongues for pain; for evil men and seducers
will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

DANIEL ii.42, 43. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of
clay; so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly broken. And whereas thou
saw iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of
men, but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with
clay.


ONE great use and intention of prophecy is to keep alive the faith and hope of
God's people in times of calamity and distress. When the city and temple of
Jerusalem had been destroyed, and the Jews were carried to Babylon, they had
the comfort of the prophecies which had been delivered by Isaiah and Jeremiah,
that the captivity would continue no more than seventy years; and that at the
expiration of that period, a prince should arise, by the name of Cyrus, who
would cause the people to be restored to their own land, and their city and
temple to be rebuilt. During this period of the seventy years captivity, there
was a series of revelations made to Daniel, and by him recorded for the
instruction and comfort of God's people, in every age of the church; these
revelations were made to him in visionary and figurative representations, and
the subjects of them were the remarkable events which should befall those
nations, with whom the church of God should be connected till the second coming
of Jesus Christ.

THE words now read are part of one of these revelations. Nebuchadnezzar, king
of Babylon, had a dream which made an uneasy impression on his mind, but he had
forgotten the particulars, and could by no means recollect it, nor could any of
the wise men of Babylon assist him in recovering it. They could indeed, by
certain rules, interpret a dream when it was related to them; but it was beyond
their art and skill, to tell a person what he had dreamed, when he himself had
forgotten it. None could do this but the God "whose dwelling was not with
flesh." For this incapacity, the monarch, in a fit of tyrannic passion,
commanded all the wise men in Babylon to be slain; and among them, Daniel and
his companions were to be put to death; but upon his promise to show the king
his dream, a suspension of the decree was obtained; and after solemn prayer to
God, the secret was revealed to Daniel, who declared it to the king in these
words. "Thou, O king, saw, and behold, a great image. This great image,
whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee, and the form thereof was
terrible. This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of
silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his legs of iron, his feet part of
iron and part of clay. Thou saw till that a stone was cut out without hands,
which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them
to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for
them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth. This is the dream, and we will tell the interpretation thereof
before the king. Thou, O king, art a king of kings; for the God of Heaven has
given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. And wheresoever the
children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven,
has he given into thine hand, and has made thee ruler over them all. Thou art
this head of gold. And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee,
and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.
And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaks in
pieces and subdueth all things; and as iron that breaks all these, shall it
break in pieces and bruise. And whereas thou saw the feet and toes part of
potters' clay and part of iron; the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall
be in it of the strength of iron, forasmuch as thou saw the iron mixed with
miry clay. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron and part of clay; so
the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken. And whereas thou saw
iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men;
but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.
And in the days of these kings shall the God of Heaven set up a kingdom, which
shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people,
but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand
forever. Forasmuch as thou saw that the stone was cut out of the mountain
without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the
silver, and the gold; the great God has made known to the king what shall come
to pass hereafter; and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof
sure." The same series of events was afterward represented to Daniel himself,
in a vision of four beasts, answering to the four parts of the image, and
signifying the same four kingdoms, with some farther particulars relating to
the church of God. This vision is recorded in the 7th chapter; and there is
another vision representing the same events, by the figures of a ram and a
goat, in the 8th chapter. These visions were intended to conduct the mind of
devout inquirers, through all the grand events, to the establishment of the
universal kingdom of the Son of God, which will break in pieces and destroy all
these kingdoms, and stand forever.

IF it be asked, In what part of the times, signified by this vision, do we
live? or what events, here set down, are to us past, present, and future? To
give an answer to this question, we must consider how far divine Providence has
explained the vision in its several parts. The golden head of the image, as
Daniel himself said, was the Babylonian empire, of which Nebuchadnezzar was the
reigning prince; "Thou art this head of gold." It was then in the height of its
splendour and glory; and the imperial city was emphatically called, the "golden
city." The same empire was signified by the lion with eagle's wings, in the 7th
chapter. It was overthrown before Daniel's death, by Cyrus, then general, and
afterward king of the Medes and Persians.

THE silver breast and arms of the image represented the kingdom of the Medes
and Persians; which succeeded the Babylonian monarchy. This was signified to
Daniel, under the figure of a bear, with three ribs in his mouth, in the 7th
chapter, and afterward of a ram with two horns, in the 8th chapter.

THE brazen belly and thighs signified the Macedonian empire, conducted by
Alexander, and continued by his four successors. This answered to the leopard
with four heads and four wings, in the 7th chapter, and to the goat, first with
one horn, and afterward with four horns, in the 8th chapter.

THESE three empires, the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian and the Macedonian, have
long since given place to the fourth, the Roman empire; which is meant by the
iron legs and feet of the image, and by its ten toes, which were partly of iron
and partly of clay. The same power is figured by the beast with great iron
teeth, in the 7th chapter, and the little horn of the goat, which waxed great,
in the 8th chapter. It is also represented in the Revelation of John by a beast
with seven heads and ten horns. It is observable, that this empire is described
in the vision of Nebuchadnezzar in a threefold state, 1. by the thighs and
legs, which were entirely of iron; 2. by the feet, which were of iron and clay;
and, 3. by the toes, which were of the same materials; and this threefold view
corresponds exactly with the events which have taken place. For the Roman
empire was at first strong and terrible. Whilst the spirit of true liberty
animated their constitution: Whilst public virtue and genuine patriotism were
the ruling principles, their councils were firm, and their arms were
victorious. They conquered the neighboring countries, and diffused the spirit
of their constitution wherever they made a conquest. This was the first and
best state of the Romans. But after a while, they grew intoxicated with
success, and degenerated from their manly fortitude into luxury and pleasure.
Then the spirit of corruption crept into the body politic, and it became, as
the prophet represents it in its second stage, like a mixture of iron and clay.
It was divided into two parts, viz. the Eastern and Western empire; the seat of
the former was Constantinople, and of the latter, Rome. There was, however,
something of the strength of iron. They were still a powerful and formidable
people. The northern nations who invaded and incorporated themselves with the
Romans, in the second stage of the empire, brought with them a spirit of
liberty, which the Romans had lost; but so distracted were they with intestine
quarrels and religious controversies, that, like iron and clay, they never
could be thoroughly blended; and these causes operated to produce the third
stage of the empire, its division into ten kingdoms; answering to the ten toes
of the image and the ten horns of John's beast.

THIS separation of the empire took place between eight and nine hundred years
ago; and though some of the kingdoms have in some degree been changed, and
mixed, yet there has been ever since, such a distinction kept up, that there
has generally been about the number of ten.

IN the days of these kings, (as Daniel foretold) i. e. the Roman empire, the
God of Heaven did set up a fifth kingdom, prefigured by a stone, cut out of a
mountain, without hands. This was the kingdom of Jesus Christ; and as long as
the divided remains of the Roman empire shall subsist, this kingdom will be, as
it has hitherto been, in the state represented by the prophets, as "a stone of
stumbling and rock of offense"; but in due time it will smite the image on its
feet and break it to pieces; and will itself become a great mountain and fill
the whole earth. This grand event was signified to Daniel in other visions,
recorded in the 7th and 12th chapters; and it is more particularly described in
the three last chapters of the book of John's revelation.

IF it be inquired, why were these four empires made the subject of divine
prophecy in preference to all the other kingdoms of this world? The answer is,
that all of them were instruments, in the hands of God, to carry on the designs
of his providence toward the Jewish people first, and ultimately the kingdom of
his SON. The vision is a kind of prophetic chronology, to point out the time
when the kingdom of God should come, or be visibly and permanently established.
The reason why these four empires only are distinguished by the spirit of
prophecy, was, not because they were greater or more remarkable than some
others; but, because the course of their history is connected with that of the
Jewish church, and led in a regular and direct succession to the time and reign
of Jesus Christ. Hurd's Introduction to the study of prophecy, p. 80.
An answer of the same kind may be given, if it be asked, why was this
revelation made to a Gentile king? This Gentile king was connected with the
Jews, and was obliged to a Jewish prophet for recovering and interpreting his
dream; and the only record of it is preserved in the Library of the Jewish
church, to whom were committed the oracles of God. It is therefore a prophecy
which comes to us in the same channel with all the other inspired prophecies,
and has the same end in view, to testify of Jesus Christ; for the testimony of
or concerning him is the spirit of prophecy, and to him give all the prophets
witness. If the facts recorded correspond with the things foretold; if the
prophecy coincide with the whole series of prophecy, having the same object in
view, and this object be, what none but God could know, before the event; then
it will follow, that the inspiration is real, and there is a further evidence
of the divinity of the revelations contained in the Old and New Testaments.

FROM the explication which has now been given of this sacred prophetic vision,
we may see, that the present period of time, pointed out by it, is that which
was signified by the ten toes of the image. The ten kingdoms, into which the
Roman empire was divided, are still subsisting, though under different forms of
government; and though the division be different from what it was at first; and
they are all, more or less, in the state in which the vision represents them, a
mixture of iron and clay, of strength and weakness; they are partly strong and
partly broken, they do not cleave to one another even as iron is not mixed with
clay. None of them ever have been able, though some of them have attempted, to
render themselves equally strong and terrible as the ancient Roman empire was
in its first stage.

YOU will please to take notice, that these ten kingdoms comprehend the western
part of the continent of Europe, once the western empire of Rome; among these,
the countries subject to the dominion of Britain and France hold a
distinguished rank; and as these are the principal ones, with which we ever
had, or now have any political connection; so I shall confine my observations
chiefly to them; though the same prophetic characters are equally applicable to
Spain, Italy, Germany, and the other divisions of the western empire. These are
the toes of the image; in which may be clearly discerned the materials of which
they are composed, iron and clay, strength and weakness, wisdom and folly;
sometimes the one has prevailed, and sometimes the other; but there has been no
union among them; all the attempts to unite them, so as to make a grand,
formidable empire, resembling that of ancient Rome, have hitherto failed of
success; and from the sure word of prophecy we have the strongest reason to
conclude, that they will always remain in the same divided state, till the
kingdom of Jesus Christ shall break them all to pieces, and shall rise upon
their ruins.

THE iron part of these toes, or the strength and power of these divisions of
the Roman empire, may be considered as consisting in the numbers of their
people, the vigor, activity and discipline of their land and naval forces;
their wealth, arising from their husbandry, manufactures, commerce and the
management of their finances; the great fertility and high cultivation of their
lands, their progress in arts and sciences, their maritime and insular
situations, and the great natural advantages which they enjoy, of which their
sagacity and their interest lead them to make the most rapid and successful
improvement; to which they are farther urged by the spirit of jealousy and
rivalship, always attending commercial nations. When these powers are put into
action by fierce passions and by skilful leaders, they make a formidable
appearance, and threaten one another, or the neighboring nations, with
conquest; and it is not surprising if they are in some measure successful.

BUT if we view the clay part of their character, we shall find that they are
not quite so terrible as some are apt to imagine. The great abilities and
resources which they possess are counterbalanced by the prevalence of
corruption, venality and profusion; by the luxury and effeminacy which commerce
generally produces, and the unbounded appetite for pleasure which pervades all
ranks and orders of the people. We shall find in some of them a spirit of
faction, a want of firmness and consistency, a thirst for power, and wealth, a
revolutionary phrenzy, operating to produce assassinations, robbery and
plunder. Under a pretense of republican liberty, we have seen some of them
exercising the most boundless licentiousness and wanton despotism, in defiance
of justice, humanity, policy, morality and religion. The same crimes have
stained their character when professing liberty and equality as when sounding
the praises of their kings. The same tyranny, the same proscriptions,
imprisonments, banishments and waste of human life, have disgraced the annals
of republicanism as of monarchy; and their national character, instead of being
meliorated, is, if possible, degenerated by their revolutions; for slaves, when
made free, are the worst of tyrants.

THINK not, my Brethren, that what I say is dictated by passion or
party-spirit. I speak the words of truth and soberness. This subject has been
familiar to me above twenty years. It was in the beginning of the third year of
our revolutionary war, May, 1777.
when we had no friend nor ally but Heaven, to shield us from the vengeance of
Britain, and when she was making her greatest efforts to subdue us, that my
thoughts were directed to this prophecy; and upon an attentive contemplation of
it, with the best helps The works of Joseph Mede, Sir Isaac Newton, and Dr.
Thomas Newton.
that I could obtain, I found in it, sufficient encouragement to rest my hope,
that the formidable power, then at war with us, would not prevail. The
confidence which I had did not prove to be vain; but as I thought there was
sufficient ground for consolation in the height of our distress, and when no
human help was engaged on our side; so the conclusion of the war justified the
expectation.

THERE was a time, about thirty-five years ago, 1763.
when Great Britain had a much fairer prospect of an extensive and growing
empire, than France has now. Her dominions were then indeed scattered over all
quarters of the world, but united in allegiance to one sovereign, the political
head of a wealthy, powerful and commercial nation; and had he known how to
improve the advantages, which Providence had put into his hands, he might have
been one of the richest and noblest princes on the face of the earth. Had the
true spirit of liberty and patriotism, which made old Rome so respectable, been
the ruling spirit of the British government, it might, according to human
probability, have rivalled or exceeded Rome in splendour. But Britain,
intoxicated with glory and proud of success, thinking her triumphant flag
superior to all the world, ventured on the mad project of quarrelling with her
best friends, and enslaving this country. Instead of the silken reins, which
always most effectually govern, because scarcely felt, she began to forge iron
chains for free Americans. By endeavoring to extend the spirit of corruption
and scatter the seeds of despotism to the remote parts of her dominions, she
roused in us the spirit of genuine liberty, a spirit which is always
uncontrolable; and then by using force to quell it, she effectually weakened
her own power, and proved to all the world that she was nothing but a mixture
of iron and clay. The spirit of liberty and the spirit of despotism can never
unite, but will be in perpetual opposition; and these two principles, after a
long and violent struggle, produced a separation, by which the prediction was
in one instance fulfilled, "they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron
is not mixed with clay." This separation and the establishment of our
independence, were the result of causes, foreseen and foretold by Him, to whom
all his works, and all the operations of inferior agents, are perfectly known
from the beginning of the world. All the wisdom of statesmen, all the eloquence
of orators, and all the strength and power of fleets and armies could not
counteract the decree of Heaven, that America must be separated from Britain.
From the experience which we have had of her conduct, it is my most earnest
wish, and from our own increasing power and resources and the wisdom and
stability of our present government, it is my confident expectation, that the
separation will ever remain, and that we shall be an independent people, fully
equal to the business of governing ourselves, without any foreign interference
whatever. If there be any persons among us who are for re-uniting us with
Great Britain, I hold their political principles in as much abhorrence as those
who are for subjecting us to the influence of France; for I detest the thought,
that any rotten toe of Nebuchadnezzar's image, or any proud horn of the
seven-headed beast, should ever exercise dominion over this country.

IT is curious and amusing, as well as instructive, to observe, how nearly the
conduct of France toward us, in the present controversy, resembles that of
Britain in a former controversy; and how the same kind of language is used by
the emissaries of the one as was then held by the minions of the other. The
quarrel between Britain and us was not of our seeking, but their own; we were
their friends and customers; and had they let us alone, we should have remained
so probably to this day. So the controversy between France and us is not of our
seeking, but we have been forced into it by themselves. We have not intended
them any injury; we have not invaded their country, nor captured their
property, either by sea or land; we have not intermeddled with their interior
government, nor sought to alienate the people of France from their rulers. We
rejoiced in what we supposed was their emancipation; and we hoped, in the first
stage of their revolution, that they would so limit and restrain the power of
their princes and nobility, and so reform the abuses of their government, as to
enjoy a degree of freedom to which they had been strangers, ever since the
elevation of the Bourbon family. We were as friendly toward the people of
France as ever we were toward the people of Britain before they began the
quarrel with us. But when it was begun, we were hectored and threatened, by the
proud language of affected superiority. In the one case, our ears were dinned
with the supremacy and omnipotence of the British parliament, with the pompous
parade of their former victories, and the triumphant flourish of their flag
over the four quarters of the world. In the other case, we are told that France
is generous to her friends, but terrible to her enemies; we hear of the
invincible arms of the republic, one and indivisible; we are pointed to the
fate of Venice as an example of republican vengeance; and we are warned by the
meditated conquest of Switzerland and the invasion of Britain, what we are to
expect, if we do not buy our peace of the terrible republic. So Sennacherib,
king of Assyria, threatened Jerusalem in the days of Hezekiah; and so Phillip of
Spain, with his invincible armada, menaced the island of Britain in the days of
Elizabeth!

TO secure a party in our country, the government of Britain once maintained a
swarm of crown officers with pensions and places; and tempted our most wealthy
citizens with the hope of preferment; and then boasted of the strength of their
influence over us. Just so the French government is boasting of the influence
which they have in this country, and of their power to control our councils, to
divide the people from the government, and effect a revolution in their own
favor.

TO preserve our connection with Great Britain, and prevent a separation from
her, we sent the most respectful petitions, which were treated with neglect and
contempt by the sovereign and his ministers. So the present ruling powers of
France have refused to hear our envoys, when soliciting for an audience to
represent our grievances and losses. When we entered into a treaty with France,
to assist us in supporting our independence, 1778.
and would not be diverted from it by the flatteries or intrigues of Britain,
they were incensed against us, and made the war more sanguinary and
destructive. So, when we had made a treaty with Britain, 1795.
to recover our property unjustly taken away, and the French have found that we
will not break our faith, they are come out in vengeance against us, and are
forcibly taking our property and ruining, as far as they are able, our commerce.

WHEN these similar circumstances are considered, must we not conclude that
both these rival and contending nations have no true regard for us; that they
have no generous and magnanimous prinples of action; but are both governed by
the same interested, narrow, selfish policy, and that neither of them deserve
our confidence any farther than the maxims of that kind of policy will permit.
There is an old rule of common prudence, which will apply as well to nations as
to individuals;

"In things of moment, on thyself depend;
Trust not too far thy servant nor thy friend."
And this very sentiment, though expressed in better language, was the advice
of our great and good WASHINGTON, when he retired from office.

"THE great rule of conduct (said he) for us, in regard to foreign nations, is
to have as little political connection with them as possible. Europe has a set
of interests, which to us have none, or a very remote relation; it must
therefore be unwise in us to implicate ourselves in the vicissitudes of her
politics, or the combinations and collisions of her friendships or enmities. It
is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of
the foreign world. As far as we have already formed engagements, let them be
fulfilled with good faith. But it is unnecessary, and would be unwise, to
extend them." See his Address to the people, p. 35.


THIS is the advice of a man who thoroughly understood, and wisely pursued, the
true interest of his country. Of his successor we ought to have the same
opinion; for from above thirty years experience he has been known and proved to
be one of our most enlightened and steady friends.

FROM the foregoing observations, we clearly see what are the prophetic
characters of those European nations, which are represented by the ten toes of
Nebuchadnezzar's image and the ten horns of the apocalyptic beast. It is both
surprising and edifying to all studious christians to see how plainly and
exactly the picture is drawn by the inspired pen, and how rapidly events are
coming on, which bear so near a resemblance to the accomplishment of the
prophecies. It was foretold that an antichristian power would arise and rule
over the nations. This we have been used to interpret of the papal sovereignty;
the combination of wealth and power with a corrupt form of Christianity, to
enslave the bodies and souls of men; and doubtless the interpretation is just.
But as the Scripture assures us "there are many antichrists," so we should
extend our idea of this power to comprehend all that opposes and exalts
itself against the pure religion of Jesus Christ. It is very evident that the
French nation was one of the firmest supporters of the papal usurpation, and
that its former government answered to the prophetic character of one of those
"kings which gave their power and strength to the beast." Rev. xvii.13.
But it was also foretold, that there very kings, the same antichristian
powers, should "hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her
flesh and burn her with fire;" Verse 16.
and do we not see this remarkable prediction in a fair way of being fulfilled?
The French power is not the less antichristian for the revolution. It is, in
another shape, directly opposed to Christianity, as well to the corrupt forms
of it as to its purity. The kingdom of Satan, at present, appears to be divided
against itself; how then shall his kingdom stand?

WHEN the spirit of God foretells future events, he does not prescribe what
ought to be done, but relates beforehand what will be done. His foreseeing and
foretelling these events does not justify the means which are to be made use of
to bring them into effect. Wicked men may do many bad things, which may serve
to bring on what is foretold in the divinely inspired writings; and yet these
very men may be proper subjects of punishment for these actions. An instance of
this we have in the king of Assyria, to whom the prophet Isaiah makes this
memorable address; "O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger and the staff in their
hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and
will give him a charge to take the spoil and the prey and to tread them down as
the mire of the streets. Howbeit, he means not so, neither does his heart
think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.
Wherefore it shall come to pass, when the Lord has performed his whole work on
Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, I will punish the stout heart of the king of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks." Isaiah x.5 -- 7, 12.


WE must not then think it strange or unaccountable that those very men, who
are instrumental of bringing on revolutions, predicted in the word of God,
should themselves be guilty of the most atrocious crimes, and influenced by no
motives but those of violence, rapine and destruction; that they should cast
off all fear of God, and even deny his existence; for bad as they are, they may
be proper instruments, in the hand of God, to punish other bad men; to pull
down thrones of iniquity; to overturn monarchies which have been supported by
ambition and bloodshed; to destroy hierarchies which have been founded in pride
and priestcraft, and maintained by superstition and persecution. From what
other sort of persons could such revolutions be expected? People of sober and
rational principles would not be guilty of a violent attack on the established
religions of any nation; they would content themselves with enjoying the
liberty of their own consciences in peace. But such convulsions are to be
expected, only from those who are inflamed by the most malignant passions, and
influenced by the zeal of fanaticism, either in religion or politics, who have
a rage for conquest and plunder, and who set no bounds to their ambition and
fury.

WHEN the great designs which God has determined to accomplish, by the
instrumentality of such agents, shall be fulfilled; when things shall be
prepared, in the course of Providence, for the final destruction of all that
rule, authority and power, which, under whatever name or appearance, has
opposed itself against the kingdom of Christ; then shall be brought to pass
that great event, which is represented in the vision by the stone, smiting the
image on its feet, and reducing it to dust. Then all these kingdoms, these
powers, which have so disturbed and distressed the world, will vanish like
chaff before the wind, and the gentle, peaceful kingdom of the SON of David
will be gradually, but universally established.

THIS kingdom, my brethren, is set up among us, and we profess to be the
subjects of it. For its increase and enlargement, it is our duty to pray; and
one of the petitions in our Lord's admirable form of prayer is, "Thy kingdom
come." If we are sincere in uttering this prayer, we should accompany it with
our endeavors to promote it. This will be the best way of expressing our
gratitude to God for so distinguishing a favor.

IF it be asked, how shall we do any thing toward promoting the kingdom of God
in the world? I would answer, there are many ways in which we may do it, and
some persons may be able to do more than others; but there is one way in which
we may all do something, and perhaps this is the best way in which any of us
can promote it; I mean by our example. Let your light so shine before men that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father in Heaven. There is
nothing more forcible than example; like the magnet, it draws with a secret and
silent, yet powerful influence. It is often more effectual than positive
precepts and penal laws. Multitudes are swayed by it, who are not to be
governed by any other means. It is in every man's power to do good in this way;
and therefore it is every man's duty to set a good example, to let every person
with whom he is conversant, see that he is under the influence of Christian
principles and prospects; that he is sincerely serving God, and committing the
keeping of his soul to him in well-doing. It is impossible to conceive how much
good may be done by our example. It may do good after we are dead. The
remembrance of what we have been, and what we have done, may long outlive us,
and unborn posterity may be the better for it. In this respect, then, every
person has a degree of importance annexed to his character, and every person
ought to use that importance and that influence for the noblest purpose.

AND what nobler purpose can we serve than that for which Christ died? This
purpose is accomplishing, though by slow degrees; and Christianity, in its
whole progress, is marked with peace on earth and good will to men. Wherever it
is known and practiced, mankind are the better for it; but wherever it is
denied and rejected, they are the worse. Christianity, when rightly known and
regarded, has made men ashamed of many enormities which they before practiced.
It has abated the horrors of war, and introduced a spirit of philanthropy into
that destructive science. It has reformed the legal and judicial systems, and
taught less severity and milder methods of reclaiming offenders, than were
before known; it has, in some cases, mitigated, and in others extinguished, the
evil of servitude, and taught men a sense of equal freedom. It has shed its
genial influence on government, and taught us, in this highly favored land, how
to crush rebellions and establish constitutions, without violence or bloodshed.

HAPPY influence, blessed spirit of true religion! This is the way in which the
kingdoms of this world will be so subdued, as to become the kingdoms of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The conquests of the Son of God are effected not
by force of the sword, but by the secret energy of truth; not by might nor
power, but by the divine spirit. By such means, and by none else, will true
religion prevail, till the kingdom of Christ shall become universal.

MAY we ever be governed by the mild and peaceful dictates of the gospel! May
it go on from conquering to conquer, till it shall have eradicated war,
slavery, oppression, tyranny, superstition and vice; till antichristian power
and influence shall be abolished; till false religion, false philosophy and
despotic government shall be destroyed; till love and peace shall reign, and
truth and righteousness shall be established in the earth.

IF we believe the scriptures, we must expect, that these blessings will be
bestowed on the world, before the plan of Divine Providence shall be completed;
and therefore we may pray in faith, grounded on the divine promises, for the
accomplishment of these predictions. The prospect is in the highest degree
pleasant to all the sincere lovers of God and man. Whilst, therefore, we are
looking, praying and waiting for these glorious times, let us learn to
anticipate them, as far as we are able, by cultivating in our own minds and
conduct, those heavenly graces and virtues, which shall prove us the true
subjects of Christ, and prepare us for the universal reign of the Prince of
peace.

AMEN.

