THE CANNIBALS' PROGRESS; OR THE DREADFUL HORRORS OF FRENCH INVASION; AS
DISPLAYED BY THE REPUBLICAN OFFICERS AND SOLDIERS, IN THEIR Perfidy, Rapacity,
Ferociousness and Brutality, EXERCISED TOWARD THE INNOCENT INHABITANTS OF
GERMANY.

Translated from the German, by ANTHONY AUFRER, Esquire.

They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

PSALMS. They say -- Come, let us lay wait for blood -- We shall find all
precious substance; we shall fill our houses with spoil.

PROVERBS. ALBANY: PRINTED BY CHARLES R. AND GEORGE WEBSTER, AT THEIR
BOOKSTORE, In the White House, corner of State and Pearl-streets.

Constantly for Sale, at WEBSTER'S Bookstore, very low for Cash, or on a
reasonable credit.
The 1st, 2d, and 3d parts of Webster's G^^mmatical Institute of the English
Language -- Watts' and David's Psalms -- Dutch Church Psalms -- Watts' Hymns --
Shorter Catechism with Scripture Proofs -- Episcopal Catechism -- Heidelbergh
and Albathoma Catechisms -- Jachin and B^az, or a key to masonry, for young
beginners -- Ten Pound, School and Militia Acts -- Steuben's Exercise,
Instructions for the Cavalry, American Cookery, Laws of Congress laying a
direct Tax, Economy of Human Life, Christian Economy, Signs of the Times,
Prompter, Robinson Crusoe, bound or in sheets, by the 1000, gross, dozen or
single. Dwight's Geography for schools, do. do.

Morse's universal Geography -- do. Abridged; Pike's Arithmetic -- do.
Abridged; Morse's Gazetteer -- Guthrie's do.
Maps of the United States and of the several States -- Blanks and Blank Books
of all kinds -- Parchment, Wafers, Sealing-Wax, Pencils, Slates, etc. etc. etc.

Also, a large quantity of Writing-Paper.

INTRODUCTORY ADDRESS.
TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA.
THE Despots of France, who have enslaved and bruti^^d the people of that
country; who have overrun, plundered, ^^d subjugated, every republic in
Europe, and who have actually ^^^tered the state of Venice to the Emperor, just
as one of you would barter your plantation and your cattle; these unprincipled
^^^tart tyrants, after innumerable and unheard of injuries and in^^^ heaped on
America, have demanded of her a TRIBUTE, great^^^ in amount than all your taxes
for years! To this rapacious and ^^^solent demand you and your government have
bravely resolved to yield, and this resolution will most assuredly stimulate
them (...) revenge. Invasion, though difficult, is yet possible; and there^^^,
nothing can be more useful at this time, than to prove to you, from the example
of other invaded nations, the calamities, the ^^^rors, the hellish barbarities,
to which you, your parents, your ^^^ires, and your children, would be exposed,
should their savage ^^^des once get a footing, and, though but for a short
time, maintain their ground in your contry.

The detail which is here laid before you is selected from a much ^^^re copious
collection of facts, taken by the magistrates of Sua^^^, from the sufferers in
their several districts, and published at ^^^ttgard, under the sanction of
their authority; so that it may be depended upon, that the account is perfectly
conformable to truth, ^^d free from exaggeration; which is besides confirmed by
the so^^^n declaration of the translator, an independent English gentle^^n, who
puts his name to the work, and who calls on the parti^^^s of France to prove,
if they can, the falsehood or mi^-statement of a single fact.

Before you enter on this dreadful detail, it is necessary for you to be
informed, that all the attrocities it records were perpetrated (...) violation
of a solemn compact. The CIRCLE OF SUABIA, ^^o which the relation is confined)
entered into an agreement with ^^e French General, MOREAU, to pay him the
enormous sum of ^1, 767, 119 sterling, being about eight millions of dollars,
which (...) equal, I believe, ^o a whole year's revenue of the United States.
This sum could not, perhaps, have been raised in specie, in the whole Circle of
Suabia. Part was therefore so paid; the rest in shoes, cloth, linen, hats,
stockings, flour, wheat, oats, etc. etc. every particular article of which is
specified by Mr. Aufrer, making a detail of several pages, which I have
contented myself with stating the gross amount, in order to save room.

In consequence of this merciless tribute, which was paid to the last farthing,
the devastating ruffian signed an agreement, that the persons and property of
the inhabitants should be strictly respected; that the several districts should
remain under their respective form of government, and be in no-wise molested;
and also, that whatever the soldiers should purchase of individuals, should be
paid for in cash.

Besides this, several proclamations were issued by the faithless enemy,
assuring the inhabitants, that their religion, property, persons, laws, rights
and customs, should be respected and preserved inviolote. But, it will be seen,
that this was only used as a mask, under which the enemy might act with greater
certainty of success; and that they were guilty of crimes too atrocious to be
credited, were they not attested by men of the most indisputable honor and
veracity. The recollection of them will forever be impresseed upon the minds of
the men of Suabia, and the melancholy story will be handed down from generation
to generation, to the everlasting infamy of the persidious, impious, barbarous,
and brutal FRENCH.

CANNIBALS' PROGRESS.
ALTORF.
AT the close of July 1796, the French army, in two columns, drew nigh to the
Austrian territories in Suabia; and upon the third of August the advanced guard
of the right wing of the army of the Rhine and Moselle, commanded by brigadier
general Abat^cci, appeared before Altorf, the chief town of the Austrian
government; whilst the general of division Ferino (who before the revolution
had been a subaltern officer in the Imperial regiment of Bender) advanced at
the hea^ of the main body toward Aulenderf, and the column under the command
of the general of division Tarreau, marched toward the lake of Constance, and
spread itself over the adjacent country. The number of persons in the Austrian
territory, who considered the French as a sort of demigods, come to deliver
them from fancied ills, and from all the duties of a subject, and to procure
them the enjoyment of the most unbridled liberty and equality. was far from
inconsiderable; and the neighboring towns discovered symptoms of a disposition
but too favorable to the enemy, and prej^dicial to the imperial army. But the
appearance of the French in their own undisguised form, and the barba^ous
excesses whi^^ announced and accompani^d their intentions, by b^traying their
real views, caused a speedy change in the sentiments of the peasa^^try, in
which they were soon joined by the inhabitants of the towns.

Upon the 4th of August, Ferino required from the town of Altorf a present of
300 louis for himself and the officers of his staff, for which he promised his
future protection to that place and its inhabitants. In like manner Tarreau
extorted 125 louis from five small villages, whilst his worthy colleague
Stouhlen, the commissary at war, at the same time imposed the most exorbitant
contributions of provisions and clothing, the greater part of which he sold,
and then exacted the delivery of similar articles. Such oppressive conduct,
joined to the ravages of the soldiery and their inhuman treatment of the
inhabitants, so enraged the peasantry, that they took up arms to oppose force
by force, and some villagers actually attacked a detachment of 30 men belonging
to the brigade of general Rousseau, who had, during their march, committed a
variety of excesses, and of whom they killed five, wounded several, and put the
rest to flight. Upon the 8th of August this account was brought to that
general, who was then at Altorf, and who ordered the strictest search to be
made for the ringleaders, when six peasants were brought before him, and every
one trembled for their lives, and the safety of the village. But Rousseau acted
with more humanity and justice than perhaps any other general in the French
army would have done on such an occasion; for after confining the peasants
during several days, he reckoned as part of their punishment their constant
apprehension of approaching death, and discharged them, after requiring and
receiving an oblation of 200 louis, which were readily given to him, with great
admiration of his lenity.

The prudence and activity of the chief magistrate had saved Altorf from much
oppression, and its suture security was thought to be ensured by the appearance
of an Imperial detachment upon the 29th of September, which was received with
the greatest joy by the inhabitants, when their hopes were most cruelly
disappointed by a dreadful engagement upon the following day. For the Austrian
general Klingling, at the head of 2400 men, having taken a position in the
neighborhood of Altorf, and his advanced guard having repulsed a patrole of
sixty French Hussars, this skirmish gave time for the main body of the French
under general Ferino to advance, when the engagement soon became serious and
general, and the Austrains having planted their artillery upon a hill south of
the town, the French in three columns, to the number of 10, 000. pus^ed forward
in fi^nt of the battery and of a tremendous cannonade with such vigor, that
the Austrians were under the necessity of retreating. Still however they
continued to engage with great bravery in the streets of Altorf, upon the
neighboring heights, and within the walls of the Benedict ac abbey of
Weingarten, in hopes that they should be reinforced by general Mercantin
according to the plan which had been arranged. But such were the force and
situation of the French army that general Mercantin was not even able to inform
Klingling of the obstacles which prevented the intended junction; and to this
is to be attributed the ill success of the day.

The abbey suffered severely, both during and after the engagement; for 500 of
the enemy, burning with rage, and greedy of plunder, rushed into the convent,
rifled every coffer and every closet, ransacked every room from the garret to
the cellar, destroyed the greatest part of the furniture, beat and wounded the
priests and their attendants, robbed them of the money in their pockets, and
carried away all the plate, linen, cloth, leather, and other articles,
exclaiming, that it was their lawful booty. During these transactions, the same
were carrying on in the town of Altorf, and many houses were pillaged, even
during the engagament. But this was only a prelude to greater and continued
persecution; for during five long and sorrowful days were the town and convent
abandoned to the extortion of the commissaries and officers, and to the
excesses and rapacity of the soldiers. It seemed as if hell had opened and
discharged upon Altorf its most reprobate and execrable demons; for there is no
enormity, however horrible, that was not perpetrated during those painfully
memorable days.

The troops had no sooner quitted the abbey, than the commissaries appeared
there for the purpose of plundering in the name of the French republic, by
exacting the most unheard of contributions, which were extorted by force of
arms, and under menaces of conflagration and the sword. The whole stock of
corn, of different kinds, all the cattle, all the wine and spirits, and, in
short, all the necessaries of life, were ordered to be delivered, either at the
camp or into the hands of those privileged locusts. One loaded wagon succeeded
another, conveying away the plunder; and at last, the empty casks, sacks, and
common household furniture, were carried off, the horses were stolen out of the
fields, many of the articles were sold or wantonly destroyed, and others were
insisted upon in their stead. The fury of these banditti increased in
proportion as their booty was diminished by their numerous thefts; and under
pretense of searching for hidden treasure and concealed arms, they were guilty
of the most barbarous excesses. Whoever refused to part with the shirt upon his
back was considered as a conspirator against the French Republic, accused of
not being a good patriot, and cruelly beaten, or maimed with a broad sword; and
the prelate of the abbey was upon the point of being hanged whilst on his way
to entreat the clemency of the commander in chief, and was saved only by the
timely interference of an officer, who was more than commonly humane.

In the course of the first night after the engagement, some of the soldiers
purposely and wantonly set fire to two houses in the town, and would not permit
any attempts to be made to quench the flames. Several other houses were more
than half consumed by fire, in consequence of their scattering red hot coals
and burning candles about the rooms, under the beds and amongst every heap of
combustibles they could discover, so that nothing but the great vigilance and
exertions of the proprietors could have prevented the entire destruction of the
town.

When Altorf was reduced to such poverty as to afford no further temptation to
the pillagers, they spread themselves in bands over the surrounding country,
attacked the cottages and habitations of the peasantry (to whom they had
promised liberty, equality and affluence) rifled their pockets, destroyed their
furniture, tore up the floors of their rooms, cut open the mattresses and
feather beds, dug up the ground in the cellars and gardens, turned over even
the contents of the privies, in hopes of finding some concealed treasure,
returned six or seven times to the same houses, and never quitted them until
they had left nothing behind them but the bare walls. Oxen, cows and swine,
were either driven off, cut in pieces upon the spot; or left cruelly mutilated;
geese and poultry were carried away either dead or alive; and such provisions
as could not either be consumed or conveyed away were trodden under foot, or
mixed with sand, ashes and ordure; nor did these ruffians spare even the stores
of bread, which it is usual in that country to keep dried for consumption in
the winter. Many cellars were left half full of wine, which had run from the
casks they had wantonly staved; and the houses were long afterward impregnated
with the vapor of the brandy which they had poured about the rooms in the most
wasteful manner. They destroyed even the milk-pails and the appendages of the
dairy; and in many dwellings there was not even a bench or a chair unbroken.
The peasants were sometimes threatened with immediate death, and sometimes put
to extreme torture, in order to procure a discovery of money and other
valuables, which they were accused of having concealed; and many were severely
wounded and crippled, either by musket balls, blows with the but ends of the
firelocks, or strokes of the broad sword. The deepest and most apparent poverty
was not even a protection against them; for beggars were stripped of their
rags; and the number of those who were left without a shirt upon their back is
by no means inconsiderable. Gray hairs and lisping infancy, the sick, the
dying, and even women in labor, were alike exposed to the most inhuman
treatment, and were dragged from their beds, kicked about, and frequently
wounded, under pretense that they were the keepers of concealed treasure. The
women and children, who att^mpted to escape, were pursued, plundered, and
violated: and girls from ten to twelve years of age were deprived of their
innocence and health by these republican barbarians. Neither age nor infirmity,
nor yet the most offensive disorders, were able to set bounds to their more
than brutal lust; and ten, twelve, and even twenty of these depraved wretches
are known successively to have gratified their passions with the same object,
whilst their flameless colleagues either kept guard at the door, or held loaded
pistols and fixed bayonets at the head of the unhappy sufferer. Even in the
infirmary near Weingarten did these cannibals commit the same horrid crimes,
and outrage persons suffering under the most disgusting maladies, and such as
preclude them from communication with the rest of mankind. But delicacy forms
^o part of the character of the French republican; for at Heiden^^im they used
as spits for their meat the iron spikes upon which they had found the heads of
some lately executed malefactors, and made their fire with the wheels upon
which the corpses had been expo^ed. Even the bodies of young women, who had
expired under their barbarity, and of women who but a few hours before had been
in labor, were made use of to satiate the infernal lust of these monsters in
human shape, degraded far beneath the beasts of the field. With menaces of
slaughter, with blows, with unsheathe sabres, and with loaded muskets, they
enforced universal submission; and dreadful was their revenge when their
inclinations were resisted. Whilst they were plundering, destroying,
dishonouring, and committing such excesses as humanity ^udders to relate, at
the village of Ingoldingen, from the second to the fourth of October, six or
eight volunteers rushed into the louse of Jacob Frust, a farmer, whose wife
they ill treated, and th^^atened with instant death if she refused to consent
to their desires; but that resolute woman declaring that she had rather ^eet
death than dishonor, attacked the ruffians, and, assisted by ^er husband, who
fortunately came in, drove them ^^t of the house. Determined however to revenge
themselves, they set fire to the dwelling, which, with the furniture, granary,
and every thing but the cattle, became a prey to the flames. Three other houses
met a similar fate, and the damages fustained by this and an adjoining village
amounted in contributions and in losses by plunder and conflagration, to the
sum of 44, 824 florins, or above L. 4, 000 sterling.

Not a trace of decency, not the least regard to religion and its customs,
appeared in the conduct of the French soldiery. In the churches they broke open
the pyx, trampled the host under foot, carried away the communion plate and the
robes of the priests, destroyed the crucifixes and other images, and treated
with ignominy every thing that is deemed holy by the catholic, and respected by
the well meaning man of every religion. In one of the villages, where the
church was stripped of its ornaments, and the minister completely pillaged,
they placed upon the altar the figure of Satan, which they had taken from the
representation of the Redeemer tempted in the desert; and in another village
they placed a crucifix before the fire, and amidst shouts of most indecent
mirth, turned it round like meat roasting upon a spit, whilst the gray headed
minister of the parish, at the venerable age of eighty-three, was not only
plundered and insulted, but severely beaten, as a reward for the hospitality
with which he had received them. And indeed it ought not to be forgotten, that,
with very few exceptions, the most brutal actions and the greatest excesses
were committed in the house of those, who, by anticipation of their wishes, or
promptitude in execution of their orders, endeavored to disarm their ferocity,
and secure protection and tranquillity.

It was not until the fifth of October that this district was relieved from the
Republican troops, and from the tribe of Jews, spies, and traitorous informers,
the refuse of Suabia, who had followed the French army, and greatly contri^med
to increase the distresses of the people. Upon the 6th of October, the
Imperialists were welcomed with a joy as sincere and universal as was the
detestation of the Republicans and their principles.

The damages sustained by the Abbey of Weingarten, by pillage and requisitions,
amounted to 257, 082 florins; those incurred by the town of Altorf, to 93, 229
florins; and the whole amount of damages sustained by this district was 500,
000 florins, or upwards of 45, 000 l. sterling.

PFULLENDORF.
Upon the second of August 1796, a division of the column under the orders of
general Ferino marched through this village, when some chasseurs belonging to
the advanced guard entered a shop, and forcibly took silk handkerchiefs and
other goods to the value of 100 florins, for which they offered some assignats
in payment; but upon the shopkeeper refusing to take such useless paper, they
struck at him with their sabres, and left the shop with shouts of laughter and
torrents of abuse. Five others entered the house of one of the magistrates,
loudly asking for wine and victuals, with which they were speedily and amply
served, and for which they testified their gratitude by robbing their
entertainer of his watch and money. The same night they threatened an
inhabitant with death for telling an officer who wanted to put his carriage
into his barn, that there was no room for it; and his life was with difficulty
saved by a magistrate, who had him conveyed to the town prison, (as a place of
safety for the enemy) under promise that he should be punished.

In the neighboring village of Neubronn, belonging to the prince of
Frustenberg, six riflemen imposed a contribution of 400 florins, or about 27 l.
sterling, pillaged several houses, and so ill treated such as endeavored to
protect their property, and to resist the insults offered to their wives and
daughters, that many honest and industrious laborers were reduced to the
greatest distress.

If the rough and barbarous manner in which these armed ruffians extorted what
they wanted excited terror and detestation, their intemperance gave rise to an
equal degree of astonishment; for two Frenchmen would devour at a meal as much
as would serve three hard working Germans during three or four days; and
between the hours of two and nine, they would frequently have three complete
meals, which they generally moistened with whole rivers of wine, plentifully
sweetened with sugar, and usually strengthened with cherry brandy.

Pfullendorf and the adjacent villages, suffered however, but little, in
comparison with other places, until the enemy began to retreat, when the French
not only carried away or destroyed all the forage and corn they could find, but
so entirely demolished a small hamlet in the neighborhood, by breaking the
windows, forcing open the doors, and destroying all the beds and other
furniture in the houses, as to oblige the owners to have recourse to their
neighbors for lodging and subsistence. After the engagements at Biberach, upon
the 2d of October, which was very destructive on both sides, without altering
the situation of affairs, the French main hospital was removed to Pfullendorf.
The enormity of the requisitions for this hospital was equalled only by the
waste and the frauds commmitted by the officiers de sante (the physicians and
surgeons) who publicly sold the sugar, and were more occupied in bargaining for
the sale of such other articles as they had extorted, than busied in attending
to the wants of the sick.

Upon the fifth of October, general Moreau himself fixed his head quarters at
Pfullendorf, and was followed by his whole army, which was distributed about
the country, and, like the preceding hordes, rendered itself forever infamous
by the gratification of every savage passion, the commission of every sort of
excess, and the practice of every species of extortion. A brave fellow, who had
assisted in driving some of the plunderers out of the village he inhabited, was
af^erwards recognized and shot* as were two farmers in another village, whilst
endeavoring to prevent the doors from b^ing forced open. A servant at the
hospital of Pfullendorf, who served as guide to a dragoon, was shot by the
blood thirsty villain without any provocation, and so grievously wounded, that
he shortly after expired. Two laborers and a shoemaker were murdered in
another place by some of the straggling soldiers, for endeavoring to prevent
some attrocious action, and for threatening to ring the alarm bell. A poor
woman, 60 years of age, who was gleaning in a field, was forcibly thrown down
by one of the Republican barbarians, and menaced with death if she did not
yield to his brutal desires, whilst another stood with his bayonet at the
breast of her aged husband, and forced him to be a witness of his wife's
dishonor. A church was broken open and plundered, and the minister's house
completely rifled, under the eyes of general Moreau himself, who to the
lamentations of the sufferer, contemptuously replied, "I cannot prevent it" --
and quietly betook himself to his favorite cherry brandy, in which he indulged
himself to excess, like the meanest of his soldiers.

Amongst the commissaries, who pillaged in the name of the Republic, one
Nicolas particularly distinguished himself; for having suddenly required, as
absolutely necessary for the army, the delivery of such an immense quantity of
hay and corn as he was told, could not possibly be procured in so short a time
as he had mentioned, he made no scruple of declaring, that if a weighty purse
were offered to him for his own private use, he would say nothing more about
the requisition; and having cheated a miller in the weight of the flour
delivered by him, he extorted from him upwards of 13 louis, as a compensation
for the pretended deficiency. Out of the many instances of fraud committed by
the commissaries, we will mention one, which in several respects is not a
little characteristic. One evening two of those harpies required the delivery
of 3000 pounds weight of beef upon the following morning; but the butcher
suspecting it to be a scheme to extort money, applied to an officer upon the
staff, who immediately agreed in opinion with the butchers, and gave them a
^ote to the commanding officer, who expressed the same opinion, but added, "It
is not in my power to protect you against these blood-suckers, and I must
therefore advise you to comply with their demands." They followed his advice,
were employed the whole night in slaughtering their beasts, and were told the
next day that the meat was not wanted.

WALDSEE.
Before the armies of the French republic overran, vexed, and desolated the
Circle of Suabia, the inhabitants of the little town of Waldsee were enabled to
form a correct judgment of the character of the republican troops, from the
conduct of the French prisoners who had been originally quartered there between
the 21st of December 1795 and 6th of July 1796, so that they heard of the
approach of this lawless horde with more apprehensions than the inhabitants of
most other places. The French behaved more like conquerors than prisoners, not
only toward the inhabitants, but toward the Austrian officers and soldiers;
and when they heard that the whole French army had crossed the Rhine, their
outrageous joy knew no bounds. They insulted the inhabitants in the grossest
terms, repaid the kindnesses they had received with insolence, and even with
blows; began to pillage the houses of the peasantry, robbed the gardens round
the town, laid waste the corn fields, endeavored forcibly to dishonor women
and children, and by numerous excesses abused the kind and noble manner in
which they had been treated by the Austrians. Several of the officers deceived
the vigilance of the garrison, and making excursions to the neighboring free
Imperial towns of Ravensburg and Biberach, reconnoitred the country, and found
many who, either out of interest or from attachment to the emissaries of
liberty and equality, degraded themselves by carrying on a traitorous
correspondence with the enemy, and forwarding the dispatches of the prisoners
to the Directory, so that it is no longer to be wondered at that the leader of
the Republican armies should possess such a circumstantial knowledge of every
district through which he was to pass.

Upon the 28th of July the Imperial general Frolich, at the head of his corpse,
quitted Waldsee, where he had arrived upon the preceding day, and being too
weak successfully to contend with the superior numbers under the command of
general Ferino, withdrew by Wurzach toward the Danube. He was followed by the
emigrant legion amounting to nine or ten thousand men, who upon the second of
August were at so short a distance from Waldsee, that Ferino's advanced guard
had pushed within a mile and a half of their rear. Upon the following day a
detachment of French infantry entered the town, and whilst their commanding
officer was endeavoring to persuade the magistrates that the inhabitants
should enjoy the most perfect security both in person and property, his
soldiers forcibly entered the shops and carried away what they thought proper.
The officer indeed ordered the goods to be restored, and appointed a
non-commissioned officer to execute his commands; but only a few trifling
articles were returned, and the non-commissioned officer publicly divided the
rest of the spoil amongst his comrades, not failing to take due care of
himself. Reeling with wine, and loaded with plunder, they quitted Waldsee in
the evening, and were next morning succeeded by another detachment, five of
whom hastened to a chapel, which they broke open and pillaged of the communion
plate; after which they proceeded to a neighboring village, plundered several
houses, and fired 15 times at one Beckhinger, a miller, who defended his
property like a hero, and who, without being himself wounded, shot one of the
robbers dead upon the spot, broke the leg of another, and put the rest to
flight. In the mean time, those in the town revelled in abundance; took the
watches from the pockets of the inhabitants, and under pretense of paying in
specie for what they wanted, forced the tradesmen to open their shops, took
what articles they chose, and paid for them in mandats and assignats.

Upon the 7th of August, the advanced guard of the column commanded by general
Ferino, amounting to 4, 000 men, under the orders of general Abbatu^ci, entered
Waldsee, which was now obliged to provide, not only for this army, but also the
numerous out-posts beyond the town. A contribution of 15, 000 pounds weight of
bread, and 4, 000 bottles of wine commenced the list of requisitions which
succeeded each other almost without intermission, and were rendered the more
oppressive from the danger which: very convoy of corn and cattle incurred from
the enemy; for whatever fell into the hands of the out posts, though destined for
the supply of the army, became a prey to those ungovernable banditti: the
peasantry, going to the town, were ^obbed of their shoes, stockings, and
wearing apparel; and even the wagons and horses that brought wine and
provisions for the troops were seized and sent away, and the owners were
frequently detained, and forced to follow the army during several days, and
even weeks, until they could purchase their liberty with money. Not satisfied
with the common fare of the country, these pretended champions of liberty and
equality, demanded large suppl^^s of fish, butter, cheese and fruit, after
every meal, and if they were not instantly produced, they fell upon the
landlord and servants, beat them, and threatened them with death, and finished
by plundering the kitchen, pantry and cellars, and such was their wilful waste
of fodder, that in this single lay several farmers were deprived of their whole
provision for ^^e winter.

Upon the 8th of August, this unbridled horde quitted Waldsee, and Ferino
himself appeared there at the head of the main body of the army, but was
preceded by the adjutant general Berthold, who came to prepare quarters for the
staff, and who tendered himself odious by his unbounded insolence and rapacity.
With menacing gestures and the most horrid oaths he threatened ^o cleave with
his sabre the head of the burgomaster, merely because he had conducted him to a
house not suited to his refined ^aste, although it was by far the best in the
place, nor was he ^acified until he had been complimented with a present of 15
^^uis, which his servant, a wretch with the countenance and demeanor of a
galley slave, negociated for him without the least delicacy. The other
officers, without scruple, extorted breeches, ^hoes, boots, stockings, linen,
and other necessaries; and Pring, the commandant of the town, declared, that he
would make no attempt at discipline until he and his servant had been newly
clothed. Others exacted a large quantity of dishes, glasses, kitchen
furniture, and provisions for their respective corpse in the neighborhood of
the town, but offered to relinquish the articles acquired for a certain
compensation in louis or dollars.

Notwithstanding the maintenance of this rapacious soldiery, and of their
numerous cavalry* far surpassed the ability of this small town, the
commissaries ordered 300 bushels of oats to (...) carried away, so that the
whole store was exhausted before (...) army had begun to move. Smiths,
saddlers, and wheelrights were forced to work hard without a recompense; and
amongst the innumerable articles put in a state of requisition, was even a
quantity of greese for wheels

Upon the 10th of August, Ferino and his licentious host began to m^ve
forwards; but not until the infirmary had been stripped of all the beds,
mattresses, and linen, nor until the governor of the infirmary, and all the
sick and poor under his care had been plundered of every thing they possessed.
Thenceforward, until the retreat, the town was dail^ obliged to provide for 20,
50, and frequently for 100 men, who with horses and baggage wagons passed
through with their spoil, and required to be forwarded to the consi^es of
France. The flying hospitals also became another sco^^ge and source of
oppression to the town of Waldsee, from the quan^^ty of drugs, wine, vinegar,
shirts, cloth, and lint, which were constantly put in requisition, and by which
the sick and wounded soldiers were but little benefitted; for the officers of
health, who were as shameless cheats as the commissaries sold the greatest part
of the wine, caused shirts for themselves and shifts for their wives and
mistresses to be made out of the cloth, and frequently took money instead of
the drugs most requisite, suffe^ing the sick and wounded to recover as they
could. They even carried their inhumanity to their own countrymen so far, that
during a day's halt at Waldsee, the wounded were not once taken out of the
wagons, but were forced to remain there throughout the day, unattended, and
exposed to the burning heat of the sun.

At length, upon the 28th of September, the advanced guard of Ferino's column
again marched into Waldsee, and was quickly succeeded by the main body of the
army. The houses were now crowded with soldiers, who committed every species of
excess, and were even more fierce and malicious than before. Under pretense
that they had been robbed of their arms or baggage, they extorted from the
innocent landlords and servants compensations in money, ill treated such as did
not instantly comply, ca^ried away all the furniture that was portable, want
only destroyed the corn in the barns and fields, rifled and wholly stripped
several habitations, and displayed the extreme of their infernal wickedness and
malevolence by pi^ng up all the bread they could find, and setting it on fire,
although they know that the poor ^^ined inhabitants were in the gre^test want
of that most necessary article of support. The fem^le ^ex was neither so
publicly nor so generally dishonored here as in many other places: and they
who were unfortunate enough to be violated, endeavored to conceal their
disgrace, but to no effect; for it discovered itself in consequence of the
disgusting maladies which soon broke out, and with which they had been infected
by these ruffians.

It was useless to complain to the general officers of the unreasonable demands
of the commissaries and the excesses of the soldiery, for their answer was,
"Give them what they ask for, and their extortions must necessarily terminate."
And thus were they constrained to see all the provision of corn taken from the
granary of the infirmary, and many of the inhabitants robbed of their whole
stock of fodder for the winter. At midnight the whole army unexpectedly began
to move, and commenced their march with burning torches and lighted endless in
their hands; their retreat was covered by general Jordis, and the next morning
not a Frenchman was to be seen in or near the town of Waldsee; though upon
their march a band of chasseurs straggled into an outlying hamlet, and demanded
the immediate payment of 12 louis as a contribution; but the peasantry not
producing it so speedily as was expected, the banditti rushed into their
houses, destroyed every thing too bulky to be carried off, and rolling the
winter stock of bread in filth and ordure, with malicious and satan-like shouts
of laughter, offered it to the unfortunate and helpless laborers. When about
10 l. sterling had been collected with much difficulty, and under continual
dread of being massacred, these unhappy people were under the necessity of
using the most humiliating entreaties to their plunderers to accept this
sacrifice, and do them no further injury.

The damages incurred by the inhabitants of Waldsee, in consequence of this
fraternal visit from the great nation, amounted to 45,000 florins, or upwards
of 4,000 l. sterling.

MARKDORF. A small town in Suabia, in the bishopric of Constance.
When the French appeared upon the banks of the lake of Constance, their
leaders affected to be surprised that people should be afraid of them, and that
many should desert the country: "For," said they, "we are only come to offer
peace to the Emperor, and not to violate either your religion, your customs,
your persons, or your property, all which shall be most carefully respected and
preserved." This assurance was publicly given to the deputies from ^everal
towns and villages by general Tarreau, who added, "that it was his particular
object and business to maintain the severest discipline and the most exact
order in his army." Tranquilized by this serious declaration the deputies
returned home, and upon the third of August, at noonday, the French, to the
number of 6000 men, entered Markdorf and the neighboring hamlets, and were
entertained as liberally as possible by the inhabitants. But they soon began to
break open doors and commit thefts, even under the eyes of the staff officers,
and some of the horde spread themselves over the surrounding country, where
these ^elf-termed protectors of the peasantry tore the clothes from the backs,
and the shoes and stockings from the feet and legs of the poor cottagers and
farmers who offered them provisions, broke open their cellars, ri^^ed their
closets and coffers, carried away all the valuable articles they could find,
destroyed the household furniture, and cruelly beat and wounded such as made a
show of defending their property. At length three volunteers were arrested for
having robbed a public messenger upon the highway of two watches and his money,
and afterward wounded him in the head with a bayonet, because he complained of
their ill usage. A court martial immediately passed sentence of death upon one
of the malefactors, and condemned the others to the galleys, which latter part
of the sentence ^arreau converted into punishment by death; but this was only
done to deceive the people by a semblance of justice and discipline: for not
withstanding the preparations for their execution, the thieves were not hanged,
but were very soon afterward discharged.

No man knew better than Tarreau how to reap where he had not sown, and no
sooner was he arrived at the castle of Markdorf than he began to demean himself
like a madman, furiously complaining that bread had not been purposely baked
for his army, although he knew that it was impossible to prepare such a
quantity upon such short notice, and that the troops had been so liberally
treated with bread and wine upon their arrival. "If you don't instantly provide
bread enough," said he with a thundering voice, "I will give orders to my whole
brigade to fal^ on and plunder you." The commissary Stouhlen, one of the most
worthless men in the army, and for that reason the confidential favorite of
Tarreau, not only spoke in the same tone, ^out immediately issued a
requisition, by which 18,000 pounds weight of bread were ordered to be baked
before nine o'clock at night, under the penalty of the town being given up to
be plundered by the soldiers. The chief magistrate not aware that this was only
a premiditated scheme to raise money, was full of anxiety for the town, well
knowing that such a provision could not possibly be made in so short a time;
but he was soon relieved from his distress by a visit from Labrousse, one of
Tarreau's ^ides-de-camp, and his faithful colleague in the arts of extortion,
who advised him to pacify the general by a present of two gold watches. "But,"
added he, "you must not hint that I gave you this advice, for the general is a
man of the most delicate feelings, and the nicest honor." Two handsome gold
watches were immediately procured, and offered to Tarreau, whose fury abated,
and whose brow was smoothed; whilst Stouhlen tore in pieces the requisition for
the 18,000 pounds of bread. and said, "Let them bake what they can" -- and so
ended the farce.

The column soon afterward proceeded on its march; but two days afterward
Stouhlen sent a demand for 9,000 pounds weight of bread, which were delivered
to him, and Markdorf was relieved from farther contributions, until the close
of September, though it still suffered much from the exactions and thefts
committed by the troops, who were continually marching to and fro.

The retreat at length took place, and upon the 22d of September the head
quarters were fixed at Hofen, in the neighborhood of Markdorf, which, with the
adjoining villages, now experienced every sort of oppression. Two of the
commissaries, established at different places near Markdorf, at the same time
and with similar menaces, required from that town the most exorbitant supplies;
so that it was exposed to the merciless attacks of those harpies, without a
possibility of redress, and requisition succeeded requisition. The deputy
commissaries also visited the adjacent country with their exactions, and
obliged the peasants either to comply with their demands, or to purchase their
exemption with gold. "We coin requisitions like money," said the commissary
Nonette, who, like his brethem, readily and publicly desisted from levying
contributions in return for a present to himself; and the town of Markdorf was
forced to pay him in cash the value of 20 tons of hay and of 25 sacks of oats,
in order to prevent the threatened general pillage by the soldiery; nor could
the execution of a similar menace from another commissary be averted but by a
well-timed present to his secretary.

Upon, the morning of the fifth of October, Tarreau arrived at Markdorf with
his staff, and finding that his head quarters had been established at the inn,
he galloped up to the Castle, and vehemently demanding why it had not been
prepared for his reception, added, speaking to the burgomaster, But I know you
had much rather entertain the Imperialists; here in the Castle, however, will I
lodge, and if in the course of two hours five beds are not prepared for me and
my staff, you shall receive 25 lashes, to be repeated every hour, until my
orders are obeyed. The beds were accordingly prepared; but Tarreau's wrath was
not appeased; and it approached almost to madness, when late at night he
received an order for the army to continue its retreat early the next morning.
The people of Markdorf passed this whole night in the greatest anxiety; for
Tarreau had more than ten times threatened to set fire to the town in four
different places, and his ungovernable rage gave them good reason to apprehend
the worst; they were, however, fortunate enough to escape the conflagration,
and the next morning the barbarian marched away with his division, followed by
the execrations of the whole country, who upon the same day joyfully received
the Austrians as their deliverers from the iron yoke which had been imposed by
these champions in the cause of liberty and equality. Their visitations cost
the inhabitants of Markdorf near 40,000 florins, or about L 3,600 sterling; a
large sum, considering that the town did not contain more than 350 heads of
families, few of whom were in a state of affluence, and that they had, during
some years, been very unsuccessful in the culture and produce of their
vineyards.

It ought not to be forgotten, that in a hamlet near the town, ten brutal
French soldiers alternately violated the chastity of a woman, who hourly
expected to be taken in labor, and whose husband was forcibly made a witness
of their barbarity. An officer too, whose assistance had been requested by the
neighbors, upon entering the house, was so far from reproving the soldiers,
that -- horrible to relate! -- he immediately followed their example, and added
to the injuries already offered to the expiring woman. In another village, a
woman who had only borne a child about eight days, was dishonored and treated
with such violence that her recovery was extremely doubtful, and when, in
despair, she fled from them in her shift, and with her infant in her arms, she
was pursued by the loose jokes and malign shouts of these inhuman sons of
Satan, over whose other atrocious actions in this district it is now time to
throw a veil.

MEERSBURG. A town upon the banks of the Lake of Constance, in the circle of
Suabia, and the residence of the prince-bishop of Constance.
Advice having been received at this town upon the 18th of September, that the
division of the French army under general Tarreau, was retreating through that
part of Suabia, the gates of the town were ordered to be shut; and, according
to the ^^nor of a French proclamation of the 18th of August, they were not to
be opened to any of the officers and soldiers, except to such as had their
route made out and signed by the officers upon the staff. Notwithstanding this
precaution the inns were soon filled with French soldiers, and the stables were
crowded with horses they had stolen upon the march; and such as could not gain
admittance were amply provided with meat and drink at the gates of the town.
Three days afterward, Tarreau, who probably had long wished for an oblation
from Meersburg, sent the following despotic and alarming note to the
magistrates; "I command you to appear at my headquarters at Yssni, in the
course of twenty four hours." The Baron de Reichlin and two other respectable
magistrates forthwith repaired to Yssni, and were received by the aid-de camp
Labrouse, who reeling about half naked, greeted them in a thundering voice with
"come in scoundrels as you are; your town shall speedily be reduced to ashes,
and yourselves exalted upon a gibbet;" and then placing a guard over them, and
reassuring them, "that the sun should early the next morning light them on
their way to the gallows," he staggered into the apartment of Tarreau. The
deputies at length discovered that their gaolers thir^ (...) for the blood of
the governor of Meersburg, who had caused the gates to be shut, as above
related, and who would certainly have fallen a sacrifice to their rage, if he
had not hastily retired into Switzerland. Upon examination of the deputies the
next morning, and upon their declaration that the gates had been ^^ut by order
of the governor, Labrouse ordered two carriages to be prepared, and immediately
drove with them, escorted by twenty hussars, and preceded by a hangman to
Meersburg, when such members of the regency as had not escaped were summoned
and treated with the same insolence and menances as the deputies had been
subject to upon the preceding evening. Fire and sword gallows and musket ball,
thundered incessantly from the lips of the tyrant, and he swore that the house
of the governor should instantly be reduced to ruins. At length after much
altercation Labrousse detained two of the chief officers of state as hostages,
and departed with them for headquarters, where, whilst the people of the town
anxiously awaited the catastrophe, this apparently tragical story terminated in
peaceful robbery. General Tarreau had an inclination for, and was complimented
with a handsome carriage and two fine horses belonging to one of the hostages,
which, with a weighty purse of gold, sacrificed to him and his assistant
Labrousse completed the expiation, though not until the friendship of the
general's valet de chamber and cook had been purchased at the price of five
louis each: for this knot of thieves was so closely united that it was not safe
to pass any of them unnoticed. Tarreau demanded also and received six horses
from the stables of the prince bishop of Constance, and the commissary Didier
imposed upon the town of Meersburg the most exorbitant contributions, which he
afterward withdrew upon receiving a present of sixty louis and two fine
horses. These are some of the many base actions of the French at Meersburg,
which though not generally plundered, was exposed to much robbery and vexation;
for some of the French, with an officer at their head forcibly entered a shop,
and carried off goods to the value of seventy pounds sterling; another party
robbed a watchmaker of four gold and two silver watches; and several petty
thefts were committed both by the officers and soldiers.

BREMEN, A village in Suabia, in the county of Friedberg.
Humanity shudders at the recollection of the cruelties and enormities
committed by the French in many parts of the county of Friedberg, and
particularly at the village of Bremen, which, upon the 6th of October, in the
evening, was beset by a band of robbers, under the denomination of Republican
soldiers, who, mad with wine, rushed into the houses with the most hedious
war-hoop and had immediate recourse to their well known system of plunder. All
the coffers and closets were broken open and rifled -- all the household
furniture was destroyed -- the peasants were required, with loaded pistols at
their breasts, to deliver up their money -- the beds and bedding were unripped
and examined -- and under pretense of searching for concealed treasure, not
only the floors of the rooms were torn up, but even infants were vehemently
dragged from their cradles, and many families were deprived of nearly all their
property. But still more terrible to these peaceable and innocent country
people was the infernal manner in which the female sex was treated by th^s^
vill^^^^ In the whole village there was neither maiden, wife* nor widow, who
was not forcibly and repeatedly dishonored; and such was the depravity of
these miscreants, that eight, ten, and frequently more than that number,
successively insulted the same unfortunate victim, with the accomplishment of
their brutral purposes. Neither early youth, nor hoary headed age, nor
deformity, nor yet the most offensive disorders, could abate the fury of their
passions; and not only husbands, but fathers, and -- to fill up the measures of
their iniquity -- even little children, were made to be witnesses of these
abominable outrages. One woman, who, with her husband, had struggled
ineffectually against the attempts of six of these monsters, was dragged into
the fields, over hedges and ditches, repeatedly dishonored, and left half dead
upon the ground, whilst her husband was cruelly ^aimed with their sabres, and
even her sucking infant was treated with the greatest inhumanity. Others of the
female sex, both here and in the adjacent villages, were fastened to trees, and
violated by succeeding numbers.

Not satisfied with these excesses, they proceeded to rifle the churches, and,
with the most blasphemous expressions, destroyed the altars, polluted the
communion table with their ordure, pulled down and reviled the image of our
Savior, trampled the host under foot, and then threw it to the dogs.

General Courbe levied a contribution of 20 louis upon the poor inhabitants of
the small hamlet of Brunweiler, under a solemn promise that they should not be
plundered or molested; but the money was scarcely paid, before a party of his
soldiers arrived, and completely ruined them.

A party of grenadiers came to the house of a farmer and innkeeper in another
village, and after being liberally supplied with provisions, suddenly attacked
the master of the house calling out in the language of highwaymen, "Your money
or your life;" and when they had secured all the money he had about him, they
forcibly threw him upon the ground and beat him, broke open and plundered all
his chests and coffers, and were upon the point of departing with their booty,
when they were joined by nine dragoons, who, after indulging themselves with
the contents of the cellar, discharged th^^e muskets, as a signal to their
distant comrades, that they had discovered some secret treasure. In less than a
quarter of an hour they were reinforced by two hundred men, who presently
consumed or destroyed all the wine, bread, and provisions in the house, and
terminated their heroic exploits by breaking all the glass and earthen ware,
destroying the empty casks, and threatening to set fire to the premises.

WEHR, A village in Austrian Suabia.
This place was visited, upon the 18th of July 1796, by four mounted artillery
men in ragged uniforms, who, in the style of a requisition, demanded 66 sacks
of oats, and three wagon loads of hay, which were no sooner delivered to them,
than they conveyed them to a neighboring town, and there sold them for ready
money.

In the same month the environs were cursed with the presence of general Tuncq,
those infamy is recorded in the annals of La Vendee, and who was assisted in
his crimes by his aid-de-camp Schulz, the son of a petty innkeeper at
Huninguen. This general chose, as articles of plunder, wood and flax, and
obliged the Baron de Schonaw, chief proprietor of Wehr, to cut down and
deliver, in the course of five days 372 oaks and other trees, which he floated
down the Rhine into Switzerland, where he had previously fixed an agent, who
sold the wood, and divided the spoil with his employer. When the chiefs of
several villages represented to him the impossibility of furnishing what he
required, he ordered them to be beaten, and chained together, and thrown into
prison like common malefactors. It is true, that upon complaint to the
Directory, Tuncq was brought to a court martial and degraded, and that his
aid-de-camp found it prudent to retreat with part of his booty; but no
recompense was made to those whom he had injured and plundered, and other
privileged thieves, under the denomination of commissaries and agents, appeared
in their room, and were sanctioned in their numerous oppressions.

Upon the 20th of October, in the afternoon, the rear guard (in every respect
the refuse) of the army of the Rhine and Moselle appeared at Wehr, and encamped
under the walls of the castle. The women and children now fled up the country
with part of their cattle and effects, and took refuge in a wood; but the
family in the castle and all the men remained at home, with the hope of in some
degree, preventing the evils they so justly dreaded. The first set of banditti
began their operations by plundering the villages, and in the course of three
hours conveyed to their camp 120 swine, 62 sheep, 36 calves, a great quantity
of poultry, and upwards of 1200 sheaves of wheat; and finished by tearing the
shoes from off the feet of the inhabitants. The next visit was from a party of
hussars headed by a colonel Marulat who appeared late in the evening, drank all
the wine and spirits in the village of Wehr, and misused those who were not
able to afford them any; and at midnight, when all was quiet, 600 volunteers,
with bayonets fixed, appeared before the castle, and loudly called for 3*600
bottles of wine, at the same time threatening to set fire to the village and
castle if their demand was not immediately complied with. Remonstrance was vain
and useless; and after the officers and men had familiarly drank to the
greatest excess, they carried away the remainder of their booty.

Amongst the innumerable acts of inhumanity committed during this dreadful
night, the following deserves to be particularly recorded: -- Five soldiers
having forced open the door of a house, in which lay a poor woman who had been
taken in labor about twelve hours before, they, with drawn swords at the
breast of the still suffering woman, demanded her money, and upon being told
that she had none, ransacked the dwelling and outhouses, and carried away all
the furniture, wearing apparel, swine, and poultry they could find, and at
departing, one of them by way of humanity, threw a dead fowl at the head of the
poor sufferer, and told her she might make herself some broth with it The
reader will have observed with horror many instances of the cruelty of the
French toward lying-in women: and he will ^^udder at hearing, that the
Republicans frequently drowned the children which were borne to them by their
wives or concubines, during their march through Franconia. This is not a
^abulous report, but a real and well-attested fact. See The conduct of the
French in Franconia, published in 1796, by the Count of S^den.
.

The retreat of the French through this district was marked by similar
instances of rapine and brutality. In one village they violated and so
barbarously abused a girl about 15 years of age, that in three days she was a
corpse. In the same village they broke into the house of a shopkeeper who was
recovering from a severe illness, cut his bedding in pieces, scattered the
feathers about the premises, rifled the house and shop, and having discovered
in the garden a chest full of goods which had been deposited there for
security, carried off with the rest of their ^ooty. They not only plundered
another house, but with the malevolence of evil spirits, mixed together all the
wheat^orn, oats, and rye they could find, and strewed them over the apartments.
The village was completely pillaged and ^^ined, the utensils necessary for the
vineyard were thrown into the Rhine, the churches were plundered, the pyx
broken to pieces, and the consecrated host trampled under foot. In the environs
of the camp the corpses of several women were found, who had been violated and
abused even unto death; and however incredible it may appear it is a fact, that
the monsters satisfied their brutal appetites with corpses, and with some
unhappy victims in the agonies of death.

RADOLF-ZELL. A town in Austrian Suabia, near the Inferior Lake of Constance,
containing about 1,800 souls.
The attachment testified by the greatest part of the inhabitants of Suabia,
and especially by those of the Austrian territories in that circle, to their
governors and constitution, amidst the successes of the enemy, was frequently
attended by very considerable danger, and was either ridiculed or murmured at
by the French, who called them German beasts, unworthy of the good fortune,
which, like missionaries from hell, they offered them, with the dagger in one
hand and the firebrand in the other. But neither menaces nor insults could
weaken their fidelity and loyalty, and it is worthy of remark, that the
incursion of the French into the empire not only put an end to every wish to
revolutionize, but contributed to unite the sovereign and the people much more
closely than before. Several towns, and Radolf-Zell in particular, suffered
much for their distinguished attachment to their sovereign and constitution:
and upon the retreat of Tarreau, the last mentioned town was saved from
threatened conflagration, by a present of two fine horses to the general, and
by supplying him and his army with an abundance of the most costly provisions
that could be procured; after which the soldiers destroyed the vineyards, the
produce of which was upon the point of being gathered, cut down the fruit
trees, in order the more easily to pluck the fruit, and broke down the hedges
and fences of the gardens. In the neighboring villages they stole all the
horses, cattle, sheep, and swine, as well as all the stock of wine in the
cellars, and the store of corn in the granaries and barns. The female sex here
also met with the most barbarous usage, the consequences of which were fatal to
many of them.

ENGELWIES, DURBHEIM, and BARENTHAL. Three villages in Suabia.
In this district the French were guilty of the greatest excesses during the
retreat; and regardless of the conditions in the convention which had been
solemnly agreed upon, they treated the peasantry and villagers like people who
were to be trampled upon, without the privilege of resistance, which was deemed
a crime punishable with conflagration and the sword, as was proved in the case
of the village of Engelwies, upon account of the following incident.

A soldier belonging to a party that had begun to plunder the village, having
pillaged the dwelling house of the parish minister, was not satisfied without
wanting to strip him of his breeches; upon which his brother, formerly an
Austrian non-commissioned officer, started up in his defense, and just as the
Frenchman was about to fire his musket at him, struck him such a blow upon the
head as brought him lifeless to the earth. This was no sooner discovered by the
comrades of the deceased, than their rage, as well as their numbers seemed
every moment to increase; they committed cruelties too horrible for
description, and concluded the terrible scene, by swearing that the whole
village should be a^^ihilated; nor could the prayers and entreaties of the aged
and the matron prevent or delay the execution of their threats. The parsonage,
15 other houses, and 18 ^arns, were speedily reduced to ashes, with their
furniture, and all the produce of their late abundant harvest; and the signal
was already given for burning the remaining houses, when they received an order
from head quarters to desist, and immediately commence their retreat, the
Austrians being in full march against them. The minister's brother had early
saved himself by flight, but the priest and his clerk were carried, chained
together, as far as Muhlheim on the Danube, and there with difficulty released;
and three of the clerk's children, who remained in the house whilst he escaped
into the church with the minister, were inhumanly suffered to perish in the
flames.

The fate of the village of Barenthal was as shocking as that already related.
The perfidy with which the French violated the articles of the convention, and
the inhumanity with which they treated the inhabitants of the districts through
which they passed, had determined the peasantry to arm themselves, and drive
them out of their dwellings, the protection and security of which had been
promised by the most solemn proclamations. So that when, upon the 6th October,
a horde of robbers attempted to plunder some houses is Barenthal, they were
opposed by the inhabitants, who, after a vigorous resistance, were defeated
with the loss of 5 killed, and 3 so desperately wounded that they soon
afterward expired. The rage of the conquerors now vented itself upon the whole
of the unfortunate village, which after being plundered of every thing valuable
and portable, was set on fire, and in a few h^^rs, the church, 18 houses, and
as many barns, were reduced to a heap of shapeless ruins. The greatest part of
the inhabitants lost the whole of their property, and many years must pass away
before they can recover from the state of poverty into which they were plunged
by the everts of that dreadful day.

The village of Durbheim was, upon the 7th of October, completely sacked, with
the exception of the parsonage and two other houses: and as it was not expected
that the French would penetrate into that seque^^ered valley, no precautions
had been taken, and every thing of value fell into the hands of the soldiers;
notwithstanding which they searched the newly made graves, and broke open the
coffins, in hopes of finding some treasure interred with the dead ^odies.

They not only indulged in drinking to the most beastly excess, but, taking the
cro^ks out of the casks, they suffered the wine to run out on the cellar flo^^.
They also led away 31 horses from this small village, and made the minister
exchange a favorite saddle horse, valued at 36 louis, for two half-starved
ponies, which they had stolen from a neighboring farmer. Upon the 9th of
October, the village was again visited by six hussars, who riding up to the
parsonag^ with the most terrifying menaces, demanded either a cask of wine or a
present of six louis, and upon being refused, not only swore that they would
burn the village, but actually fired into the houses, and spread universal
consternation. The peasantry who soon gathered together, prevented any farther
misch^ef, and upon the following day, four of these band^tti were taken
prisoners by an Austrian patrole, as they were maurauding in an out-lying
hamlet. Upon the same day the minister of another village was carried in
fetters before general Moreau, and accused of having excited the people in his
village to take up arms, and defend themselves against the assaults of their
enemies; for which he and five of the peasants were condemned to be hanged, and
were saved from execution with the greatest difficulty, and after suffering,
during some time, all the anguish attendant upon the expectation of a cruel and
ignominious death.

WATTERDINGEN, A village in Suabia, containing 453 inhabitants.
UPON the first days of October, a detachment of the army of the Rhine and
Moselle overran this village, and distinguished itself by such excesses as
cannot fail of stamping the Great Nation with everlasting infamy. Not satisfied
with the anticipation of their wishes by the inhabitants, they furiously ran
about the street with drawn swords and cocked pistols, broke into houses,
rifled the different apartments, carried away provisions, kitchen utensils,
bedding, and wearing apparel, and wantonly destroyed what they could not convey
away; so that the losses of the different proprietors amounted, upon the most
moderate computation, to 21,000 florins, or nearly L 2,000 sterling. Thirty-six
horses, 96 swine, two bullocks fit for the slaughterhouse, two calves, 150
geese, and a great quantity of poultry, formed one part of their spoil; and the
minister of the parish, who was the principal sufferer, lost 60 louis in cash,
much silver plate, all his kitchen furniture, nearly all his clothes and
household linen, 5 beds, 35 sacks of corn, and a large quantity of flour. Such
of the corn and flour as they could not carry away, they rendered useless by
mixing with dust, ashes and ordure: they also broke in pieces, the looking
glasses, wardrobe^, and other household furniture, tore the books and pictures,
destroyed the curcifixes, incessantly villified the name of their Creator, and
the most sacred things, and drove the minister out of his house, after
dangerously wounding him with their sabres. In the church, they broke the pyx,
trampled under ^oot the consecrated host, threw down the images, carried away
such of the communion furniture as was valuable and useful to them, clothed
themselves in the ^^cerd^tal robes, and paraded the streets o^ horseback,
roaring out the most obscene and blasphemous s^^gs and ballads.

Humanity shudders, and the blood runs cold, at the relation of the more ^^an
brutal ^er^ci^ (...) lust with which the female sex was d^ed by these monsters.
Three women, already past their s^ve ^^eth year, six lying-in women, four far
advanced in their pregnancy, and 12 young girls, were, by their outrages, br^^,
(...) to the ^^es of death. Even Children, thirteen years of age, lost their
^nnocence and their health, in the constrained pr^senc^ of others still (...)
than themselves; and five m^^ who ^^e p^^d to protect ^he (...) of their wives,
were trampled under (...) de^^ with severe wounds from the broad swo^ds of
these (...) villains.

Of DUHEM, the General of Division.
At Fribourg* in Brisgaw, in the circle of Suabia.
UPON the 12th of October, between two and three o'clock in the afternoon,
orders were received to prepare quarters, in a gentleman's house, for a French
general and four officers; soon after which appeared the general of division
Duhem, and a suite of 30 or 40 officers, several privates, and servants, who
were received with the greatest complaisance. But the general, in a commanding
tone, gave orders that a dinner, fit for a republican general and twenty-five
of his retinue, should be provided at five o'clock, and he added, that he
expected to be in all respects treated and attended according to his rank and
dignity. Six rooms and the saloon were immediately opened; but the servants of
the house not being able, in the hurry and confusion, to find the keys of the
other apartments, the general threatened to break open the doors, and his
aid-de-camp began to talk about cudgels and horsewhips. Before I proceed, let
me relate an anecdote of this aid-de-camp, highly characteristic of him and his
associates: Duhem having issued an order that the magistrates of Fribourg
should furnish the instruments used in the Turkish music, and they having
represented to the aid-de-camp the impossibility of obeying so unreasonable a
demand, that shameless reprobate replied, "that if they would procure him a
couple of handsome girls, they might keep the Turkish music for themselves."

The general, officers, and privates passed their whole time at the table, and
every exertion was made to satisfy their gluttony, but in vain; for upon the
13th of October general Duhem, after bitterly complaining of his ordinary fare,
with many threats commanded the delivery of 20 pounds weight of sugar, 16 of
coffee, 16 of rice, and 18 lemons, which he had no sooner received, than he
made a further demand of 50 bottles of champaigne, and 30 bottles of sweet
wine; and the next morning, before his departure, he issued a fresh order for
50 more bottles of champaigne, which he received and conveyed away. Neither
were his servants idle; for in the afternoon of the 13th of October, they broke
into the saddle house, and plundered it of all the saddles and harness they
could find; and though the general and some of his officers saw them carry away
their spoil, and were applied to for redress, they did not choose to listen to
the complaint, but suffered the booty to be carried off. When Duhem and his
followers quitted the house, upon the fourteenth of October, it was discovered
that they had left in their apartments and beds the most filthy traces of their
existence, and that they had stolen several pairs of sheets and a handsome
counterpane, and rifled a portmanteau of its contents. The upper part of this
house had been previously plundered by a commissary's assistant in July, and
was now again publicly robbed, not by the ungovernable soldiery, but by a
general, who affected to talk about discipline, and by his officers and
servants. A French lieutenant had indeed been degraded and sent to the galleys
for levying a trifling contribution when the French first appeared at Fribourg;
but that was done only to deceive the Germans until they had got a firm footing
in the country, after which the incendiaries, murderers, and plunderers of all
descriptions were suffered to commit their ravages with impunity.

HEDINGEN, A Franciscan convent, and the two farm-houses, in the county of
Sigmaringen, near the Danube, and in the circle of Suabia.
UPON the fifth of October, whilst a column of the army of the Rhine and
Moselle was retreating toward Switzerland, a party of the infantry marched
across the fields, plundered the two farm-houses, stormed the convent, stripped
the priests and their servants even of their shoes and neckcloths, and either
carried away or destroyed all the bedding, and every thing else they could
discover; and two cavalry officers, who appeared to have more humanity than
their comrades, coming up an ordering them to desist, were grossly insulted,
deprived of their pistols, and put to flight by the soldiers with their sabres.
The church was pillaged of the sacerdotal garments and communion plate, and the
greatest indignities were offered to every thing that is deemed sacred. These
excesses continued from eleven in the morning, until four in the afternoon; and
the friars, after repeated blows, and threats of immediate death, lost almost
every thing but their lives.

SCHWANDORF, A village in the Austrian part of Suabia.
To this place of the 8th of October was a day of terror and calamity; and as
the report of the French cruelties had already reached the ears of the
inhabitants, the women and children fled, with some of their valuable effects,
into an adjoining wood, hoping to be there secure from the attacks of the
soldiers, who were now upon their retreat, and entered the village, to the
number of 3000. Some of them stopped at the parsonage, and demanded wine; but
whilst the minister was giving orders for its delivery, they dragged him into
the cellar, and robbed him of his watch, whilst others stole his horses out of
the adjoining pasture. In the mean time the heroes who, in the language of
their employers, had not ceased to deserve well of their country, began
pillaging with such violence and rapacity, that the inhabitants were driven by
despair to attempt the protection of their property, which enraged the
aggressors so much, that they threatened to burn the village, and would
probably have done so, but for the exertions of some officers, and for the
flight of the peasants, whom they pursued toward the wood, where the shrieks
of the women and children presently discovered their retreat. When the soldiers
had here satisfied their rapacity, and plundered the poor fugitives of nearly
all that they possessed, they completed the tragedy with outrages the most
shocking to humanity. Married women were dishonored in the presence of their
husbands and children; and young girls were despoiled of their innocence under
the eyes of their parents and companions. Even women, who had borne children
only eight or ten days, were not safe from the disgraceful outrages of these
inhuman wretches, who dragged the infants from their arms, and insensible to
the agonizing screams of the sufferers, threatened the resistance of their
mothers with instant death.

EMMINGEN, A village in Suabia, in the principality of Furstenberg.
Upon the morning of the seventh of October the peace of this village was
suddenly and unexpectedly disturbed by six or seven hundred Republicans, who to
the character of soldiers added that of robbers, miscreants, and barbarians,
destitute of feeling and of decency. They broke into the dwelling of one of the
principal farmers, carried off all the provisions, linen, and wearing apparel,
even of the children, and stole a wagon and four horses, with which they
conveyed away their booty; and most of the houses in the village underwent a
similar fate. But the minister of the parish was one of the greatest sufferers;
for not even age or severe illness could protect him from ill usage, and from
being dragged from his bed under pretense that he had concealed his money;
after which they broke open his wardrobe and coffers, and carried away all his
money, plate, household linen, and wearing apparel.

The prince of F^^stenberg's steward, who, in attempting to escape, fell down
and dis^ocated his ancle, was pursued by the soldiers, and nearly beaten to
death; after which they pillaged his habitation, and committed every species of
enormity. Several young girls and married women fell a sacrifice to the
outrageous passions of these ruffians, against whom even gray hairs afforded no
protection; for an old woman near 70 years of age was successively dishonored
by four of these monsters, whose brutality words are wanting sufficiently to
reprobate.

BIBURG, A small but pleasant village near Augsburg in Suabia. An account of
the infamous conduct of the French in this place was given in a pamphlet
called. The French at Biburg, in 17^6, to the Directory at Paris, published in
1797 in Germany, by a person of veracity and reputation.
.
Upon the 20th of September, part of the French army retreated through Biburg,
under the command of general Duhem, who, with a retinue of 45 men and 50
horses, took up his abode at the country house of a gentleman of Augsburg, and
commanded a large supply of provisions for the table. But the lesser robbers,
upon their march toward Bavaria, had so plundered the village, that there was
but little left for the greater; and he had fortunately brought with him a cask
of wine, stolen by his orders out of a cellar at Augsburgh. His followers,
however, ransacked every part of the house, and the soldiers either carried
away or destroyed what had been left by their predecessors; every thing was
deemed lawful prey, and scarcely a house escaped without being completely
pillaged. The beer in the casks was wasted, large branclies of fruit trees were
cut off, and even the water pipes were cut to pieces, so that the village
remained four days without water. Women advanced in years, and girls who were
hardly out of their childhood, were sacrificed to the passions of these
savages; and a French officer who attempted to put a stop to their brutality,
was so desperately wounded by them, that he fell almost lifeless from his
horse. Duhem, who demanded a quantity of sugar and coffee, and condescended to
accept about three louis in their stead, marched out of Biburg the next
morning; when it was discovered that the great general and his gang understood
the art of thieving and desolating as well as the rest of the banditti; for
they had carried away all the plate and linen, let all the wine run out of the
casks in the cellar, and done all possible mischief to the furniture.

The damages sustained by this village, during four or five weeks, by the
French, upon their march and their retreat, were very considerable; and several
families were reduced to the greatest poverty and distress. Such are the
blessings conferred upon their fellow creatures by the disciples of liberty and
equality, the vile instruments of a few sanguinary and ambitious tyrants!

STOZINGEN, A village in Suabia, containing 1,100 inhabitants, and belonging to
the Count Stain and others. The sufferings of this place are detailed at large
in a German publication, called "Materials for the History of the War in
Suabia, in 1796." The Germans hope these publications will operate as warnings
to other nations.

When the French entered this place, they testified some sort of respect for
the articles of the convention, which had been purchased at so great a price;
but upon the following day they threw off the mask, assumed their proper
character of plunderers, and turned the contest against kings into war with the
peasants and mechanics. But this was only a prelude to greater calamities; for
general Vandamme having, either through ignorance or inattention, established
his military chest at Stozingen, under a small guard, and an Austrian party,
lying only five miles distant, having in the course of their patrole, fallen in
with and carried it off, and made the guard prisoners, the inhabitants were
accused of having given information to the Austrians, and a detachment, under
the command of colonel Lavalle, arrived upon the 10th of August, with orders to
set fire to the village. Old and young, and women with infants at the breast,
rending the air with their lamentations, hastily fled into the fields, and at
four o'clock the cannons were pointed against the houses, whilst the hussars
and chasseurs with cocked pistols and drawn swords, prevented the flight of the
few who had remained there. One woman was killed by them upon the spot, and
another died two days afterward in consequence of the blows she received upon
the breast with the but-end of a pistol. Lavalle, after the most humiliating
entreaties, at length yielded to the prayers of the clergy and other persons,
and promised to spare the town upon the payment of 1,000 louis, which
condition, though tending to their ruin, was complied with; but most of the
houses were pillaged, several women were abused in the most brutal manner, and
five of the most opulent inhabitants were led away as hostages, one of whom was
tied between two horses, and forced to keep up with them on foot, even when
upon the full trot. Neither was the bloody and rapacious mind of Vandamme
satisfied with the payment of the 1,000 louis; for he insisted upon and
actually received 500 more, which, with the subsequent losses of the
inhabitants by different parties during the ^^treat of the French, raised the
damages to considerably more than 2,500 pounds sterling, and reduced many
industrious persons to the greatest distress.

The mind recoils and the hand almost refuses to do its office in recording the
crimes committed by these plunderers in several neighboring villages, where
they burned, destroyed, pillaged, and violated, according to their wonted
system, and where, with the malignity of demons, they broke even the crutches
of a cripple, because he possessed nothing worth their stealing from him.

And against such wild beasts will not every arm be lifted up, should they
again attempt to make an attack upon our country?

AYSTETTEN, A village in the neigbourhood of Augsburg, in the Circle of Suabia.
Upon the 22d of August this place was visited by a party of the French, who
broke open the cellar in the castle, drank or carried away a large quantity of
foreign wine, stole or destroyed much of the furniture, and conveyed away their
spoil in a carriage drawn by two fine horses, which they took out of the
stable. From that period until the middle of September, not a day passed but
the village was either plundered by soldiers or oppressed by commissaries armed
with requisitions; and as they constantly rendered useless what they could not
carry away, the damages sustained by the inhabitants amounted to upwards of
3,000 l. sterling. But no adequate idea can be given of the cruelties inflicted
upon the men, and of the outrages committed against the women, both here and in
the neighboring towns and hamlets; it is, however, worthy of observation, that
these self-named protectors of the peasantry seemed to take the greatest
delight in robbing the houses, and destroying the peace of that class of
people, whose protection and welfare they and their employers have so
frequently declared to be the chief objects of their ambition.

ENGEN, A small town in Suabia, in the Principality of Furstenberg.
Although the destructive steps of the French were every where marked with
blood, cruelty, and rapine, no place suffered in so great a degree as the town
of Engen; and the most unfeeling must tremble, the most patient be inspired
with desire of revenge, and the most obstinate partisan of Frenchmen and French
principles must be converted, and even filled with horror, at the relation of
all the criminal excesses committed in this little town by the Republicans. We
no longer hear the cry, which, before the passage of the Rhine and K^hl by the
Republicans, was but too common in some of the German towns and villages O! if
the French would but come; then should we be happy and free! Dreadful
experience has cured the p^asants and the citizens of this pernicious and
erroneous opinion. Yet still do there remain a few lofty spirits, who are not
made wise by experience, and who not only forgive the disgraceful conduct of
the French, but endeavor even to justify it. But these are men, of whom
Solomon, with prophetic spirit, says -- Though thou should bray a fool in a
mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.
But I will spare my readers the pain of perusing a repetition of such
calamities, and shall only mention some of the most attrocious actions of these
pretended friends to liberty and to mankind.

A man happening indiscreetly to express his joy at the retreat of the French,
and the near approach of the Austrians, was shot at and mortally wounded; and
another, who had expressed the same satisfaction, and had attempted to defend
his property, was deliberately shot, after tearing his flesh to pieces, and
pulling his tongue out by the roots. Married women and girls, mothers and their
daughters, who had hoped for safety in the church, were violated at the foot of
the altar; and neither the venerable age of seventy or eighty years, nor the
most loathsome disorders and deformities, could check the passions of the
invaders, who left behind them traces of diseases, whose very names had until
then been unknown in this sequestered district. All the archives in the
townhouse were wantonly destroyed, the churches in every way profaned and
defiled, and even the crosses upon the graves of the dead were objects of their
fury and passion for destruction.

But it was reserved for Genesis Ferino to crown these misdeeds with an action
eternally disgraceful to his name and country; for upon t^^ 9th of October,
under pretense of the treachery of the inhabitants, he commanded one of the
suburbs to be set on fire; and in order to prevent any attempts to quench the
flames, ^e surrounded it with a guard. In a short time thirty-three houses and
barns, with all their contents, were reduced to ashes and ruins, and only the
church and four cottages escaped the fury of the conflagration; but having
received advice at midnight that the Austrians, to the number of 10,000 were in
pursuit of him, Ferino became so furious, that he ordered another suburb to be
set on fire, and twelve houses fell a sacrifice to the inhumanity of the
Republicans, who left the place, followed by the curses and bitter lamentations
of numerous families and individuals, whose ruin they had thus wantonly
accomplished.

I have purposely, omitted the detail of the various acts of plundering and
destroying, and shall close this melancholy account by flating, that the losses
sustained by the people of this town and twelve neigbouring villages, amounted
at the lowest computation to 373,768 florins, or more than L. 33,000 sterling.

OF GENERAL TARREAU, At Hofen, a Benedictine convent, in Suabia, near the Lake
of Constance.
SEVERAL of the leaders of the French hordes have, by their misdeeds, forever
connected their names with infamy; but general Tarreau united in himself the
several bad qualities of the rest. and cannot be mentioned without horror and
detestation. The most unbounded rapacity, insatiable cruelty, intemperance,
thirst of revenge, vulgar insolence, contempt of every thing sacred and decent,
and the disavowal of all the feelings of humanity, formed the basis of the
character of this man, who in no country but in France, and there only under
the auspices of such a revolution, could ever have been entrusted with the
command of an army. Some of his monstrous excesses have already been recorded,
and it remains only to be told, that when the French were obliged to give way
before the Austrians, this man, raging like a tiger that had lost its prey,
arrived upon the 23d of September at Hofen, where he established his
headquarters, and with his worthy associate Labrousse, and his confidential
valet Laguerre, endeavored to make himself a small compensation for the loss
of the spoils of Vienna, of which the French had thought themselves secure. His
whole character will best be known from the following dreadful declaration,
which was continually upon his lips, that "He only repented having at any time
acted with humanity, and of not having converted into dust and ashes all the
cities, villages, and convents he had seen upon his march." His life at Hofen
was one continued scene of cruelty, robbery, intemperance, and debauchery; and
upon the 23d of September he sent a requisition to Constance of 6,000 pints of
brandy, to be delivered in 24 hours, under pain of being given up to be
plundered by the soldiery. No more than half of the quantity demanded could be
found in Constance, and was sent off toward head quarters by water, but was
detained by contrary winds; upon which Farreau threatened not only to set fire
to the town, but to put to death the chief magistrate, and several others whom
he detained as hostages, and who, after passing the night under the
apprehensions o^ approaching death, would probably have fallen a sacrifice to
the passion of this sanguinary commander, if the brandy had not arrived in the
morning before the hour appointed for their execution. The booty remained three
days at head quarters, and was then sold by the commissary Stouhlen to the
neighboring Swiss; nor did the French soldiers taste one drop of this liquor,
which had been extorted under pretense that it was necessary for the army.

ANECDOTES of various French Generals, Officers, and Commissaries.
THAT not only privates, but that even officers of rank, either pillaged or
divided the spoil, is proved by innumerable instances, of which we think it
necessary only to notice the following. A carriage laden with plunder,
belonging to an officer upon the staff, having broken down during the retreat
of the French army, two of the inhabitants of the village of Eyken, where the
accident happened, were obliged instantly to provide another conveyance, and
re-load the booty, which was so speedily and well executed, that, contrary to
their expectation, and to the usual practice of his comrades, he rewarded them
with 16 pounds weight of tallow, and a complete set of joiners' tools! Another
officer of rank sold in the same village a bird cage and a Bohemian drinking
glass for the sum of about seven pence sterling; and at Rheinfelden, another
officer having sold a horse to a Swiss of the Canton of Basle for 9 louis, he
no sooner received the money than jumping upon the horse he gallopped away, and
disappeared both with the horse and money. A soldier having stripped a
gentleman's servant of the boots he was wearing, was, upon the complaint of the
servant to an officer, obliged to restore them; but the officer drawing them
on, and finding that they fitted him, told the servant, in a jeering tone, that
they were much too good for him, and strutted away with them. Whilst the French
were at Donauwerth, a general officer, accompanied by two officers, and
escorted by six hussars, espying some ducks and poultry in a farm-yard in a
village through which they were riding, the officers dismounted, and whilst the
general held their horses, they stole the ducks and fowls, and returned
triumphantly to Donauwerth with their booty. When Tarreau had his head quarters
at the imperial town of Wangen, he made a requisition of such a quantity of
corn as it was impossible for the municipality to furnish; but the chief
magistrate having received a hint that the general was very fond of cray-fish,
he sent him a present of some out of an adjoining lake, famous in Suabia for
those fish, with which the general was so pleased that he withdrew the demand
for corn, but put in requisition all the cray-fish in the lake for the daily
supply of his table, as long as he should remain there. A^ a ^^^panion to the
foregoing anecdote, we will mention, tha^, in a village near Wisbaden, upon the
Rhine, one of the commissaries of the army of the Sambre and Meuse put in
requisition not only all the wine belonging to the Minister of the parish, but
his glasses, bottles, kitchen furniture, table linen, and napkins for twelve
persons, and even his housekeeper, to prepare the dinner; and further informed
him, that he must send to Wisbad^n to purchase what they wanted, and what his
house did not afford.

Some French soldiers having stolen a very fine horse out of a farmer's stable
near Augsburg, he complained to the adjutant-general Houel, who promised him
redress, but upon seeing the horse, thought proper to retain it for his own
use. But it should seem as if Providence connived a^ this crime, as carrying
its punishment along with it, for Houel was shortly after drowned in crossing
the Leck, whilst riding the stolen horse, which worked its way through the
water, and fortunately found its road back to its old master.

A republican general having upon the retreat taken up his quarters at the
house or a clergyman, went qu^^tly to bed after demanding and receiving six
shirts for himself and his followers; but his servants soon afterward came to
the clergyman with an (...) from their master to procure him a handsome
b^d^ellow, which (...) refused, and threatened in case of ill-usage to alarm
the p^a^antry; upon which they desired that they might be allowed to ^^^^duce
one out of the village, to which he so s^^e^uously ^^j^^^ed that, being few in
number, they thought proper to de^^^ from their demands. The next morning the
general ordered his entertainer to give him his money; but he replied that some
republican robbers had already deprived him of his watch and money, and had
left him nothing but a dollar, which the general condescended to pocket, and
then rode away.

Ecclesiastics of every description and every religion, and particularly the
professed, of both sexes, seemed the chief objects of republican malevolence,
in morality, and cruelty, in which the soldiers were led on and encouraged by
their officers (...) respect for decency and for the sufferers forbids us to
particularize the numberless well authenticated proofs of this assertion, and
to name the places where aged priests were forced to the commission of the most
indecent and immoral actions, and where nuns were stripped of their garments,
and obliged to dance in a state of nature with the officers and soldiers. At a
small town in Suabia, the friars and nuns belonging to two neighboring
convents were convened by command of the French officers, bound fast together
face to face, with their hands tied behind their backs, and each was obliged to
drink a cup full of coffee, containing a strong emetic; and in that position
did they remain until the medicine had operated, whilst the officers rejoiced
and shouted as if they performed some heroic action.

And here let us conclude the detail of crimes, surpassing in cruelty and
variety any excesses ever before committed by the soldiers of a civilized
country, and rendered more hideous, when we consider that the perpetrators
proclaim themselves the most humane and enlightened people of the earth, and
endeavor to seduce the subjects of other countries from their allegiance by
the specious but treacherous offer of a liberty pregnant with mischief, and of
an equality which has been found to be impracticable.

AMERICANS,
THUS have you seen the consequences of FRENCH INVASION, from which you have
also seen, that no compact, no convention, no treaty, no TRIBUTE, will preserve
any country, in which these infernal monsters can, either by force or fraud,
once get a sure footing. That they will leave nothing unattempted to get such a
footing in these States is most certain; so that you have only to determine,
whither you will witness horrors such as you have read of, and perhaps still
worse, or bravely resolve to keep off the contaminating, cut throat crew, by
the thunder of your cannon and the point of your bayonets.

Peace! peace! peace! -- Ah! this is the soothing sound, by which you have
been, and yet are, lulled and deluded. A corrupt and wicked faction, who are
combined with the despots of France, and who are continually endeavoring to
divide you and keep you disarmed, in order that you may fall an easier prey to
themselves and their Gallic masters; this abominable faction, in spite of all
your boasted knowledge and still more boasted love of liberty and independence,
have contrived to hood-wink and delude you, and to make you submit, with
seeming resignation, to injuries and insults unheard of; and all this have they
done by a continual canting repetition of the single monosyllable, PEACE!

But, even suppose it possible to patch up a peace with the haughty Divan:
suppose that your government and yourselves were to abandon every thought of
preserving you^ national honor and independence, and basely knuckle down
before the altar of Ga^lic despotism, bearing the demanded TRIBUTE in your
enervated hands; and suppose, that, in consequence of this, the grovelling
tyrants were to condescend to honor you with the supercicilious grin of
forgiveness? Suppose all this; would all this insure you your beloved peace,
after which you hanker and pine wi^h the fond^ess of the lover and the
f^etfulness of the child? -- The answer to this question is best given in the
fate of the degraded republics of Europe, to whom, on like conditions, France
has alre^dy granted the blessings of PEACE.

Holl^^^ stands first in the catalogue of misery and dishonor. Ho^land so
lately the s^at of freedom, comme^ce industry, and affluence, having been
pillaged by its dear ally the rapaciou^ republi^ of France, and forced to
declare war against Great B^itain by which it lost both its maritime importance
and nearly all he foreign valuable possessions, presents at this moment the sad
sp^^tacle of a country divided against itself, governed by the haughty
mandates, and awed by the arms of France, destitute of commerce, its navy
annihilated, defaced almost from amongst the nations of Europe, and reduced to
a mere skeleton of that power, which once so n^bly contended for real liberty,
and which disputed with Great Britain the empire of the main. -- If I ask you
to what this mighty downfall is to be attri^^ed, you will not hesitate to
answer, that it was effected by the introduction of French principles, and by
the united efforts of the crafty and the credulous; by the traitors who (as
ours do) stil^ cried peace with France, and by the silly people who listened to
their deluding voice.

Geneva owes its ruin to a peace with France. Without the least excuse in the
world, in the year 1792, the French marched ^n army against this little
republic, and surrounded the city. The Genevese, having called in their
neighbor, the Swiss, to their assistance, were in a situation to defend
themselves, and expressed their determination to do it. The Convention (ever as
base as it was bloody) finding this to be the case, wheedled them into a
negotiation. A treaty was made, according to which the Swiss were to be sent
away, and the French army was to retire. The army did ^etire; but, when the
Swiss were gone, the villains of the Convention annulled the treaty; their army
advanced, entered the city, and were joined by numbers of traitors. All the
blessings of a French revolution began. The rich were plundered, some of them
put to death, others to flight; the poor little state became a province of
France, and, from case, opulence, and independence, fell to the lowest degree
of misery and vassalage.

Gen^a, by yielding to demand after demand, by paying tribute upon tribute, and
by swallowing humiliation upon humiliation, thought to escape the general
wreck; but no; a revolution has been effected, as at Geneva, and followed by
similar consequences.

Hamburgh, Bremen, and Lubeck, though so remote, have not been able to avoid
the out stretched arm of French rapacity and power; but have been compelled, as
the price of peace, to pay a tribute of several millions, in return for which
they are hourly threatened with final subversion and total ruin.

Venice made peace with the French, and thereby gave them an opportunity of
displaying the treacherousness of their character in its fullest glare. After
deluding the people of this state with the hopes of liberty, equality, and
independence, they pillaged the city of its treasures, destroyed its most
splendid institutions (...) ^^^lly ornaments, and levelled the pride of ages
with the (...). They took possession of its most valuable islands, plundered it
of its navy, beat and murdered hundreds of its inhabitants in mere whim and
caprice, and finished their perfidious work by delivering up the miserable
people to the government of a stranger and of a monarch, whom they had always
affected to consid^r as one of the greatest enemies of liberty, and whom they
had, in their decrees and proc^amations, a thousand times styled a despot.

Switzerland, closes the awful lesson. This republic was, like the United
States, a federative one. It had long been equally the admiration of the
historian and the civilian, and not unfrequently the subject of the muse's
praise. Yet, by peace with France this much admired republic has been torn up
root and branch -- Switzerland, basely forgetting the murder of the King's
guards on the 10th of August, officiously came forward, the first state in
Europe, to acknowledge the republic of France. The Swiss observed what they
called a neutrality; but it was vilely insincere, always operating in favor of
the French. When these latter had swallowed up the neighboring countries, they
quarrelled with the Swiss. They ordered them to send away the English
Ambassador, which would have been done, had he not spa^ed them the disgrace by
retiring. They were next ordered to banish the emigrants: they negociated and
complied. Now there was no ground of quarrel left; an insurrection was
therefore excited, and the generous French marched in their army to protect the
poor oppressed insurgents! -- In short, the HELVETIC UNION was now told that
they must change their constitution. They negociated; but still the enemy
approached. The legislators met: they offered to make some alterations. Those
would not do. They must receive a constitution from Paris. They refused, and
collected their army; but, still indecisive (just like our House of
Representatives,) they ordered their army not to act. At last, while they were
still debating, comes the French ^ans-culottes and disperses them at the point
of the bayonet. The Swiss army was sound; the people were brave and active; but
what, with such governors, were they to do against ten times their forces --
They rushed on the enemy's cannon; were blown to pieces by thousands. The women
fought by the sides of their husbands; no less than eight hundred of them
expired under the sabres of the bloody French. With these gallant females the
liberty of Switzerland groaned out its last.

Thus, AMERICANS, have all the republics of Europe, for their endeavoring to
conciliate with France; for their ^ame submission to injury and insult; for
their whining, cringing, and crawling for peace, been finally rewarded by the
subversion of their governments, by the loss of their property, by the massacre
of their people, by being reduced to the last degree of national wretchedness
and disgrace, and by being rendered the scorn and contempt of the Universe.

But, the example is not complete without showing you what would have been the
effect of an opposite conduct. This you must also learn by again turning you:
eyes on Europe. There you will perceive, that those who have fought the French
with bravery, who have obstinately resisted the progress of their principles,
and who have never yielded to their insolent demands, are still secure in the
enjoyment of their commerce, their wealth, their liberty, and their religion.

Viewing the general desolation of Europe, the fallen state of all the
countries that have submitted to the scourge of the republicans, and the
calamitous, the brutal condition of these republicans themselves, what a grand
and noble figure do the people of Great-Brit^in exhibit to surrounding nations,
standing, as they do, firm and erect amidst the storm, proudly determined not
to submit to the will of the enemy, bravely resolved to sacrifice every comfort
in support of their religion and their liberties, and still enjoying all those
blessings, of which other countries have, in so short a period, been bereaved!
Their trade and manufactures still flourish "through the state," and surpass the
commercial enterprises and successes of all the other nations in the world.
Agriculture, far from languishing during the war, has been pursued with
unexampled vigor and prosperity; all their excellent institutions continue to
thrive under the unremitting assiduity of their governors, and the ceaseless
generosity of the public; and the national benevolence has been most nobly
displayed in the successive and ample subscriptions for the relief of
persecuted foreigners, for that of their own wounded soldies and sailors, and
for the benefit of the widows and the orphans of those who have fallen in
fighting the battles of their country. The intercourse between man and man is
preserved unalloyed by suspicion; the charms of society remain uncontrouled by
terror; their wives and daughters sleep without apprehension of being disturbed
by the violator or the assassin; and their property is secured by mild and
well-dispensed laws against the public depredator, and the private aggressor.
Their islands in the West Indies have been secured, and augmented by those of
the enemy; their posse^^ions on this continent have continued unmolested; their
extensive and valuable territorities in the East Indies have enjoyed the most
profound tranquillity; they have added conquest to conquest in Asia and Africa;
the Cape of Good Hope is the guardian of their commerce to the East, and the
rock of Gibraltar defies the power of Spain. In naval same they have made a
vast acquisition. In that part of the war which belongs to Britain, they have
obtained successes which surpass the most brilliant examples of their
ancestors: History abounds with the noble deeds of British tars; but it was
reserved for GEORGE THE THIRD, after decisive and glorious victories
successively gained over the fleets of France, Spain, and Holland, to see his
navy ride triumphant at the same moment, at the mouths of Breast, Cadiz, and the
Texel.

Such, AMERICANS, and so situated, is the nation from whom, generally speaking,
you are descended. Compare her situation with that of the degraded
peace-seeking republics of Europe, and then determine which example you shall
follow. Independence, with all its attendant blessings, is yet within your
power; but, as it was obtained by arms, so it must be maintained; and you have
not a month, ^ay, not a day, left you to consider, whether you shall assume
those arms, or basely bend your necks to the galling yoke of the insolent
blood-thirsty tyrants of France.

FINIS.
CHARLES R. and GEORGE WEBSTER, HAVE FOR SALE, At their BOOKSTORE, in the White
House, corner of State and Pearl-streets, ALBANY, A large and general
Assortment of BOOKS AND STATIONARY: Among which are the following, viz.
ADAMS' Roman Antiquities, Aikins' Letters to his Son, American Magazine,
^merican Remembrancer, Alexander's Virgil, Aitkin's Surgery, Anderson's history
of Commerce, Arabian Tales, Lendrun's American Revolution, Anson's Voyages,
History of 300 ^nimals, American Pocket Atlas, Afflicted man's Companion,
Anecdotes of the Delborough Family, Adventures of Telemachus, American
Preceptor, America's Legacy, Adela and Theodore, Akenside's Pleasures of the
Imagination, ^bbe Raynal's History of America, Appleton's Religious Discourses,
Adam's history of Man, Ashe's Grammar, American Cookery, Answer to Paine's
Rights of Man.

Brown's Family Bible, Bruce's Travels, British Plutarch, Burke's Reflections
on the French Revolution, Bu^^er's Analogy of Religion, Bu^yan's Holy War,
Barlow's Vision of Columbus, Butterworth's Concordance, Blair's Lectures on
rhetoric and the belles lettres, Boyer's French Dictionary, Baron Trenck,
Boston's fourfold State. Blair's ^ermons, Arington's history of Henry II. and
Richard and John his Sons, Brown's Body of Divinity, Bailey's Dictionary, do.
Ovid, Buchan's Domestic Medicine, Bell on Ulcers, Browns Elements of Medicine,
Baillie's Morbid Anatomy, Bossuit's Universal History, Boyle's Voyages,
Bourgourne's Travels in Spain, Barlow's Writings, Burton's Lectures on Female
Education, Bennett's Letters to a Young Lady, Brissot on Commerce, Brown's
Oracle, Beattie's Elements of Moral Science, Beauties of Hervey, do. of Stern,
do. of Shakespeare, do. of History, Belinda, or the fair fugitive, Miss
Bleecker's Posthumous Works, Butler's Sermons, Brother's Prophecies, Bell's
Shakespeare, 18 vol. with plates, Bolingbroke's Works, ^rown on Equality,
Boswell's Life of Johnson, Busy Body, Beauties of Goldsmith, Bellington's
Memoirs, Mrs. Berbauld's Lessons, Bracken's Farriery, Best's Logic, Billing's
republican Harmony; Bull's Responsary, a collection of church music, Bunyan's
Grace abounding to the chief of Sinners.

Cruden's Concordance, Carpenter and Joiner's Repository, Coxe's Travels in
Switzerland, Cook's Voyages, Common Prayer, Carr's Sermons, Clark's Homer,
Ciceroni Orationes Salute, Cicero's Orations, Carey on the Fever, Castle of
Wole^anbach, Child of Providence, Camela's Picture of France, Charlotte's
Letters, Curse of Sentiment, Citizen of the World, Charlotte Temple, Conquest
of Canada, Carver's Travels, Children's Friend, Castle of Ollida, Count
Roderic's Castle, Child of Woe, Christian Exercises, Ceci^ia, Constitution of
England, Crusoe's Life, Cyrus' Travels, Columbian Monitor, Constitution of the
Dutch Church, Croxal's Fables, Cavern of Death, Collection of Novels, Catechism
of Health.

Da^rymple's Annals of Scotland, Drinkwater's Siege of Gibraltar, Dow's history
of Hindosia^, Darwin's Botanic Garden, Darwin's Zoonomia, Dumourier's Memoirs,
Davies' Sermons, Daworth's Bookkeeping, Dyche's Dictionary, Duncan's Cicero,
Danish Mas^^cre, Drummond's Poems, Dismond, a novel. The Demo^rat, Don
Quixotte, Duchess of York, Duncan's Logic, Dodd's Thoughts in Prison, Dupaly's
Travels in Italy, David's Psalms Dutch Church Psalms, Dwight's Geography, Death
of Ca^^, Dwight's Sermons, Dissertation on Law, Delicate Songster.

Edwards' Redemption, ^meline, the orphan of the castle, Eve^^a, Ellen,
countess of Howell, Esop's Fables, Englissh House^eeper, Enfield's Speaker,
Erskine's Sonne^s, Elegant Extracts, En^ic's Dictionary, Emily Montague,
Eugenius, Episcopalian Cate^hism, Erskine's View, Every man a good Cardplayer.

Franklin's Life and Works, Fleetwood's Life of Christ, Fergu^on's Astronomy,
Findley on the Western Insurrection Fraternal Victim, Family ketches, Favorite
Ta^es, Fortunate Discovery, Friend of Youth, Farmer's Friend, Farmer's Letters,
Freemason's Monitor, Fisher's Catechism, Fra^er's Select Biography, Fisher's
Young Man's best Companion, Friend of Youth. Family Instruc^or, Flowers of
History, Federal Ready Reckoner.

Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Goldsmith's ^xperimental
Philosophy, Gay's Fables, Guardian, Gordon's histo^y of the American
Revolution, Gibson's Surveying, Guthrie's Geography, Gi^b^as, Gazetteer of
France, Goldsmith's Roman History, Ghost Seer, Gustavus Vasa, Gordon's
Arithmetic, Greek Testament and Grammar, Guthrie's Gazetteer, Gray's Poems.

Howard's Works, Hodge's Travels in India, History of France, ^u^e's England,
Hamilton's introduction to Merchandise, Har^ev's Thereon and Aspasian,
Hutchinson's history of Massachusetts, Histoire Literaire De M. de Voltaire,
Hutton's history of Birming^am, Huntington's Calvinism improved, History of the
French Clergy, Horati^ Del; hi^^, Hunter on Blood, Hunter's complete Dictionary
of Farriery and Horsemanship, Honors of the Table, Henry and Francis, Hervey's
Meditations, Hudson's Guide, Haw^i^s' voyage to Africa, Hive, Hartley House,
Henry 4 of France, ^eidelbergh Catechism, Hardie's Latin Grammar, House of
Wisdom in a Bussle, How to grow Rich, Highland Reel.

Imeson's Scho^^^ (...), Infernal Conferences, Jones' Geographical Grammar,
(...) to Voltaire, Johnson's Dictionary, Ireland's Picturesque view of the
river Medway, Italian, Im^ay's history of Kentucky, Italian Nun, Jenyn's
Lectures, Interesting Memoirs, Johnson's Sermons, Instructions for the Cavalty,
Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, Jockey Club, Jachin and Boaz.

Kaime on Education, Knox's Miscellany, Kaime's Elements of Criticism, Knox's
Essays, Kings of England, Knox on Education.

Locke's Works complete, Love's Surveying, Lock on Government, Lauderdale's
Letters to the Feers of Scotland, Littleton's England, Life of Joseph, Lee's
American Accomptant, Life of Mahomet, do. of Newton, Lee's Memoits, Lowth's
Grammar, Linn's Signs of the Times, Liorel and Clarissa, Love in a Village.

Motherby's Medical Dictionary, Milton's Paradise Lost, More's Zeluco,
Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, Marshall's Rural Economy, Millot's elements
of Ancient History, Morse's American Gazetteer, Do. Geography, Moore's
Surveying, M'Cartney's Embassy to China, Mair's Geography, Man of the World,
Mentoria, Memoirs of a Baroness, M'Donald's Travels, Melmoth's Essays, Morse's
elements of Geography, Medical Repository.

Newton on the Prophecies, Newton's Le^^ers to a Wife, Norman Tales, Nature and
Art, Neckar on ^eligious Opinions.

Owen's Discourses, O^erveld's Bible, Do. Christian Theology, Ovid's Art of
Love, Osgood's Sermons, Orphan of the Castle.

P^owden's British Empire, Paine's political Writings, Picturesque Antiquities
of Scotland, Price's ^ermons, Pike's Arithmetic, Pitt's Ancedo^es, or Life of
Chatham, Pope's Homer, Po^itical Dictionary, Picture of England, Pailosophical
Dictionary, Perry's Dictionary, Pope's Essa^ on Man, Prompter, Pain on the
Funding System.

Russell's description of Aleppo, Robertson's history, of America, Robison's
Scotland, Russell's modern Europe, Robison's Proo^s of a Con^piracy,
Radcliffe's Journey through Sweden, Ray^al's history of the E. and W. Indies,
Rura^ Walks, Recess, Royal Captives, Reily's Union, Romance of the Forest, Rock
of Mordrie.

Swan's British Archi^ect, System of Chemistry, Sheridan's Life of Swi^t,
Spectator, Swenburne's Trave^s, Sti^^'s history of Judges of king Charles I.
Lowth's Isaiah, Smith's Letters to married Women, Seneca's Morals, Smith's
Universal History, School for Widows, ^euben's Exercise, Smith's Wealth of
Nations.

Truxton's Remarks, Tapline's Fa^riety. Tower's Fracts, Trumbull's history of
Connecticut, Thompson's Season^, Tom Jones, Thea^re of Education, Thompson's
Works, Testaments.

Universal Asylum and Columbian Magazine, Vo^^ey's Travels. Voltair^'s General
History, Vicar of Wake^ield, (...).

Winterbotham's History of America, War Atlus, etc. etc.


