AN ORATION OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, TO THE
PRESENT CRISIS, AND ON THE DUTIES OF THE CITIZENS.

BY ALEXANDER ADDISON, ESQUIRE.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY JOHN ORMROD, No. 41, CHESNUT-STREET. 1798.

ORATION.
AFTER the peace of seventeen hundred and sixty-three, the British ministry
proposed to raise a revenue by act of Parliament, from their American colonies.
The sum, which, in this manner, they determined to raise, was indeed small, and
not equal to the hazard of a revolution, or the expense of a war; but the
people of America saw that a violation of principle ought to be resisted in the
first instance, and at all hazards; and that, if they once yielded to
extortion, there would be no end of demands; and if they once abandoned their
right of self-government, there would be no restraint on oppression.

Resistance, war, and a revolution ensued. Providence countenanced the American
cause, raised up to us allies among the rivals and enemies of Britain, and the
colonies were acknowledged free and independent States.

But as waves long agitated by the wind do not subside at the moment of the
calm, the rancorous passions excited by the revolution war were not soothed by
the peace of 1783; but reciprocally stirred in the bosom of Britain and
America. Concealed enmity, a delay of justice, and alternate injury, were the
consequences. The treaty of peace was not executed on either side. They
complained that they were not permitted to recover their debts. We, that we
were not permitted to occupy our posts. These, still maintained by British
garrisons, prevented the sale and settlement of an extensive country, and if
they did not excite and countenance, at least disabled us from suppressing, a
pernicious and expensive Indian war.

During all this time, America regarded France with a gratitude and affection
approaching enthusiasm. France, next to the courage and perseverance of the
American people, was regarded as an instrument under God of securing American
independence. Yet France herself never pretended that she engaged in our
contest from any affection for liberty, or for the United States; but from
hostility to Britain and a desire to weaken this ancient enemy, by depriving
her of the ample source of commerce and wealth which the American colonies
furnished.

It is thus that the Almighty in whose hands are the hearts of kings and of all
men, sometimes converts their worst passion; into instruments of useful
purposes. The lust of Henry VIII. was made an instrument of the reformation in
England; and the enmity of France against Britain was made an instrument of
American independence.

The theories of philosophy and the practical lessons of the American
revolution kindled a fire of liberty in France which soon blazed into a flame
and consumed the fabric of her former government.

America viewed the commencement of the French revolution with sympathy and
hope, and its progress with exultation and triumph. The cause of France was
considered as the cause of liberty -- as our cause. We excused her outrages, we
deplored her defeats, we rejoiced in her victories, as if they were all our
own. She needed not, she declared that she did not desire the aid of our arms.
But we made every exertion to supply her and her colonies with provisions, in
the most seasonable and efficacious manner. We received her citizens with every
mark of hospitality. Our government instantly, and first of all the nations of
the earth, acknowledged her as a Republic, and defying all chance of
counter-revolution and the risk of British resentment, paid to the agents of
this republic, at a time of urgent necessity, and before it was due, every
dollar of our debt to the king. France cannot charge the people of America with
want of gratitude, nor the government of America with want of justice.

Yet though the American government went to the utmost extent of duty, by a
punctual and a generous performance of her treaties and obligations, as France
declared it to be her wish, America knew it to be her interest, by not
overstepping the boundary of duty, to preserve herself from war. America in the
European war would have been but as a drop in the bucket, and her entering into
it on the side of France, would have increased her debt, ruined her trade, and
made her an useless ally, and an impoverished and burdened nation. She could
aid France better by neutrality than by being a party in the war. -- Our
government, therefore, and with professions of approbation from France,
determined on a strict and impartial neutrality, and, while consistently with
neutrality, she honestly and usefully served France, adhered to this
determination with unimpeachable sincerity and perseverance. Ample proof has
been made of this by Mr. Jefferson, in his letter for the recall of Mr. Genet.

But the professions and the purposes of France did not agree. Mr. Genet, the
very minister, who on his arrival at Philadelphia, publicly declared, that it
was not the wish nor interest of France that America should engage in the war,
afterward published instructions given him by the French government before his
departure from France, enjoining him to endeavor to engage America in the war
against Britain. The inflexible prudence of the President precluded all hope of
Mr. Genet's succeeding with the government, in this subject of his
instructions. He had recourse, therefore, to other means. He fitted out
privateers in our ports, he commissioned and engaged our citizens to enter on
board those privateers. British ships were taken within our jurisdiction, and
sold in our ports. Clubs or societies were, under his suggestions, formed
throughout the continent; to hang on the skirts of government, censure all its
measures and weaken its authority, by rendering it suspected, and to rouse the
passions of the people, and prepare them for a submission and even ardent
devotion to the will of France. The inevitable tendency of the measures of Mr.
Genet to embroil us with Britain, engage us in the war, and thus make us
dependent on France, is clearly exposed by Mr. Jefferson in the letter already
referred to. -- The measures of Mr. Genet were pursued though less openly with
not less perseverance by his successors: and it has been the constant object of
the ministers of France to give to that government an influence in this
country, by dividing the people from our administration, and turning the
efforts of the people against the efforts of the executive to subject our
public counsels to the will of France, to maintain among the people an hostile
disposition to Britain, and, by gradual and indirect means compel our
government into open war with that nation.

Though the prudent and active spirit of the President preserved us from the
full effect of those insidious machinations -- an open war with Britain, and a
consequent dependence on France; yet those machinations and the intemperate
partiality and zeal for France manifested by the people, and by a strong party
in Congress, could not fail to draw on us the suspicion of Britain, that we
could not long resist those inducements to war, and should very soon be
actually engaged in it. France had, with respect to our trading ships, very
early in the war, cast off any regard to the treaty of commerce between her and
America. Britain had no commercial treaty with us, and was bound to us in this
respect, only by the general law of nations. Even this law both nations soon
ceased to regard. France set, and Britain followed the example, of making
unjustifiable spoliations of our trade. What will not men do, when they have
power without immediate control! The spoliations of Britain had amounted to a
vast sum, and threatened the ruin of our commerce; when measures were proposed
by those called the friends of France in Congress to check those spoliations.
An embargo was adopted, and afterward (at the request of the French minister,
who wanted to send supplies to their West India islands) was taken off.
Commercial regulations, a suspension of commerce with Britain, and a
sequestration of British debts were proposed. Those members of Congress, who
had approved the neutral measures of the President, and were desirous of
preserving the United States in peace, considered those measures as necessarily
tending to war with Britain, and some as being in fact a cause of it. The
President seemed to have viewed them in the same light, and determined first to
try whether a negotiation would not obtain justice. The friends of the measures
thus prevented declaimed against a negotiation under such circumstances, loudly
extolled the force and spirit of America, reprobated the baseness of national
submission to injustice, and declared, that there was no prospect of success in
negotiation unsupported by the proposed vigorous measures. Those of the same
party in the Senate reprobated the appointment of the negociator. And pains
were taken, that both he and the negotiation should be considered as odious and
unsuccessful.

All prophets, like Jonah, are angry, if their prophecy be not accomplished;
and their endeavors are seldom wanting to promote its accomplishment. The
prospect of a negotiation with Britain seemed fatal to the hope of France and
her agents here, of involving us in the war. Those in Congress whose
propositions were thereby prevented, felt the chagrin of disappointment. Thus a
vast interest was established in the United States against any treaty whatever
with Britain. Even before the treaty was known, it was attacked by conjecture.
No sooner was it known, than town-meetings assembled in the most tumultuous
manner, and without argument or deliberation condemned it. It was censured for
faults which had no existence, and evils created by imagination. The treaty was
opposed in every stage, and even after it became a law a strong party in the
House of Representatives endeavored to defeat it. But it triumphed over all
opposition, the posts were surrendered, our claims for spoliations were put in
an equitable mode of adjustment. And great progress has, in consequence, been
made in adjusting and paying them.

For a long time after the treaty was ratified and published, France made
little if any objections to it; and if she made any they were suggested to her
by her partisans among ourselves. Had they been silent, so would France have
been. But it was evident, if the prophecies of menace and resentment uttered by
the partisans of France here were not fulfilled, they would lose all credit and
consequence; our government would triumph; those popular leaders would sink
into insignificance; the influence of France on this country would cease; our
government would be restored to its confidence and authority; and the United
States become really independent.

Instigated therefore by their party here, and to preserve its hold on the
people of this country, and keep them dependent, by weakening the
administration by a separation of the people from it, the French government at
last complained that our treaty with Britain was injurious to France; of
themselves took upon them to new-model their treaty with us; and proceeded to
new and exorbitant spoliations on our commerce.

That their objections to the British treaty, and all their objections to the
conduct of our government were but pretexts, and that the true motive of their
resentment was to maintain their influence in this country to use the people
against the government of the United States, and thereby subject both to the
will of France; must be evident to every candid and intelligent man, who reads
the French objections to the British treaty, and to other parts of the conduct
of our administration, as stated in Mr. Adet's letter to our secretary of
state; and compares it with that plain and satisfactory answer to all those
objections in the letter of the secretary. It must be still more evident from
the critical time which Mr. Adet chose to state those objections, and from his
publishing them to the people just before the election of Electors of a
President of the United States, when one of the candidates for that station was
supposed to be devoted to the interests of France, and was zealously supported
by all their partisans and agents in this country.

To those who do not read, and to those who read without thinking, all argument
on this head is vain. But to those who have considered the treaty, the
objections, and the answers, I may safely appeal. And I challenge any man, to
point out any part of the British treaty which is injurious to France, or which
gives to Britain any advantage, which as an independent and neutral nation, we
had not a right to give. If this be the case, and that it is the case has been
often proved, and may be confidently believed, they must have a wretched
opinion of the principles, moderation, and integrity of the French government,
who can think the British treaty a cause of war by France against America.
What! are we a sovereign and independent nation, and have we not a right to
make such contracts as we please, harmless to other nations? are we yet in a
state of infancy, and our acts to be considered void, and grounds of
chastisement, unless approved by our guardians? Did we emancipate ourselves
from the dominion of Britain, only to subject ourselves to the dominion of
France? Are the United States independent, if they dare not make such treaties
as they please, consistent with prior engagements, and the general law of
nations? And is the spirit, of 1776 so completely extinguished in the American
breast, that we shall now tamely submit to encroachments which then we resisted
and repelled? Tame concessions to unjust demands, like the beginnings of
strife, are, as the letting out of water: the dam once broken, an irresistible
flood will rush in, and overwhelm us.

But supposing the making of the British treaty a cause of war by France
against America, a violation of it, or a refusal to comply with it, would
clearly have been a cause of war by Britain against America. Britain had her
complaints as well as we, and having proposed a reasonable accommodation, if we
refused to comply with it, had a right to employ force to compel us. This right
would have been the same, if no treaty had been made, but merely a demand and
refusal to pay British debts. We have not to consider now, only whether the
British treaty be the cause of the resentment and aggressions of France; but
also, what would have been our condition if that treaty had not been made, or
being made, had been broken, or not executed. We should then, probably, have
had an Indian war on our frontiers, and a war with Britain at sea. It is not
hard to determine whether that, or our present state, with all we can fear from
France, be the greater evil. Supposing an invasion of our country from either,
France could indeed raise, but probably could not transport a greater army than
Britain. But supposing, as perhaps is the case, an invasion not probable, and
only a sea war; there is no comparison between the naval power of Britain and
that of France, perhaps and that of the world: and our danger would be in
proportion to the power of our enemy. If we have incurred therefore a danger,
by making the British treaty, we have thereby escaped a far greater danger; an
Indian war, and a sea war with the greatest naval power in the world.

But there is another difference between the two cases, a difference which by
all who believe and regard a divine Providence will never be lost sight of. In
our dispute with France we are contending for principle, for justice, and for
our independent rights, and resisting oppression and unjust dominion. In the
dispute to have been feared with Britain, if we refused a peaceable
accommodation, we should have had to contend for injustice and iniquity. In our
dispute with France, we have a a good cause; in that with Britain, we should
have had a bad cause. Courage, and, if we can trust in Providence, success, is
in proportion to conscience.

But though the British treaty furnished no justification, it was used as a
pretext, for drawing on us the anger and vengeance of France. This vengeance
was thought necessary, to give consequence to their party, and maintain their
hold on the people against the government of America. It was the only remaining
mean of preventing the complete emancipation of the United States from the yoke
of foreign influence.

At an important time to influence the election of a President of the United
States, Mr. Adet announced not only to the government, but to the people, the
suspension of his diplomatic powers in this country, accompanied with vehement
but silly and groundless complaints against the government of the United
States. This menace failing to produce the intended effect, the election of Mr.
Jefferson as President, was soon followed by the grossest injuries to our
trade, the capture of our vessels, on the most frivolous and unjustifiable
pretexts; till the damages have amounted, it has been said, to thirty million
of dollars. Payment was also refused of a large debt contracted by the agents
of France for provisions furnished on the credit of that government. And it
became the avowed object of France to compel the United States to an implicit
submission to her will, or to ruin them.

To all these invasions of our rights, depredations of our property,
machinations against our peace and independence, and intrigues to draw us into
the war, the French government had been encouraged by our minister in France, a
weak zealot, subservient to their ambition and insolence. He fostered their
hope that the people of the United States were ready to make a common cause
with France, and would cheerfully submit to any invasion of their rights or
spoliations of their commerce, that would contribute to the success of that
cause. He neglected, in spite of the positive and repeated instructions of the
President, effectually to remonstrate against the violations of our treaty and
neutral rights, committed on our commerce by the French ships of war and
privateers. He neglected also, contrary to express instructions, to give to the
French government the necessary explanations of our treaty with Britain, and
point out the misconceptions on which the prejudice of France against it, and
the conduct of our government generally were founded. And he not only
encouraged but strongly recommended a loan of money, by the United States to
France, which would have been a plain breach of neutrality, and an open taking
part in the war, and, of course, a cause of war against us by all the enemies
of France. By speculations in the French funds, he purchased a princely palace
in the vicinity of Paris. His house was a resort for all discontented
Americans, where they were instructed by him not in respect, but disaffection
of their own government. At his table he read and misrepresented our treaty
with Britain. In his house he entertained the profligate and impious Pain,
while he wrote his scandalous letter to General Washington, and had it recited
to him as it was composed, for his amusement. -- And, at a public
entertainment, he retired, while the health of the President was drank, and
immediately after returned. When such was the treacherous conduct of our
minister, no wonder that the French government broke through all restraints of
decency or justice to us, no wonder that the President recalled him, and no
wonder that the Directory parted with him with regret.

As the French government were thus seduced to a false confidence in the
baseness and depravity of the American spirit; neither need we wonder that the
American people were so long deluded by a false opinion of the virtue of
France, and have only renounced that opinion, when it becomes too plain to be
denied, that the French government have abandoned all regard to God, to
government, to justice, or to decency. Vast and incessant pains have been taken
throughout this country, to mislead the understanding and the judgment of the
people. Pamphlets and newspapers have been continually issuing from the press,
for the avowed purpose of destroying all trust in God, and all confidence in
our government. No public character, not even the virtue of a Washington, nor
religion itself, has escaped abuse and defamation. Every act of the government
has been censured and misrepresented and even the motives and intentions of
public officers have been perverted and mistated. Every thing done by our
government has been represented as constantly wrong, every thing done against
us by the French, or any other government under their influence, as constantly
right; till we have seemed more willing to obey a mandate of the French
Directory, than a solemn act of our own administration.

Those notoriously false statements of public transactions have been supported
by many who having more concern in the administration, or being near the source
of information might have known (if in fact they did not know) better. Many of
our members of Assembly and members of Congress not only in conversations but
in letters have taken the utmost pains to disseminate suspicions and ill
opinions of the most respectable officers and necessary measures of the
administration; and have rendered it impossible for the citizens to know the
truth, or to form a right judgment of men or things. Hence the opinions and
duties of the citizens were perverted. And, as the nature of man is prone to
believe slander, the authors of those misrepresentations became popular in
proportion to their malignity, and influenced the opinions and elections of the
people.

Of all whom I have had an opportunity of observing, the member of Congress
from the adjoining district has been the most busy and mischievous. With a
reputation for candor, patriotism and truth, which gave to all his statements
the confidence of authenticity, his letters have filled the country with false
opinions of the acts and officers of government, and false vindications of
every thing done against it. The falsehood and malignity of many of his
representations have been discovered, and, if he have any value of reputation,
he will now cease to promote disaffection to the regular administration of
public authority; or if he should persist, the credit of his reports has so
much fallen, that they will be less injurious. But hitherto they have had a
pernicious influence on the judgment and conduct of the people of this country.
He has published them in newspapers. He has sent under cover to postmasters,
whom he knew disposed to be organs of the propagation of his opinions, his
letters to his correspondents open, for the purpose of being read and published
by those postmasters. His letters have been very frequent, and his
correspondents often of a sort not sufficiently qualified to detect or correct
the error and poison conveyed in them. The late message of the President has
been a complete confutation of some of the most malignant parts of them. It
becomes every man to aid in exposing them, in order to restore the people who
have been misled by them, to a right judgment and conduct, and preserve the
country from the dangerous effects of their delusion.

While the people of America were thus misrepresented by our minister in
France, and misled by the partisans of France here, and while prejudice and
false opinions of the American government were thus industriously suggested and
cultivated, both there and here; we need not recur to the British treaty, nor
to any conduct of our administration, for the causes of the French aggressions
on America, for they may be accounted for from the nature of man and the
general principles and conduct of the French government.

Power without restraint or accountability seldom fails to be abused in the
hands of men. The French had triumphed over all their enemies and were elated
with victory. It was the interest of those who possessed the powers of
government to keep the nation embroiled, in order to maintain their station and
influence. Early in the French revolution they publicly declared that they were
ready to unite with a party in any nation to change the form of their
government. And this, whatever they might afterward profess, they incessantly
pursued, wherever they had opportunity. It was indifferent to them whether the
government which they assisted the disaffected to destroy was a monarchy or a
republic, arbitrary or free. The point with them was to excite and support a
party, promote confusion, and so acquire influence, predominancy, and plunder.
Flanders, Holland, Italy, Germany, Switzerland and Venice, are ample proofs of
this spirit. The plunder of the church, the banishment and murder of their
fellow citizens, the perpetual destruction and succession of parties, and above
all the contempt and extinction of all principles of morality, humanity, and
religion, show, that we need not look beyond their own character, for causes of
mischief from the French government. Can we expect justice from men who deny it
to each other? Will those respect the rights of man, who contemn the rights of
God? Can we expect any decency or right from men with power in their hands, who
deny a God and a future state?

It is not therefore in the British treaty, nor in any part of the conduct of
our own government, but in the character of the French government, and in our
own divisions excited by the slander and abuse of our public officers, and
measures, that we are to look for the causes of the French aggressions. A love
of plunder and universal domination is plainly seen in all the conduct of the
French government. And the influence they had acquired here, and the fatal
division between the people and the government, which they and their partisans
had so incessantly and successfully promoted; showed us to be weak, because
divided, and therefore defenseless, and an easy prey. An house divided against
itself cannot stand. The French government might therefore freely indulge their
passion for plunder and power, unrelentingly persist in their violation of our
rights, and spoliation of our commerce, and set our government at defiance;
since they had a party among ourselves of strength and disposition competent to
defeat every purpose of the government, and render all its measures odious.

Confident therefore in these means of defeating any exertion for maintaining
our national sovereignty, and determined to reduce us to a state of submission
and dependence, when a minister was sent to Paris, who really would observe the
instructions of the President, and would not submit to be a tool of the
Directory; they refused to receive him and even threatened him with
imprisonment, unless he left their territory. He accordingly retired to
Holland, and waited for instructions from the President, to direct his future
conduct.

To have a just feeling of this gross indignity, let us suppose that the
British court had thus rejected Mr. Jay, obstinately rejected all communication
of complaints for the injuries done us, and told him he must leave the country
or perhaps go to prison: What would have been the indignation of America! And
how would the cry of war have resounded from all the partisans of France, even
from all spirited Americans! And, was not the rejection of Mr. Pinckney by the
French, a greater indignity? Is not indignity from a friend whom we have loved,
and praised, more grievous, than like treatment from a man whom we have hated
and abused?

Yet the American government did not resent this indignity, but refrained from
hostility; and the present President determined to make one effort more for
reconciliation. And, to give it more solemnity, appointed three Envoys to the
French Directory, to endeavor to obtain justice and peace, by stipulating for
compensation for past, and security against future injuries; in a new treaty
settling all the disputed constructions of the former, and fixing the terms of
our future intercourse with France.

It has been admitted by the greatest slanderers of the President, and even
contrary to their own previous suspicions and reports, that the instructions
given by the President to his Envoys have been the most liberal and candid,
that could have been justifiable. -- They authorized the Envoys, if this were
desired by the French, to modify the commercial treaty with France, according
to the principles of the British treaty; to give up our claim for enemies
property captured in vessels of the United States; to stipulate for our
accepting securities payable at a future time, instead of money, for our claims
for depredations on our commerce; and even not to insist on satisfaction of our
claims as an indispensable condition of the proposed treaty.

With full powers and such liberal instructions, the envoys arrived in Paris on
the 4th of October last, and the day following announced their arrival and
their mission to the minister of foreign affairs. His secretary gave
information, that the Directory were exasperated at Parts of the President's
speech, that the negotiation would be conducted under the direction of this
minister, and they would have no audience of the Directory till it was
finished. Two weeks after their arrival, authorized and acknowledged agents of
this minister commenced conversations, preparatory to the negotiation. They
began by stating the pride of the Directory, their great offense at certain
parts of the President's speech, and the humiliating apologies, disavowals,
reparations, and explanations, which would be required from the envoys. These
however, they fairly avowed to be only pretexts for the purpose of obtaining,
what was their real object, and without which, the envoys were told, that they
could expect no treaty nor even a reception, nor permission to remain in Paris;
money! that with or without these apologies, etc. money must be given. They
must, in the first place, give to the minister about 223,000 dollars, to be
employed by him in gaining the good will of the Directory. They must advance to
the French government a sum equal to all the American claims against France,
and the French government would then pay the claimants, and they lay out the
money again in supplies to the French colonies. They must purchase from the
French government Dutch debts to the amount of about six millions of dollars,
as sometimes stated, and twelve million of dollars as stated at other times,
paying twenty shillings in the pound, when in the market they were hardly worth
ten. All this was to be done without any assurance, that a negotiation would be
successful, without any statement of terms, and perhaps without even a
suspension of hostilities. These terms the envoys positively rejected. Argument
and menace were exerted in vain, to produce a compliance. -- The wrath and
power of the French government was set forth in strong terms. It was stated
that the present Directors would probably not be long in power, and a temporary
compliance might prevent a war. That we had to treat with men who disregarded
the justice of our claims, and the reasoning with which we supported them: that
they disregarded their own colonies, and considered themselves as invulnerable
with respect to us; that we would acquire an interest among them only by a
judicious application of money; that nothing was to be obtained there without
money; and that all the neighboring states had, in like manner, been obliged
to purchase peace. That if we did not, they would confiscate our property, and
embargo our vessels and ravage our coasts; that we might look for the fate of
Venice, to be parcelled out, and bartered away; or at least have the form of
our government changed, as that of Hamburgh and Switzerland would soon be; or
partake of a like ruin as was hanging over Portugal and England. That France
had lent us money, and we ought to show the same friendship. That they had
intelligence from the United States, that if Mr. Burr and Mr. Madison had
constituted the mission, the differences would have been accommodated. That the
minister was preparing a memorial, to be sent out to the United States,
complaining of the envoys, as being unfriendly to an accommodation with France.
That they had a party in America strongly in their interest; and that the
diplomatic skill of France, and the means which she possesses in our country,
are sufficient to enable her, with the French party in America, to throw the
blame of the rupture of the negotiations on the federalists.

To these proposals the Envoys replied, that, though sensible of the power of
France, they could never consent to purchase peace by a surrender of their
national independence. That submission to claims not founded in right, instead
of procuring solid peace, would only invite a repetition of demands without
end. That they expected to receive, and were prepared, in the amplest manner,
to give justice; and would make any reasonable sacrifice for the sake of peace.
That they were anxious to avoid war; but if war forced itself upon them, the
United States had nothing left, but to exert their means of self-defence; and
that those means were sufficient to preserve them from subjection to any
government. That while we were struggling for liberty, we had solicited from
France a loan of money as a favor, had not extorted it by threats or injuries,
nor exacted it as a condition of doing justice, or forbearing hostility; and
that France had lent it in the time of our distress, of her own choice, and in
order to maim and depress a rival nation. That France now stood in no need of
money for her own defense, and wanted it only to extend her conquests over
other nations. -- And that our lending it to France, while engaged in war for
that purpose, was becoming parties in the war; and taking part in the war under
the coercion of France was surrendering our independence. That it would not be
easy for the minister to persuade the people of America, that the statements
made by their Envoys are untrue; at any rate he might be assured, that the fear
of censure would not induce them to deserve it. They would act according to
their own judgment; and trusted they should be supported by the great body of
candid and honest men. And that France miscalculated on the parties in America;
for the extreme injustice offered to our country would unite every man against
her.

The latest dispatches received from our Envoys, dated 8th January last,
announce new measures tending to the utter destruction of our trade, and inform
us, that after a stay of three months there, unnoticed and unacknowledged, they
have no hope of being received, or of accomplishing the object of their
mission. All this the President has announced to Congress, with a declaration,
that no prospect remains of accommodating our differences with France, without
a surrender of the essential principles of our independence.

The crisis to which the United States are now brought, is one of the most
extraordinary to be found in the history of nations. A sovereign state
conscious of no offense is causelessly attacked by a proud and potent nation,
and on pretexts as various as they are groundless, and every day shifting and
multiplying, is spoiled of property to a vast amount, and threatened with the
utter extinction of her trade and her means of defense. Desirous to avoid war,
and to live on good terms with her spoiler, she sends to him messengers of
peace, to discuss the causes and effects of her sufferings, and even to forgive
all that is past, on condition that she may live securely in future. These
messengers, the spoiler first refuses to hear, drives from him, and threatens
with imprisonment. -- They are sent back. They are still not suffered to unfold
their complaints, or the powers of their mission. Frivolous grounds of
complaint against the suffering state are fabricated. Submissions are required,
on purpose to mark their degradation, and show how far the spoiler might
proceed in his plunder and demands. Those submissions are acknowledged to be
mere pretexts for exacting further enormous sums of money, as bribes or loans,
to men who professed no regard to justice, and might soon be out of authority.
When all these terms were to be complied with, it was possible the messengers
might be admitted to state their complaints, and propose terms of redress; but
in the mean time the spoiler would proceed in his acts of violence.

That when the colonies sent petitions for redress to Britain, they were
received contemptuously, was not matter of great wonder; for they were held as
in a state of rebellion. But that when one sovereign state, having received
unexampled and unprovoked injuries from another, has sent ambassadors to
discuss the grounds of injury, and means of redress, those ambassadors are
treated contemptuously, and dismissed unheard; and are moreover told, that if
ever they be heard, it shall be after a surrender of national dignity,
independence, and self-government, and a great increase of their past damage,
is a degree of insolence, and a contempt of justice, rarely experienced in the
annals of the world. The nation that can impose such terms has no principle to
restrain it. The nation that can submit to them is prepared for all oppression.
Force only can decide between them; or the one must be a tyrant and the other a
slave.

The dispatches are in the hands of every one, and no honest American but must
burn with indignation at their insolent demand of concessions for the
President's speech. Shall they impudently interfere in the discretionary
administration of our government, not affecting them, and we not speak with
resentment! Shall we pave the way to a negotiation by a disavowal of truth, and
a profession of falsehood! O! if they had found the envoys base enough to
submit to these terms, there would have been no humiliation so great that would
not have been required of them.

But these were but pretexts. The real preliminary was money. Money in bribes
and in gifts under the name of loans. For a loan from a weaker to a more
powerful government is but another name for a gift or tribute; especially when
the government requiring the money is avowed to have no regard to justice, is
publicly compared to the Indians and Algerines, and declared like them to sell
peace and forbearance of their cruel aggressions. With such a government having
made one concession, would there have been any end of demand, while we had any
thing to give? Indeed, at once they avow, that their expectations are in
proportion to our ability to pay. The first concession was putting our necks
under their feet. And true interest, as well as true dignity, required that we
should stop at the point of right.

But would it not have been better to have made this concession? By no means.
When a government disavows any regard to justice, declares that nothing is to
be obtained from it without money; not pretending any claim of right, like
Indians and Algerines, sets out on the principle of general plunder and
exaction; and fairly owns that her demands will be measured by our means of
satisfying them; we can never hope, by any concessions, to stop exaction, while
we have any thing to give: especially when the men whom we should now glut with
our tribute might be out of power in a few weeks, and a new set not less
ravenous and more hungry than they, on new pretenses, and with the same
terrors, might demand new supplies. Our envoys had no assurance, if all the
demands were complied with, how the money could be disposed of, or what terms,
or whether any terms of accommodation would be accorded to them. Nor, if they
had received such assurance, could any confidence be placed in it: for whenever
in mutual transactions, the basis of right, justice, and mutual interest is
departed from, all confidence is gone; the party exacting what is not founded
on this basis, becomes a knave, and if he have power, a tyrant; and the party
yielding, lays himself at his feet, and must submit to whatever, is required of
him. Besides, no concession from us can save us from her aggressions, while she
is at war with England. For it is the ruin of England that she seeks, and her
plundering us is one of her means of accomplishing that main object. And if we
make the concessions required, while Britain is at war with France, we shall
certainly draw on ourselves a war with Britain.

But still would it not be better for us, by not resisting, to avoid a war with
France?

What those men mean who, speaking of our present situation with respect to
France, talk of avoiding war, or of keeping out of war, I have never been able
to comprehend, unless they mean, that we ought to permit France in peace, to
take all our seamen, our ships, and our property by piece meal; unmolested in
peace, to reduce us to a state of starving beggars; and then, when we have no
means of defense, if she think proper, to come in peace and cut our throats,
parcel out our lands among her soldiers, and give up our wives and children to
their lusts. This seems to be the darling peace of those men. No resistance,
unless our territory be invaded. Let France go on and take our ships, our
seamen, and our wealth; it is true, that will deprive us of all means of
self-defence, stop our agriculture, manufactures, and arts; but then we shall
be at peace. If, indeed, France ever invade our country, then we shall go to
war; and if then we be incapable of defense, and can procure neither arms,
clothing, nor provisions, we may console ourselves with the reflection, that
we have sacrificed all these to peace; and in peace surrender our lives,
property, liberty, and independence to the French, and again sit down under the
blessings of a colonial government.

But some may say France is too good for us to fear any such fate from her. Is
not this the fate that all the states which she has cursed with her protection
or invasion have experienced? Has she not in all of them stirred up troubles,
discontents, commotions, seditions, and insurrections, and, under the pretense
of aiding, or suppressing, or punishing the insurgents, reduced them to
implicit subjection to her will. What are Spain, Holland, the Italian kingdoms
and republics, Switzerland, Rome, Flanders, and great part of Germany, but
colonies or dominions of France, plundered of their wealth and reduced to
poverty? What is Venice, a neutral nation overrun by the arms of France,
received under her protection, and promised a democratic form of government,
incited to commotion reduced to the condition of a conquered country, plundered
of her fleet and wealth, erased from the list of nations, and bartered to the
Emperor. France was not too good to do all this to Venice: and this is the
nation with whose fate we are now threatened by France.

France has long been carrying on war against us, in the safest and most
effectual way for her, and the most destructive to us; a war on her side, and
peace on ours. It is now upwards of five years since she began it. -- From
slender beginnings, she has proceeded to extravagant degrees of spoliation,
extended the extravagance of her pretexts and plunder, according to the degree
of our patience. The government remonstrated; but the French government knew
they dared not resent. They had a party among ourselves strong enough to defeat
all the energy of our government, and they might safely proceed to any measure
of oppression. In this party they yet confide; and in this confidence threaten
us not only with further plunder, but with ruin. And unless we show them by an
open and unanimous approbation of the past, and confidence in the future
conduct of our administration; that we are determined to support our government
in a just resentment, they will proceed in their spoliation, extending the
extravagance of their pretenses and their violence, as we extend our patience;
till they disable us from all means of defense, and reduce us to absolute
poverty, dependence, and subjection.

This is the only kind of war that France can carry on against us, with any
prospect of accomplishing her object, and subjecting us to her will. While she
continues this war, and we continue our delusive peace, our ruin is as certain,
as will be our security, if we now fix our foot and say, We will yield no more.
Here we take our stand, and from this moment we will repel all aggressions. We
will no longer seek shelter under the influence of a foreign government, but
under the parental guardianship of our own. And the authority of our own
government we will maintain, or perish with it.

But is there any hope, that we shall succeed in our resistance? Whether there
be or not, our condition can hardly be worse. For, under the last decree of
France, hardly any of our ships will escape condemnation, if they choose to
take them; and their disposition to take them we cannot doubt. And as their
resentment is violent against Britain, and our destruction would injure that
nation, we can hardly doubt that after rendering us defenseless, they will seek
to destroy us.

But there is hope that resistance will be successful, and obtain us peace, at
least, if not justice. France has now nothing to fear, while we acquiesce in
her violence; but if we resist we may repel, and even revenge, if not remedy
it. While we can maintain a tolerable portion of shipping and commerce, we can
obtain such supplies, as will enable us to support ourselves against an
invasion, if it should be attempted. -- But we are at such a distance from
France, and such is the crippled state of her navy, that it is not likely that
she will attempt an invasion of us, while she is at war with Britain, or if she
do attempt it, it is not likely that it can be successful. If there be a
prospect of an European peace, France must depend, for her future greatness, on
her manufactures, commerce, and shipping. These only can make her a rival to
Britain. And, to support these, she must have a foreign market. America is one
of the most important markets in the world for European manufactures. If the
French government find, that they can no longer maintain their influence here,
by a division or party among the people against the government, and find, that
the people unite with the government in just resentment against them for their
cruel and unprovoked aggressions; they must have lost all prudence, if they do
not see that a continuance of injury will rivet indelible prejudices against
them in the American mind, and disappoint all hope of securing any tolerable
share of trade with us; and they must have lost all regard for the future glory
of their nation, and all resentment against Britain, if they do not change
their conduct toward us, and, endeavor to conciliate our affections.

On these grounds, it appears that France has long been carrying on an
insidious and destructive war against us; that she will continue this kind of
war, in proportion to our patience and submission, until she has first
disabled, and then ruined and subjected us; that there is no other way of
obtaining an end to this war, peace, and justice, but by resistance; and that a
state of resistance to such war is more advantageous to us, than submission,
and will be effectual to procure us peace, justice, and national independence.

It is therefore the duty of the government, having offered all reasonable
terms, and exhausted all means of reconciliation, to prepare the nation for a
state of self-defence; and to convince France, that we will no longer submit to
unjust depredations, and violent invasions of our rights of property and
sovereignty. War is a dreadful calamity. But in self-defence, it becomes a duty
both for nations and individuals. And a government, which suffers another
government unjustly and without resistance, to exhaust it by plunder, and
render it defenseless, thereby to ruin and enslave it, is like a man who
quietly suffers a robber to tie his hands and bleed him to death, thereby to
seize his property.

The people also have duties to perform. When an independent and free nation
has its sovereign rights attacked, and violated by another nation; it is a call
of Providence to all the citizens to stand forth, and defend the cause of truth
and national liberty. Union in resistance becomes as much a duty in all the
citizens, as it is the duty of all the members of a family to unite in defense
of the house against midnight assassins or incendiaries. And in the discharge
of this duty, to which Providence calls them, they ought to look up with holy
confidence to the protection of that Providence which calls them out to trial,
and to the strength of the Lord of Hosts, who calls them to battle. His
providence and strength America has heretofore experienced: and the Lord,
which delivered us out of the paw of the lion, will deliver us out of the hand
of the Philistine.

To a trust in God we ought to unite confidence in those men whom Providence
has called to rule over us. We see that the conduct of the President and his
council has been virtuous, liberal and enlightened; that he has done every
thing practicable to avoid war; and that war is brought and continued on us, by
the malice and injustice of our enemies. Those slanders with which base men
have obscured the light, truth, and wisdom of our government, have been chased
away like mists before the sun. Let us return therefore from our error. Let us
restore to our administration that confidence which never ought to have been
withdrawn. And as our enemies have taken advantage of our jealousies and
suspicions of our government, and made the divisions arising from them, grounds
of their presumptuous hopes of destroying us; let us remove this cause of
danger, if we would avoid the danger itself. Let us show, that the people and
the government are of one heart and one mind. United we stand: divided we fall.

As, to remove danger, we must remove divisions, jealousies and suspicions, so
to remove these, we must silence slanderers, and set our faces against them. We
have seen the sad effects, and the gross misrepresentations of those lying
newspapers, lying pamphlets, lying letters, and lying conversations, with which
the country has been filled. It is no longer a season to trifle with public
opinion or popular passion; lest God give us up to strong delusion, and suffer
us to fall into destruction. Let us turn a deaf ear to those lying prophets.
Let us withdraw from them all belief, all aid, and all countenance. They are
vipers in our bosom, vultures preying on our bowels, and fatal instruments of
the malicious purposes of our enemies. No good man, with a just regard to his
own reputation, will any longer support or countenance them, for, by doing so,
he gives them confidence, and enables them to be mischievous. Silence those
slanderers, and we shall be as happy as we are free, as united as we are happy,
and as formidable as we are united.

Finally, in order to remove the danger thereby threatened, it is our duty to
endeavor to remove that impression, which our divisions have made on the
French government. As they rest their hopes of injuring us on the belief that
there is a party among ourselves devoted to their will; let us show them that
there is no such party. Let us unite in one band of unity among ourselves, and
confidence in our administration; and, to testify this union and confidence to
the world, let us unanimously sign an instrument, expressing to our government
our confidence in the rectitude of its measures, our firm reliance on the
protection of divine Providence, for the support of our independence from a
foreign yoke, on this as on a former occasion; and, for this support, now as
then, pledging to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor.

FINIS.

