CHARLES H. ATHERTON's ORATION.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED IN THE FIRST PARISH AT AMHERST, N. H. ON THE
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4, 1798.

BY CHARLES H. ATHERTON.

"The nation, which indulges toward another an habitual hatred or an habitual
fondness, is in some degree a slave."

"May the happiness of the people of the United States, under the auspices of
LIBERTY, be made complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of
this blessing as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the
applause, the affection, and adoption of every nation, which is yet a stranger
to it."

Washington's Farewell Address. PRINTED AT AMHERST, BY SAMUEL PRESTON.

JULY, 1798.

AMHERST, JULY 4, 1798. CHARLES H. ATHERTON, Esquire.
BY the unanimous Vote of the subscribers for the Public Dinner, we are
directed to request, for the press, a copy of the Oration this day delivered by
you, and permit us to add, Sir, that this vote accords highly with the
individual desire of this Committee.

ROBERT FLETCHER, ROBERT MEANS, JONATHAN SMITH.


JULY 5, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
THE request of my fellow citizens is complied with. -- Accept my thanks for
your particular approbation, and suffer me to add, that could the author
flatter himself, that the following sentiments are calculated to excite
"sensations purely American," to awaken that dignified self regard, that
INDEPENDENCE of feeling, which while it disdains the threats, is superior to
the caresses of any foreign power, which has been, is, must ever be, the main
pillar and support of our NATIONAL Independence; he should regard his
intentions, as having a claim to the indulgence of the public.

I am, Gentlemen, With considerations of esteem and respect, Your most obedient
and Very humble servant, CHARLES H. ATHERTON.
THE COMMITTEE.



AN ORATION.
MY MUCH RESPECTED FELLOW CITIZENS,
THE twenty third anniversary of the independence of the United States has
revolved upon us under circumstances, which though far from being discouraging,
are calculated to awaken our vigilance for its security.

To take a principal part in the commemoration of an event, which has given
this day peculiar importance, and stamped it as the natal day of the political
sovereignty of this country; to the origin of which there are many living
witnesses, but which, though not remote, is too early in the history of America
to be the object of the speaker's recollection, may demand of him an apology.
But his assurance, that it is a blessing to confirm the acquisition and
eternize the existence of which, the aspiration of every heart present unites,
is to him a sure pledge of the benevolence of the audience, that he has the
honor to address.

To that wisdom, which decided, to that energy, which executed in the day of
our trouble, to those events, which raised the American character to the summit
of fame, to the heroes, whose bones are now mouldering in the soil of the
nation for whose liberties they bled, we feel, we render, a grateful tribute of
veneration and respect. History does justice to their merit; pillars erected to
renown remind the traveller that " here we fought, bled and fell in defense of
our country's rights." But there is engraven on the living tablets of the
heart, a sweet remembrance, more honorary, than records, and more durable, than
the wasting monuments of human architecture.

AN elucidation of the causes, which may blast, and of the principles, which
may give eternal verdure to the dear bought honors of this day, would even to
an auditory of the departed spirits of the unfortunate brave, be more
acceptable, than a comment on their individual exploits. Over these, therefore,
we will spread a mantle of respectful silence, and hasten to objects more
immediately connected, with the perpetuation of the blessings, which, we have
now assembled to commemorate.

BUT in our rapid career over years of peril, wisdom, prowess and victory, in
which America gathered a rich and an abundant harvest of glory, we should be
deaf to the claims of justice, if we omitted to render a suitable tribute of
grateful remembrance, to the blunders of a corrupt and hoodwinked ministry,
when groping after the deceptive phantom of colonial subjugation.

WE will retrace the history of the United States, about ten years, and from
that stand, as an observatory, we will view the situation of this country. Are
there any causes for the divisions with which we have been lacerated, for the
rude contest for Liberty, either by her real or pretended friends, and which
has almost torn her robes from her limbs, it shall be our object to draw them
into view. Are there any appearances in our political horizon, indicating the
storms and eruptions, which have since burst over our heads, we will unawed
point them out.

WE behold a nation, having risen in vindication of her rights, to repel the
unjust aggressions and the still more dangerous pretensions of a foreign power.
She pursued her object with the magnanimity of conscious rectitude. Here we
trace no footsteps of cruelty. The specious and fatal argument of necessity had
yet found no place in the code of revolutionary law. An atheistical philosophy
had yet invented no metaphysical guillotines. America erected no scaffold for
the immolation of her sons. No political heresy of sentiment, was a watchword
for slaughter; but a humane toleration of opinion clearly evinced, that the
country understood the liberties for which they contended. The object of our
independence was pursued with a moderation, a justice, a mild humanity, which
has reflected on the event an irradiation of glory, that will outlive the blaze
of its victories.

WE behold a government, the choice of her most profound deliberations, come
into exercise under the administration of her tried patriots. Here we remark
the origin of a spirit, which like a baleful meteor portended darkness and
storm. The unavoidable preference of one character to another in the
distribution of the higher offices of state, left disappointment festering in
the breasts of those, who from a high appreciation of their services, from
ambition and from a vanity inseparable from human nature, regarded their claims
as secondary to none. Envy swore in the court of malice, that she would be
revenged on her superiors; and her minions waited only for occurrences to form
a breast work, from behind which they might direct their deadly weapons and
batter down the fortress, that was so unfortunate as to be commanded by persons
better than themselves.

WE remark likewise a violent prejudice against a nation, with whom we had
contended, originated and sustained by the injuries and resentments of a recent
war, and cherished and fomented by a cabinet, the darling object of whose
policy it was, to keep alive an eternal enmity between her and the United
States.

IT requires no political sagacity to observe, that the tardy, though
acceptable assistance, afforded by France in our struggle for independence, had
impressed this country with views partial to her interests. An unwillingness on
our part to scrutinize the motives, while receiving the benefits, and the
dexterity of a nation, never known to undervalue her merits, gave to this
interference the name of benevolence, for which they modestly demanded
gratitude.

SUCH was the excess of these prejudices, that many of the most virtuous
friends of the American liberties would have thought themselves perfectly
secure in entrusting the jewel of their independence to the safe keeping of
French generosity, while England was thrust out of the pale of civilized
nations, and to treat with her was regarded impious, as bending the knee to
Baal.

To feel a sense of injury, when opposing an enemy, gives vigor to the
warrior, and dignifies the patriot; but to harbor sensations of anger, malice
or revenge, after the ratification of peace, is a deviation from true glory.
These feelings, however, of hatred and affection, had their existence, and
mutually co-operated in committing this country in some future war with France
against Great Britain, in defiance of sound policy and the dictates of
morality, and in impelling us to a disregard of that dignified sentiment,
contained in the declaration of independence, "to hold them, as we hold the
rest of mankind, enemies in war, and in peace friends." Nothing was wanting but
a collision of the powers, who wield the interests of Europe, and whose
jarrings make the world a theater of intrigue, to give to our prejudices and
partialities a contentious and alarming aspect.

THE grievances and oppressions of France had long been the object of our most
sincere commiseration. A reformation of the government and a redress of its
injuries was a darling theme of American friendship; and it was not long, ere
the trump (...) ^allic emancipation blew the flame of enthusiasm in this
country to an indescribable height. In the apprehensions of many, the
millennium of universal liberty was at hand, and every movement in the French
revolution was regarded as a progression toward ameliorating the sad condition
of humanity.

FRANCE witnessing the electric joy, which diffused itself throughout the
United States at her successes, and well knowing, that time had not yet effaced
the old grudge against a nation, to which she is an hereditary enemy,
calculated with certainty upon the assistance of America in hostilities already
commenced against Great Britain. Under the specious pretext of a common cause,
France was to have monopolized the commerce of the United States, and cramped
her rival by depriving her of a material branch of her trade. We were to be
compensated for the horrors of war, and the loss of the manufacturing industry
of England, by rich cargoes of ribbons and fans.

BUT the proffered boon and the political intoxication of a part of the country
afforded to our government, no sufficient reason, to launch the United States
into the ocean of war, where all was tempest and hazard, without any probable
prospects of gain. The proclamation for neutrality was made, and the people
sanctioned it by their representatives.

IT was not long ere the French revolution began to disappoint the expectations
of its best friends, That is, after, the justice and virtuous moderation of La
Fayette grew intolerable to the unprincipled characters raised to rule, from
the dregs of society by political ferment. The President of the United States
in his answer to one of the late addresses made to him, says, "Since the
commencement of the French Republic, if we except hypocritical professions of
extravagant love of our people, I have seen nothing in the conduct of that
government in Europe, or that of her Ministers here, but unwarrantable
depredations, unjust exactious, imperious demands, and contumelious language."
and to show its resemblance to a fabled wonder of antiquity in having the head
of a human being; but the tail of a serpent. America, however, still the
enthusiast of France, fixed its eyes upon the perfect shapes of the child,
which in the dialect of the day was called the second born of liberty, and like
a fond mother, tried to forget, that it was a monster.

THE cool decision of the American government, not to make ourselves a party in
the war, which was deluging Europe in blood, called forth the intriguing
energies of the French cabinet* A determination to draw a voluntary or forced
aid from all the world in a war, which was now impiously called a war in favor
of the injuried rights of man, prompted her to put into operation in this
country the same machinery of revolt, by which she has secured unbounded
aggrandizement in Europe, and poured out the vials of her wrath upon the
nations, who have drank the poison of her cup.

WE have seen printing presses and the mercenary talents of their editors,
devoted to her interests, and like machines formed for the purposes of
counteraction, and as if directed by a fatal necessity, uniformly opposing and
calumniating the measures of our government. We have seen her revolutionary
societies established, and by the electric rapidity of their communications
giving concert to opposition, and sounding the tocsin of false alarm from one
extremity of the continent to the other. And what is still stranger, we have
seen under the name of friendship for the people, a battery formed against the
people's government, from which have issued the most unheard of calumnies. By
the dexterity of her councils and the daring enterprise of her ministers, she
has marshalled every particle of discontent in the country into a subserviency
to her views. Nothing that could impart ardor to the virtuous partialities and
embitter the honest prejudices of this country; nothing that could flatter the
disappointed, and allure the rapacious has been left unessayed. No exertions
have been wanting, that could excite suspicions against, and induce the people
to abandon, a government, which the all grasping Republic of France could not
control.

AN instrument, which adjusted subsisting difficulties between this country and
the power, with whom we had been at war, and laid the foundation for a lasting
peace between the two nations, as it removed a main object of French policy
farther from her reach, could not fail of being the object of peculiar
opposition. Then did we experience the efficacious means of France in this
country. Her printing presses teemed with misrepresentation, and the British
treaty was made the rallying point of party to thousands ignorant of its
contents.

THE bottomless pit of abuse was laid open, and the destroying angel of
division directed its blasts to the deathless laurels of WASHINGTON'S fame.
WASHINGTON, great and good name! By Heaven destined to be twice thy country's
savior. With what unshaken firmness did thou oppose thy breast to the
envenomed shafts of this hidden warfare, more dangerous, than the open violence
of arms, and they fell, like the bolts of British thunder, harmless at thy
feet. Do any wounds afflict thy bosom? Oh! let the balm of thy country's love
heal them. America shall be unworthy her liberties, and the name of an American
shall be a reproach, when thy services shall cease to warm the heart with
gratitude, or thy virtues cease to be

"The people's prayer, the glad diviner's theme,
The young man's vision, and the old man's dream."
WHEN we recollect the proffers of fraternity, generosity and protection, which
deluded the people of Holland and Belgium; See Harper's Address, and the
extracts published in the VILLAGE MESSENGER of July 21, 1798.
when we recollect that printing presses and private societies formed the van
and paved the way for the revolutionizing armies of France; that one of these
powers has dwiindled to skeleton by her deadly hug, and that the other has been
made to drink the cup of humiliation to its lowest dregs; when we recollect the
threats, and the actual execution of an appeal from the government to the
people of the United States, as if they were, or could be made to be, at
variance; when we recollect the alarming, insulting and mutinons insinuations
of Barras President of the Directory. See his speech to (...) after his recall.
Had he have said, "PEOPLE OF AMERICA! take of WASHINGTON's head and you will be
free," it would not have been more pointed.
to a disgraced American minister, the enthusiast for once must see the truth,
and the skeptic cease to doubt of the origin and tendency of the clamor
against the government of the United States. Rejoice, my countrymen. America
demands the joy. Rejoice, that you have not seen in this country the
establishment of a revolutionary tribunal, and under their auspices, a
scaffold, where upon the charge already fabricated, that " they were stooping
to the suggestions of their former tyrants," you might have seen WASHINGTON and
ADAMS marked as its prime victims. See the same speech. RECOLLECT the
insinuations, which have wounded your own ears. Oh! what a terrible
purification, would the United States have been subject to, under the
regenerating control of France. -- Stop, as this (...) government do not shed
blood now, they might only have been Bartholomew'd, that is, transported to
Cayenne. -- WHO would not have followed them in voluntary exile?
This might you have seen with unavailing astonishment, while an executioner
was calmly regaling himself with a pinch of rappee.

PAINFUL is the task, to develope the hostile intentions of a nation, whom we
have once called our ally; disagreeable is the necessity that makes it a duty
sacredly binding.

THAT ambition and lust of power, which seems to have arrested the French
revolution, left to America no exclusive favors to hope of her Republic. Her
depredations on our commerce were indications of hostility. The rejection of a
minister, however, deputed by the benevolent and moral policy of the United
States, for the purposes of reconciliation, could not convince us, that we were
to find an enemy in the nation, whom we have been proud to call our friend. The
revival of this mission in three of the most respectable characters in America,
as it evinced a sincere disposition on our part for peace with the French
Republic, was gratifying to the United States in general, and supported the few
remaining hopes of a reconciliation. But the conclusion of this embassy,
calculated from the dignity of the persons forming it, from the amplitude of
their powers, and from its being the second attempt at negotiation, to flatter
the vanity and soothe the ambition of any nation on earth, without effecting a
single object of their mission, has clouded every prospect of peace. The still
increasing plunder of our property, while the American ministers were waiting,
unaccredited, at the footstool of the Directory, by their authority, and by
decrees, which have emptied every breeze, freighted with our commerce, and
every tide laden with our wealth, into the coffers of her rapacity, leave on
the mind no doubt of the hostility of her views, and the extremity to which she
is determined to drive us. Her exaction of a gratuity, and the stipulation of a
loan, as preliminaries of their reception, enforced by the necessity of our
compliance, if France, all powerful in her partisans, make the demand, was,
like the asserted "right of taxing us in all cases whatever," staring us in the
face with the death's head of unconditional submission.

THE opiates of fraternity administered by one hand, while she has been
inflicting upon us the most cruel scourges with the other, her pretended
friendship and the bleeding interests of our country, instruct us, to beware of
the whited outsides of her political Pharisees. They go about with phylacteries
of generosity on their foreheads, and commandments of liberty on the hems of
their garments; but they are the seducers of the unsuspecting, and the
devourers of the weak.

THE declaration of her executive, that "she ought to become the model and
arbiter of nations," her undisguised attempts to make herself the despot of
Europe, and the arbitress of the world, the murdered liberties of Switzerland,
and the bartered independence of Venice, warn us, with more than archangel
eloquence, to rally round the standard of government, and to be ready to defend
the palladium of our sovereignty.

AMERICANS! Shall I alarm your fears by portraying the terrors of the storm,
that cannot be averted? No; but I hail you as having, this moment, firmly
planted your feet on the threshold of safety. Union affords a barrier, that
bids defiance to foreign aggression, and it has pervaded our land with healing
in its wings. Whatever causes may have conspired to create a difference of
sentiment on the minor topics of politics, on the grand subject of our
independence, can there be more than one opinion? It was the dear purchase of
treasure and blood; and if Americans can prostitute it by the payment of a
single barley corn of tribute to any nation on earth, base indeed must be their
degeneracy.

WE have escaped an "habitual hatred" for one nation, and an "habitual
fondness" for another, which, while calling ourselves free, made us really
slaves and dupes, slaves to our prejudices, dupes to our affections, and while
contenting ourselves with the bauble of nominal sovereignty, degraded our
independence, (Oh! could the recording angel drop a tear upon the truth and
blot it out forever) degraded our INDEPENDENCE, I say, into a shameful
servility to France. America is at length sovereign. We are at last FREEMEN.

WE have escaped the contagion of principles engendered in a revolution, whose
page is disgraced with the massacre of two hundred and fifty thousand women,
and two hundred and thirty thousand children, where the generous virtue of man
has not been sufficient to shield from political violence the fairer, and the
infant part of the human race; but they too have been sacrificed with
unrelenting barbarity, at the blood-stained altar of his pretended rights.

WE have escaped the demoralizing influence of a revolution, where christianity
has been formally annulled, and its sabbath erased from the callendar; where
the belief, "that death is an eternal sleep," has forced every barrier of vice
and every safeguard to virtue; where a contempt for the sacred obligations of
an oath, a disregard of all social ties and civil subordination, and where the
maxim, that "all means however profligate are sanctioned by the end," opened
upon the human race a new Pandora's box of evils, without any hope at the
bottom. These have (...) escaped, and from their progress in Europe, and their
aiming a death stroke at the base of civil society by unloosing the world from
its grand hinges of morality and religion, they are more terrible, than the
ravages of the sword, and portend greater ills to wretched humanity, than did
ever the triumph of the Pope, or the victories of Mahomet.

EXPERIENCE, the wise instructress of man, has spread before us the chart of
desolated Europe, and taught us, with what prudence the finger of reform ought
to be directed, and with what energy the rude arm of innovation must be
restrained, lest in undermining the establishments of time, the fabric they
supported should crush us in its fall.

THE pleasing and delusive phantom of national generosity, we have given to the
winds. It was the dream of a hypocondriac, and more fantastic, than the
vagaries of a sectary. The individual, who suspends his felicity on personal
favor, wretchedness has called her own. The nation, who trusts its independence
to the generosity of another, have already yoked themselves for vassals.

"Oh! momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for, than the grace of God,
Who builds his hopes in air of your fond looks,
Lives, like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep."
LET us Americanize our feelings, nor suffer our own interests to go to ruin,
while we are gossipping about the welfare of our neighbors.

WE have a constitution, the work of our own wisdom, administered by persons of
our own choice. As such, the government and its administrators deserve our most
generous support and confidence. Had we a government of fraud or violence, had
we a monarch imposed upon us by the wayward hand of chance, had we an
hereditary senate, whose pretensions to opulence, power and merit depended on
the fortuitous circumstance of birth, well might the people view in their
governors an interest opposed to their welfare, well might they exercise
political jealousy, well might the person, who should espouse the cause of the
people, in despite of the allurements of wealth and the patronage of the great,
and nobly oppose himself to the over-bearing aristocracy of his country, well
might he have his name embalmed to posterity as the patriot of his day. But in
a government like ours, founded in public opinion, a government, emanating from
the spirit, the genius and the feelings of the people, the man, who uniformly
opposes its measures, is, with the certainty of all calculations not
mathematical, at issue with the WILL of his country, that will to which he owes
obedience, and far from being the patriot of a representative government, he is
only the APE of a patriot under a MONARCHY. Let the people be convinced of the
truth of this reasoning, founded on the nature of their government, and they
will rend asunder the veil of mock patriotism, and be able to distinguish their
friends from their flatterers.

IN the crisis, which is dawning upon us, we do not look around in vain for
objects, which inspire the most flattering hopes.

SUFFER me to congratulate you upon the abilities and virtue, which adorn the
chief magistracy of the United States. Genius, habits of thinking, all the ties
of honor and interest, all the allurements of fame attach the President to his
country, and conspire to render him the most undoubted friend of America. The
pillar of his glory, founded on the broad and firm pedestal of talents,
science, patriotism, law and liberty, wants only a virtuous and patriotic
administration of the government, the image of his earliest and fondest
researches, as a chaplet, to cap and give it perfection.

IN the rising generation, you have a pleasing pledge of a vigorous defense of
the rights, the hard earnings of their ancestors. At the altar of Liberty have
they sworn, that they will defend with their lives, the soil of their fathers,
this "dear, dear" inheritance of plenty and freedom.

AMONG the firmest friends of America, we view the veteran asserters of her
rights, and assure ourselves, that the arm, which was nerved to repel the
aggressions of a British Monarch, will not fall lifeless by its side, when
summoned to resist the encroachments of a French Directory.

ABOVE all, my countrymen, you have a pure and religious source of consolation
in the measures of your government. A most critical review of them finds
nothing for reproach. The adminministration of the federal government exhibits
an integrity and rectitude seldom to be sound in the history of nations. Marked
with a sacred adherence to the laws of nations, and a moral regard to
subsisting, particular engagements, it is defensible at all points. The
American Eagle has not ceased to extend to the world her olive branch of peace;
it is in the last resort only, that she draws her arrows from their quiver.
When all human means have been essayed for peace, in vain; when we are urged to
war by the unrelenting mandates of necessity, it is then, in the TERRIBLE
APPEAL OF ARMS, we can look with confidence for success, to the GOD OF PATTLES.

FINIS.

