COLLECTIONS FOR AN ESSAY TOWARD A MATERIA MEDICA OF THE UNITED-STATES.

READ BEFORE THE PHILADELPHIA MEDICAL SOCIETY, ON THE TWENTY-FIRST OF FEBRUARY,
1798.

BY BENJAMIN SMITH BARTON, M. D. ONE OF THE HONORARY MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY,
AND PROFESSOR OF MATERIA MEDICA, NATURAL HISTORY, AND BOTANY, IN THE UNIVERSITY
OF PENNSYLVANIA.

Sunt Simplicia desumpta e triplici Naturae Regno: e Lapideo, Vegetabili and
Animali; heic VEGETABILIA tantum depromsi, quae maximam constituunt Materiae
Medicae partem, alio tempori reservans cetera. LINNAEUS. ^^DEM NON ABSTULIT
ERROR.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED, FOR THE AUTHOR, BY WAY and GROFF, No. 27, ARCH-STREET.

1798.

COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

TO JAMES EDWARD SMITH, M. D. F. R. S. PRESIDENT OF THE LINNAEAN SOCIETY,
MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMIES OF TURIN, UPSAL, AND LISBON; AND MEMBER of the
AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, etc.
DEAR SIR,
I CANNOT expect to add any thing to your reputation, by dedicating to you the
following pages. I mean not, by this act, to choose a patron who shall veil my
faults, or screen me from the censure of the public critic. The actions of men,
particularly perhaps of young men, are sometimes disinterested. It is with
pleasure I declare to the public, how much I admire your exertions for the
extension of that amiable science which both of us cultivate: you with the
happiest success; I with an humble ardour.

THE age in which we live is the age of natural science. The mind of LINNAEUS
has effected more than the combined intellects of all the naturalists of any
preceding century. Natural history, however, is still an infant science. This
is particularly the case with respect to America. Even the nomenclature of our
productions is extremely imperfect. We are still less acquainted with the
properties of our productions. I view this blank in the history of science,
with pain. This pain, however, is daily diminished: for something is daily
added to the stock of our knowledge.

I AM far from insinuating, that what I offer you is important in its kind. I
am fully sensible of the imperfections of this Essay. I could wish it were more
worthy of your attention. If I succeed in convincing you, that there are some
lovers and cultivators of botany in the United-States, one of my objects in
writing this dedication will be accomplished.

ACCEPT of my sincere wishes for your happiness, and believe me to be, with
great respect,

Dear Sir, Your friend and humble servant, etc. BENJAMIN SMITH BARTON.
Philadelphia, March 12th, 1798.
PREFACE.
I HOPE the following pages will be received as an earnest of my desire to
extend our knowledge of the medical properties of the indigenous vegetables of
the United-States. I do not expect to acquire any reputation by the
publication. Perhaps, in making this assertion, I shall not be doubted, when I
confess that in every thing which I have hitherto published, I have had
reputation in view. If I have not acquired it, I have borne the disappointment
with tranquil indifference.

THE readers of these Collections (for every thing that is written and
published solicits some readers), will form different opinions about my medical
faith. Some of them will think I have too much; and others that I have not
enough. I certainly do not repose implicit confidence in the half of what is
said concerning the powers of medicines. Accordingly, I have not given a place
in these pages to many of our vegetables which have been praised as specifics
for the cure of diseases; in particular, as specifics against the bites of
venomous serpents. But, on the other hand, it will be asked, whether I mean
that all the different vegetables which I have mentioned, should have a place
in the materia medica of physicians? I answer, No. But how are we to know what
plants are most proper for the purposes of medicine, until we shall have
examined the properties of a great body of vegetables? The Digitalis is now
thought one of the most important of the diuretic medicines: but perhaps future
inquiries will discover a diuretic which shall, in a great measure, supersede
the frequent use of this active plant. I wish to turn the attention of our
physicians to an investigation of the properties of their native productions.
When it is considered how little has hitherto been done in this way, every
attempt (mine is an humble one) should be heartily received. I do not mean that
its faults should not be pointed out.

THE arrangement of the articles which I have mentioned is by no means
faultless: on the contrary, it is liable to many objections. I should not have
followed this arrangement had I been considering all the articles of the
materia medica. I shall give a sketch of my ideas of a method of the science,
in my strictures on the arrangement of the learned and elegant author of the
Botanic Garden, a poem which unites the fire of Lucretius with the taste of
Virgil, and a learning unequalled by that of Camoens or of Milton.

I THINK it but candid to confess, that since reading this address to the
Medical Society, I have made some alterations in it. These alterations,
however, are very inconsiderable. In general, even the very style and faults of
each phrase are preserved, for I had not time to alter or correct much. I have
left out the concluding part of the address, relative to the establishment of a
medical library: not that I doubt the ability of the society to form a library
of its own. The notes contained in the appendix were not read to the society.

WHATEVER may be the reception of this essay by the public, whether favorable
or unfavourable, I shall pursue my inquiries concerning the nature and
properties of the natural productions of my native country. I shall pursue
them, because there is at least a possibility that they may ultimately tend to
something useful: and because I have the experience of several years to teach
me, that the cultivation of science is the extension of my happiness.

ERRATUM.
Page 13. For Cornus Cincinata. read Cornus circinata.

COLLECTIONS, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
WE have assembled together to celebrate the anniversary of our foundation. It
is an occasion which ought to give pleasure to us all. We have met, however,
for the difficult purpose of mingling science with pleasure. This difficulty
falls peculiarly upon me. By your vote, I have been called upon to deliver the
annual discourse. I accepted of the appointment cheerfully, because I was
anxious to demonstrate my attachment to the Society, of which I had the honor
to be a member at a very early period of my life; a Society in which I first
imbibed my love of the different sciences which constitute the great fabric of
medicine.

BUT if I accepted of the appointment with pleasure, I do not address you with
confidence. I have found it difficult to select a subject for your
entertainment. I, at one time, contemplated a comparative view of the different
theories which have prevailed in medicine, in the present century. But I soon
found this subject too extensive for our purpose: besides, in the investigation
of this view, I should have been obliged to speak with a freedom, which might
not have given pleasure to every one of us. Men are often attached to theories,
as parents are attached to their children.

AFTER some difficulty, I have selected a subject. It is An Essay toward a
materia medica of the United-States; or, if you please, An Inquiry what
indigenous vegetables of our country may be used with advantage in the
treatment of diseases. This, you will immediately perceive, is a task both
extensive and difficult. But it is an important one. I shall not, perhaps,
perform a duty altogether unacceptable to you, if I furnish you with a few
facts, not generally known to you before. This is all I aim at.

MINE is not the first attempt of this kind. Besides the paper entitled
Specifica Canadensium, See Amo^nitates Academicae. Vol. iv. Dissertatio lxxii.
Dr. Schoepf, of Erlangen in Germany, has favored us with a specimen of such a
work, under the title of Materia Medica Americana potissimum regni vegetabilis.
This work was printed in 1787. The author arranges the articles according to
the sexual system of Linnaeus. This, though an objection, is not the greatest.
He has given us nothing from his own experience. He ascribes active powers to
plants which are nearly inert, and appears to me to be, in some measure,
governed by the old notion of Signatures: one of the tyrants of the ancient
schools. He discovers none of that infidelity, or, if you please, skepticism,
which ought ever to be attached to physicians: I mean not an infidelity
relative to religion; but an unwillingness to acquiesce, without good proofs,
in the truth of every tale concerning the powers of medicines. This pliant,
this credulous disposition, has been one of the causes which have obstructed
the regular march of medical science. But as the effort of Schoepf is the best
of the kind, so we ought to tread lightly on his work. He is at least a man of
learning; and learning should always claim indulgence from the lovers and
cultivators of science.

I AM far from supposing that it is in my power, especially on this occasion,
to supply all the defects of Schoepf's book. It would be easy to point out its
faults. I aim at a rude sketch of our materia medica. It is so extremely
unfinished, that I have no objection to its being called by any inferior name.
I confine myself entirely to vegetables.

MATERIA ALIMENTARIA.
YOU are all acquainted with the great general division of the materia medica
into two parts: that which relates to the aliments, or nutrientia, of mankind,
and the medical part, more strictly so called. Each of these is highly
important; but I mean in this address to confine myself almost entirely to the
latter branch. Yet the former should claim some of our attention. Much may be
expected from a country which has blessed us with the maize, the potatoe, etc.
I could readily furnish you with a long list of the indigenous nutrientia of
this country; but such a list would be very uninteresting. On this subject,
however, an useful work might be written. He who shall undertake to examine the
subject extensively will find, that Providence has, in the gift of esculent
vegetables, been as liberal to the countries of the United-States, as to any
other countries of the world, of equal extent.

UNDER this head of the nutrientia, I shall content myself with mentioning two
native articles, which deserve the attention of physicians and others. Perhaps,
they may even supersede, on many occasions, the use of some other articles,
which are purchased at a pretty dear rate.

THERE grows upon the river Mobile a species of palm, which is but little known
to naturalists, but which promises to be an important article of food to man.
It has no stalk or stem above ground. The leaves spread regularly all round,
and when fully expanded are flabelliform. In the center of these leaves is
produced the receptacle of the fruit, which is of the form and size of a common
sugar loaf. This receptacle consists of a vast number of drupes, or berries, of
the size and shape of common plumbs: each is covered with a fibrous,
farinaceous, pulpy coating of considerable thickness. This substance is said to
resemble manna in texture, color and taste; or, perhaps, it still more
resembles moist brown sugar, with particles of loaf sugar mixed with it. It is a
most delicious and nourishing food, and is diligently sought after in the
places where it grows. Upon first tasting it, it is somewhat bitter and
pungent. From the information of Mr. William Bartram. MS penes me. Vol. i


THE large tuberous roots of the Smilax China afford our southern Indians a
nourishing food. The fresh roots are well macerated in wooden mortars. The mass
is then put into vessels nearly filled with clear water, where it is well mixed
with paddles. It is decanted off into other vessels, where it is left to
settle, and after the subsidence is completed, the water is cast off, leaving
the farinaceous substance at the bottom. When this is taken out and dried, it
is an impalpable powder of a redish color. Mixed with boiling water, it
becomes a beautiful jelly, which, when sweetened with honey or sugar, affords a
most nourishing and pleasant food for children or aged people. The Indians
sometimes use it mixed with fine corn-flour, and fried in fresh bears' oil.
From the information of Mr. William Bartram. MS penes me. Vol. i.


THE chemical history of the maize, or Indian corn, the blessing of our
country, deserves to be farther investigated. Its importance as an article of
diet is sufficiently established by the experience of whole nations.

MATERIA MEDICA.
I AM not very anxious, on this occasion, about my division of the materia
medica. I have attempted, in my lectures, to make some improvements upon the
arrangement of Dr. Cullen; and, if I live, I hope to publish, in a few months,
my strictures on the late arrangement of the ingenious Dr. Darwin. At present,
in possession of only a small collection of original facts immediately relative
to the materia medica of the United-States, I shall content myself with
disposing of these facts under the nine following heads, viz. 1. ASTRINGENTS;
2. TONICS; 3. STIMULANTS; 4. ERRHINES; 5. SIALAGOGA, or SALIVATING MEDICINES;
6. EMETICS; 7. CATHARTICS; 8. DIURETICS; 9. ANTHELMINTICS.

SECT. I. ASTRINGENTS.
I THINK it proper, in the present state of our knowledge of medicines, to give
place to a class of ASTRINGENTS. There is the more propriety for the adoption
of such a class, because we see more readily, than with respect to many other
medicines, their direct mode of operation. Our vegetable astringents, I mean
the purer and more unmixed astringents, are numerous. The barks of all our oaks
are of this kind. But I may here particularly mention three or four native
astringents, which seem to be more especially entitled to your attention.

THE first is the Geranium Maculatum, or Spotted Geranium, which grows very
plentifully about this city: it flowers in the spring. The root is used: this
boiled in milk has been found an excellent medicine in the cholera of children.
It is not necessary to be very nice about the dose. I imagine it would also
prove useful in old diarrheas, where the kino, and other astringents are
exhibited. If nephritis, of certain kinds, be relieved by astringents, this
geranium would seem entitled to attention, not merely because it is a powerful
astringent, but because a species of the same genus, the Geranium robertianum,
or Herb-Robert, has been employed with advantage in this distressing complaint.
I am not certain that the Geranium robertianum is a native of any part of
America.


THE Heuchera Americana is the next astringent. This is sometimes called
American Sanicle. It is more commonly called Alum-Root. The root is a very
intense astringent. It is the basis of a powder which has lately acquired some
reputation in the cure of cancer. I suppose all its virtue, in this case,
depends upon its astringency. I may here observe, that the disease of cancer is
not confined to civilized nations. It is known among our Indians. I am informed
that the Cheerake cure it with a plant which is thought to be the Hydrastis
Canadensis, one of our fine native dies. I do not believe that the Heuchera has
cured genuine cancer: but it seems certain that it has proved very beneficial
in some obstinate ulcers, which have been mistaken for cancer. In such cases,
the astringent medicines are too much neglected.

THE Actaea racemosa, or Black Snake-root, is also a valuable medicine. It is
sometimes called Squaw-root, I suppose from its having been used as a medicine
by our Indians. The root of this plant is considerably astringent. In a putrid
sore throat which prevailed in Jersey, many years ago, a strong decoction of
the roots was used, with great benefit, as a gargle. Our Indians set an high
value on it. A decoction of it cures the itch. In North Carolina, it has been
found useful, as a drench, in the disease of cattle called the murrain.

THE Uva Ursi Arbutus Uva ursi of Linnaeus.
is considerably astringent. Yet I suspect that it does not operate entirely by
virtue of its astringent quality. This plant, from my own experience, I can
recommend to you as a most valuable medicine. It should be in the hands of
every physician. I have used it with advantage in old gonorrhea. But its great
virtue is that of a medicine in nephritis. I am inclined to think that it is
peculiarly adapted to cases of what I call nephritis podagrica, or nephritis
depending upon gout. This is one of the plants which is common to the old and
to the new-world. It grows plentifully in Canada, New York, New Jersey, etc.
Schoepf says, the Indians mix the leaves with tobacco. Page 68.


THE Liquidambar asplenifolium Comptonia asplenifolia of Aiton.
of Linnaeus is well known by the name of Sweet-Fern. It has often been found
useful in diarrhea. Other virtues have been ascribed to it. Sec Schoepf, p. 142.


SECT. II. TONICS.
I BELIEVE all the astringent medicines are more or less TONIC. But there are a
good many tonics which are not astringent. There is, certainly, some propriety
in considering the astringents and tonics under two distinct heads, as Dr.
Cullen has done. But, perhaps, the tonics should only form one section of the
great class of stimulants. Certain it is, that many of the tonic medicines are
considerably stimulant.

THE class of tonics is extremely interesting to physicians. It embraces some
of the most valuable medicines with which we are acquainted, such as the
Peruvian bark, the extensive tribe of bitter medicines, as the gentians, etc.
The natural infirmities of mankind, and perhaps especially the vices to which
civilized nations are so propense, will always render the tonics most necessary
implements in the hands of physicians.

OUR woods possess several medicines which I am inclined to think might to be
used, with advantage, as substitutes for the Peruvian bark. Perhaps, most of
our Oaks, which are in general different from the oaks of the old-world, are of
this kind. Sufficient trials have not been made with them; at least internally
used. Externally some of them have been employed with advantage. I have used
the bark of the Spanish oak Quercus rubra montana of Marshall.
in gangrene, and I had every reason to think it was, in this case, equal in
power to the best Peruvian bark. The bark of the Prunus Virginiana, or
Wild-Cherry-tree, has been used in intermittent fevers, and found useful. This
is a very common tree. Its leaves are poisonous to certain animals, as calves.
Even the berries intoxicate different kinds of birds. The barks of the Common
Sassafras (Laurus Sassafras) and Persimmon (Diospyros Virginiana) have likewise
been found useful in intermittents. In the year 1793, I used the bark of the
last of these vegetables in an ulcerous sore throat. Dr. Woodhouse has favored
us with some interesting information concerning the Persimmon. See his
Inaugural Dissertation. Philadelphia. 1792.
Our Willows have not been attentively examined. We have several native
species, and I believe they possess nearly the same properties which have been
ascribed to the willows of Europe, Particularly the Salix alba, Salix
pentandra, Salix latifolia, etc.
by Stone, Haller, and other writers. The Dogwood is a genus which seems well
worthy of attention. Of this, the Cornus of the botanists, there are several
species in North America. The most common is the Cornus Florida, or Common
Dogwood. I find this in every part of the United-States. It is one of our most
beautiful shrubs. It flowers early in the spring, and with so much regularity,
that some of our southern tribes were accustomed to name the spring season from
its flowering. The bark is considerably astringent. It has long been employed
in intermittent fevers. A decoction of it has also been employed, and found
very useful, in a malignant fever, called the yellow water, Canada distemper,
etc. which, within the last eight years, has carried off great numbers of the
horses in the United-States. The ripe fruit, or berries, infused in spirit or
brandy, make an agreeable bitter. Our Indians employ an infusion of the flowers
in intermittents. The same infusion has been much recommended by some in
flatulent cholic. I have used it as a tea.

THE Cornus sericea, another species, is called Red-Willow and Rose-Willow;
which are very improper names. The bark of this is often mixed with tobacco and
smoken by the savages. It has been found but little inferior to the common pale
Peruvian bark, in intermittent fevers. This species grows in wet places, on the
sides of rivers, creeks, etc. and flowers in August and September. I know
nothing of the medical properties of the other native species of this genus;
viz. Cornus Canadensis, Cornus Cincinata, etc.

MANY years ago, Zannichelli, and of late, Cusson and other writers,
recommended the bark of the AEsculus Hippocastanum, or Common Horse-Chesnut, as
a substitute for the Peruvian bark. This AEsculus is not a native of America,
though it thrives very well in the open ground of Pennsylvania, etc. But we
have at least two native species of the same genus within the limits of the
United-States. AEsculus Pavia of Linnaeus, and AEsculus ^lava of Aiton.
Whether the bark of these possess the properties which have been ascribed to
the Hippocastanum, I do not know. They deserve to be examined.

I MUST not omit to mention, under this head, the Magnolias. Of this fine
genus, we have at least six species, viz. the Magnolia glauca, the acuminata,
the tripetala, the grandiflora, the auriculata, and the Fraseri. I believe they
all possess nearly one general assemblage of properties; but of this I am not
quite certain. The species that is best known to me is the glauca, commonly
called Magnolia, Beaver-tree, and Swamp-Sassafras. The bark of this is an
agreeable aromatic, tonic, bitter medicine. It has been used in intermittent
fevers. The flowers have a powerful and to most persons an agreeable smell. It
is an emanation which must be considered as a potent stimulant, or incitant. I
am well acquainted with a physician in whom the newly-expanded flower evidently
increased the paroxysm of a fever which came on every afternoon; and also
increased the pain of inflammatory gout. This is an interesting fact. In
Virginia, a spirituous tincture of the cones, or seed-vessels, of the Magnolia
acuminata, which is commonly called Cucumber-Tree, has been used, and we are
told very advantageously, in rheumatic complaints. See Dr. Duncan's Medical
Commentaries, for the year 1793. Vol. xviii. p. 445.
The bark of the root of the Magnolia grandiflora, sometimes called Tulip-tree,
is used in Florida, in combination with the Snake-root, as a substitute to the
Peruvian bark, in the treatment of intermittent fevers. The flowers of the
Magnolia tripetala, or Umbrella-tree, have a very powerful smell. They often
induce nausea and headache.

I AM inclined to think that the Cortex Angusturae, which has lately been
introduced into medical practice, and is so greatly celebrated as a tonic, by
the practitioners of Britain, is the bark of some species of Magnolia.

THE Liriodendron Tulipisera, well known in the United-States, by the names of
Tulip-Tree, Poplar, White-Wood, etc. is very closely allied, by its botanical
character, to the Magnolias. They both belong to the same class of the sexual
system, and both, I believe, possess nearly the same properties. The bark of
the Liriodendron is sometimes used in intermittents. Many persons are of
opinion, that in this case, it is but little inferior to the Peruvian bark. I
have never employed it.

THE bark of the Populus tremula? or Aspin? has likewise been used in cases of
intermittent fevers. This is a powerful tonic, and deserves the attention of
the American physician. It has been found very useful, as a stomachic, in the
diseases of our horses.

THE Snake-root, the Aristolochia Serpentaria, is one of the more stimulating
tonic bitters. It is certainly a valuable medicine, in the second stage of
certain fevers, after the inflammatory diathesis has been removed. It was used
with great benefit, in a most malignant fever, attended with carbuncles, which
prevailed at Bristol, on the Delaware, in this state, in the years 1749 and
1753. Another species of this genus, the Aristolochia sipho of L'Heritier,
grows in the neighborhood of Pittsburg, and in other parts of the
United-States. This is a large, climbing plant. The root has a pungent,
aromatic taste, and for certain purposes is perhaps preferable to the common
Snake-root.

I SHALL conclude this subject of tonics by observing, that we possess a good
many of the bitter plants of Europe, which have long claimed the attention of
physicians. Our Gentians have not been carefully examined. We have one species
which appears to be equal to any of the officinal kinds yet known.

SECT. III. STIMULANTS, OR INCITANTS.
THE class of STIMULANTS, or INCITANTS, is so very extensive, that in order to
exhibit a methodical or natural medical arrangement of these articles, it would
be necessary to consider them under a number of different heads, or sections.
But this, in such a sketch as I offer you, does not appear necessary. I shall
content myself, therefore, with speaking of a few of our native stimulant
vegetables, under the two heads of such as are more general, and such as are
more partial, or topical, in their operation.

GENERAL STIMULANTS.
I THINK that many of our different balsamic products may, with propriety, be
considered under the head of GENERAL STIMULANTS, though they are certainly not
the most diffusible articles of this class. Such is the resin of the Populus
balsamifera, called Balsam, or Tacamahaca-Tree. This is a native of
North America and of Siberia. The resin is procured from the leaf-buds. This
balsam is so very penetrating, that it communicates its peculiar smell and
taste to the flesh of certain birds which feed upon the buds. It was formerly
supposed, that the Tacamahaca of the shops was the produce of this tree. But it
seems more probable that it is the produce of the Fagara octandra.

THE gum-resin which exudes from the Sweetgum, or Maple-leaved
Liquidambar-Tree, the Liquidambar Styraci^lua of Linnaeus, deserves to be
mentioned. The storax of the shops is thought to be the produce of this tree:
but perhaps this point is not yet quite ascertained. I am informed that the
produce of our tree has been used, with advantage, in diarrheas. Some of our
southern Indians mix the dried leaves with tobacco, for smoking.

To the head of stimulants I have no hesitation in referring a number of
poisonous vegetables, with the properties of which we are not so well
acquainted as we ought to be. Such are the Datura Stramonium, or
James-town-weed, the Cicuta maculata, etc.

THE Datura is one of our most common plants. It is certainly a medicine
possessed of useful powers. The properties of this vegetable have lately been
more satisfactorily investigated by one of our members, Dr. Samuel Cooper.

WE have several native plants of the natural order umbelliferae. That
described by the late Dr. James Greenway, under the name of Cicuta venenosa,
should be carefully investigated. This, from his account, must either be a
direct sedative, or a stimulant, whose first operation is very soon
accomplished. It kills without inducing pain or convulsions. Perhaps the plant
with which some of our Indians, when weary of life, destroy themselves, is the
same. It grows in meadows, and has a root like a parsnip.

BEFORE I take leave of these poisonous plants, I may mention some others whose
properties are but little known. The first is the Rhododendron maximum, or
Pennsylvania Mountain-Laurel. This is certainly a poison. It is a species of
the same genus as the Rhododendron Crysanthmum, which has lately acquired much
reputation in the cure of chronic rheumatism.

NEARLY allied to the Rhododendron is the genus Kalmia. Of this we have several
species, and all of them are poisons. The Kalmia latifolia, or Broad-leaved
Laurel, is best known to us. It kills sheep and other animals. Our Indians
sometimes use a decoction of it to destroy themselves. In the county of
Lancaster, an empiric has used the powdered leaves with success in certain
stages of fevers, and in tinea capitis. A decoction of the plant externally
applied has often cured the itch; but it must be used with great care, for thus
applied it has been known to occasion disagreeable subsultus, or startings, and
convulsions. I have given the powder of this plant internally in a case of
fever, and have thus, at least, ascertained that it may be used with safety.

THE medical properties of our different species of Andromeda and Azalea, which
in botanical character are very nearly akin to the Rhododendron and Kalmia, are
but little known to me. I have long suspected that they are poisons. A
decoction of the Andromeda Mariana has been found useful as a wash in a
disagreeable ulceration of the feet, which is not uncommon among the slaves,
etc. in the southern states.

THE Gaultheria procumbens, which we call Mountain-Tea, is spread very
extensively over the more barren, mountainous parts of the United-States. It
belongs to the same class as the plants just mentioned. I have made use of a
strong infusion of this plant, which is evidently possessed of a stimulant and
anodyne quality. I am told it has been found an useful medicine in cases of
asthma. But I have not learned to what particular forms of this disease it is
best adapted, nor in what manner it operates.

OUR native species of Laurus deserve to be investigated. The Camphor and the
Cinnamon belong to this genus: but hitherto, they have not been discovered
within the limits of the United-States. The properties of the Common Sassafras,
which is a species of Laurus, have not been sufficiently examined. It is the
Laurus Sassafras of the botanists. I have already mentioned the bark. Its oil
seems to be an useful medicine. I have been assured that this oil has been
found an efficacious medicine, externally applied, in cases of w^ns. This looks
probable; for our medicine is nearly allied to camphor, which has been used
with advantage in bronchocele. The oil rubbed upon the head has been found very
useful in killing lice. The bark, especially that of the root, powdered and
mixed with pomatum, has the same effect.
I knew a woman in whom an infusion or tea of the root of the Sassafras always
induced an oppression at breast, with sighing, and depression of spirits.

DURING the late American war, necessity drove the inhabitants, in many parts
of the United-States, to seek for a substitute for some of the spices to which
they had been accustomed. They used the dried and powdered berries of the
Laurus Benzoin, which we call Spice-Wood, and Wild-Alspice-Bush, and found them
a tolerable substitute for alspice. "A decoction of the small twigs makes an
agreeable drink in slow fevers, and is much used by the country people. It is
said the Indians esteemed it highly for its medicinal virtues." Reverend Dr. M.
Cutler.


THE celebrated Gynseng, or Panax quinquefolium, may, with propriety, be thrown
into the class of stimulants. I find it difficult to speak of this plant with
any degree of certainty. If it were not a native of our woods, it is probable
that we should import it, as we do the teas of China and Japan, at a high price.

THE Eryngium aquaticum, or Water-Eryngo, is one of the stimulants which more
especially act as sudorific. It is nearly allied in its qualities to the
contrayerva of the shops. It is one of the medicines of our southern Indians.
They use the decoction.

AMONG the more acrid stimulants of our country, I may mention the Arum
Virginicum, or Indian-Turnip, as it is most commonly called. I could wish that
the properties of this plant were examined with attention. The leaves of a
plant a good deal allied to this, I mean the Dracontium pertusum of the
botanists, are employed, by the Indians of Demerara, in a very singular manner,
in the treatment of general dropsy. The whole body of the patient is covered
with the leaves. An universal sweat, or rather vescication, is induced, and the
patient often recovers. Perhaps, it would be worth trying this practice in
cases of anasarca, which have resisted the usual modes of treatment. This fact
was communicated to me by my friend the late Mr. Julius Von Rohr, a gentleman
whose death is a real loss to natural science, and perhaps an irreparable loss
to the interests of an injured and distressed part of mankind; I mean the
blacks.


TOPICAL STIMULANTS.
BY the TOPICAL STIMULANTS, I mean those articles which more especially
increase the action or living powers of the parts to which they are applied,
and which, at the same time, generally produce a discharge of fluid from the
part. The Cantharis is one of these articles: but of this, as an animal body,
and not a native, I have nothing to say.

THE bark of our White-Walnut, or Butternut, the Juglans cinerea of Wangenheim,
is a pretty efficacious blister. The bark of the root is more powerful than
that of the stem or branches. It has been applied with advantage, as a blister,
to the bite of some of our venomous serpents.

I BELIEVE the bark of our Moose-wood, or Leather-wood, the Dirca palustris of
Linnaeus, is also a blister. This plant, by its botanical habit, is nearly
allied to the genus Daphne, all the species of which are blisters; especially
the Daphne Gnidium.

SOME of our Indians make use of a plant, which, when mashed a little, induces
nearly as good a blister as the cantharides. It has been used with advantage in
sciatica. I do not know this plant.

THE Ranunculus sceleratus, or Celery-leaved Crowfoot, is a very acrid plant.
If it be bruised, and laid upon any part of the body, it will, in a few hours
time, raise a blister. This plant is a native of Europe and of America. The
Ranunculus bulbosus, called Bulbous Crowfoot, and Buttercups, possesses the
same properties. This plant grows very plentifully in our meadows and fields;
but I believe it is not a native.

To this head of topical stimulants, I may refer several species of the genus
Rhus, or Sumac; particularly the Rhus radicans, or Poison-vine; the Rhus
Vernix, or Vernice-tree; and the Rhus Toxicodendron, or Poison-oak. In many
persons they induce a peculiar and very troublesome vescication, which I have
frequently removed, in a short time, by means of a mercurial wash. These plants
are more active in the southern than in the northern climates. They more
readily poison immediately after than before a full meal. Their stimulant
effect is extended beyond the skin. It is said that the bark of one species
(but I cannot tell you what species) has been found useful in intermittents.

SECT. IV. ERRHINES.
I HAVE but little to say under the head of ERRHINES, or STERNUTATORY
MEDICINES. Our native vegetables of this class, with the exception of the
Tobacco, are but little known to me. Of the Tobacco, as being so well known to
you all, I need say nothing.

THE brown powder which is attached to the footstalks of the leaves of the
Andromeda, the Kalmia, and the Rhododendron, formerly mentioned to you, is
considerably errhine. The powder about the seeds, in the seed-vessels of the
same vegetables, possesses a similar quality. Whether this powder may be
advantageously employed in practice I cannot say.

WE have many native species of the genus Euphorbia, or Spurge. There can be
little doubt, that some of them are sternutative.

SECT. V. SIALAGOGA.
The number of SALIVATING MEDICINES is, I believe, much greater than has been
commonly imagined. Perhaps, there are but few of the Incitant medicines which
may not be so managed as to salivate. Opium, camphor, and hemloc Conium
maculatum
all induce salivation.

I AM but little acquainted with our indigenous salivating vegetables. The
Seneca Snake-root has long since been observed to possess this property.

THE Zanthoxylum Clava Herculis, or Ash-leaved Tooth-ach-Tree, is a very
powerful stimulant. Applied to the mouth and internal fauces, it occasions a
copious flow of saliva. By this property it appears to be a good deal allied to
the Pyrethrum, Cochlearia, etc. I am informed that our plant is not merely an
external sialagogue, but that even when taken into the stomach, it exerts its
effects upon the salivary glands. I speak of the bark of the plant: but the
feed-vessels have the same property. This medicine has been given internally in
cases of rheumatism.

SECT. VI. EMETICS.
AMONG the indigenous vegetables of our country, there are several which are
entitled to your attention as EMETICS. Such are the Euphorbia Ipecacuanha, the
Spiraea trifoliata, the Asarum Canadense, etc.

THE first of these, the Euphorbia Ipecacuanha, like all the species of the
genus, is an extremely active plant. It is employed as an emetic by some of the
country people. I do not know the dose. I suppose it is small, for it belongs
to the head of drastic emetics. I am not certain that it would be a valuable
addition to the materia medica; but, perhaps, it would. There are many cases in
which we have occasion to make use of immediate and active emetics; as when
certain poisons, such as laudanum, etc. have been swallowed. In such cases it
may possibly be of much use.

I CAN speak with more confidence of the Spiraea trifoliata. This is a shrub,
which grows very plentifully in various parts of the United-States. It is one
of the few active plants of the class Icosandria, to which it belongs. The
root, which is the part made use of, like that of the officinal ipecacuanha,
consists of a cortex or bark, and a ligneous or woody part. The active power of
the root seems to reside exclusively in the bark. It is a safe and efficacious
emetic, in doses of about thirty grains. Along with its emetic, it seems to
possess a tonic power. It has accordingly been thought peculiarly beneficial in
the intermittent fever, and it is often given to horses to mend their appetite.
This plant has a number of different names, such as Ipecacuanha, Indian-Physic,
Bowman's Root, etc.

WE have several species of the genus Asarum, or Asarabacca. I am best
acquainted with the Asarum Canadense, which is well known by the name of
Wild-Ginger. In Virginia it is called Coltsfoot. Both the root and leaves may
be used. The expressed juice of the fresh leaves is a powerful emetic.

SOME of our Indians also prepare an emetic from the bark of a certain vine,
which a good deal resembles the Celastrus scandens of Linnaeus. This vine bears
bunches of red berries of a sweetish taste, but of a poisonous nature. I know
nothing of this plant from my own experience; but a gentleman Mr. John
Heckewelder.
who has used it prefers it to every other emetic. The Indians make a decoction
of the bark. A large dose is required to produce the effect. This is certainly
an objection against its use.

A DECOCTION of the Eupatorium perfoliatum, or Thorough-wort, is also emetic. I
might have observed, that this plant is used by our Indians as a medicine in
intermittent fevers.

THE root of the Sanguinaria Canadensis Called, in the United-States,
Indian-Paint, Puccoon, Turmeric, etc
has been mentioned to me as an emetic. I know nothing particular of this
property of the plant. I should have observed, under the head of General
Stimulants, that the seeds appear to possess nearly the same quality as the
seeds of the Datura Stramonium.

I HAVE been assured, that the Six-Nations make use of at least twelve or
fourteen different emetic. All them, except the sulphat of iron, are
vegetables. It is probable that the Spiraea, Euphorbia Ipecacuanha, etc. are
among the number of these vegetable emetics.

I SHALL conclude this subject of emetics by recommending to your attention an
examination of the properties of some of our native species of Viola, or
Violet. I suspect it will be found, that the roots of some of these are endued
with an useful emetic quality.

SECT. VII. CATHARTICS.
WE have many indigenous CATHARTICS. Some of them are well worthy of your
attention. These may be divided into two kinds, the milder, and the more
drastic.

AMONG the more mild, I may mention the Triosteum persoliatum, sometimes called
Bastard-Ipecacuanha. This, when given in very large doses, sometimes proves
emetic; hence the vulgar name. But I find it a good cathartic. The cortex, or
bark, of the root is employed. I give it in doses of twenty and thirty grains.
On some occasions, it has seemed to operate as a diuretic. But this may have
been only an accidental circumstance. Rhubarb sometimes produces the same
effect, as has been observed by C. Piso.

NEARLY allied to the Triosteum, I mean in its properties, is the Asclepias
decumbens. This is one of our most beautiful and common plants. It has received
many vulgar names, such as Pleurisy-root, Flux-root, Butterfly-weed, etc. It
has been much celebrated in Virginia, as a remedy in dysentery. I have used it,
and I think with advantage. I believe it does good principally by its purgative
quality. The dose is from twenty to thirty grains of the root in powder. A
great deal has been said about the virtue of this vegetable in pleurisy.

THE powder of this Asclepias is escarotic, and has been found useful in
restraining fungous flesh in ulcers. I believe this, and not the Poke, as has
been supposed, is the plant which is employed by our southern Indians in cases
of venereal chancre.

THE dried fruit of our Papaw, or Custard-apple, the Annona triloba of
Linnaeus, is likewise purgative. I can say nothing of it from my own experience.

I KNOW nothing, from experience, of the Mechameck, or Wild-Rhubarb, of some of
our Indians. It is, certainly, a species of Convolvulus, or Bind-weed, and I
believe the Convolvulus panduratus, which in Virginia is called "wild potatoe."
Its name Wild-Rhubarb, implies that it is a purgative. An extract but little,
if any thing, inferior to the Scammony of the shops, has been procured from one
of our species of Convolvulus. One must have a good deal of medical faith to
believe what Catesby has said concerning the remarkable power of the
Convolvulus purpureus, or Purple-Bindweed. The Natural History of Carolina,
etc. Vol. i. p. 35.


MORE active than any of the native purgatives which I have mentioned is the
Podophyllum peltatum of Linnaeus. This is a very common plant through the whole
of the United-States, and in other parts of North America. It is known by a
variety of names, such as May-apple, Mandrake, Ipecacuanha, Wild-lemons, etc.
The fruit is esculent, and by many persons is thought delicious. The leaves are
poisonous. -- It is the root which is used in practice. In doses of twenty
grains, it is an excellent cathartic. It has some advantages over the rhubarb
and jallap. It is most advantageously used in combination with calomel, or the
crystals of tartar. I have heard much of the virtues of an extract prepared of
this root; but have never used it.

THERE is a plant which was thought by Linnaeus to be a species of the same
genus. He called it Podophyllum diphyllum. I have shown, that it is a new
genus. See Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. Vol. III. No.
XLI.
I have not been able to collect a sufficient quantity of this to ascertain its
powers; but, judging by the taste and smell, which it must be confessed are
sometimes fallacious tests, I suspect its root possesses the virtues of the
May-Apple, or Podophyllum peltatum.

THE Cassia Marilandica, one of our finest plants, belongs to the same genus as
the senna of the shops. The American species possesses nearly the same virtues
as the eastern species. It is used as a purgative in different parts of the
United-States.

AN extract prepared from the inner bark of the Juglans cinerea, or
Butternut-Walnut, has long been used as a purgative in the United-States. It is
a valuable medicine. As it is often, however, very carelessly prepared by the
country people, it has gone into some kind of neglect. It ought to be prepared
by the better informed apothecaries, and have a place in the Pharmacopoeia of
this country, WHEN SUCH A DESIDERATUM SHALL BE SUPPLIED. The dose of this
extract is from ten to thirty grains. I have thought it possesses something of
an anodyne property.

I HAVE been told, that some of our Indians use as a cathartic a decoction of
the bark of the root of the Dirca palustris, or Leather-wood, already mentioned
to you. Of this property of the Dirca I know nothing farther.

THE decoction or powder of the root of the Polygala Senega, or Seneca
Snake-root, is also a purgative. Dr. Cullen, indeed, thinks its purgative is
its most striking property, and therefore he arranges it under his head of
cathartics. "I have put it into the catalogue of purgatives, as this is the
only operation of it that is constantly very evident; and perhaps all its other
virtues depend upon this." A Treatise of the Materia Medica. Vol. II. P. 532.
Edinburgh: 1789, quarto.


SOME of our native species of Iris, or Flag, are powerful cathartics. Such are
the Iris versicolor and the Iris verna. They are both used by our southern
Indians. Mr. William Bartram.
I can say nothing certain concerning the dose of these vegetables. It is
doubtless small, for they are very active plants. Several of the European
species of Iris are irritating cathartics.

A SPECIES of Croton, or perhaps of Stillingia, is used in the southern states,
as a cathartic. It enters into the composition of a medicine which has acquired
much celebrity in the cure of that hideous disease the Frambaesia, or Yaws.
This plant grows spontaneously on the dry, high lands of Carolina, Georgia, and
Florida. It is called Yaw-weed, and Cock-up-Hat. The Stillingia sylvatica,
perhaps the very plant I have been speaking of, is said to be a specific in the
venereal disease. Bernard Romans says, the Jallap grows wild near Pensacola, in
Florida.


SECT. VIII. DIURETICS.
DIURETICS have so long been employed with benefit, in the treatment of
dropsies, that it becomes a matter of consequence to increase the number of the
medicines of this class, and to learn how to exhibit, with more advantage,
those which are already known. I do not mean by this observation to assert,
that dropsies cannot be cured without the use of diuretic medicines. On the
contrary, I am persuaded that they can, and often are, especially when the
dropsy depends upon fever, or is connected with it. But in the management of
all kinds of dropsies, it is often necessary to have recourse to the use of
diuretics, and I believe that some of the worst forms of this disease, such as
hydrothorax, are most effectually cured by these medicines. The Digitalis
purpurea, so much and so justly celebrated at present, is not, to my knowledge,
a native of any part of America. This plant, however, bears extremely well the
open ground of Pennsylvania.
But we have several native diuretics, which deserve the attention of our
physicians. Such are the Seneca-Snake-root, the Lobelia siphilitica, the
Serratula spicata, the Cassena, and others.

THE first of these, the Polygala Senega of the botanists, along with its
diuretic, possesses an emetic, cathartic, expectorant, salivating, and
diaphoretic power. I have already hinted at its salivating and cathartic
operation. As a diuretic, it has been employed, and found useful, in dropsy, by
Tennent, Bouvart, and other writers. I am informed that it has lately been
used, with great success, in the treatment of the cynanche trachealis, or
croup, by Dr. Archer of Maryland. He uses a strong decoction of the root, which
operates as an emetic, cathartic, and expectorant. There is a species, or
rather variety, of croup, which I have sometimes called the Bronchial Hives. In
this there does not appear to be any reason to suspect the existence of a
preternatural membrane in the trachea: but the disease depends upon the
presence of large quantities of mucus, which exists in a loose state in the
ramifications of the trachea. I believe this species is much more common than
the other, which might be called Cynanche trachealis coriac^a. In the bronchial
hives, I have found strong coffee of evident use: but the disease often
requires a much more active treatment. The Seneca should have a trial.
This medicine sometimes operates so powerfully as a sudorific, that I have
been assured it has been known to remove portions of the mucous body, or rete
mucosum, from the skin of blacks who have used it. I do not vouch for the truth
of this fact: but I must confess that to me the circumstance does not seem
improbable. Our Indians use a decoction of this root in syphilis. I have no
confidence in the powers which have been ascribed to the Seneca, in curing the
bite of the rattle-snake. Besides the Polygala Senega, we have several other
native species of this genus. I do not know how far they possess the powers
which have been ascribed to the Seneca itself. It is probable that they only
differ in degree. Kiernander, a long time ago, remarked that the Polygala
vulgaris, which grows spontaneously in Europe, possesses, though in a less
eminent degree, the virtues of the celebrated American species. See his paper,
entitled Radix Senega, in the second volume of the Amoenitates Academicae.


THE Lobelia siphilitica is also considerably diuretic. This plant was
purchased from the northern Indians, by the late Sir William Johnson, as a
remedy in the venereal disease: hence its specific name, siphilitica. I do not
believe, after paying some attention to the subject, that this plant has cured
confirmed syphilis. I know that the Indians, even those who are best acquainted
with the plant, are glad to have an opportunity of applying to the whites for
relief, when they have the disease. They certainly do not trust the cure
entirely to the Lobelia. They use the bark of the wild cherry (Prunus
Virginiana), the root of the May-apple (Podophyllum peltatum), and many other
plants. I do not believe that the disease of syphilis was known among the
North-American Indians before they became acquainted with the whites. Mr. John
Heckewelder informs me, that the Indians speak of it as a foreign disease
communicated by the whites.
I believe, however, that the Lobelia has been of service in the disease. In
gonorrhea it has certainly performed a cure; but the tendency of the
constitution, unaided by medicines, to get rid of this complaint, is well
known. I may here observe, that gonorrhea appears to be much more common among
the Indians than syphilis. The Lobelia seems to operate chiefly by its diuretic
quality. From their ignorance of botany, many persons in the western country
have been using a plant, which they call Lobelia, in the same complaints. I
have received specimens of the plant under the name of Lobelia. It proves to be
the Serratula spicata, or Spiked Saw-wort. There is good reason to believe,
that it has been found useful, not only in veneral complaints, but also in
cases of nephritis calculosa, or gravel. Thus ignorance sometimes leads to
knowledge. This supposed Lobelia is a powerful diuretic. The Indians sometimes
drink the decoction of it so strong that it occasions gleets. They cure these
gleets by eating turpentine, as I am informed by Colonel Winthrop Sargent. An
old Indian assured this gentleman, that a decoction of this Serratula, cures
syphilis in all its forms. Dr. Allison, one of the army-physicians, has an high
opinion of the plant, in this disease. I am told Dr Bedford, of Pittsburg, has
found it an efficacious medicine in the gravel. It certainly ought to have a
fair trial in these diseases. The late Major Jonathan Heart assured me, that the
Indians northwest of the Ohio could not cure confirmed syphilis. He said the
Lobelia (I suppose the Serratula spicata) had been of service in slight cases;
but he was persuaded that the Indians would fall victims to the general
complaint, if they were to trust wholly to their own remedies. A Mr. Wilson,
who is well acquainted with the Indians, particularly the Delawares and
Shawneese, most confidently asserts, that they cannot cure the venereal
disease, "when it gets into the blood;" but that they can cure the gonorrhea.
He also said, they can remove the venereal disease for a time, but "that it
will break out again."
It is the root of the plant which is commonly employed, but the flowers and
the leaves may also be used.

An infusion of another species of Lobelia, I believe the Lobelia inflata, has
been found very useful in the leucorrhoea, or whites. It is a lactescent, and
very active plant. I do not know that this acts as a diuretic, and it would
have been more proper to have mentioned the plant under the head of stimulants.

The Cassena is a species of Ilex, or Holly. It is the Ilex vomitoria of Aiton,
and is a native of Carolina, West-Florida, etc. It has been called
South-Sea-tea, or Evergreen Cassine. It is thought to be one of the most
powerful diuretics hitherto discovered. It is held in great esteem among the
southern Indians. They toast the leaves and make a decoction of them. It is the
men alone that are permitted to drink this decoction, which is called Black
Drink.

The Medeola Virginica grows plentifully in the vicinity of this city, and in
almost every other part of the United-States. Its root is white, and tastes a
good deal like the cucumber, which has given the plant the name of
Cucumber-root. I am told that this root is diuretic, and has cured dropsies.
The sensible qualities of the plant do not promise much; but this does not
prove that it is not an useful medicine.

SECT. IX. ANTHELMINTICS.
OF the class of medicines called ANTHELMINTICS, or destroyers and expellers of
worms, we have several which are entitled to your notice. One of the most
celebrated of these is the Carolina Pinkroot, the Spigelia Marilandica of
Linnaeus. This is a very common plant in our southern states. It is a valuable
medicine, as has been demonstrated by the physicians of Europe and of this
country. It is commonly given in the form of an infusion, or tea; but I prefer
the exhibition of it in powder. It has been accused of occasioning, for a short
time, a disagreeable affection of the eyes. But this effect may often be
prevented by combining with the Spigelia some of the common Virginia
Snake-root. The Cheerake-Indians have so high an opinion of this plant, that it
would sometimes be dangerous for a person to be detected in digging it up, to
carry it out of the country. The whites learned the anthelmintic powers of this
vegetable from the Indians. The Spigelia is said to possess other valuable
properties. Infused in wine, it has been found an useful medicine in
intermittent fevers. But I can say nothing particular concerning the precise
mode of administering it in this case.

THE Chenopodium anthelminticum grows plentifully in the United-States. It is
commonly called Worm-seed. The whole plant has a most powerful smell, of which
it is very retentive. The taste is bitter, with a good deal of aromatic
acrimony.

THE root of the May-apple, (Podophyllum peltatum), which I have mentioned to
you under the head of cathartics, has often been found to operate as an
anthelmintic. It is used as such by the Cheerake, and other southern Indians.
Whether it operates by its cathartic quality exclusively, or partly by some
other quality, deleterious to the worms, I cannot say. The whites learned from
the Indians the anthelmintic power of this plant. The best time for gathering
the may-apple, for medical purposes, is the autumn, when the leaves have turned
yellow, and are about falling off The Indians dry it in the shade, and powder
it for use.


THE Helleborus foetidus, or Stinking Hellebore, has been mentioned as a
powerful anthelmintic, by Bisset, and other European writers. It has been used
in this country, and has been found very efficacious. It is supposed to have
been the worm-medicine of a Dr. Wit, who acquired much reputation by the use
of it. I am indebted to Dr. Adam Kuhn for this information. He says that Wit
used the powder of the leaves in combination with the ethiops mineral.


THE Cheerake use a decoction of the root of the beautiful Lobelia Cardinalis,
or Cardinal-Flower, as a remedy against worms. I have already mentioned the
diuretic quality of another species of this genus, the Lobelia siphilitica.

THE seeds of the Common Tobacco (Nicotiana Tabacum) have also been found
useful as an anthelmintic.

THE Silene Virginica, or Ground-Pink, as it is called in some parts of our
country, is another native anthelmintic. A decoction of the root is used, and
is said to have been found a very efficacious remedy.

From the information of my friend the late Dr. James Greenway, of Virginia.
I HAVE not lost all confidence in the anthelmintic powers ascribed to the
Polypodium vulgar, or Male-Fern. I do suppose, however, that too much has been
ascribed to this plant. We have several native species of this genus, which it
would, at least, be a matter of curiosity to examine. The Polypodium
Virginianum grows about this city, and probably possesses the same powers as
the European species.

A PLANT, called the "Pride of India," has lately been mentioned as an
excellent anthelmintic. The bark of the root has been used as such in
South Carolina. This vegetable, the Melia Azedarach of Linnaeus, is not a
native of our country. Mr. Andrew Michaux informed me, that in Pers^a, where
this plant grows spontaneously, the pulp which invests the (...) of the seed is
pounded with tallow, and used as an "antisphoric," in cases of tinea capitis in
children.


I SHALL conclude this account of anthelmintics by observing, that the southern
Indians dress all their dishes, prepared of the Indian-corn, or maize, (Zea
Mays) with a strong lixivium, or lie, of the ashes of bean-stalks and other
vegetables, in order to prevent the generation of worms. They are of opinion
that this grain nourishes the worms exceedingly. Nor is this opinion peculiar
to the Indians.

I HAVE thus, Gentlemen, endeavored to present you with a specimen, or rather
rude outline, of an Essay toward a Materia Medica of the United-States. My
object has been a collection of facts. I could have wished for more leisure to
have pursued the subject: but that leisure I do not possess. I hope, however,
that with all its imperfections, I have presented you with a sketch which will
not prove unacceptable to you. I have opened a path which deserves to be trod
by you all.

THE man who discovers one valuable new medicine is a more important benefactor
to his species than Alexander, Caesar, or an hundred other conquerors. Even his
glory, in the estimation of a truly civilized age, will be greater, and more
lasting, than that of these admired ravagers of the world. I will venture to go
farther. All the splendid discoveries of Newton are not of so much real utility
to the world as the discovery of the Peruvian bark, or of the powers of opium
and mercury in the cure of certain diseases. If the distance of time, or the
darkness of history, did not prevent us from ascertaining who first discovered
the properties of the Poppy, that "sweet oblivious antidote" for alleviating
pain, and for soothing, while the memory remains, those rooted sorrows which
disturb our happiness; if we could tell who first discovered the mighty
strength of Mercury in strangling the hydra of pleasures and of generation; if
we could even ascertain who was the native of Peru, that first experienced and
revealed to his countrymen the powers of the Bark in curing intermittent
fevers; would not the civilized nations of mankind, with one accord, concur in
erecting durable monuments of granite and of brass to such benefactors of the
species? Would not even the savage, who wants not a sense of benefits conferred
upon him, be seen to form the tumulus of stones, or to raise the green sod, the
only monuments his humble condition would admit of his erecting? And may we not
yet look for the discovery of medicines as important to mankind as opium, the
bark, and mercury?

For this purpose, the discovery of new and valuable medicines, your situation,
Gentlemen, (I address myself at present, more especially to the younger part of
my audience); for this purpose, your situation is peculiarly happy. In the
pursuit of one of the most dignified and most useful of all the sciences, you
are placed in an extensive country, the productions of which have never been
investigated with accuracy, or with zeal. From this school, I will venture to
call it the punctum saliens of the science of our country, you are to spread
yourselves over the happiest and one of the fairest portions of the world. In
whatever part of this vast continent you may be placed, you will find an
abundant field of new and interesting objects to reap in. The volume of nature
lies before you: it has hardly yet been opened: it has never been perused. But
by your assistance, the knowledge of the natural productions of our country may
be greatly extended, and travelers shall then no longer upbraid us with an
utter ignorance of the treasures which an all-benevolent Providence has so
largely bestowed upon us. May I not flatter myself that among the number of
those whom I am now addressing, there are some of you for whom medical
discoveries of importance are reserved? discoveries which would add a luster to
your names, whilst they would ensure to you that which is much more to be
desired, in this mixed scene of affairs, an happiness that is imbosomed in the
happiness of one's country, and the world.

APPENDIX, CONTAINING ILLUSTRATIONS AND ADDITIONS.
PAGE 14. "I am well acquainted with a physician," etc. The room in which the
flowers of the Magnolia glauca produced the effects here mentioned, was not a
small one, and was well aired. It was in the month of June.

I ought to have observed, under the head of Tonics, that the Menyanthes
trifoliata, or Marsh-Trefoil and Bog-bean of the English, is a native of our
country. It grows spontaneously in Pennsylvania. This is certainly an active
plant, and if we can depend upon the half of what has been said of its virtues,
it deserves a place in the Pharmacopoeia of every country.

Page 18. Dr. Samuel Cooper. See his valuable Inaugural Dissertation on the
Properties and Effects of the Datura Stramonium, etc. Philadelphia: 1797.

Page 18. Cicuta venenosa. In Virginia, this plant is called Wild-Carrot,
Wild-Parsnip, Fever-Root, and Mock-Eel-root. See Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society. Vol. iii. No. xxix.

Page 19. Kalmia latifolia. In South Carolina, this beautiful shrub is called
"Calico-Tree."

Pages 19, 20. "A decoction of the Andromeda Mariana has been found useful as a
wash, in a disagreeable ulceration of the feet, which is not uncommon among the
slaves, etc. in the southern states." This complaint is very common,
particularly among the negroes, and the poorer sort of white people, in
Carolina, Georgia, etc. It is called "Toe-Itch and Ground-Itch." It is a kind
of ulcerous excoriation between the toes, sometimes extending as high as the
instep, and is attended with most intolerable itching. It is probably, in a
great measure, the consequence of inattention to cleanliness. Is it occasioned
by particular infects? Some persons, with whom I have conversed on the subject,
are of opinion, that it is owing to the great warmth of the waters to the
southward, in which the inhabitants are accustomed to wade a great deal. The
disease is sometimes seen in Pennsylvania. Besides the Andromeda Mariana, or
Broad-leaved Moor-wort, a decoction of the leaves of the Kalmia latifolia is
used for the cure of this complaint. The decoction of the leaves of both these
plants is used. They are both called "Wicke" to the southward.

Page 21. "I knew a woman," etc. She was a stout, and seemingly very hearty,
woman. She informed me, that a lady of her acquaintance was affected in the
same way by this tea. I could not learn whether the flowers of the Sassafras
produced a similar effect.

Page 24. Rhus, or Sumac. "It is said that the bark of one species (but I
cannot tell you what species) has been found useful in intermittents." Perhaps
it is the bark of the Rhus glabrum, or Smooth Pennsylvania Sumac. In some parts
of our country, this species is called "Indian Salt." Was it used as a
condiment to their food by the Indians? The berries of this species are used as
a mordant, or fixer, for the red color with which they die their porcupine
quills. They use other mordants for the same purpose. The juice of the
Upland-Sumac (Rhus glabrum?) is said to be excellent for removing warts, and
also tetters. It is applied to the affected parts.

Page 27. "The expressed juice of the fresh leaves" of the Asarum Canadense,
"is a powerful emetic." I should have observed that the leaves are errhine.
"Asari canadensis radices suaveolentes in petio vino fermentanti immersae,
liquorem gratiorem reddunt." Cornutus, as quoted by Schoepf, p. 73.

Page 30. Asclepias decumbens. -- The Asclepias decumbens, and the Asclepias
tuberosa, of Linnaeus, appear to me to be merely varieties of the same species.
Dr. Schoepf (page 160) mentions a plant which he says is called in Maryland,
Butterfly-root, and Pleurisy-root. He says he has not seen the plant; but that
the name Butterfly-root seems to show that it belongs to the class of
Diadelphia. I suspect this plant is no other than the Asclepias decumbens. It
is called Butterfly-weed, etc. because its flowers are often visited by the
butterflies.

Page 35. Polygala Senega. If this plant has been found so useful in pleurisy
as it is said to have been, by Tennent, and other writers, I cannot suppose it
has been in genuine inflammatory pleurisy, unless previously to the exhibition
of the medicine, the lancet has been liberally used. In the pleurisy, as it is
called, which prevails in the low and marshy countries, it is not improbable it
has been of real use. This is a true intermittent or remittent, attended with a
local pain, either in the side, or in the head. When it is in the head, the
disease is called (a ridiculous name) the pleurisy in the head. In either case,
it is a complaint in which cordial medicines, and such the Seneca is, have been
exhibited with advantage.

Almost an hundred years ago, the Reverend Dr. Cotton Mather mentioned an
American plant, called "Partridge-berries," as being excellent for curing
dropsy. A decoction of the leaves is to be drank as a tea, for several days. It
discharges, he says, a vast quantity of urine, as long as the disease lasts,
"after which it may be drank without provoking urine observably. Gouty persons
drink it with benefit." The Philosophical Transactions, Abridged. Vol. V. Part
ii. p. 160.
I take the plant mentioned by Mather, to be the Mitchella repens of Linnaeus.
This is a very common plant in every part of the United-States. In New England,
it is called Partridge-berry. Catesby has given us a wretched figure of it. I
know nothing of the powers of this plant. I could mention some of the
superstitious notions of our Indians concerning it.

Page 40. Chenopodium anthelminticum. This is also called Jerusalem-oak. It is
the seeds that are used.

THE END.

