MEMOIRS OF STEPHEN BUROUGHS.

WHEN SUCH SAD SCENES THE BOSOM PAIN,
WHAT EYE FROM WEEPING CAN REFRAIN.
COPY RIGHT SECURED.

PRINTED AT HANOVER, NEW HAMPSHIRE, BY BENJAMIN TRUE, MDCCXCVIII:

THE FOLLOWING IS A LETTER FROM THE AUTHOR TO A FRIEND, WHO HAD REQUESTED A
NARRATIVE OF HIS LIFE.
WASHINGTON, 25th JULY, 1794. DEAR SIR,
THE uninterrupted attention of your politeness to my welfare, since my arrival
in this Country, is a sufficient inducement, for me to attend to any request
which you shall barely intimate. -- You mentioned yesterday, whilst I was
enjoying the agreeable society of your family, that a relation of my adventures
would be highly gratifying, at some convenient time, when opportunity would
serve. You say, that what had come to your knowledge previous to any
acquaintance with me, but more especially, what has occured since my residence
in this place, has filled you with an almost (...) irre^^stible ^nxiety, to be
made acquainted with the more minute circumstances of a life, which has been
filled with so many curious anecdotes, and unbeard of occurrences. I fear the
relation will poorly answer your expectations. My life, it is true, has been
one continued course of tumult, revolution and vexation; and such as it is, I
will give to you in detail, (in this method, rather than verbally, it being
more convenient to peruse it at your leisure, than to listen to the dull ^ale
of egotisms, which I must make use of in a verbal relation.) When you become
tired with reading, you will be under no necessity of holding the book in your
hand, from the feelings of delicacy, but can lay it by at leisure; this liberty
you could (...) take with a dull relater of a more dull narrative. You say my
character, to you, is an enigma; that I possess an uncommon share of
sensibility, and at the same time, maintain an equality of mind, which is
uncommon, particularly in the midst of those occurrences, which are calculated
to wound the feelings. I have learned fortitude in the school of adversity. In
draining the cup of bitterness to its dr^gs, I have been taught to despise the
occurrences of misfortune. This one thing I fully believe, that our happiness
is in our power, more than is generally thought; or at least, we have the
ability of preventing that misery, which is so common to unfortunate
situations. No state or condition in life, but from which we may (if we
exercise that reason which the God of Nature has given us) draw comfort and
happiness. We are too apt to be governed by the opinion of others, and if they
think our circumstances unhappy, to consider them so ourselves, and of course,
make them so. The state of the mind is the only criterion of happiness or
misery. The Cynic, Diogenes, was more happy than the Conquer^^ Alexander, and
the Philosopher Socrates more happy than either; they all had, undoubtedly,
passions and feelings alike, which, not properly regulated, would have rendered
them equally unhappy. Yet, whenever reason stood at helm, the vessel was
brought into the haven of peace.

MEMOIRS OF STEPHEN BUROUGHS.
CHAPTER I.
Full well I know you; deep too deep engraved
On memory's tablet your rude (...) live.

IN relating the facts of my life to you, I shall endeavor to give as simple
an account of them* as I am able, without coloring or dakening any
circumstances; although the relation of many matters will give me a degree, and
kind of pain, which only they, who feel, can describe. I have often lamented my
neglect of keeping minutes of the occurrences of my life, from time to time,
when they were fresh in my memory, and alive to my feelings; the disadvantage
of which I now feel, when I come to run over in my mind the chain, which has
connected the events together; many circumstances are entirely lost, and many
more, so obscurely remembered, that I shall not even attempt to give them a
place, in this account. Not to trouble you with any more prefatory remarks -- I
will proceed to the relation.

I AM the only son of a Clergyman, living in Hanover, in the state of
Newhampshire; and, were any to expect merit from their parentage, I might
justly look for that merit. But I am so far a republican, that I consider a
man's merit, to ^est entirely with himself, without any regard to family,
blood^ or connection. My Father being a Presbyterian, by principle, I was
educated in all the rigor of that order, which ^lly suited my volatile
impatient temper of mind; this being the case, my first entrance on the stage
of life, was by no means the most agreeable. My thirst for amusement was
insatiable, and as in my situation, the only dependence, for that
gratification, was entirely within myself. I sought it in pestering others,
especially those, who were my superiors in age, and in making them appear in a
ludicrous situation, so as to raise the laugh at their expense, and partake of
the general diversion, which such a matter created. My success in those
undertakings was so great, that I became the terror of the people where I
lived, and all were very unanimous in declaring, that Stephen Buroughs was the
worst boy in town; and those, who could get him whipped, were most worthy of
esteem: their attempts to bring on my back a flagellation, were often very
successful, for my heedless temper seldom studied (...) a retreat, when I was
fairly in danger; however, the repeated application of this birchen medicine
never cured my pursuit of fun. A neighbor of my Father's, an old man, had a
fine yard of watermellons, which had been purloined by some body, for three or
four succeeding nights; the old man, being of a hasty petulant disposition, was
determined to watch his watermellons, with a club, and severely beat the thief.
One night, he took his stand in a convenient place, for watching, unknown to
any one. Accident made me acquainted with the old man's situation, and
suspecting his intention, I went to a son of his, a young man, of about twenty,
and told him I saw a man in the watermellon yard, whom I suspected to be the
thief, and advised him to go, cautiously, to the yard, and peradventure he
might catch him: accordingly, the young man went, but no sooner had he got into
the yard, than the old man, supposing this to be the thief, rushed from his
hiding place, and attacked his son with his club, and severely handled the poor
fellow, before he found out his mistake: the son supposing the thief was
beating him, bawled out to his Father, who, he expected, was at the house,
Murder! Father! Father! Murder! Murder! This scene of ^^^^ment, I enjoyed to
the full, but soon paid for it through the note. The plot being discovered, and
the agent, who set this machine in motion, clearly detected: complaint was
made, and I tasted of the same food, I had so ingeniously cooked for the old
man's son. I should hardly mention the insipid ancedotes of my childish years,
were it not for the purpose of showing how those small occurrences had a
decided influence, in giving a tone to the character, which I sustain, at this
time, and in directing the operations of my after life. So much ^o the greatest
events depend upon circumstances ^o minute, that they often pass unobserved,
and consequently, wrong causes are attributed to the effects, (...) take place.
Being passionately fond of information, (...) embraced all opportunities for
reading, which my desultory life would admit, and unfortunately, many Novels
sell in my way, of that (...), which had a direct tendency to blow the fire o^
my temper into a tenfold rage. -- The character of Guy, Earl of Warwick, was my
favorite. I felt (...) enthusiastic ardour to tread the stage, on which he had
so fortunately exhibited. I often viewed myself at the head of armies, rushing
with impetuosity into the thickest of embattled foes, and bearing down all, who
dared to oppose me. Reading and dwelling so much on those romantic scenes, at
that early period of life, when judgment was weak, was attended with very
pernicious consequences, in the operations of my after conduct. Nothing gives
the mind of childhood a more unfavorable bi^^, than a representation of those
unnatural characters, exhibited in Novels and Romances. It has a (...) tendency
to lead the mind from the plain simple path of nature, into the airy regions of
fancy* and when the mind is once habituated to calculate on the Romantic
System, error and irregularity are the common consequences: -- Likewise, when a
man is long habituated to think erroneously* we can hardly expect, that he will
be able to root out the first o^ (...) sentiments of his education. I will
cand^^^ly confess, that I, too strongly, feel the truth of this doctrine, even
to this day. Permit me, here, ^^^^gress a moment from the narrative, and offer
a remark on education, for your consideration. The motives of the most sincere
friendship to you and your family induce me to do it. I have been in the habit
of educating youth for seven years, constantly; in the course of my business, I
have endeavored to study the operations of the human heart, that I might be
able to afford that instruction, which would be salutary, and in this, I find
one truth clearly established, viz. a child will endeavor to be, what you make
him think, mankind in general are. His first ambition is to be like his
Parents, be soon finds, that his neighbors, the inhabitants of the country,
nay, the world of mankind, are to be his associates for life, and to whom it is
necessary, for him to recommend himself, in order to enjoy the benefit of their
society, without alloy, -- he therefore endeavors to assimilate himself to the
character, which he supposes mankind generally possess. This motive, I believe,
has an operation more or less on every man. If these remarks are just, which I
think no observing man will deny, how evident is this truth, that a child, in
forming his own character, will be essentially directed by that idea, which you
instill into his mind respecting mankind? Give him an idea, that the inhabitants
of the world esteem virtue, integrity, mildness, and modesty, and that the
contrary are obnoxious to them, he will be most likely to pursue that course
unremittedly. Perhaps an objection may arise in your mind, to the truth of this
observation, and you will say, it often happens that those, who are the most
strict in cultivating principles of integrity, in the minds of their children,
are disappointed in their endeavors, to make their children virtuous. In answer
to this objection, I will observe, That our actions are as strong a language,
and perhaps stronger, than our words, and as the observations of children are
extremely keen, they discover at once, whether our words and our actions speak
the same language; and when they find them interfering, they immediately
conclude, that deception is the object of the parent, and not sincerity, that
he utters words, that he does not believe himself, and puts on a false
appearance to answer some sinister end; a view of which, insensibly, leads the
child into the practice of dissimulation. The ambition in children of becoming
like their superiors, rightly directed, is of the utmost importance, in forming
them such as they ought to be. To grant a child your approbation, when doing,
or desiring to do right, is a reward, which he will ever seek after, when he
thinks it within his reach, therefore, to keep that reward uniformly within his
power, is a matter of importance; and not, by indulging a petulant disposition,
destroy or render doubtful his expectations of obtaining what he merits: here
you establish the first principles of Justice in his mind, upon which he will
practice, when he becomes an active member of Society. -- As the child advances
to a riper state, and becomes what is generally termed a youth, he feels the
strength of his disposition for assimulating his character to the feelings of
mankind increase, and he will adopt such measures as his judgment then
dictates; hence, to inform his judgment, is the only way to make him capable of
conducting well; to restrain him, by dictatorial dogmas, from the paths of
error, will answer but a temporary purpose; until he learns by the lessons of
reason^ or by the more feeling effects of prudence, he never will be in a
capacity to act his part in life with propriety. We must expect to find many
errors in the calculations of youthful years, and those errors ought to be
pruned by the most careful hand, lest the harshness of the pruning should
appear to the subject, the cruel stroke of an enemy, rather than the gentle
touch of a friend. To censure the faults of youth beyond what they ought to
bear, is generally attended with fatal consequences. It destroys the object of
their pursuit, viz. approbation* they revolt at the injustice, which they
sensibly feel, therefore, inflicting unjust punishment is generally attended
with fatal consequences in the system of education. It destroys the principles
of equity in the youthful breast, and substitutes in their room, the despotic
principles of tyranny. This cause strongly operates in society. Hence, my Lord
Hale with great pertinency and humanity says, "better ten guilty escape, than
one innocent person suffer." I have often seen instances where the ambition of
youth, to do well has been destroyed, by censuring their faults with too much
severity, one of which, I will mention. I once taught a school in a town of
Massachusetts, by the name of Charleton. Having a school consisting of eighty
members, I divided them, according to my usual custom, into two classes. My
school, at this time, was entirely regulated according to my mind, and in the
most obedient order, greatly to the satisfaction of the parents of the
children, who frequented the school. Application was made to me at this time,
by a clergyman in the vicinity, for the admission of his son into the school.
With great difficulty I persuaded the Committee, who had the direction of
admitting members, to admit him. My desire for his admission sprang from the
same cause, which the committee's aversion did. The Youth was fifteen years of
age, and had been expelled from all the schools in the country, consequently,
whatever Dodge, the name of this Youth, was concerned in, must, in the opinion
of people, be adopted from a wrong motive. Convinced, from my own feelings
under similar circumstances, that a different line of conduct toward him, from
what had been observed, would produce a different effect, I was desirous of
trying the experiment: accordingly, when he came to my school, I intimated to
him, that he must take the lead of one of the classes, which composed the
school; and that I expected, from his exertions and example, his class would
make a very reputable appearance. I endeavored to convince him, that this
appointment was not from design, but from a real esteem of his merit, by
showing him many little distinctions. His conduct, for about twelve or fourteen
days, was equal to my most sanguine expectations; -- but returning from dinner
one day, I found the school in an uproar, at the conduct of Dodge, who, in my
absence, had gone into the upper loft of the house, and had most scandalously
insulted some young women, who were at the back side of the school house.
Complaint was made of this, with all the exaggeration which is apt to attend
the transgression of such a character. Dodge, himself, was present at the time,
and possessed that mortification in his countenance, which made me feel sensibly
affected for him. I treated the report as though I could not believe, that
Dodge had conducted in such a manner as to render it possible, that the thing
should be as represented; that some mistake must have existed, and ^^fused to
pay any further attention to it. It would have been to you, Sir, a matter of
curiosity, to have observed the workings of the countenance of Dodge under this
trial, -- and when he found that my confidence in him was yet unshaken, so
contrary to his fears, I was really afraid he would have fainted. -- This had
the desired effect -- Never had I one in my school, who conducted better
afterward, during his whole continuance with me, which was about a year.

I would not wish to be understood that a relaxation of discipline is ever to
be admitted; on the contrary, the most uniform course of this administration
should be attended to, without the least deviation. Our commands, in the first
place, ought to be reasonable, humane, and parental, calculated to promote, not
only the good of the subject of our government, but likewise embracing for
their object, the benefit of the whole community. When the commands are once
given, never ought we to suffer a breach of them, under any circumstances
whatever: by such a practice we make good subjects, good legislators, and good
executors. By these means we habituate our youth to submit to good and
wholesome laws, without being in danger of that restless turbulent disposition,
which so freqently distracts the Government of a Commonwealth: we likewise make
them good legislators, by giving them constant examples, in our mode of
governing them, of justice, humanity, and parental kindness; and when those
principles are once established in the human breast, the governing object of
such characters will be, to enact and establish such laws, as will distribute
and support the genuine and real principles of their education. They, likewise,
will make men, who, in their executive capacity, will promote the highest good
of Society, by uniformly adhering to an undeviating course of executing laws to
which they are appointed: -- But I return from this digression to the narrative.

CHAP. II.
It Is education forms the common mind;
Just as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined.

BEING possessed with the most romantic ideas of military prowess, I longed for
an opportunity of signalizing myself in that department, and consequently,
embraced the first opportunity of entering into the military line. At this time
a regiment of the continental forces, commanded by Colonel Hazen, were marching
through the country where I lived, and I, at the age of fourteen, enlisted into
an artillery company, attending the regiment, as a private soldier. This
circumstance soon coming to the knowledge of my Father, he applied to the
officer under whom I had enlisted, and obtained my discharge. Chagrined and
disappointed at this unexpected repulse, I concluded that all my prospects for
fame were at an end, knowing of no other opportunity by which I could,
probably, introduce myself into the military department. -- The regiment were
on a march, which took them about six weeks, and then returned through Hanover
again, on their way to headquarters. While they lay encamped in this town,
about five miles from my Father's house, I began to consider the probability of
joining them again -- thinking, that should I neglect this opportunity, all my
future prospects in life were at an end. After revolving this subject some time
in my mind, I came to a resolution to elope from my Father, about the time the
regiment were to march, and go off with them. Report said they were to march on
Monday morning, therefore, that was the time fixed in my mind to leave my
Father's house. On the Sunday preceding the time of their march, my Father was
absent, on a change with a neighboring Minister, and so produced a favorable
situation for the execution of my plan. On some pretended cause, I tarried from
church that day, in order to have an opportunity of making those arrangements,
which I then thought necessary, to equip myself for a soldier. Accordingly, I
took a bed blanket and tied it full of clothes and provisions, not knowing that
I should ever be provided with either by the public. My provision, consisted of
bread and cheese, that being the only kind, which was ready cooked, would best
answer my purpose. All this baggage, together with an old musket, belonging to
my Father, powder horn filled with powder, and thirty balls, I laid by, in a
convenient place, until the important moment should arrive. About the dawn of
day, on Monday morning, I placed myself under the enormous load, contained in
the blanket, after being accoutred with powder horn and musket, I pursued my
way with great energy to the camp, where I arrived a little after sunrise. My
appearance in camp, in this ludicrous plight, was an object of universal
curiosity and amusement. Sweating under an enormous load of bread and cheese,
brandishing the old family musket of my Father's, accoutred with a due quantity
of powder in a horn, by my side, and a sufficiency of ball in my pocket to kill
thirty men, if rightly directed; I made the appearance of more than Quixotic
bravery. Surely the Knight of La Mancha, had he seen me in my present plight,
would have dismounted from the most redoubtable Rosenante, and would have
yielded to me the palm of Chivalry, as the most accomplished Knight on the sod.

These first dawnings of resolution and perseverance, which were manifested in
this ridiculous essay, I found were pleasing to the officer, under whom I had
formerly enlisted -- to whom I again applied for admission into his company,
but previously declared, that I would not again enlist with him, unless he
would engage not to discharge me, if my Father should pursue me. The regiment
did not march till near the middle of the day, much to my disappointment, and I
received the disagreeable intelligence, that my Father had arrived in camp,
previous to their march.

The resolution of my officer, who was a man of feeling, was not proof against
the solicitations of my Father. He again discharged me, and my father took me
home. As the obstacles to my joining the army increased, my resolution to
surmount them gained strength, and my anxiety for this purpose, had arisen to
such a degree, that I determined to elope, the first minute I was from under my
Father's eye, and follow the regiment. All that day and night I was guarded
with the utmost attention. About ten o'clock the next morning, I was sent on an
errand to the next neighbor's, about the distance of ten rods. When I had
gotten that distance, I ran with all my might, and never stoped, until I had
run twenty eight miles from home, where I overtook the regiment. There I
enlisted with another officer, determined not to be dismissed again, by my
former misplaced confidence. I had not been here long before my father, with
two other men, came full tilt after me. Being somewhat doubtful whether I
should again be discharged, I determined to make my own safety by flight, but
the men, who were with my Father, observing my opperations, pursued me, and
overtook me after some little difficulty: However, the officer under whom I had
inlisted, absolutely refused to discharge me, unless I gave my consent.
Accordingly, my Father made application to me, for my approbation in the
matter. This was a new scene; to view my Parent before me, a supplicant,
beseeching me to return with him; stating to my view, the situation of a
disconsolate Mother, the most affectionate of Parents; the yearnings of his own
feelings of compassion toward me, and the unhappy situation to which they
should all be reduced, should I still persist in my desperate resolution of
leaving them; this was a situation too affecting for me to bear. -- A flood of
contending passions rushed on my mind. To return from the first attempt for
military fame, before I had fairly set out, after forming such strong
resolutions to the contrary, appeared to me pusillanimous and foolish. On the
other hand, to break through all the ties of nature, compassion, and
benevolence, was what my soul sickened at viewing. One moment I was determined
on going, at the next I was for returning. No permanent resolution could I
form, till the next morning, when the revallee being beaten, all the feelings
of military ardor were again rekindled, and I was determined to march. My
Father finding my resolution fixed, took a most solemn and affecting leave.
This scene I cannot reflect upon without feeling the weakness of a woman.

The night following, when the hurry of contending passions had subsided, and I
had full leisure of taking a retrospective view of those very singular
transactions, they filled my mind with the severest compunction. To view my
parent, returning to a disconsolate family, laden with sorrow, whilst I had
been deaf to all the calls of nature and compassion, were circumstances, which
filled me with the keenest sensations of distress; and the night following, I
was not able to close my eyes to sleep; such were the agitations of my mind.

There I determined to return to my father, notwithstanding all the mortifying
circumstances, which would attend such a procedure. Early the next morning, a
clergyman, by the name of Olcott, came to me, to persuade me to return to my
father, -- this he found no difficult matter to do. I told him frankly I was
willing: but when he made application to my officer for a discharge, he was
flatly refused. We marched from thence to headquarters, at West-Point, without
meeting with any occurrences, worth relating.

When the Regiment had arrived on the North river, they were constantly alarmed
by the enemy, and had a number of skirmishes with them. At such times, I was
always kept back with the baggage, and never suffered to go into action,
notwithstanding all my entreaty. I fully believe, had I been indulged in my
romantic disposition, I should have rushed, foolishly, into that danger, from
which I never should have returned. These repulses brought about that
mortification and disappointment, which cured me of my military ardor. Filled
with resentment and chagrine I suddenly left the army and returned home to my
Father. Soon after my return, my Father wrote the following letter to General
Washington for my discharge, and sent it by the hand of the Honorable Bezaleel
Woodward, Esquire. who was then on his way to Congress, from the state of
Newhampshire.

Hanover, N. Hampshire, Dec. 24, 1779. MUCH HONORED SIR,
THESE wait on your Excellency, to inform, that while Col. Hazen's regiment
remained at Coos, Lieut. Crowley, an officer of the train, meeting with my son,
a young lad, of the age of fourteen years, persuaded him to inlist into his
company; with some difficulty I obtained his release from that inlistment: But
the young lad having had his mind inflamed, by many fair promises and any
encouragements, with unappeasable desires to join the service, afterward
eloped from me, and inlisted under Capt. Lloyd, on the regiment's return from
these parts to head quarters. But finding his expectations disappointed, he
left the army soon after its arrival at head quarters, and is now at home with
me. As a sovereign God, has not long since, deprived me of four children, and
has left me but two to survive their death; and as this son is a lad, so much
under the age, that is commonly deemed necessary to constitute a soldier, fit
for the service, and I had ever designed him for a public education; your
Excellency will please to indulge my request, that he may be regularly
discharged from the service. Though I have the cause of America sincerely at
heart, and ever have, and trust I ever shall, exert myself to the utmost of my
ability in its behalf; yet your excellency will not wonder, at any degree of
reluctance in me, against my son's engaging in the service, under my present
circumstances. Your Excellency will please to signify your pleasure by the
bearer, and due obedience shall be rendered to your commands, with
cheerfulness. -- With daily prayers, that the God of armies will be your shield
and friend, and honor your Excellency as an instrument of complete salvation,
and deliverance to the United States of America,

I am your Excellency's Most obedient humble Servant, EDEN BUROUGHS.

His Excellency GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire.
P. S. During the time my son was with the army, he never passed muster, nor
drew any bounty or clothing."




CHAP. III.
S^^es of my youth! pale sorrow flings,
A shade over all your beauties now;
And robs the ^^^ents of their wings,
That scatter pleasures as they (...).

SOON after this, my Father placed me at school, under the (...) late Joseph
Huntington, D. D. whose fame for an instructor was very noted throughout all
the New England States, where I continued one year, and was then removed to
Dartmouth College, of which I became a member.

Whilst I was with Doctor Huntington, many of those boyish pranks, which
students are apt to practice, in order to give themselves the tone of wits,
were performed by me, to the no small diversion of myself, and the other
students, and to the great hinderance of my pursuit in literary acquirements.
This was the hour of folly. From the effect of this age, flowed a continued
stream of crude, undigested whims, which kept the school and myself in a
constant uproar. I became an inmate in the family of my Preceptor, which
consisted of the Doctor, Mrs. Huntington, two sons, by a former wi^e, nearly my
own age, and a number of small children, how many I do not recollect. The
Doctor himself was a character, whose parallel is not commonly found. A man of
very considerable oratorical abilities, which consisted more in smooth figures,
and ingenious declamation; than in close metaphysical reasoning. A mind by no
means tied down to established modes and forms, but internally despising them,
possessing an unbounded ambition, fond of flattery. A temper, when undisturbed,
philanthropic, but disappointment and chagrine changed it into the boisterous
rage of a northwest whirlwind. Mrs. Huntington, a character truly amiable.
Joseph, second son to the Doctor, after his own name, about one year younger
than myself. -- This youth was truly the son of his Father. The fire of his
ambition was great -- his resolution was equal to his ambition; and his
excentricity was equal to both; with a strong mind, equal to his father, he
despised the shackles of education, broke through all the little obstacles of
vulgar prejudice, and pursued those paths, to which the fire of genius, and the
want of judgment, at that time, directed him. The rest of the family had
nothing uncommon in their characters which distinguished them from mankind in
general.

Being full of vivacity, Joseph and I were almost perpetually prosecuting some
scene of amusement or diversion. Some of those pastimes were graduated upon a
scale of innocence, and some, I am sorry to say, embraced for their object, the
vexation and detriment of the neighbors. Our chief force was aimed at a
neighbor, commonly known by the name of Tiger, on account of his morose
misanthropic disposition. One night we repaired to his house and took logs from
his wood pile, about two feet in length, and piled them up against the door,
until they reached the top, laying them in such a manner as to incline into the
house. After arranging matters in this order, we made a noise as if attempting
to get into the old man's garden, sufficiently loud for him to hear;
immediately upon this, the old man crept softly to the door and opening it
suddenly, down came the logs, so rapidly as to knock him to the floor, and
cover him over. The noise which this made alarmed the family universally, with
an idea that they felt the shock of an earthquake, and that the last judgment
had arrived, which set some a screaming and some a praying, and for a long time
these ideas so wholly occupied the minds of the family, that the old man could
not get any assistance from the load of timber, under which he was buried,
immediately upon his being freed from his confinement, he put on some clothes
and repaired to Doctor Huntington's, in order to enter a complaint against
Joseph and myself, whom he suspected of being the agents in this disagreeable
scene; and the reason of his suspicion was founded in this, viz. but a few days
before Joseph and I were caught by him, picking some early apples off a tree in
his garden; a complaint of which was made, and we obliged to pay three
shillings: But as we were seen to go to bed, that night, and found in bed when
he came with this last complaint, and no evidence that we had left our bed, it
was concluded that his suspicions wanted proof, and there this matter ended.

Soon after this, we contrived another plan to disturb the old man's quiet.
Joseph went to him, and with a woeful countenance professed his sorrow for his
having given him trouble, and in order to evince his sorrow, told him, he had
to inform, of an intention of some of the scholars, to rob his apple trees that
night, and advised him to watch, that he might detect them; and if he should,
they would have to pay him a considerable sum of money: this ba^t the old man
eagerly swallowed, and took his stand, accordingly, for watching.

The other part of this contrivance, I was to act myself, -- as being the best
fitted for it, on account of my superior agility. Accordingly, about ten at
night, I crept along close to the garden fence, till I came, as though by
accident, near to the old man, at which I turned and ran, and he after me.
Being able, abundantly to outrun him, I kept but a very small distance before
him, pretending to run with all my might, in order to raise his expectations of
being able to overtake me; when coming to the edge of a ditch, which contained
about three feet depth of mud and filth, I clapped down on my hands and knees
before the old man, and he stumbled over me, plump into the ditch; but catching
hold of the skirt of my coat, tore it off, and carried it into the ditch with
him. -- This was a clue which served, the next day, to unravel the plot, in
part, as it related to me; and when complaint was made to our Preceptor, he
acquitted us entirely, as not having done any thing unlawful, nor having
attempted it, according to the proof.

This was a scene of great diversion to the Doctor. The woeful countenance which
Tiger made, about falling into the ditch, together with my strutting about,
without a skirt to my coat, altogether, made so ludicrous an appearance, that,
notwithstanding all the exertion of the Doctor, he could not suppress the
rising inclination to laugh, but would, once in a while, burst forth, in spite
of himself. Not long after this, I had intelligence of the death of an only
brother, by a letter from my father to the Doctor, a copy of the answer to
which is as follows.

Coventry, (Con.) 20 th Nov. 1780. REV. AND VERY DEAR SIR,
IN your great affliction, I am afflicted; and the sight of your letter, with
the melancholy tidings, made a very deep impression upon my heart. I have
several times tasted of the bitter cup; may we learn to live wholly on GOD; If
our houses are not so with him as we naturally wish, and do not grow and
flourish agreeably to our fond hopes -- yet there is an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure; let this be all our salvation, and all our
desire. -- Dear Sir, I, condole with you and Mrs. Borroughs, in this furnace of
affliction, and our prayers for each other, I doubt not, are mutual. -- With
regard to Stephen, he behaves well, and makes good progress in his learning;
seems well contented: we take the same care of him as of our own children, as
to every thing he stands in need of. I am glad to see that he takes serious
notice of the death of his dear brother: I have done, and shall do, all in my
power, that, with the blessing of God, he may make a good improvement of it,
and be a spiritual gainer, by so great a loss. You know how, dear sir, to leave
your now only son with GOD, as well as all your other concerns, for time and
eternity. While Stephen is with me, be assured that I will be as kind and
faithful a parent to him, as I am capable. But alas! what are friends,
children, or any of the dying enjoyments of this transitory world! had you not
a better portion, you would be very unhappy; but you can say with the Prophet,
"although the fig tree shall not blossom -- "

May Mrs. Huntington's sincere love, and sympathetic condolence, together with
mine, be acceptable to Mr. Borroughs and his lady.

I have the honor to be, my dear Sir, with great respect, your most obedient,
humble servant, JOSEPH HUNTINGTON.

Rev. Mr. BUROUGHS.

AS it is a custom, generally, through the state of Connecticut, to keep
Saturday evenings, as the commencement of holy time, and consequently, to
consider Sunday, as expiring with the beginning of the succeeding evening, the
relation of the following circumstance, will not be so much wondered at.

One Sunday, after sunset, a number of the Doctor's students had assembled in
the streets, and were somewhat noisy, about a pastime, by which they were
amusing themselves. This noisy merriment appeared to the Doctor, to be
mistimed, when exhibited in the street, at so great a proximity with the
Sunday; and therefore, he wished us to desist from pursuing our sport in the
street, and attend to it in his door-yard; telling us we might do any thing in
the yard, if we would not make a noise in the street: we, accordingly, all came
into his yard, and began our amusement again; but soon stoped, by an idea's
being suggested of the great liberty, which the Doctor had granted us, of doing
any thing in his yard. His office of necessity stood within the limits of the
yard; therefore, it was proposed, and immediately agreed, to upset this
building.

Dr. Huntington, rising very early the next morning, according to his usual
custom, saw the destruction of his little house: on making enquiry of the
scholars, they all denied that they knew how the house came to be overset,
until he came to me, and said, "Borroughs, do you know how the little house was
turned over?" "Yes, sir." "Well, who turned it over?" "We, who were at play,
last evening, in the yard." "How came you to turn it over?" "You said, sir, we
might do any thing in the yard." The Doctor said no more -- went down --
procured some hands -- and replaced the necessary on its former foundation. Not
long after this, the Doctor wrote the following letter to my Father.

Coventry, (Con.) March 8 th, 1781. REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,
YOU and your lady will please to accept our best regards: no doubt the welfare
of your only son lies near both your hearts: he is well; has a fine genius,
makes swift advances in the classics. There is in him such an exuberance of
life and spirits, as requires uncommon vigilance and care in the overfight and
direction of his ways, in this early period of life, which however, I trust may
in future time make him so much the more active and useful in the service of
GOD and his country; I hope he will pass a good examination at the next
commencement, if you choose he should (...) College. At his own earnest
request, he board (...) a mile and an halt from my house, with a young man a
little older than he; I have thought proper to dispense with the distance of
way, in consideration that the family and whole vicinity are attached to
religion, virtue, and good order, more than any other neighborhood in this
place, and more, almost, than ever I knew any where in the world. Mr. Wright
lives next door to him; he and all the neighbors have a great respect for you,
and unite in every friendly effort, for the best interest of your son; I often
tell him, however, that he may return and board with me whenever he is willing;
mean while, I take the same care of all his wants as though he was in my own
house.

Such are the times with us, sir, that the support of those ministers, who live
by the p^nny, without farms, is one half curtailed, even among parishes that do
the best for them, and if such times continue, I must give my sons their
education at home, I hope, however, in the good providence of GOD, they will
live to have the benefit of Dartmouth College.

What we can do for your son, in the family is left wholly to your generosity,
and indeed, was my income, as in years past, the whole expense I should look
upon not worthy of any account. Rest assured, sir, that the best interest of
your son is daily consulted, to the utmost of my ability, and I hope and trust
that his parents and his country will rejoice in his honor and usefulness in
days to come.

I am, dear sir, with great affection and respect, your most obedient, humble
servant, JOSEPH HUNTINGON.

Rev. Mr. BUROUGHS.

SOME time after this, boarding about a mile and a half from the Doctor's, with
another lad nearly of my own age; we took an old horse, that ran in the road,
and mounted him* as we were going to school without saddle or br^dle, and rode
him through the street, full (...). This circumstance, becoming known, the
owner of the horse, applied to a Justice of the Peace, and obtained a warrant
for us, and being taken, we were brought before him, and fined, together with
the cost, fifteen dollars; the owner having summoned twenty witnesses to prove
one fact. Soon after this, I returned to my Father, and brought the following
letter from the Doctor to him.

Coventry, (Con.) Sept. 5 th, 1781. REVEREND SIR,
ON examination, I trust, you will find your son, well accomplished, to perform
the exercises of a freshman at College; with constant study, I think he is able
to do it better than freshmen in general did at Yale College in my day -- I
have done every thing in my power for his education, and his morals, and am
exceedingly grieved to acquaint you, that one affair has happened since I last
wrote to you, which must be uncomfortable to his parents, as indeed it has been
to me.

S^phen was so unguarded, about the middle of June last, as to take and use a
horse several times, and that even in a cruel manner, without the knowledge of
the owner, who lived not in my parish, but in the vicinity, near the borders of
it: the owner of the horse happens to be one of the most inhuman, cruel,
revengeful, spiteful, monsters that ever disgraced humanity; and as soon as he
sound out the matter, he was wholly bent on vengeance and the utmost cruelty; I
took and pastured the horse eight weeks, and repaired all damage more than
seven sold, I also offered the man two crowns if he would settle the matter
without a law suit, and took every other step I could think of to save expense,
and prevent a public noise; but all in vain; the monster knew that the law in
such a case is extremely severe, awarding three fold damages and all costs, and
nothing could glut his infernal malice till he had drawn your son before
authority; and, for threefold damages and costs, obtained judgment against him
for about fifteen dollars; for the payment of which two of my neighbors, Mr.
Porter and Mr. Hawkins, gave their security, and your son returned to his study
as before. The affair gave me unspeakable distress of mind, and even kept me
awake several nights. The authority could do nothing in the case, but what they
did, the law is plain; the monster that prosecuted summoned a great cloud of
evidences on purpose, I suppose, to gratify his malice in augmenting the cost.
Our people, sir, have all the highest respect and veneration for you, and are
ready to interpose and do all they can to save you trouble, and with one voice
cry out upon the wretch that has been so cruel to you and your son.

It is highly necessary, sir, that you should make us a visit as soon as may be
after commencement. I am in fear you will think somewhat hard of me, that I did
not retain Stephen in my own house; when I see you, I will give you the fullest
satisfaction in that matter; had he been willing to have lived with me, the
whole time, I should have rejoiced at it, notwithstanding the extreme
difficulty of my keeping any boarders in these times: I hope God will dispose
and improve him in some important and honorable station in life, as he has
certainly an excellent genius; though, he is, as yet, in the vanity of youth.

I mourn, that I cannot wait on you, as I intended, and the other worthy
gentlemen of the board.

May our kindest regards be acceptable to Mr. Buroughs and his lady -- may all
New Covenant blessings be your portion, and that of your remaining children: --
after all our trouble may we meet in everlasting rest.

My kind love, to all my friends and acquaintance, in your parts:

I remain, Rev. and dear Sir, with the firmest attachments, and most cordial
affection, your faithful friend, and most obedient, humble serv't. JOSEPH
HUNTINGTON.

REV. MR. BUROUGHS.

INASMUCH, as you are now on the subject of Dr. Huntington, and his
correspondence with my father, I will here insert two other letters, written by
him some years after, one, when I was in great adversity, and the other, at a
time of apparent prosperity.

Coventry. (Con.) 26 th Jun. 1783. REV. AND VERY DEAR SIR,
YOUR late Epistle came safe to hand; and while I was affected with pleasure in
your kind remembrance of me, I was impressed with much sympathy and grief, in
the case of your dear and only son. -- The ways of divine Providence are a
great deep; what GOD does, we "know not now, but shall know hereafter." -- St.
Austin, when a Youth, was very vain, vicious, wild, and ungovernable: his pious
mother, Monica, was continually in prayers and tears for him: an eminent
Divine, one day, told her, that so many prayers would never be lost. You well
know what GOD did for St. Austin, and what a blessing he was to the Church, and
to the world. -- Let us submit, pray, hope and wait.

We are in good health; have no news more, perhaps, than what you have been
acquainted with: the work of GOD has been considerable among us, and yet
continues; the effusion of the divine Spirit, with you, has been more copious;
Oh! may it be on all the world, "as rivers in the wilderness, and as floods on
the dry ground!"

I beg that my most cordial regards, with Mrs. Huntington's, may be acceptable,
to Mr. Buroughs and his lady*:

Remaining, as ever, dear Sir, with great respect, your most obedient, humble
servant, JOSEPH HUNTINGTON.

REV. MR. BUROUGHS.

Coventry, (Con.) 23 rd Oct. 1784. REV. AND VERY DEAR SIR,
COULD you know the tender feelings of my heart, toward you and your family, it
would give me comfort; my friendship is warm as ever, while I lament the
separation made among your people, and mourn that we could not worship
together, when I last waited on you, at Hanover. But as my prayers have been
answered, with regard to your son, so I believe they will be with respect to
your people: you have now, great comfort, in the former, you will, I hope, soon
have in the latter; and the whole people shall unite, and rejoice in your
light, as in days past.

Mrs. Huntington, unites with me, in love, and respect, to Mr. Buroughs, his
lady, and son. GODALMIGHTY, grant you every New Covenant blessing.

I have the honor to be, dear sir, with much respect, your most obedient,
humble sev't* JOSEPH HUNTINGTON.

REV. MR. BUROUGHS.

CHAP. IV.
In life's gay morn, what vivid but*
Adorn the animating views,
By flattering Fancy drawn?
But starms with gloomy aspect rise,
To cloud the azure of the skies;
Now mists obscure the dawn.

AT Commencement, I was presented, examined, and admitted a member of Dartmouth
College. Here I had a new situation before me, and another part to act; not
possessing all the advantages to act it with eclat. The reports of my many wild
eccentricities had come before me, magnified in a tenfold degree; and I found
all were waiting with open mouths to see an explosion. Those, who were fond of
such scenes of diversion, were disappointed at my neglect in exhibiting some
specimens of fun, which I had determined to lay by entirely. Others, who were
of a different cast, lowered upon me with a threatening brow, indicative of
their intention to check my wildness in its first appearance.

Here, I found my situation very different and disagreeable, on the one hand, I
was excited, invited and flattered, to gratify those, who were fond of
amusement; on the other, I was watched, with the scrutinizing eye of jealousy,
for misconduct, and a readiness to censure in me, what would be thought
innocent in others, to humble and check that growing propensity to disorder, as
was alleged. My Father was careful to have me take a room with one Jacob Wood,
A. M. who, of all others, was best calculated to humble and mortify any, whom
he entertained a suspicion against, as differing from him in principle or
practice. A man of small stature, and yet smaller mental abilities; regid and
enthusiastic in his notions of religion, which consisted in a sower, morose,
misanthropic line of conduct toward all, who where not of his party. To be an
inmate with such a character, you will readily conceive, no way comported with
a disposition like mine; and consequently, we never enjoyed that union and
harmony of feelings in our intercourse, as room mates, which was necessary for
the perfect enjoyment of social life. Possessing a mind very unstable, he was
often out of humor, at his want of success, in making me submissive and humble,
to his caprice; and being desirous of my ^^^^ing a part of his cha^^ine, he
assailed my ears with a perpetual stream of petulant criminations. He sought
opportunities to mortify me before company, by representing me as a person
inattentive to matters of religion, and consequently, wanting every virtue.
This mode of procedure, I could not tamely dispense wi^h; my invention was the
only mean of resort for retaliation.

One night, while he was paying his devoirs to a young lady, word was brought
him, that in a fit of the epilepsy, I was about expiring, and wished for him to
perform the last kind office of a friend, to pray with, and for me. This was a
business he always attended with great promptitude, his Dulcinea being equally
possessed with the laudable ambition of proselyting, agreed to accompany him to
the room. But when they came there, they found it empty of every living thing,
and not even the appearance of any person's being there that night; for the
truth was, I had, the day preceding, obtained leave of absence, and was gone to
my Father's. This was readily understood as a p^n upon his sacerdotal
character, than which, nothing could have wounded him more. His character, in
that respect, he wished to have considered as sacred; and to trifle with that,
was striking at the very root of all his sanctimonious self-importance. He
suspected me to be the author of this mortifying (...), and was unwearied in
his endeavors to gain some evidence of the fact, but all his exertions were
ineffectual. Notwithstanding all these singularities and eccentricities, I
believe him to be a man of an honest heart, lead to practice those ridiculous
plans by a misguided zeal for religion.

About this time, the Indians had made (...) upon some of the frontier
settlements, and destroyed them. It was feared they would make a descent upon
Hanover, and burn Dartmouth College, with the buildings in its vicinity; and
consequently, the minds of the people were full of fear, and easily aroused by
an alarm of any kind. One evening, being in company with a number of others, we
proposed and agreed, to make a visit to a (...) of watermelons, belonging to a
man in the vicinity, who kept them for sale, and help ourselves to some of
them. We, accordingly, put our plan in execution; and went as far as the river,
half a mile out of town, in order to eat them more securely. After we had
finished our repast, every one took his own way, in order to get to his room
unperceived. I came directly into town, by the most obvious rout, in company
with one Pain: when we had gotten to the green, around which the buildings
stand, we discovered some person walking before my door, suspecting, as I
suppose, my absence from my room, which being against the laws of College, at
that time of night, would give him an opportunity, if he made the desired
discovery, to involve me in difficulty.

All these circumstances were very apparent to me, and therefore, I wished to
avoid being known to him, as well as to avoid the discovery of the watermelons:
We, therefore, turned off another course, than directly to the College, and
rolled our gowns close together, and tucked them up on our backs, so as to make
the appearance of men worn packs on their backs. This man, Higgins by name,
seeing us, by this time, came on toward us; we quickened our pace -- he pursued
us with equal speed -- we ran -- he ran after us, and hallooed with all his
might. -- I was now sensible, that an alarm would be made among the
inhabitants, and of course, some immediate and decisive measures must be taken,
to prevent a discovery, or a suspicion of the watermelon business falling on
me: I, therefore, turned a short corner, where my pursuer lost sight of me, and
ran directly back to the College, and got into my room undiscovered.

Fortunately, my room-mate, was not at his lodgings this night. I heard an
inquiry, in the rooms adjoining, respecting the noise: I went into one of them,
and found they were about starting after Higgins, to learn the difficulty. We,
accordingly, all started together and after running about one hundred rods,
came up to him, who was still hallooing for help. On inquiry, he told us that
he had discovered two men, carrying packs on their backs, lurking about the
town, whom he supposed to be spies from the Indians, and that they had fled on
discovering him. The town was alarmed, the militia turned out; the boats up and
down the river were stopped; the woods were scoured, but nothing found, nothing
discovered; all night, the fruitless search was continued.

About the dawn of day, the people returned, weary and fatigued, into the town,
and assembled for mutual consultation. Some thought one thing, and some
another. Some thought the whole difficulty began in nothing, and ended in the
same. Some thought it a trick of the scholars, to make themselves diversion. At
the suggestion of this idea, one Capt. Storrs observed, that he saw Buroughs
and Pain pass by his house, about six minutes before he heard the outcry. The
name of Buroughs cast a suspicious appearance upon the business They all
turned their eyes on me, as the author (...) this alarm and uproar. I cited
those who ran from the College with me, on the first of the outcry, to vouch
for my innocence; they readily did it. All were satisfied, on my account,
except my good friend, Mr. Wood. He rolled the eye of jealousy over the
business -- he was dissatisfied. -- He took Pain to a private room in the
College, -- and there, by a reiterated course of flattery, threatening,
terrors, and soothings, he obtained the mighty secret, as it related to me. I
was immediately informed of the business, by a person, whom I had placed in a
room adjoining, to overhear whatever should be the result of this conference.

It was now about sunrise. I, immediately, went to the owner of the
watermelons, and told him, that passing his yard last evening, after he was in
bed, I had taken twelve of his watermelons, knowing he kept them for sale, and
came to let him know it, and pay him for them. After counting his watermelons,
and finding twelve taken, according to my account, he took the pay, and gave me
his receipt. I now returned to my room, ready to meet the heavy blow, I saw was
preparing against me.

By this time, it had taken air, that I was the author of last night's alarm.
Every countenance was turned upon me, in an oblique direction. They had all
heard, that theft was combined in the business, they had all determined, I must
fall under this blow; -- therefore, they were waiting for the awful moment, of
my being summoned before the authority of College. Ten o'clock, the all
tremendous hour arrived! I appeared -- a number had gathered -- which crowded
the room. After the charge was read against me, Mr. Ripley, one of the Tutors,
addressed me in a speech of half an hour's length, stating the enormous crime I
had been guilty of, the course of iniquity I must have led through life, to be
detected in such an atrocious high handed breach of law, at the age of sixteen;
the disgrace I had brought on my family connexions, and the seminary, of which
I was a member; that my expulsion, which would undoubtedly succeed, would be
but only a prelude to my punishment by the civil law; that ruin and disgrace
were the only effects, which would fall on my devoted head.

This rant I heard, with the coolness of a Stoic. After he had talked himself
out of breath, I had liberty to answer. I mentioned the hardness of my case, in
being ^^cused, condemned, and executed, without any proof, or even being heard
in my own defense. That I did not know what evidence they could produce of my
being guilty of the crime laid to my charge, but whatever it was, I hoped to be
sufficiently able to overturn its validity, and clearly establish my innocence.
At least, the humane language of candor, taught us to hold every man innocent,
till he was proved guilty. True it was, I had taken watermelons from Mr. Smith,
the night preceding, but had early that morning, informed him of the fact, and
paid for them. This information, was like a thunderclap, to some of the
spectators. All their hopes, of seeing r^in fall heavy on my head, were now
quashed in the twinkling of an eye. Mr. Smith, the owner of the watermelons,
having been sent for, testified to all the facts, which I had stated; and of
course, here the business ended.

My Father consented for my removal from the room where I had lived. I,
accordingly, changed my lodgings, to my no small satisfaction. During the
succeeding vacation, my Father, attentive to his wonted humanity, took a
classmate of mine, by the name of Coffin, home to his house, whose pecuniary
circumstances were difficult, and gave him his board and tuition, gratis. He
likewise supplied Coffin with provisions for his subsistence for the next
winter, on condition of his paying for them afterward, at a time he himself
had fixed, as being most convenient. The time being elapsed, I asked Coffin for
the money, according to his promise, in behalf of my Father, in order to answer
some small engagements, which I was under, for the payment of money. He paid
but little attention to my request; I repeated it a number of times afterward,
but without effect. At length, Coffin told me plainly, he had no intention of
paying the debt; stating the difference between his and my Father's
circumstances, that my Father was better able to do without it, than he was to
pay it. I remonstrated in warm terms on the unreasonableness of his conduct.
This brought about a violent resentment on his side, which he never failed to
show, when he had an opportunity. He united himself under the banner of my
friend Wood, in order to increase their strength by union. Mr. Ripley, the
Tutor, was likewise disaffected, not only by the chagrine of being found to be
a false preacher, when he was on the subject of the watermelons, but likewise
on account of a violent antipathy and resentment against my Father, owing to
their disagreeing in sentiment, with regard to the management of certain
religious matters, and therefore, was determined, according to the good old
rule, "to (...) the iniquities of the ^athers on the children." He uniting his
force with those abovementioned, formed a powerful triumvirate against me.

About this time, the President of the College left here, intending a tour to
Europe. The Tutors now became the only executive authority of the College. My
friend Riply, was the second in standing, and consequently, a great degree of
influence fell into his hands. This influence, he was careful to exercise on
every occasion. On a certain day of the week, when my class were called upon to
declaim, I did not attend; the reason of my absence, was owing to this
circumstance. I had sent my shoes to the shoe maker, and contrary to my
expectation, they had not yet returned, and I had not shoes, decent for my
appearance abroad, Mr. Riply sent for me to appear, and perform my part of the
exercises of the day; the excuse, which existed, I sent him, but the messenger
returned with positive order for me to attend. I attended, with such shoes as I
had, mounted the stage, and declaimed. I made my obeisance, and retired. He
called to me, and publicly reprimanded me for appearing in such habiliment. At
a certain time, he made a request to my class, to assist him in a certain piece
of business, which he was desirous of performing, one afternoon. I turned out
to assist him. We were detained till ten o'clock at night. The next morning, I
was absent from recitation -- He sent for me -- I came, -- He again reprimanded
me for being deficient in my classic lesson, though he knew the cause was my
performing service for him at his request. Finding matters thus disagreeably
situated, I determined to quit that ground, which I could not maintain with any
probability of success. I, accordingly, left College, and went to my father's.

CHAP. V.
And thus my days in one sad tenor run
And end in sorrow, as they first begun.

TO remain an inactive member of society was far from my desire, various plans
were proposed by my Father for my entering into business, or at least,
preparing myself for it, but none appeared so eligible as going to sea;
therefore, it was determined for me to bend my course that way. My Father
fitted me out with a horse, saddle, bridle, and about twenty dollars in money,
and let me loose upon the broad theater of the world, to act my part according
to my abilities. The want of experience and a natural hasty temper, prone to
inconsiderate actions, augured no very favorable prospects before me.

I had been a member of the seminary of Dartmouth College sufficiently long, to
be filled with that sort of learning, which gave me an exalted idea of my own
importance, and which was of no manner of use, in my pursuits through life.
This may appear strange, that I should spend three years in gaining that, which
was good for nothing. However strange it may seem to you, sir, yet it is a
fact. One year, I was studying to prepare myself for admittance into that
seminary, where I spent two, in learning nothing, or that which amounted to the
same in the end.

Perhaps you may think I entertain an opinion of this College as being, in
point of usefulness, much below the other Universities on the continent; but
this is not the case. It is a melancholy consideration, that our youth should
spend so much time in acquiring that knowledge, which is of no use to
themselves or to the community, of which they are members. To acquire an
accurate knowledge of the dead languages, seven years is a short time; and
after this is effected, to what does it amount? does it give bread to the
persons possessing it, or does it serve to enlighten, enrich, or render more
happy, any part of the community? I contend, that the person, who has learned
to make a shoe, does more good to society, than he who has spent seven years in
acquiring a knowledge of the dead languages. If this position is founded in
truth, then this consequence will follow, that more than one half of the time
spent at the Universities, according to their present establishment on this
continent, is thrown away, and that the position is founded in fact, I will
endeavor to prove.

The happiness of ourselves, together with the good of society, is the
governing pursuit of every valuable member of the community, therefore,
whatever conduces to this end is the only object worthy of attention. The good
of Society may be comprised in these three points, viz. 1st. to obtain what is
necessary to supply the calls of nature, by the least painful measures. 2d.
Rules for the regulation of mankind, in their relative situation, which, in
their operation, will tend to harmonize the conduct of the whole, toward
individuals* 3d. A supply of food for the mental part of creation; for the
mental part requires a certain supply, in order to render us sensibly happy, as
well as the corporal. Mankind, in their present state of existence, find it
necessary to submit to the pain of labor, in order to protect themselves from
the cries of hunger and thirst, from the inclemency of the climates and
seasons, and from the unjust encroachments upon their industrious acquisitions
and natural rights. These are the first objects, which mankind find themselves
under the necessity of attending to; hence, we find the most savage and
barbarous nations occupied in these pursuits. Nations, that have made no
improvements in useful knowledge, are subject to the greatest degree of pain,
in supplying the simple calls of nature. The precarious effects of the chase
are the most general supplies to the calls of hunger, with them, and as that is
a resource of so doubtful a nature, those people often suffer the pain of
hunger unsatisfied; therefore, no wonder we find the inventer of the plow
immortalized, and deified, because the good, which he had done to mankind, was
so essentially felt, and known. They then saw the uncertainty of a support
changed into a certainty; that they now were able to provide for themselves and
families, and consequently, the different sexes could enter into that
connection, which contributed greatly to increase the happiness of Society,
without the danger of seeing their tender offspring perish miserably for the
want of sustenance. This object occupies the feelings of mankind now, as it has
done heretofore. They find the same necessity for a support for themselves and
offspring; and consequently, those acquirements, which serve to render men able
to procure a support, in an easy and certain way, are now the most essential to
the good of Society. That learning the dead languages has no direct or indirect
tendency to this acquirement is a truth so obvious, that more need not be said
upon this subject; therefore, with regard to the usefulness of this species of
knowledge, in the first and most essential pursuit of mankind, we find that it
is not founded in fact.

The second most important object, for the good of Society, is those rules for
the regulation of mankind in their relative situation, which, in their
operation, will tend to harmonize the conduct of mankind toward each other.
Legislation is a subject, perhaps, of all others, the most difficult to bring
to perfection, so as to have a thorough understanding of its nature and
operation. It has been the study of the greatest men in all ages, since Society
has been formed, and yet, much is to be learned on this subject.

To understand the operations of the human heart, so as to adopt rules for the
regulation of man, in his conduct toward his fellow members of Society, in
such a manner as to render those rules easy and acceptable to all, and under
which, all will enjoy the blessings of society uninterrupted, is an object of
such magnitude and importance, that every breast, possessing the principles of
Philanthropy, must be fired with ardor in the investigation. As far as mankind
deviate from such a government, so far they are politically unhappy, and in as
great a degree as they approximate to this golden age, not of poetic fiction,
but of reality, so far they approach toward real political perfection. What a
perversion of the talents and time of our youth, whom we intend for public
employments! to keep them tied down to the study of the uninteresting and
unessential branches of the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew languages, the greater
part of their continuance at the University, to the utter neglect of political
knowledge! I am bold to affirm, that not one to twenty of those, who are dubed
with the title of A. B. or A. M. understand that constitution or form of
Government under which they live. Will not the mind of sensibility cry out with
the Orator, on an other occasion? "O, the times! O, the manners!"

The last object of attention, though not less interesting, is a supply of food
for the mental part of creation. The mind of man is made capable of greater
enjoyment, than what barely relates to the senses. The system of Morality and
Philosophy are what I mean to be understood, as food for the mind, or mental
part of creation. When the mind of man becomes disengaged from the primary
objects of Nature's call, it then mounts to things of greater magnitude, than
what barely relate to itself; it views creation, the works of providence, and
the end to which all these things point. The doctrine of right and wrong, or in
other words, virtue and vice is a subject which supplies food for the mind, or
which gives the highest polish to the happiness which it enjoys. When we view
the curious order of Nature, and see that all things are governed by fixed and
unalterable laws, which, once discovered, lead to a knowledge of future events
and useful improvements; that the parent of Nature, has carefully and curiously
provided for all his children, even to the minutest insect, we cannot but be
filled with that delight at viewing the fitness of things, which no other
subject can create. I will contend, that more satisfaction is enjoyed in
viewing the operation of Nature on a single kernel of wheat, after it is
committed to the ground, and there is more usefulness in that contemplation,
than in the study of the dead languages through life. Can a knowledge of these
languages help a person in the investigation of Ethics, Philosophy, or Morality?

I am aware it will be said, that to read the scriptures in the original
tongues will enable a person to understand them much better, than to be able to
read the translations only; and therefore, it is necessary that all, who intend
the study of Divinity as their pursuit, should be acquainted with these
languages. Happy would it have been for mankind, had these effects followed:
but, the truth is far otherwise. We find the Christian world broken into
parties and factions, by those very characters, who have been enabled to read
the scriptures in the original; and much greater disagreement has happened in
the interpretation, than what has been among those, who can read the
translation only; and even in this enlightened age, when so many are savored
with this great privilege, we do not find a more general agreement respecting
the doctrines of Scripture.

I appeal to your own observations, whether I have not s^ated matters of fact,
as they exist, without miscolouring or exaggeration, in respect to the study of
the dead languages. Then the greater part of the time spent at the
Universities, amounts to nothing, or that which is worse. It habituates the
mind to a system of error, and puts it upon the pursuit of wrong objects, and
of course, it becomes difficult to break those chains of habit, which education
has forged.

Look around on mankind; do we see any of those luminaries, who have been
granted to the world, as Heaven's richest boon, from among our collegiate
characters? On the contrary, a Washington, a Franklin, a Rittenhouse, have
shone resplendent, without the borrowed rays of a College. We are prone to form
a wrong estimate of education, perhaps, more than of any other object of our
attention. When a Youth has spent four years at a University, and has gone the
common round of establishing a character for ability, by stealing watermelons,
robbing hen-roosts, geese-houses, etc. and playing tricks upon the inhabitants'
cows and horses, and can speak a number of sentences, which others do not
understand, his fond mother looks at him with a pleasing significance, and
tells her inquisitive neighbors, that her son has got to be a man of science,
and in order to establish her doctrine recounts all the maneuvers he has
practiced at College, in order to get a hen out of the roost. The father thinks
these are marks of greatness of mind, and depth of knowledge, and from these
evidences, forms the most pleasing expectations of his son's future greatness.
These anecdotes are recounted by the neighbors to their families, through a
long course of succeeding winter evenings' amusements. They drink deeply at
this fountain of entertainment. When they hear of the foolish pranks of
scholars, they are exhilerated at the recital; they dwell upon them with
pleasure, and behold the performers with admiration. Whereas, let it be said,
that such or such persons have outstripped their fellows in depth of thought,
or perspicuity of reasoning and invention, the tale becomes lifeless, and is
soon forgotten.

Our Youth, possessing the ambition of becoming famous, strike out in that road
which the unaccountable prejudices of mankind have marked for them. They wish
to start into notice, and will most assuredly adopt such measures, as they see
have brought others forward into public esteem. I believe, Sir, you will be
heartily tired with my digressions, before I get through with my tedious
narration; but I ask for that exercise of patience, toward my weakness, which
I know your generosity will grant. My feelings are so warmly interested in the
ideas, which some of my observations communicate, that I cannont suppress them,
without doing great violence to my mind. But, to return to the narrative.

I left my father's house, about the 20th of November, at the age of seventeen,
and directed my course for Newbury-Port, a small seaport town in the state of
Massachusetts, where they fitted out many small vessels for privateering. After
I had traveled the chief of the day, I entered into the woods about sunset.
Being unacquainted with the way, I was not aware of riding more than a mile or
two, at farthest, before I should come to inhabitants; but to my surprise, I
continued my course till it became quite dark, without discovering any traces
of human beings except the road I was traveling. It began to snow violently,
and the night was extremely dark. I suddenly found myself against a team and
wagon, containing a family moving into the country. After inquiring the
distance through to inhabitants, and the nature of the road, I found I had got
the greatest part of the night's work before me. I, accordingly, quickened my
pace, and waded through the snow, which, by this time, had become (...) deep,
with all the exertion in my power. My horse, which had not been refreshed since
I left home, now became fatigued; alighting, I drove him before me, till I
became weary with traveling myself; and then mounted again. I pursued such
measures alternately, till about twelve at night, when I espied a light, at a
little distance before me.

A person, who has been in a similar situation, will readily conceive of the
nature of my feelings at this time. The sight of this illumination, through a
small cranny of an old log hut, was attended with those effusions of pleasure,
which the miser never feels when hoarding over his treasures. Entering the
building from which the light proceeded, I found it a hut, made in that rude
state, which did not admit of the polish of art. Logs cut from the forest were
laid on the top of each other, to the height of eight feet, when a roof was
added, the rafters of the same materials, covered with the barks of trees. This
building was about twenty feet square; a large fire being built in the midst,
the family lay around it, on the ground. The whole group presented a subject,
fit for the pencil of Hogarth. Inquiring how far it was to a public inn, I was
informed, that one was kept there. Necessity constrained me to accept of those
accommodations, for the want of better.

Some refreshment for my horse being obtained, I was conducted to a bed kept
for travelers, as the best piece of furniture in the house. Nature was too
much fatigued, to hold a parley with inconveniences. I soon fell into a
profound sleep, which continued, I expect, about two hours, when I awoke. By
the complaints which my bones uttered, I was jealous my bed was not made of
down. I arose, called for my horse, and after traveling five miles farther,
over a bad road, I came to a tavern, where accomodations were to ^e had for man
and horse. I enjoyed myself, in this situation, much better, since my other
entertainment had been so disagreeable. I stayed at this house until noon; when
I found myself refreshed with food and sleep, I again pursued my journey. The
next day, I arrived at a town called Londonderry, where the Father of a
classmate of mine lived, on whom I called, and to my great satisfaction, found
the son at his Father's. I told them my intention of going to sea, and the
reason why I had left College. They tried to persuade me to relinquish my
purpose, but when they found me fixed, the old gentleman wrote to some of his
acquaintance in Newbury-Port, to befriend me in my pursuit.

Intending to fell my horse, saddle, and bridle, and with the avails to prepare
myself for sea, I here found the market for horses so low, that a sale for him
would not be easily obtained, without great loss, I, therefore, concluded to
send my horse back to my Father. I arrived at Newbury-Port and delivered my
letter of introduction to Capt. M'Hurd* to whom it was addressed. This man kept
a house for boarders and lodgers; I accordingly put up with him. Not finding
any privateers going to sea soon, I concluded to go in a packet, which had a
letter of marque, to France. Having no doctor engaged, I undertook to act in
that capacity; and after obtaining the assistance, advice, and direction of an
old practitioner in physic, together with marks set on each parcel of medicine,
I thought myself tolerably well qualified to perform the office of a physician
on board the ship. We did not sail till the first day of January, 1784. When I
lost ^ight of America, I cannot say, but what my feelings were more
disagreeably affected, than I expected. Those attachments, which we form in
childhood to places, to persons, and things, are pre^ty strong, I believe, in
the minds of all; and none can give them up without a struggle.

Soon after we had lost fight of land, I began to grow intolerably seasick,
which continued without intermission for four days. This is a species of
sickness, though not dangerous, yet as disagreeable to bear, as the most
violent disorder, to which the human constitution is subject. This served, in a
great measure, to cool my ardor for spending my days on the salt water. On the
fifth day I began to feel more at my ease; the motion of the vessel was not so
irksome; my appetite began to recover, which before was quite gone. We made the
island of Sable, lying in 45 north latitude, where we went on shore. This
island is a dreary barren place, about thirty miles in length. Some wild horses
and hogs were placed on this spot, for the support of seamen, who might be cast
away. Accidents of this kind being very common here, on account of the shoals
extending from its shores at a great distance into the sea. Here was likewise a
small hut, a porridge pot, and firewood, slint, and tinder-box. Here, the
sailors recounted many circumstances of the mavelous, representing this as
the abode of spirits, hobgoblins, etc. They affirmed with much positive
assurance, that many familes had attempted living here, induced by great
rewards from government, but all their attempts were in vain, owing to sights
and noises, which had disturbed them. It was said that this island, in time of
an easterly storm, would shake with great violence, which I was rather induced
to believe, because a natural reason can be assigned for this phenomenon.
Leaving this place, we proceeded on our voyage, till the eighth day of our
departure, when, about 10 o'clock in the morning, the man at the mast head
cried out, a sail! a sail was discovered a head, we hove to, in order to see
which way she was going. We soon found her making from us with all her force.
We put about and made sail after her, till about sunset. We found her a
merchant's brig from New York, bound to London, with pearlash, commanded by one
Pratt. After we had manned out our prize, we pursued our rout, without-any
material occurrence till the twenty third.

About 11 o'clock in the morning, we espied a sail astern, which we soon saw
was in pursuit of us; we made all the sail we could, to run from her, and found
she carried to it, a sea term, for not taking in sail, through some pretty
severe squalls. We lost sight of her about sunset: we made an island on the
coast of France, pronounced, in the French language, Graw -- bow they spell it,
I do not recollect. We came to under this island, and fired for a Pilot, One
soon came off to us: about 1 o'clock at night, we got under way again. This
Pilot was the first person I ever saw wearing wooden shoes; his dress and
apperance were miserable; the use of the knife and fork was unknown to him: He
was invited into the cabin, and victuals set before him; he felt himself in
such an awkward situation, that, instead of eating, he filled his pockets with
hard bread, and went on deck. This is the situation of the peasantry, though
not in quite so deplorable a condition, through France, so far as I had
opportunity of observing. About 10 o'clock the next morning, we made Bellisle,
and soon after, saw a sail standing for us, right ahead. We thought her the
same that pursued us the day preceding; she proved to be the same. She was a
Lugger, carrying 12 six pounders, and was chasing a brig mounting 6 guns. We
soon passed the brig, and speaking with her, found her from Boston, bound to
Nantz. We entreated her to put about with us, and look at the Lugger, which, by
this time, was hove to, waiting for us. All our entreaties were in vain, she
ran in under the fort of Bellisle. We carried 18 guns, but unfortunately, ten
of them were wood, so that little advantage could be expected from them. We
haled up our courses, put up our boarding nettings, cleared our decks, lit our
matches, and made all ready for action. We had on board 21 men, besides the
prisoners. The thirteen stripes of the United States were flying; but, the
Lugger, as yet, showed no colors. We came so near as to hail -- she answered
in French -- and after understanding we came from America, and were bound to
Nantz, she offered us a pilot, and when we told them we had a pilot already on
board, she affected not to understand, but made toward us with a pretended
design of accommodating us with a pilot. Not more than ten men were to be seen
on her deck. By this time, she was sufficiently near to discover those on
board, by their countenances. Mr. Severe, our first mate, knew the commander of
the Lugger to be a man from the Isle of Jersey, having been taken by him the
preceding year. The mate vociferated like a s^entor, "give them a gun! give
them a gun!" We fired, but so strongly prepossessed were the gunners, that the
Lugger was a Frenchman, that they pointed over her, and so did her no damage.
She ported her helm, and fell astern, as much as half a mile, expecting that we
fought with 18 guns. We kept on our course -- seeing this* she made all the
sail possible after us, hung out the English colors, and her deck became
instantly filled with men. She first came up on our windward board, but now
altered her intention, and came round on our l^e-side. We began to fire stern
chases at them, and they returned our salute with bow chases. While Mr. Severe
was elevating the gun at our bow he received a swivel ball, which carried away
his right cheek, went through, and broke his right arm, and two of his ribs. We
caught him up, and carried him into the cockpit, where I dressed his wounds,
and at the desire of one Bootman, a passenger, left Mr. Severe in his care, and
returned on deck. Our ship was thinly manned, and the help of every hand was
felt. A chest of loaded small arms s^ood on the quarter deck, where I took my
station. The Lugger, by this time, was grappled to our ship, and attempted
sword in hand, to cut away our boarding nettings. Every man was ordered to his
boarding pike, and for about 10 minutes, the conflict was truly sharp, but the
issue was in our favor. They retreated on board their own vessel, the guns were
their next resort. With cannon and small arms they poured in upon us a shower
of balls, and we endeavored to pay them in the like kind, to the full amount of
our receipt, so that a balance should be left in our favor, and not against us.
The captain and myself had fired nearly all the small arms, which were loaded.
The commander of the Lugger, kept bellowing from his quarter deck, that if we
did not strike, he would give us no quarter. I took a blunderbuss, which
remained loaded, and taking aim, very leisurely, at the mouth of his trumpet,
let fly. I believe this did his business, at least, I heard no more of this
bravado. Twice more did they attempt to cut away our boarding nettings, but, to
as little effect as at first. We, by this time, had disabled their
fore-top-mast, and carried away their gibboom. They cut from us, and made all
the sail possible toward the Penmarks, which were hidden and dangerous rocks,
lying under water, where they expected we should not follow them. In this
conjecture, they were right. We arrived the same day in the river Loire, and
came to an anchor at a town called Penbeef, 30 miles below the city of Nantz.
The next day, I went up to the city, and took lodgings at one Madame M.
Harty's, a house of general resort for the Americans. To undertake a particular
description of the places through which I went, will be less interesting than
the accounts of travelers of more observation; being too young, at that time,
to make those remarks, which would serve to throw any light upon your previous
knowledge of those places, by the information of other authors.

Soon after my arrival, I had an advantageous offer, of going as Doctor's
second mate, in a ship bound for the East Indias. I accepted of the offer, and
was preparing to go; but the ship, which lay at Penrine, ten miles below
Penbeef, had order suddenly to sail, and so left me behind.

We received our dividend of the prize money, which was 42 guineas each. Being
possessed with so much money, and some time on hand, I determined to take a short
excursion through the country, in order to see what of France, my finances
would admit. I, accordingly, set out, with two more Americans, for Angers, from
thence to Breast, from there to L' Orient, and then back to Nantz. I was absent
on this excursion about three weeks, if I remember right; as nothing more
occurred than what happens to travelers generally, I shall not take up your
time in giving you the uninteresting detail.

When I returned to our ship, I found some alterations had taken place in my
absence, which proved a source of the utmost mortification to me, afterward.
The prize brig had been bought by the Captain, and fitted out for Lisbon, on
board of which, went the first mate, as commander, and one Kenne was engaged to
succeed him in our ship. The third mate supposed this, by the right of
succession, belonged to him, and accordingly, desired me to write to the
Captain, who was at Nantz, in his behalf. I did according to his desire, which
I was induced to do, by the drunken irregular conduct of Kenne, who had
disgusted the whole crew, he having proved a worthless wretch. This act of mine
was the cause of a mortal enmity toward me, which he was but too successful in
showing. When the Captain came on board, I found his feelings were cooled
toward, me. However, no open breach a^ yet took place. We sailed for America
some time in April, and being becalmed off the western isles, we went on shore
at St. Michael's; when we came on shore, we saw a great concourse of people,
about half a mile distant. Our curiosity lead us to see what was the occasion
of this assemblage; when we came to the spot we found a negro bound to a
cannon, and a man standing by with a stake in his hand, sharpened at one end.
The people were Portuguese, and consequently, we could not understand their
language, nor learn the occasion of what we saw, only from conjecture. The
negro appeared to be in great distress, with fearful apprehensions. The
dreadful operation of empaling soon began, which consisted in driving the stake
through his body, from one end to the other, till it came out a little above
his shoulders. The agonies, which he manifested by writhings and hedious yells,
had such an effect on my mind, that I almost fainted. The wind breezing up, we
soon returned on board, to my great satisfaction. I could not, for a number of
days, get the scene of this horrid action out of mind, and even now, sir, my
blood recoils with horror, at the recollection! What strange infatuation! That
man, who is placed in this state of dependence, in stead of granting that help,
which the voice of nature calls for, should exert his power to make a fellow
creature more miserable, than to be left to the savage beasts of prey.

We sailed from hence, I soon began to perceive that Kenne was intriguing
against me, by holding conferences often with Jack, the cabin boy. One day, it
was said, that wine had been, clandestinely, handed out of the cabin to two
men, who appeared to be drunk. I was ordered in a very peremptory manner to
leave the cabin, and remove my chest into the forepack. I moved according to
orders, but you can scarce conceive the emotions of my mind on the occasion. No
reasons were offered for this order*

The conduct of the Captain, before, had been of such a nature as to gain my
warmest esteem. I felt those emotions of friendship for him, which would have
carried me almost any length to serve him.

To receive this treatment from him, and, as I supposed, by the influence of a
low dirty scoundrel, added a poignancy to the sting of disappointment; which is
more easily conceived, by a mind of sensibility, than language can discribe.
For the Captain to suppose it possible, that I could be actuated by so base a
motive, as to hand his wine clandestinely to any of the crew, was a
sacrilegious profanation of the feelings of my heart.

All intercourse between the Captain and myself was at an end. I often had
visits from Kenne, who in the most arrogant insulting manner triumphed over me,
and it was well for him, that I was sick with the small pox at this time. About
the time I was recovering from this disorder, I found by the noise that a
number of the crew was drunk on dock. The Captain came down into the forepeak,
and clapped me into irons, being in a great passion, accused me of breaking
open a box of wine and giving it to the men, in order to revenge the affront of
being turned out of the cabin. I endeavored to expostulate, but in the room of
being heard, I received a brutal kick on my head. All this did not wean my
affection from the Captain. -- I considered him a dupe to the low intrigues, of
those wretches, who were unworthy his notice.

We arrived at Newbury-Port, where I left the ship, and put up at a boarding
house. Here I remained three days, about entering on board of a sloop bound to
the West Indies. I had removed all my things out of the ship, and had no
further communication with any one belonging to her. I intended a further
investigation of the treatment I had received. While I was contemplating these
circumstances, I was arrested in the street, and carried before a Justice of
the Peace, and there found, to my surprise, the Cabin-boy, Kenne, and an
Irishman, who testified, that one Bradley, who had before run away, and could
not be found, told them that I gave him wine out of the cabin; that afterward,
I broke open a chest of wine, and handed him the bottles; and likewise broke
open a bale of silk, and hid one piece of it; all which was done through a
revengeful disposition. Something worth observing took place on their side,
viz. Kenne and the Cabin-boy were those, who made the discovery, of the wine
box being broken open; of the silk bale being broken, and the place in which
the piece of silk was hid; it being where no man would have mistrusted, who did
not know beforehand: it was concealed in a cask, once in my use. Kenne was the
man, who informed the Captain, that the wine was gone out of the cabin; and as
he was half drunk, the greater part of the time, from his first coming on
board, till we arrived, I never doubted, in my own mind, what became of the
wine. And as for Bradley's telling the story, which they related, I knew it was
false, unless it was done by a preconcerted plan. However, I was committed to
jail, where I lay some time, how long, I do not remember, and was then turned
out, in a manner as unaccountable.

By this time, all my money and clothes were gone I know not where; I never saw
them more. The assistance of my friend Ripley was not wanting, to embellish
this scene, who was in Newbury-Port, at this time. My situation did not afford
me the opportunity of calling those to a legal account, who had con^ined me,
contrary to law, and dismissed me in such a clandestine manner. I returned to
my father's sunken and discouraged; the world appeared a gloomy chaos; the sun
arose to cast a sickly glimmer on the surrounding objects; the flowers of the
hold insulted my feelings with their gaiety and splendour; the frolicsome lamb,
the playful kitten, and the antic colt, were beheld with those painful
emotions, which are beyond description. Shall all nature, said I, smile with
joy, shall the brute creation break out into irregular transports, by the
overflowings of pleasing sensations, whilst I am shut out from even the dim
rays of hope? The comparison between my situation, and that of the rest of
intelligent nature, was so much against me, that I could not bear the ideas
which this brought into view, without groaning with pain, under the pressure of
the load.

Those, who had before pursued me, with their unabating enmity, proclaimed
their triumph. I found a censorious world, little desirous of inquiring into
circumstances. It was sufficient for them to have such facts, as served to
raise a slanderous report; and they felt easy, without giving themselves the
trouble of inquiring into the causes, why those facts existed, and the
circumstances attending them.

CHAP. VI.
Descend, bland Pity, from thy native sky,
Come with thy moving plaint and melting eye.

AFTER I had remained at my father's house about one year, without attending to
any kind of business, I concluded, from what reason I was capable of
exercising, that it ill became me, as a (...), to remain thus inattentive and
useless. I determined to enter into business of some kind; and as a school was
the only employment which immediately offered, I entered into that calling. At
a town called Haverhill, thirty miles from Hanover, I engaged to teach an
English school, for four months. No sooner was I seated in the business here,
than I found my friend Ripley busy in his endeavors to throw me out of
employment. He came to Haverhill, and in that plausible manner, of which he was
master, stated the evil consequences of continuing me in that business. The
base examples I should set before the children, who attended my school; and
although I did very well now, yet, notwithstanding my subtilty to conceal my
disposition, I should, ere long, do something, which would make them repent of
their credulity, and expose myself to their universal censure. His
representation had but too much effect on the people. He was a clergyman, and
consequently, must speak the truth. They were afraid -- they kept their
children chiefly at home, for fear of some terrible explosion, which had been
foretold by their spiritual leader. With indignation I quitted them, and the
school.

I then took a school in a town called Orford, eighteen miles below Haverhill,
and twelve miles from Hanover. Fortunately for me, I had kept this school long
enough to get established, before Mr. R -- y knew where I was, and of course,
his efforts for my overthrow, here, were ineffectual. I continued this school
until the expiration of the (...) agreed for, to the universal satisfaction of
all concerned. I began this school in November, and ended with the month of
February. The (...) time for schooling, in all the towns through the eastern
states, is only in the winter, some few ^^^ulous towns excepted.

Whilst I taught this school, I (...) with a woman, who was supposed to be a
widow, possessing those amiable qualifications, calculated to attract the
attention of every admirer of the fair part of creation. I paid strict
attention to gain her affections, and flattered myself I had in a measure
succeeded. After the school was ended, I returned to my father's. I had not
been long with my father, before I had a visit from Joseph Huntington, who was
a member of Dartmouth College. He came in a sleigh, and brought a class mate,
who was of that peculiar turn of mind, as to be a butt for the ridicule of all
the Wits in College; and it was certain, he would be lead into all the scrapes
then in vogue. Huntington proposed to me to take a ride that evening, in his
sleigh, telling me at the same time, he had brought A -- with him, to steal a
bee-hive. For the diversion of drawing A -- into a ludicrous situation, I
immediately consented to be one of the party. We accordingly all got into the
sleigh, and drove away about two miles, when, coming near where bees were kept,
we sent A -- after them, who was ever prompt to do what he was set about by any
one. He soon returned with a hive to the sleigh, when we drove off with great
speed to the College, where I found a number assembled, ready to partake of the
repast which the honey afforded. All were regaled with this delicious morsel,
but myself, having an insuperable antipathy to honey, which wholly
incapacitates me from ever making use of it.

I am now, Sir, at a place in my narrative, which has caused me pain in
relating, because I view my conduct entirely wrong, and my mode of reasoning
upon such subjects, at that age, quite ridiculous. For some unaccountable
reason or other, Youth are carried away with false notions of right and wrong.
I know, for instance, that Huntington possessed those principles of integrity,
that no consideration would have induced him to deprive another by stealth, of
any species of property, except fruit, bees, pigs, and poultry. And why it is
considered by Youth generally, that depriving another of those articles is less
criminal, than stealing any other kind of property, I cannot tell; but it is a
fact, that almost all do esteem this so, and robbing others of those articles
is thought to be only the playful wantonness of thoughtless inexperience. I
will ask you, Sir, whether our treatment of those things does not give too much
reason to convince Youth, that we view them in that light ourselves.

We parted at 11 o'clock that evening, and I returned home. The man, that lost
the bees, suspected the scholars as the authors of this depredation, and
accordingly, went to the governors to enter his complaint. Search was made, and
by the inattention of A --, a discovery was effected. It was found, likewise,
in the discovery, that I was of the party, -- this was a fine bone for my
friend R -- y to pick. He did not fail to fulfill the office of a clergyman, by
setting his face against iniquity. He was determined I should be made a public
example. After Huntington and A -- had settled with the owner of the bees, R --
y represented to him, the necessity of not making any settlement with me, but
prosecute in the law, and there have it terminate. Coffin was ready to back
this representation, with all his oratory. They succeeded; I was informed into
the circumstances; and as another circumstance had now taken place, which
cooperated with this, it is necessary I should go back a little in my
narrative, and bring forward this event, to the present time. The lady, of whom
mention has been made, and who was supposed to be a widow, I still addressed
upon the terms of courtship: matters between us had proceeded to considerable
length. I went to visit her one day, after I had left Orford, and coming to a
neighbor's of here is, about six rods distant, I saw a man standing in the door
of her house, a stranger, whom I never before saw; and upon inquiring who he
was, received information that her husband was alive, and had come home. This
intelligence was like heaven's artillery, charged with ten-fold vim. The wheels
of nature ran backward! The blood curdled in my veins, and I fell almost
senseless into a chair! I was aroused from this stupor, by female shrieks!
Howlings of bitter lementation assailed my ears ********* God of nature! what
greater scenes of distress are reserved in store!? What sharper arrows yet
remain in thy quiver!? ****************************** May I hide myself with a
mantle of darkness, and retire from the stage of action, into eternal obscurity.

CHAP. VII.
Fired is the muse? And let the muse be fired,
Who not inflamed, when what he speaks, he feels?

WEARY with life, I returned to my father's, made some small arrangements, and
left the country. One pistarene was all the ready cash I had on hand, and the
suddenness with which I departed, deprived me of a chance to raise more.
Traveling on leisurely, I had time for reflection. What, said I, again an
outcast among mankind? where am I going? what can I do with myself in this
world, where I meet with nothing but disappointment and chagrine. True it is, I
am an outcast, but who cares for that? If I will not use means for my own
preservation and prosperity, what am I to expect? Is it to be supposed that
whining over misfortunes is calculated to make them better? No, by no means.
Then arouse, said I, for shame: use such means as you have in your power. The
greater embarrassments, the more honor in overcoming them; -- lay aside the
idea of being any longer a child, and become a man. If others endeavor to throw
obstacles in the way of your prosperity, show them that you can rise above them.

This dialogue with myself was productive of the most happy effects; I began to
look about me, to see what was to be done in my present situation, to what
business I could turn my attention.

The practice of Law, which would have been most to my mind, I could not
undertake, until I had spent some considerable time in the study, which would
be attended with expense, far beyond my abilities; therefore, this object must
be laid aside. Physic was under the same embarrassments: business of the
mercantile line, I could not pursue, for want of a capital; and even a school,
at this time of the year, was hardly to be obtained.

Business of some kind, I must enter into, and that immediately, in order to
answer the present calls of nature. And what can that be? said I: have not I
enumerated all the callings, which are profitable for me to attend to? I might
possibly write in an office, or tend in a store, on wages, had I any person to
recommend or introduce me into that business: But what can now be done? A
stranger -- moneyless -- and friendless. -- There is one thing, said
Contrivance, which you may do; and it will answer your purpose. Preach!! --
Preach? -- What a pretty fellow am I for a preacher! -- A pretty character
mine, to tickle the ears of a grave audience! Run away from my own home, for
being connected in robbing a bee-house, and for my attention to a married
woman; having been through scenes of tumult, during my whole career, since I
have exhibited on the active stage of life. Besides all this, what an
appearance should I make, in my present dress? which consisted of a light gray
coat, with silver plated buttons, green vest, and red velvet breeches. This,
said I, is a curious dress for me to offer myself in, as a Preacher; and I am
by no means able to obtain a different suit.

These objections, truly, are weighty, -- many difficulties must be surmounted,
in order to enter into this business, but as this is the only kind, you can
attend to, said I to myself, under present circumstances, you can but be
destitute of resource, if you make the trial, and do not succeed. At any rate,
it is best to see what can be done; therefore, in order to obviate the first
difficulty, viz. of disagreeable reports following you, it will be necessary to
prevent, as much as possible, your being known, where you offer yourself to
preach: and in order to prevent that, you must change your name. This being
done, you must go some distance, where you are not personally known; and the
probability is, that you can continue in such business, till some opportunity
may offer for your entering into other employment. As for your dress, you
cannot alter that, at present, and therefore, you must make the best of it you
can. I do not think it will be an insurmountable obstacle; if you fail in one
attempt, mind not to be discouraged, but repeat the trial, until you succeed,

After I had held this parley with myself, I was determined to follow the
foregoing plan, according to the best of my abilities. I exchanged my horse for
another, much worse, and received three dollars for the difference: This
furnished me with money for my immediate expenses in traveling. I pursued my
course, down Connecticut river, about 150 miles, judging, that by this time, I
was for enough from home, to remain unknown, I concluded to begin my
operations. Hearing of a place called Ludlow, not far distant, where they were
(...) of a clergyman, I bent my course that way, it being Saturday, and
intended to preach the next day, if I proved successful. I arrived about noon,
and put up at the house of one Fuller, whom I found to be a leading man in
their religious society. I introduced myself to him as a clergyman, and he gave
me an invitation to spend the sabbath with them, and preach. You will readily
conclude, that I did not refuse this invitation. The greatest obstacle was now
surmounted, as I conceived, viewing myself as fairly introduced into the
ministerial function. I retired to rest at the usual time, and after I had
composed my mind, sufficiently for reflection, I began to consider under what
situation my affairs now stood, and what was to be done under present
circumstances. I had engaged to preach on the morrow. I had almost forgotten to
tell you that my name here was Davis. -- People had been notified that a sermon
would be delivered: This business I never had attempted. It is true, the study
of Divinity had come under my attention, together with every other subject of
common concern, in a cursory manner. I concluded that sermonizing would not be
so difficult, as the other exercises of public worship. Many disagreeable
possibilities arose into view. What, said I, would be my feelings, should I
make some egregious blunder in traveling this unbeaten road? I must be exposed
to the mortifying consideration of being observed by a whole assembly, in this
ridiculous essay to preach, and not be able to carry my attempt into execution;
and all those things possibly may happen. Those considerations made so dismal
an appearance, that I once concluded to get up, take my horse privately out of
the stable, and depart, rather than run the risk of the dangers which were
before me. But upon more mature reflection, I found the hard hand of necessity
compelled me to stay. When I awoke the next morning, my heart beat with anxious
palpitation for the issue of the day. I considered this as the most important
scene of my life. That in a great measure, my future happiness or wretchedness
depended on my conduct through this day. The time for assembling approached! I
saw people began to come together. My feelings were all in arms against me, my
heart would leap almost into my mouth.

What a strange thing, said I, is man! why am I thus perturbated with these
whimsical feelings? I know my dress is against me, and will cause some
speculation, but I cannot help it, and why need I afflict myself with
disagreeables, before they arrive? I endeavored to calm my feelings, by those
reflections. I fortified my countenance with all my resolution, and set out
with my bible and psalm book under my arm; those being the only insignia of a
clergyman about me. When I made my appearance, I found a stare of universal
surprise, at my gay dress, which suited better the character of a beau, than a
clergyman. My eyes, I could not persuade myself, to raise from the ground, till
I had ascended the pulpit. I was doubtful whether I had the command of my
voice, or even whether I had any voice. I sat a few moments, collecting my
resolution for the effort of beginning: I made the attempt -- I found my voice
at command -- my anxiety was hushed in a moment -- my perturbation subsided; --
and I felt all the s^renity of a calm summer's morning. I went through the
exercises of the forenoon, without any difficulty. No monarch, when seated on
the throne, had more sensible feelings of prosperity, than what I experienced
at this time.

During the intermission, I heard the whisper, in swift circulation among the
people, concerning my appearance, in such a dress. The question was often asked
with great emphasis, "Who is he?" but no one was able to give those answers,
which were satisfactory. A consultation took place among some leading members
of the society, relative to hiring me, to continue among them, as a preacher;
as I had intimated to Mr. Fuller, that I should ^e willing to continue among
them in that capacity, should such a matter meet with their approbation. I
attended on the afternoon's exercises without any singular occurrence. The
meeting being dismissed, and the people retired, I was informed by my
landlord, that they did not agree to here me any longer; -- accordingly, I
found my business here at an end.

I was advised by Mr. Fuller, to make application to Mr. Baldwin, minister of
Palmer, about twenty miles distant from Ludlow, for information where were
vacancies, and for an introduction into those vacancies. I, accordingly, set
out for Palmer, on Monday morning, and arrived at Mr. Baldwin's about 4 o'colck
in the afternoon. I introduced myself to him as a clergyman, wanting
employment. I saw he noticed my dress, but asked no questions. He examined into
my education, knowledge of Divinity, tenets, etc. and finding all agreeing with
his ideas of orthodoxy, he concluded to recommend me to a town called Pelham,
eighteen miles distant from Palmer. The next morning I set off for Pelham, with
a letter to one Deacon Gray. I arrived, and delivered my letter, and was hired,
in consequence of the recommendation of Mr. Baldwin, without any hesitation,
for four sabbaths, five dollars a sabbath; boarding, horse-keeping, etc. etc.
-- I now found myself, in some measure, settled in business. The want of an
immediate relief, to my temporary inconveniences, was now supplied. I (...) and
the family into which I had fallen, to be an agreeable sociable circle, and I
was much respected in the family, not only on account of my sacerdotal
character, but likewise on account of the ease with which I mixed with them, in
all their little social enjoyments.

CHAP. VIII.
Companion of the wretched come,
Fair Hope! and dwell with me a while;
Thy heavenly presence gilds the gloom,
While happier scenes in prospect smile.

BEFORE I proceed to the relation of succeeding events, it will be necessary,
to give a description of the people inhabiting this town; as much will depend
on knowing their character, to rightly understand the relation of incidents,
which will follow.

The town of Pelham was settled with people, chiefly from the north of Ireland.
They were, of course, strict Presbyterians. They valued themselves much, on
being acquainted with the nice distinctions between orthodox and heterodox
principles and practice. They, likewise, wished to be thought shrewd in their
observations on ministers and preaching. A people generally possessing violent
passions, which once disturbed, raged, uncontrolled by the dictates of reason;
Unpolished in their manners, possessing a jealous disposition; and either very
friendly or very enemical, not knowing a medium between those two extremes. The
first settled minister they had among them, was one Abicrombie, from Scotland,
a man of handsome abilities but violent passions, resolute and persevering. Not
many years after he was settled among them, a difficulty took place between him
and the people, which was carried to considerable length, and ended in his
dismission. After Mr. Abicrombie left this people, they made application to one
Grayham, who, at length, settled among them, to their universal satisfaction;
being a very handsome speaker, and otherwise possessed with popular talents, as a
preacher. Mr. Grayham was a man of very delicate feelings, of superior
refinement, and inheriting a great desire for that peace, which establishes the
enjoyments of society.

After preaching a number of years to this people, he found an uneasiness
prevailing among them, the chief cause of which was his practicing upon a
system of manners more refined, than what was prevalent in the place;
consequently, they accused him of pride, of attention to the vanities of the
world; of leaving the plain path of scripture, and following after the vices of
Rome. Mr. Grayham labored to convince them of their mistake; of his wish to
live with them upon the most intimate terms of equality; of his ever having it
in view, to pursue such measures, as would, in their operation, conduce to
their good and prosperity; and in that pursuit, he had expected his examples
and precepts would answer a valuable purpose. His expostulations,
remonstrances, and entreaties, were all given to the wind. The difficulties
increased, and the clamor grew louder. The mind of Mr. Grayham was too
delicately strung to bear those strokes of misfortune; they insensibly wore
upon his constitution, till at last he fell a sacrifice to the tumult, and
sought his rest in the grave.

The town of Pelham remained destitute of a minister for a considerable time.
They tried a number of candidates, but not finding any, with whom they could
agree, no one was yet settled. At length, a Mr. Merrill came among them. He was
a man possessing the gift of utterance and flow of expression, perhaps equal to
any. He was an eccentric genius, and imprudent to the last degree; possessing
violent passions, -- headstrong and impetuous. The plausible part of his
character was so captivating, that the town agreed to settle him. He,
accordingly, was installed. His imprudences soon made their appearance.
Complaint was made, but they found one, now, who paid but little attention to
their complaining. Both parties began to give way to passion. Their contention
increased, and a flame was kindled, which set the whole town in an uproar. Mr.
Merrill refused to start from that foundation, to which his legal contract
entitled him, therefore, the other party determined to use extraordinary and
violent measures. This attack, Mr. Merrill durst not meet; therefore, he
suddenly left the town. Matters were in this situation, when I came to Pelham.
From the information of Mr. Baldwin, and from the communications of my landlord
and family, I soon gained a pretty thorough knowledge of the people, whom I was
amongst; and I endeavored to adopt my conduct to their genius, as far as I was
capable. I found myself soon able to dress in a habit fitting my calling. I
soon found, likewise, that my endeavors to suit the people had not altogether
failed. At the expiration of the four sabbaths, they engaged me to preach
sixteen more. I began to form an acquaintance in the neighboring towns, and
with the neighboring ministers.

This happened to be a time of great mortality among women in childbed;
consequently, I was called to preach many funeral sermons, in this, and the
neighboring towns, many of which were destitute of a clergyman of their own. I
always attended this business, when I had a call. This circumstance began to
raise a wonder in the minds of some, how I could be prepared for preaching so
constantly, and on so short notice, being as yet, only nineteen years of age. I
had, in reality, ten Sermons with me, written by my father.

At a certain time, being suddenly called to preach a funeral sermon, I had
none of my own written, proper for the occasion. I took one of my father's, and
delivered it to a crowded audience. As this sermon was delivered in a private
house, it was in the power of any to look into my notes. One, who had wondered
at my always being prepared to preach, took this opportunity of looking over my
notes, and thought they appeared too old to be lately written. This
circumstance was mentioned to a number, who began to grow uneasy, with the
apprehension of my preaching sermons, not my own. Mr. Baldwin coming to Pelham,
about this time, they mentioned the matter to him, that he might make some
inquiry into the business, and inform them. He, accordingly, mentioned the
matter to me, in a confidential manner, and desired to see the sermon, alluded
to. I was sensible the handwriting of my father was so different from my own,
that the first view must clearly convince any observer, that this sermon was
not written by myself: I, therefore, thought it the better way, to treat the
matter ingeniously, and tell him the simple matter of fact.

I told Mr. Baldwin, that the sermon was a manuscript which I had in my
possession, together with some others, written by another person, and that the
want of time to prepare a discourse had induced me to take this, rather than
refuse to preach. -- Mr. Baldwin made some observations with regard to my
situation; of the necessity of a great degree of prudence; and of the
impropriety of using other sermons, as a general thing. He returned to Palmer,
without giving the men any account respecting the matter of their suspicion.
Not gaining that intelligence by Mr. Baldwin, which was expected, those, who
were uneasy, spread their suspicions among others, until there became
uneasiness, pretty generally, through the town. They proposed a number of ways
to obtain that satisfaction, with regard to their suspicion, which would either
clear me from the fact of which they were jealous, or else establish them in
it. They, at length, agreed to this method, viz. to send one of their number to
me, on Sunday morning, previous to my going into the meeting house, and desire
me to preach from a passage of scripture, which he should give me. I was
informed of all these circumstances, previous to the time of trial. Their
reasoning upon this subject, was of this nature, viz. That if I was able, on
the shortest notice, to preach on any occasion, I should be able likewise, to
preach on Sunday, from such a passage as should be given me, on the morning of
the same day; and should I not be able to preach, the evidence would be
conclusive against me, that I preached the sermons of others, and not my own.

The Sunday following, I was waited on by Mr. Clark, who desired me to oblige
him, by delivering a discourse from the first clause of the 5th verse of the
9th chapter of Joshua; the words were, "old shoes and clouted on their feet." I
informed him I would deliver a discourse from that text, and accordingly he
left me. I truly felt somewhat blanked, at the nature of the passage I had to
discourse upon. However, I was determined to do the best on the subject I was
capable. I endeavored to make some arrangements in my mind on the subject. I
had not thought long on it, before the matter opened to my mind, in such a
manner, as to give me much satisfaction. As your patience would hardly endure
the repetition of a tedious sermon, I will not trouble you with it, yet, sir,
indulge me, in giving you some general outlines of this discourse, as it was
founded on a very singular passage, and delivered on a very extraordinary
occasion.

CHAP. IX.
Thus airy pleasure dances in our eyes,
And spreads false images in fair disguise,
To lure our souls; 'till just within our arms
The vision dies, and all the painted charms
Flee quick away, from the pursuing fight
'Till they are lost in shades, and mingle with the night.

IN handling this discourse, the exordium consisted of a description of the
Gibeonites; the duplicity which they practiced upon the Jews; the nature and
general tendency of deceit, etc. After I had gone through with the
introduction, I divided my discourse into three general heads, viz. To consider
in the first place of shoes, 2dly of old shoes, and 3dly of clouted shoes. In
treating of the first general head viz. shoes, I considered them in a
metaphorical sense, as showing our mode of conduct in life. We are all, said I,
sojourners in this world, but for a season, traveling to another country, to
which we shall, ere long, arrive, we must all beshod, in order to enable us to
travel the road before us. We find the good man represented as having his "feet
shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace." All mankind are in a state
of motion; none remain inactive on this stage of probation; all are moving
forward with rapidity, and hastening to their final end. Not only the natural
world, but likewise the mental, is filled with briars and thorns, stones and
rubbish, which wound us at every step, when we are not shod to guard us from
those injuries, we should otherwise receive from those impediments. Mankind,
finding this to be the case, have immediate recourse to such coverings for
their feet, as they imagine will protect them from the injuries to which they
are exposed, etc. etc.

In treating the second head viz. of old shoes, I endeavored to show, that
they represented those, "who had been hewing to themselves cisterns, broken
cisterns, which can hold no water." We find, said I, from the earliest ages of
the world, mankind practicing upon that system. They have continued ever since
to tread in the steps of their predecessors, and to wear the same old shoes.
The old shoes represent old sins, which mankind have made use of from old
times, down to the present day. And would to GOD, they had been worn until
mankind had been ashamed of them. A spirit of jealousy and discord, perhaps,
may be accounted as old as any shoes now worn. How soon after the creation do
we find this same destructive principle raging in the little family, which then
composed the whole human race. Murder was the consequence; revenge and hatred
were perpetuated by it. Now I am possessed with this accursed passion, said
Cain, "whoever shall find me, shall slay me." The direful influence of this
passion spreads its dismal effects among all mankind, when it once prevails:
Solomon, viewing the operation of this principle upon the human heart, says
"Jealousy is more cruel than the grave." It deluges countries, destroys
societies, and renders man hateful to man. All civil and religious bodies are
destroyed, when once this hateful monster is allowed an entrance. Ministers and
people, parents and children, husbands and wives, fall a sacrifice to the
influence of "jealousy, that green eyed monster, which makes the meat it feeds
on." Therefore, woe be to that people, who cherish the seeds of jealousy, or
practice after her counsels, etc. etc. etc.

In considering the last general head, viz. of clouted shoes, I observed, that
those, who wore those old shoes, and practiced upon a system of jealousy, were
sensible of its odious and hateful nature, and of consequence, ashamed to be
seen by GOD, man, or the devil, nay, they were ashamed to be seen by
themselves, therefore, they had recourse to patching and clouting themselves
over with false and feigned pretenses, to hide their shame and disgrace. This
vice has been considered, by all wise men, as the most destructive to human
felicity, and the least excusable, and most unreasonable, of any passion
incident to the human heart. It is a passion, which debases the human character
to its lowest ebb, as says a noted author; "Where I see a jealous people, I
expect, likewise, to see every thing base and sordid among them.

Look around, my hearers, and judge for yourselves, whenever you have left this
first born son of hell triumphing in your bosoms, how soon has joy and comfort
fled from your hearts? how soon has this doleful monster turned all the sweets
of life into wormwood and gall? etc. etc. etc.

I concluded this discourse by an application of the subject, after the
following manner. My hearers, where shall I apply this doctrine? is it
calculated for a people only at some great distance? can we not bring it home,
even to our* own doors? search and see. Try yourselves by the sanctuary, and if
there your garments are not washed in innocence, you will find, "Mean, Mean.
Tekel Upharsin", written on your walls. Will you suffer this hateful monster to
rage among you? will you wear these old filthy clouted shoes any longer? will
you not rather put on that "charity which endures all things, which hops all
things." Will you not rather be "shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace?" etc. etc. etc.

After this sermon was delivered, I found the people, though somewhat disturbed
at my esteeming them jealous, satisfied with regard to my ability in
sermonizing, and they, afterward, remained quiet on that head. I found it
necessary to purchase me a horse, saddle, and bridle, as well as to cro^he
myself anew entirely, with such apparel as became a clergyman; therefore, I was
under the necessity to anticipate my wages to answer these purposes, after I
had disposed of my old horse, saddle, and bridle, to the best advantage.

No person of my acquaintance kn^w where I was at this time, except Joseph
Huntington, whom I had left at Dartmouth College: with him I continued, a
correspondence by letter, by engaged to make me a visit in September, as he
should then be on his way to Coventry, and could take Pelham in his journey. I
once saw a person, whom I had formerly been acquainted with at Coventry, by the
name of Avery, but he did not appear to recognize me, being under a different
name, and in a different dress. The first of my seeing him was in the meeting
house. I made i^ convenient to fall in with him afterward, to see if he had
any recollection of me, and found he had not.

Not long after this, I saw a young man by the name of Powers, with whom I was
acquainted at Dartmouth College. I saw he (...) attention to me, whilst I was
preaching, and concluded, from a number of circumstances, he knew me. He lived
in Greenwich, a town adjoining, and had connexions in Pelham. I, therefore,
concluded it to be a matter of consequence, to throw myself in his way, and
come to an explanation with him. Accordingly, after meeting, I made it
convenient for him to speak to me, which he readily did; and he being informed
into the motives of my conduct, promised not to say any thing, which should
create an uneasiness among the people.

At another time, coming from a town called Colrain, having been on a visit to
the clergyman living in that town, I met one Church, with whom I was acquainted
at the College; he now being a clergyman, and seeing me in clerical habit,
stared with surprise at me. I frankly told him my situation, and where I was
preaching. At the relation of this, his phi^ became lengthened, he assumed all
the importance attached to his function, and addressed me in a lengthy
h^ran^^e, showing the sacre^ness of the character, which I had assumed, and of
the great importance of "walking worthy of the vocation wherewith I was
called." I pulled off my hat, made him a profound reverence, and rode on.

Soon after I had left this Knight of the Cros^, I began to reflect upon the
nature of my own conduct, and upon mature consideration, blamed myself much for
giving him that information which I had, with regard to my own matters. This
information, said I, can do him no manner of good, and it may do me much
injury. The secret is now gone from me, and I cannot recall it. I cannot receive
any possible good from communicating this matter, and many possible evils may
befall me in consequence of (...).

I will leave matters in this situation, and go back some way in my narrative,
in order to fetch forward a number of matters, necessary to understand many
events, which will hereafter be related.

When I first came to Pelham, I formed an acquaintance with a family, which
must remain nameless, for reasons which you will understand by the after
relation. The man was possessed of information far above the rest of the
inhabitants. His manners and sentiments were* equally refined; his wife possessed
those amiable accomplishments, which made her a paragon of excellence, among
the rude inhabitants of this town. This couple lived together on such terms, as
to do honor to their refinement. The most tender affections marked all their
actions, while their parental care had formed a family of the most lovely
children. With this family I formed an acquaintance, which was not only
intimate, but ardently affectionate. I lived with them on such terms of
nearness and confidence, as I never expect to do with any other. All their
propensities, feelings, and sentiments, were in union with my own; so that not
a discordant sound was heard among us. In fine, I do not know the act of
friendship too romantic or desperate for me to have performed, for this amiable
family, had occasion called; my feelings of friendship were so strong toward
them. I communicated all the secrets respecting myself to them, without
disguising any circumstance. The man told me that measures were in such a
train, that he should soon be in possession of an independent fortune. Prompted
by the feelings of friendship, he wished me to enjoy a part of the blessing in
store for him; he, therefore, let me into the knowledge of his wealth and
greatness. He informed me that one Philips, who was then at work, in New Salem,
with the noted Glazier Wheeler, a money-maker, known throughout all New
England, had the art of transmuting metals, so as to make copper into good
silver, which would stand the test of every essay made upon it. This knowledge
Philips had agreed to communicate to my friend, who, for distinction sake, I
will call Lysander. Said I, if this can be done, at no considerable expense, it
is a matter of the utmost consequence, but his working with Glazier Wheeler is
an exceptionable circumstance against him, in my opinion; however, he may have
his own reasons for it, and those reasons, were they known to me, might be
satisfactory. Lysander appeared to entertain the highest confidence in the
business. His wife was more doubtful; who, by the by, was the most penetrating
of the two. In order to put the matter out of all doubt, I agreed to attend
Lysander on a visit, to this wonderful transmute of metals, and there examine
his experiments, until we had reduced the matter to a certainty. The visit was
to be made in the night, to prevent any suspicion arising from the circumstance
of being at the money-maker Wheeler's. We accordingly, one night, set out on
our destination, it being a rout of about twelve miles, and arrived there about
10 o'clock. We made our business known to Philips, who was willing to give us
proofs of his skill.

He, in the first place, weighed one half ounce of copper, and put it into a
crucible, and then put the crucible into the fire; after it remained there a
short space of time, he put in a paper, containing something wrapped in it, and
immediately the matter in the crucible became turbid, and began to foam and
boil with great violence, for the term of ten minutes, and then settled down
into a clear beautiful metal, which, when poured off, and cooled, was good
silver, weighing one half an ounce. It stood the trial by aquafortis, and
several ways, so that I had no doubt of its being good silver. My only doubt
remained as to the contents of the paper, which was put into the crucible. This
contained a certain powder, as Philips said, which served to destroy the
verdigrise, which the copper absorbed, and the remainder was pure silver. I
wished to see the powder -- with some seeming reluctance, he showed it me. -- I
saw it was in reality a powder. -- I wished him to try the experiment again,
and to put the powder in open, so as to have it seen after (...) was in the
crucible. He pretended it would not do quite so well this way, but, to gra^^y
our curiosity, consented. The experiment, in all (...) circumstances, was
repeated, excepting his laying a large flat coal over the mouth of the
crucible, immediately after the copper was put in. The effect was the same --
one half an ounce of good silver was poured out of the crucible.

I again desired him to furnish me with the materials, and let ^^e go through
the operation myself, without his coming near the fire. He consented. I weighed
the copper, put it in, and proceeded according to his method, which I had seen
him perform, till the powder produced the boiling foam in the crucible, when he
cried out to me to (...). I did not recollect seeing him stir it, however, I
put an iron rod, about the bigness of a large nail-rod, and about eighteen
inches long, into the crucible, and stirred the contents. There was nothing but
this iron rod, which would answer to stir the metal with. When we empried the
crucible, we found half an ounce of good silver. Once more, I begged his
indulgence for another experiment; and that he should not be in the room when
it was performed. He readily consented. Lysander and myself proceeded together
in the experiment, s^cundum ar^em. When we came to stir the metal, we could
find nothing calculated for that purpose, excepting a short piece of a
walking-staff; we, therefore, made use of that; but saw afterward, we had burn
off about four inches of that end, we put into the crucible. We poured out the
usual quantity of good silver. I was now satisfied beyond all doubt. We
returned to Pelham with no small satisfaction. I felt all the confidence in the
business, which was possible to feel on any subject. I saw in my own
imagination my fortune certainly made. Not a doubt remained in my mind of
becoming the (...) man on the continent of America. But how fleeting our joys!
how (...) our expectations! Can you suppose the whole of this an (...)? It was
truly so. All the plausible experiments, which were performed by Philips and
ourselves, were a ^^ries of the most consummate duplicity, which was ever
performed. We did not make this discovery, till some time afterward, but I
will go forward with the account now, for the reason of its being so closely
connected with the incidents already related.

When the first copper was put into the crucible, he put half an ounce of
silver in likewise, which was wrapped in the paper, with some powder, which
consumed the copper and left the silver. The next operation was after this
manner: Being prevented from conveying the silver into the crucible, by my
request of seeing the powder put in, he therefore, secretly, put his silver on
the forge, and laid a large flat coal over it. At the proper time, he took up
the silver and coal together, with his tongs, and laying them over the top of
the crucible, the silver, unperceived, fell in. The next deception was
performed thus: at the time in which I was ordered to stir the metal in the
crucible, an iron rod was the only thing to be found for such a purpose: on the
lower end of this rod was fixed the silver, blackened like iron, which, being
put into the crucible, melted off. The last experiment for supplying us with
silver, was performed by making the end of the piece of walking-staff hollow,
and placing the silver in the end of it, which being burnt off, left the silver
in the crucible. Thus this mighty fabric of wealth was blown away in an
instant, like the baseless fabric of a vision. This adroit deceiver obtained
property of a number, to the amount of 2000 dollars, and snddenly was missed.

As he will be fouud on the stage, a number of times, in the course of this
Narrative, it will be necessary to give some more particular description of
this singular man -- He was about five feet eight inches high, dark complexion,
thick set, down look, plausible in conversation, very ingenious in executing
mechanical undertakings, and what is more surprising, he has but one arm. He
had the entire command of his own feelings, so that his countenance or actions
never betrayed his inward sensations, persevering in any undertaking,
perfidious, subfil, and designing, lost to all feelings of fidelity, either
toward the public, as a member of the community, or toward individuals, to
whom he had more immediately pledged his faith, a rank coward, yet possessing
the happiest abilities of imitating courage, of any man I ever saw. There was
no part of the coining art, but what he was master of, and could, with one arm
only, execute it to perfection.

Being fully possessed with the idea, that our prosperity was certain, we
concerted a plan, to carry on the business to that amount, as to answer a
purpose of magnitude. We therefore concluded to charter a vessel, load her with
copper, coal, provision, etc. necessary for the business, and retire to the
isle of Sable, where we could pursue our plan uninterrupted. A writing was made
and signed by all parties, for our regulation in prosecuting said purpose.

CHAP. X.
It was a se^son, when the lingering night,
Disputes her empire with the rising light;
A rosy blush here paints the doubtful morn,
There glimering stars, the uncertain s^ades adorn.

AT the time fixed on, Joseph Huntington came to see me at Pelham, I introduced
him to my acquaintance, and particularly to Lysander. We opened our schemes of
aggrandizement to him, without reserve. He was pleased with our prospects, and
in the overflowings of our friendship, we agreed to allow him, as the highest
favor possible for us to communicate, to set his hand to our agreement, and so
become a partner in our business. In the course of Huntington's remaining with
me at Pelham, he made several unguarded mistakes, which reduced me to a very
disagreeable situation. He called me by my proper name, a number of times,
before the family where I lived. He excused himself by saying, that Buroughs
was my nick name at College, and was given in consequence of my looking so much
like one of that name. One Sunday morning, as people were going to meeting, I
was leaning back in my chair, the pommel resting against the door case.
Huntington seeing the situation in which I was resting, put his staff against
the chair and pushed it off the case, and down I fell on the floor. This
impudent action, done on Sunday, by my known intimate friend, had a very
disagreeable appearance, and made people look with astonishment at the
circumstance, however, I reproved Huntington, with some warmth, and he, seeing
the naure of his folly, bore it with patience. The Monday following, Huntington
was to proceed on to Coventry. I rode with him about twelve miles on his way,
and then returned; but previous to my return, an affair took place, which gave
a new face to the scene of things.

As we were riding by the house of Mr. Forward, minister of Belchertown, he
came out of his house, and desired us to call, alleging that Mr. Chapin, a
minister from Windsor, was in the house, to whom he offered to introduce us.
Mr. Chapin was a man well known to me, and I presumed I should be equally well
known to him. I excused the matter, alleging that I was in haste, and
therefore, could not do myself the pleasure of accepting his invitation. Mr.
Forward was pressing for us to alight, and go in; and while this dialogue
continued Mr. Chapin came out of his house, and addressed me by the name of
Buroughs; I endeavored to convince him of his mistake, but to no purpose; he
insisted in a very peremptory manner, that my name was not Davis, but was bona
side Barroughs. I replied that those insults were not grateful to my feelings,
and what I should not bear. "Your humble servant gentlemen." We then rode on,
though repetedly desired to stop. When Huntington and I were by ourselves, we
were merry upon the circumstance of being driven into so short a corner.

After I had parted from Huntington, I was under the necessity of returning
back the same road I came, and consequently, must pass, again, by the house of
Mr. Forward. Soon after I had gone by the house, I heard some body calling
after me, "Mr. Davis, Mr. Buroughs," but for reasons which you will easily
conceive, I did not answer. As I rode on toward Pelham, I endeavored to
concert measures of retreat against the storm, which was fast gathering, and
would soon burst upon me, if it were not averted. The news would soon come to
Pelham, of my real name, character, etc. This would serve to arouse the
indignation of that people to its full height. To continue among them any
longer, would be out of the question, and to meet the rage of their resentment,
after the whole matter of fact should be promulgated, I dared not, neither did
I wish it. One Sunday more I was to preach among them, before my time of
engagement expired, and for this Sunday, I had already received my pay, but
under existing circumstances, it was doubtful in my mind, whether they would
insist on my fulfilling my engagement. At all events, I was determined to leave
them very suddenly. I, accordingly, came to my land-lord's that evening, put my
horse in the barn, and after the family were all retired to rest, I put my
things in order, took my horse, and silently left the house. In this situation,
I sought Lysander, related the circumstances which I was under, and concluded
to lie by with him, till I should see what the event of those things would be.

The next morning, Mr. Davis was not to be found. My landlord was almost
frantic with surprise and grief. The town was alarmed, and suddenly was all in
a flame. About 11 o'clock P. M. a man came from Belchertown, with information
respecting the character, who had exhibited among them, as a preacher, this
blew the flame into a tenfold rage. No pen can describe the uproar there was in
the town of Pelham. They mounted hue and cries after me in every direction,
with orders to spare not horse flesh. They perambulated the town, and anxiously
asked every one for some circumstance, which would lead to a discovery where I
was. All this took place whilst I lay snug in the corner, observing their
operations. In holding a consultation upon these disagreeable matters, every
one was anxious to clear himself of being the dupe to my artifice, as much as
possible. "I never liked him," says one, -- "I always thought there was
something suspicious about him," says another. "He ever had a very deceitful
look," says a third. In fine, it had come to this, that not one now could
discern any thing, which ever appeared good or commendable about me, except one
good old lady, who said, "Well, I hope they will catch him, and bring him back
among us, and we will make him a good man, and keep him for our preacher."

You may, with propriety, ask me, what the people of Pelham expected they could
do, should they overtake me in their pursuit? I know the question will
naturally arise; but I cannot give you an answer, for I do not know their
intentions or expectations. Perhaps they thought, for they were a people very
ignorant, that I had broken the laws of the Land, to the same amount, as I had
offended them.

About 12 o'clock, the night following, I took my leave of Lysander, promising
to return and see him again, as soon as the tumult was hushed, and concert
further measures for our prosecuting our schemes, for gaining wealth by
transmutation; being obliged so suddenly to leave the country, that we could
not ripen our plans, for the present. It was not without the most sensible pain
I left this amiable family. Journeying on, I had time for reflection. At dead
of night -- all alone -- reflection would have its operation.

A very singular scene have I now passed though, said I, and to what does it
amount? Have I acted with propriety as a man, or have I deviated from the path
of rectitude? I have had an unheard of, difficult, disagreeable, part to act: I
do not feel entirely satisfied with myself in this business, and yet, I do not
know how I should have done otherwise, and have made the matter better. The
laws of the Land I have not broken, in any instance, but my situation has been
such, that I have violated that principle of veracity, which we implicitly
pledge ourselves to maintain toward each other, as a general thing in Society:
and whether my peculiar circumstances would warrant such a line of procedure is
the question? I know many things may be said in favor of it, as well as against
it. How I came into this disagreeable situation, is another matter: I know that
the leading cause, which produced it, was founded in wrong. My giving
countenance to an open breach of the laws of the Land, in the ^ase of the bees,
was a matter in which I was justly reprehensible; but that matter is now past;
the owner of the bees is remunerated to the utmost extent, which is provided
for by law, and therefore, I must take things as they now are, and under these
circumstances, do the best I can. I know the world will blame me, but I wish to
justify my conduct to myself, let the world think what it may. Indeed, I know
they are not capable of judging upon the matter, with any propriety, because
they ever will and ever must remain ignorant of the particular causes, which
brought these events into existence. They understand the matter in the gross,
that I have preached under a fictitious name and character, and consequently,
have roused many ideas in the minds of the people, not founded in fact.
Therefore, they concluded from this general view, the whole to be grounded in
wrong. The name imposture, is therefore easily fixed to my character. An
imposture, we generally conceive, puts on feigned appearances, in order to
enrich or aggrandize himself, to the damage of others. That this is not the
case with me, in this transaction, I think is clear. That I have aimed at
nothing but a bare supply of the necessaries of life, is a fact. That I have
never, in one instance, taken advantage of that confidence which the people of
Pelham entertained toward me, to injure them and benefit myself, is a truth
acknowledged by all. Under these circumstances, whether I ought to bear the
name of imposture, according to the common acceptance, is the question?

That I have a good and equitable right to preach, if I choose, and others
choose to hear me, is a truth of which I entertain no doubt: but whether any
circumstance will justify my putting on a false appearance, in order to
introduce myself into that business, is the only doubt remaining on my mind. I
think it my duty, at least, to stear as clear of this base guise, for the
future, as my safety will admit.

About 1 o'clock at night, leaving the confines of Pelham, I overtook Powers,
the person whom I have before mentioned, likewise coming out of Pelham. He knew
me -- I asked him where he had been -- He was embarrassed about giving me an
answer. I mistrusted he had been employed in searching after me; I laid it to
his charge. After some hesitation, he owned the fact. I put on a fierce look,
and commanded him to stop, in a very peremptory manner; he obeyed. Now, said I,
Powers, you see my situation, you art the only person, who knows where I am;
therefore, I am determined to take measures for my own safety, and for that
reason, promise me, with the solemnity of an oath, that you will give no
information respecting me. Powers began to expostulate -- I added yet more
terror to my looks, and commanded him to swear to secresy, immediately, if he
ever wished for the opportunity. He was terrified. He began to imprecate curses
on his head, of the most horrid nature, if he should divulge his having seen
me, or knowing which way I had gone. We then fell into familiar chat on various
topics; rode on together till we arrived at the place, where he left me to go
to his father's. I went on without suspicion of danger, but no sooner had I
left Powers, than he took his way back again, with all speed, and informed the
people of Pelham of his discovery. It was about the dawn of day, when he had
returned to Pelham, and gave this important information. The news was like an
electric shock. It was communicated through the town with that rapidity, which
would have done honor to a cause of importance. The people were assembled, and
a select number appointed to pursue me.

All these things were unknown to me, whilst I rode on leisurely and securely,
thinking of no danger. I had determined to bend my course for Rutland, (Mass.)
where I expected to find an acquaintance of mine, by the name of Frink, who was
doing business in the mercantile line, in that town and if fortunately, I could
obtain business of some other kind, through his means, I determined to drop
preaching, which subjected me to so many false appearances, contrary to my
inclination. I arrived about 8 o'clock A. M. at Rutland, and found Mr. Frink,
according to my expectation, at his shop.

CHAP. XI.
No joy, no glory, glitters in thy sight,
But through the thin partition of an hour,
I see its Sables wove by Destiny,
And that in sorrow buried; this in shame;
While howling Furies ring the doleful knell.

I RELATED to him the scenes through which I had passed; my motives in
performing such parts in those scenes; and my present determination. Mr. Frink
had no business of his own, in which he wished to engage me; but said he would
make inquiry among his acquaintance, and see what could be done. In the mean
time, he wished me to tarry with him, and make myself easy, until he could have
opportunity of making the necessary inquiry. After I had taken some
refreshment, and put out my horse, I went into his counting-room, to have some
further conversation upon the subject of my business: Whilst I was leaning my
elbow out at the window, I turned my eyes at the sudden and violent trampling
of horses, and saw a large number of people from Pelham after me. Seeing so
many, and they riding with such fury, gave me a sudden impulse of fear, and I
thought to elude them by flight; therefore, sprang out of my chair, and ran
across the shop, in order to go out at the back door; but no sooner had I
arrived there, than I was met by one Konkey, who attempted to seize me. This
roused my indignation, and with my walking-staff, I gave him a blow across the
right arm, which broke it. Having, by this mean, made myself a passage, I ran
round the end of the shop, which I supposed would be most out of sight; but,
when I turned the corner, I met, full in the face, two of my Deacons. I then
turned and ran about twenty rods, down a small hill, and the Pelhamites all
after me, hallowing with all their might, "Stop him! stop him!" To be pursued
thus, like a thief, an object of universal speculation, to the inhabitants of
Rutland, gave me very disagreeable sensations, which I was determined not to
bear. I, therefore, stopped, -- took up a stone, and declared that the first, who
should approach me, I would kill on the spot.

To hear such language, and see such a state of determined defiance, in one
whom they had lately reverenced as a clergyman, struck even the people of
Pelham, with astonishment and fear. They were very credulous in stories of the
devil, witches, etc. and now thought the devil had appeared in human shape,
ready to destroy them. They all stopped -- amazement being pictured on their
countenances, except one Hind. This man valued himself much on his courage and
dexterity, and in order to show his seperior ability, advanced alone, till he
came within my reach; when, with a stroke of my stone, I tumbled him to the
ground, apparently a lifeless corpse. This was a sufficient corroboration of
their first suspicion, and they were now very certain, that the devil had
actually taken the liberty to hold a tight dispute with them. A sharp dialogue
took place between those men and myself. Seeing a large number of people
beginning to collect and come toward me, I moved on about two rods in front of
the Pelhamites, and they after me. I told them in the most decided manner, that
instant destruction should be their portion, if they attempted to approach any
nearer. They believed, and kept their distance, till coming to a barn, which
had only one small door, I went in, determined to defend the door, which I
expected to be able to do, on account of its advantageous situation. After I
had entered the barn, I found there a situation, which pleased me much better,
viz. the hay-mow, there being only one place, by which it was possible to
ascend it, therefore, when I was on the top of this hay-mow, I could keep off
any number of men, that should attack me. I, accordingly, seized this strong
hold with dispatch, mounted my fortress, and carried with me a sithe-snath, as
a weapon of defense, to keep off the assistants. When the Pelhamites saw,
through the crannies of the barn, where I had taken my station, they ventured
to come in, together with a number of the inhabitants.

I found the people, who came into the barn with the Pelhamites, were anxious
to learn the reason of this uproar. Deacon Mc. Mullen, of Pelham, informed them
that I was an impostor; had called my name Davis, when in reality it was
Buroughs; had come among them under that character, and grossly deceived them;
preaching with them through the summer. It was demanded of him whether this
Buroughs had, during the time of his preaching among them, preached well, and
conducted accordingly? The answer was in the affirmative. "Well," says a
by-stander, "why need you make any difficulty? he preached well -- you paid him
well -- all parties were satisfied, and why need you now be uneasy? What
signifies what he called his name? A name does no good nor hurt, as to the
matter of his doctrine; therefore, it will be well for you to make the best use
of his preaching; and of course, you will find yourselves rewarded that way,
for the money which you have paid him." But, said the Deacon, "we have paid him
for one Sunday which he has not preached." "As to that matter," said the
by-stander, "I think he is wrong, if that be the case. If he has engaged to
preach, he ought to fulfill his engagements; but as the Sunday is not yet come,
on which he is to preach, I think it a hard interpretation of his conduct, to
say he has cheated you out of that sermon, until that time comes, so that you
may see whether he will perform his engagements or not." "He certainly has
attempted to murder Doctor Hind and Mr. Konkey," said Deacon Mc. Mullen. He
therefore ought to be apprehended, and prosecuted according to the severity of
the law." "As to rightly understanding that," replied the other, "I believe a
number of circumstances will come into view. As first, you came upon him in a
riotous, tumultuous manner, indicating by your conduct, that your intentions
toward him were evil, and, under this situation, he might well suppose, that
to submit tamely to what you were about to do, might be exposing himself to
immediate death: And, secondly, -- he took those measures to discover the
violence of your intentions, which prudence dictated, under such circumstances,
by telling you to keep your distance; and at the same time, declaring his
determination, in case you did not do it. Therefore, as self-defence is
justifiable, and as it will appear that his conduct was dictated by
self-defence; I believe it will be somewhat difficult to make it evident to any
impartial Jury, that he has transgressed the law, in the instance you mention."
"If he has broken the law no other way," said the Deacon, "he has done it in
threatening to kill a young man, last night, by the name of Powers, because
he would not promise to keep it a secret, that he had seen him." "If that be the
case." said the other, "he certainly is cognizable by the law, when that is
proved. But where is this said Powers?" "At Pelham," said the Deacon. "Then,"
said the other, "it is our of your, or my power, to do any thing in this
business. It would be subjecting us all to very hard terms, to be liable to be
apprehended, on every report of our breaking the Peace. If the said Powers,
whom you mention, has been threatened with death, and, under that threatening,
he absolutely fears that his life is in danger from Burronghs, and to all this,
will give testimony under oath, before any Justice of the Peace, it will then
be in his power to obtain such security, as to render him safe against the
threatenings of Buroughs; but for others to undertake a prosecution of this
business, upon a vague report, is not only out of the question, but is
ridiculous to the last degree."

Deacon Mc. Mullen, being driven from all his strong holds, began to grow
uneasy at the approaching termination of that cause, upon which he had entered
with so much sanguine assurance. However, as his last resort, he adverted again
to the pay which I had anticipated, for one day's preaching, which I had not
yet performed, and said he was very sensible I did not mean to perform, and to
my deceiving them under a false name.

As to obviating the first difficulty, this objection arises, said the
by-stander, "From whom did Buroughs receive this money, which you mention?"
"From Deacon Gray, our committee for supplying the pulpit," said Deacon Mc.
Mullen. "Then, said the other, the business stands thus: Buroughs stands
indebted to Deacon Gray, for money had and received of him, to the amount of
the sum total. On the other hand, Deacon Gray stands indebted to Buroughs, for
the services which he has rendered, according to their agreement. Now, if Deac.
Gray's advances have been greater than his receipts, undoubtedly Buroughs is
indebted to Deac. Gray, for the balance, and ought to pay him according to
contract, but as you have no power, to act for Deac. Gray, I do not conceive
how you can have any demand either mediately or immediately against Buroughs,
^n that account; and if Buroughs should even pay you back the five dollars,
which you say, though without any legal evidence, he owes Deacon Gray, yet that
would not exonerate Buroughs from the debt, or make him less liable to pay it
over again.

And as for his deceiving you by a false name, I will tell you how you may
settle that matter, in the best way I can think of. I recollect, some years
since, when Mr. Abicrombie was your minister, there was an uneasiness
prevailing among his people, on account of his intemperance; they, therefore,
chose a committee, of whom, I think you, Deacon Mc. Mullen, was one, to deal
with him, for this crime. They accordingly came. The old fox understood how to
avoid the trap. He had laid in some excellent W. India rum, treated the
committee with great hospitality, and, in the language of the Poet, caused them
to "drink deep at the fountain of pleasure," till they were unable to leave him
through the night, on account of dipping too deep into the sweets, for which
they were about to reprove him. Under this situation, they concluded the next
morning, as the better way, to make their report to the church, that Mr.
Abicrombie had given them christian satisfaction. They did so -- and here this
matter ended. Now, continued this bystander, the way that I propose is, for
Buroughs to do as Mr. Abicrombie did, and for you to accept it as christian
satisfaction, from this minister, as well as that. Wood keeps an excellent
tavern hard by; I propose for all to move up there."

This proposal was finally accepted by all. I, therefore, came down, and we all
went up toward the tavern. I called for drink, according to the orator's
advice, to the satisfaction of all, till Hind, whom I had knocked down with the
stone, came among them. He foamed with rage and disappointment. A number of
them retired into another room, to consult on measures to be adopted for their
future procedure. I learned that they had entered into a determination to carry
me back to Pelham, by force of arms. I was doubtful whether people would
interfere, where they were not immediately interested, so as to prevent this
being done. I concluded it best, by all means, to put this project out of the
power of the Pelhamites. Being in a room on the second story, I locked myself
in. When they came after me, they found my door locked, and immediately
determined to break it open. They sent some of their number after an axe --
Hearing this, I jumped out of the window, on to the horse-shed, and off that on
to the ground, close by those, who were after the axe.

Coming so suddenly among them, they had not time to recollect themselves, so
as to know what this meant, till I had run the distance of twenty rods, when
they started after me; but one of their number much exceeded the rest in
swiftness, so that in running sixty rods, he was twenty rods before the others.
By this time, I was out of breath, by running, and coming to a high wall, made
of small stones, I jumped over it, and sat down behind it, by a tree standing
against the wall. I took a stone in my hand, as I went over, intending to knock
down the foremost man, when he came up to me, which I supposed would be easy to
do, as I should take him by surprise, and execute my plan before he could
defend himself; after this should be performed, I could easily outrun the
rest, as I should, by this time, be rested, and be forward of them. An alder
swamp, about half a mile distant, was my object.

When the foremost man came up to the wall, I heard him panting and puffing for
breath, and in stead of being able to lerp over he ran against it, and threw it
down in such a manner as to cover me almost entirely from sight; -- the stones
^^^ling against the tree, in such a manner as to do me no injury. The man ran
through the breach of the wall, and continued his course about fifteen rods
beyond me, and stopped until the others came up, who anxiously inquired, what
had become of Buroughs? The others replied, that he had run like a deer,
across the meadow, and gone into the alder swamp.

They concluding it would be in vain to pursue me, gave up the chase -- went
back to the tavern -- took a little more satisfaction -- and returned to
Pelham. -- After they were gone, I crept out of my hiding place, and returned
to Frink's store. My first object of going into business, through his
recommendation, was now lost. After this uproar, I did not wish to find
employment in Rutland; neither did I suppose Mr. Frink would feel that freedom
in recommending me to others.

CHAP. XII.
Again the youth his wanted life regained;
A transient sparkle in his eye obtained
A rising glow his tender tho'ts confessed,
And the soft motions of his melting breast.
But soon dark gloom the feeble smiles overspread;
Like morn's gay hues, the fading splendor's fled;
Returning anguish froze his feeling soul;
Deep sighs burst forth -- and tears began to roll.

EARLY the next morning, I left Rutland, and traveled on toward Providence,
endeavoring again, to learn where I could find a vacancy for preaching. On the
road, I heard of a town called Attleborough, nine miles from Providence, where
they were destitute of a preacher, and wanted one. I came to this town, and
engaged to preach four Sundays. Here, I called myself by my own name, and
engaged only for a short time, expecting I could tarry here, that length of
time, without any disagreeable reports following me.

I took lodgings at Mrs. Weld's, widow of the former Minister of Attleborough.
The family consisted of the old Lady and her maiden daughter. They were both
agreeable, and of course the whole time I spent here was pleasing. I formed,
whilst in this place, many new acquaintances, which heightened the enjoyment of
the scene; one in a particular manner, which I cannot think of, even at this
day, without feeling the flush of pleasing emotions.

I found the people of Attleborough were desirous to have me continue longer,
after the term of my first engagement had expired; but I positively refused to
do it, alleging that I was engaged to preach at Danbury in Connecticut, which
in fact was true, having entered into an engagement of that kind, with a man
belonging there, who had heared me preach in Attleborough.

I had determined in my own mind to take Coventry in my way, as I went to
Danbury, and see Joseph Huntington, for this particular purpose, viz. Hearing
that a gentleman from Amherst was going to Dartmouth College, previous to
holding the aniversary Commencement; and that he had a design to make such
representations to the Corporation of said College, against Huntington, for
acting a part in the Pelham business as should deprive him of the degree of A.
B. As H -- n had passed his examination for this degree, and was approved
previous to his leaving the College, it was in his power to obtain his degree
at any other College; Therefore, I had a desire to give him information of the
evil, which was hatching against him, that he might avoid it, (...) applying
else where, and obtaining that, which his (...) was about to refuse. I,
accord^^^ (...) (...) to Coventry, and gave him this inform^^ (...) (...),
accordingly, made immediate application to the College in New Haven, in
Connecticut, and obtained his title of A. B.

When these matters came to be known at Dartmouth College, that Huntington had
fairly stolen a march upon them, and consequently, warded off the stroke of
fulmination, which they had laid by in store for him, there was no small stir
about the matter; but no help could be obtained, for then he had his diplomatic
commission, which could not be recalled, or wrenched out of his hands. They
suspected the Doctor, as being confederate with his son in this business; and
hence, an altercation, warm and recriminating, took place; but their suspicion,
of the old Doctor's being acquainted or active in this business, was entirely
unfounded.

The Doctor had ever designed his son should receive a degree at the College in
New Haven, as well as at Hanover, and as the commencement at New Haven was
previous to that at Hanover, he was very willing his son should take his degree
at New Haven, in the first place; but was, at that time, totally ignorant of
any intention of refusing his son the same degree, at Dartmouth College.

The commencement at Dartmouth College having arrived, the Doctor and his son
came on. When the reasons of the corporation were offered, for not granting his
son a degree, the Doctor thought them highly inadequate to answer such a
purpose, and remonstrated with warmth, upon the impropriety of their conduct;
but all to no purpose. The Doctor had been enthusiastically pursuing the
prosperity of this College; being a member of the corporation himself. These
difficulties cooled his affections. He soon after resigned his office of
trustee, and dropped all further connexions with the institution.

When I left Coventry, I was determined to make a visit to Lysander, in Pelham,
and see whether he had brought his business of transmuting metals to
perfection; and whether he had made the necessary arrangements, for prosecuting
our intended purpose of a voyage to the Isle of Sable; and, in fine, to see
what aspect the whole business now wore. I accordingly traveled again into the
state of Massachusetts, and arrived in Pelham, about 1 o'clock at night, at the
house of Lysander.

Those, who have felt the glow of friendship, will readily conceive of my
feelings, at meeting again in this agreeable family. The contemplation of this
object kept me in the highest flow of spirits, during my solitary ride through
the greatest part of this gloomy night. My heart expanded with fraternal
kindness toward them. My whole soul was tuned to the soft harmony of
friendship; and I had formed in my mind a thousand tender expressions, to
communicate the overflowing of my feelings toward them. Never did the lover
fly with greater rapture to the arms of his mistress, than what I did to the
embraces of this beloved family. A thousand soft expressions I had anticipated
from them. My heart beat quick with the palpitations of pleasure, and my whole
soul was in extacy, at entering their house. My reception was equal to my most
sanguine expectations; and to endeavor to describe this scene, would but show
how absolutely incapable language is, to a real representation of those
exquisite joys, which flow from a heart of sensibility.

We mutually recapitulated the entertaining occurrences, which had taken place,
in the time of our absence. We laughed at the strange wh^^s and maneuvers, of
the Pelhamites: at their chagrin, when returning from Rutland: at their
consultations and execrations upon me, for an impostor; and upon the people of
Rutland, for not rising up to a man, and fighting the battle of the Lord. After
we had ended the first friendly salutation, and that course of information,
which flows in upon the mind, immediately after those salutations, I inquired
of Lysander, what were his prospects with regard to transmuting metals, and
more particularly, of changing copper into silver. At this question, my friend
Lysander looked disconcerted, and seemed embarrassed at giving me an answer.
His wife smiled significantly. I saw there was something in the business I did
not understand. My anxiety and curiosity were excited. I inquired with
solicitation into the meaning of what I saw.

Lysander, by this time, saw I was in earnest. He at first entertained an idea,
that I was treating him in a satirical manner. That I was fully possessed with a
knowledge of facts, after which I inquired, and consequently, rallied him on a
subject too disagreeable to be called into remembrance in this manner. He was
now satisfied of the contrary. His countenance fell. The tear glittered in his
eye. He said, "Buroughs, we have been deceived! greatly deceived by Philips,
that king of villains. Could you have thought, that all the experiments which
he tried before us, when we were at Salem, were nothing but the vilest
deception? It truly is the case. We were not alone the dupes of his duplicity.
He had lead as many as thirty men into the ^ame belief, until he had obtained
property of us to the amount of two thousand dollars, and then he was suddenly
missed. Search was made after him, in every direction, but all to no purpose.
He could not be found. Nothing could be heard of him. That elegant mare, that
you formerly so much admired, the villain had obtained from me, with one
hundred dollars in cash, when he left this country.

His partner, who was knowing to all his hellish maneuvers to deceive, was
equally cheated with the rest of us. Philips having promised him one half the
booty for his assistance, but left him equally destitute with the rest. This
man, finding matters in this forlorn situation, revealed all the artful plans
which Philips had recourse to, in order to make mankind believe, he possessed
the secret of changing one metal into another.

We could not any of us believe, but what Philips had the knowledge he
pretended to, so fair were his experiments, until we saw them all unveiled by
his partner, who went over them again, showing us, at the same time, how
Philips practiced the deception at every experiment."

As I have already given you an account, respecting this series of deception, I
shall not repeat Lysander's narrative of it any further in this place. I now
found those ideas of wealth, which had before so wholly possessed my mind,
entirely unfounded. The painted vision fled quickly from sight; the airy bubble
broke in an instant, and left me in the abyss of poverty.

My hopes in this resource had been sanguine. I had reflected upon the subject
till I was as confident of extensive wealth, as of any occurrance, which had
not taken place. I felt all the enjoyment of the advantages resulting from
property. I had formed, in my own mind, schemes of conduct through life: How I
should make the rich respect me, and the poor adore me. What exquisite
pleasure, said I shall I enjoy in relieving the heart of distress? In
distributing bread to the hungry, clothes to the naked, and consolation to the
brokenhearted? I had already, in imagination, distributed such benefits
through the land, as not to leave a poor person to inhabit his poverty. I
beheld myself at the head of a people, distributing joy and gladness. I saw the
brow unclouded with care. Hilarity and vivacity were in the countenances of
all; an index of peace and quiet within. Hail, happy people! said I, where no
want is known to thee, -- where no anxious care corrodes the breast.

These were, sir, the fond images which I had pictured in my imagination. I was
at this time, in a state of real delirium; but it was a delirium of joy; a
state of happiness, which I believe none can have a just idea of; for I expect
none ever allowed their imagination so far to get the start of their judgment:
and therefore, when I awoke from my delirium, to a sense of my real situation,
and saw that in the room of distributing wealth, to others, I had but barely
the necessaries of life, for myself, and that the supply for those necessaries
was on a very precarious footing, I awoke to distress, anguish, mortification,
and chagrin. My feelings were shocked beyond description, with this sudden
reverse of fortune!

I believe that the disappointment would not have been greater, or more keenly
felt, had I in reality (...) in possession of all the enjoyments, which I had
so (...) pictured to my view, and from that state, had been reduced, on a
sudden, to poverty, as great as what in reality, now existed. My friend
Lysander and his wife saw the workings of my mind. They had passed through the
same scenes themselves. They endeavored to console my feelings -- They
discoursed upon the uncertain events of this world like Philosophers. They
adverted to the disappointments which all meet with daily: to that fortitude
which we ought to exercise under every trial; so as to rise above
disappointment, rather than to have disappointment rise above us. That riches
and poverty were nothing but imaginary beings, created by our own fancy, by
comparing one situation with another, and thereby giving a name to each: to the
calls of nature, as being very simple, and easily supplied, if we would rest
contented with that supply; and that every thing beyond, ^ended to render us
uneasy, rather than to contribute to our happiness.

How easy is it for man to give the most salutary advice to his fellow. In
reasoning upon a system in theory, many will discover a depth of wisdom beyond
our expectations; yet, when they attempt to reduce this advice, founded in
theory, into practice, how great the contrast! The feelings of the human heart,
the weaknesses of nature, and the errors of judgment, all set themselves in
array against us, when we attempt to listen to the dictates of wisdom, in our
practice.

Happy would it have been for Lysander, and family, yea, thrice happy would it
have been for me, had we attended in our practice to those lessons of reason:
but alas! the mania of (...) taken strong possession of our minds, and we
listened with eagerness to her calls. This soon reduced me to a state of
wretchedness, far beyond the power of language to describe. But, sir, as your
messenger is in waiting, I will end this letter, concluding that the God of
night will cast his sable mantle over your mind, before you complete this
chapter: I am as always, etc.

CHAP. XIII.
I see the circling (...) of noisy men,
Burst Law's enclosure, leap the mounds of right,
Pursuing, and pursued, each other's prey;
As wolves, for rapine; as the fox, for (...);
Till Death, that ^ighty hunter, earths the^^ all.

IN order to give me some consolation for the disappointment which I had
suffered, Lysander told me he had a plan in agitation, which would operate
nearly as well, as we expected the other would have done. "Glazier Wheeler,"
said he "is a man, who can be depended on, for his honesty to those for whom he
undertakes to work, and he can make one silver dollar into three connterfeits,
which will pass as well as any. And it will be in our power, to prosecute our
intended expedition to the Isle of Sable, upon this scheme, with nearly as
great profit, as we expected from transmuting reetals. We shall not be with the
old man a great while, before we shall be able to work at that business as well
as he; and should we find it necessary, can hire a number of hands, and drive
the business, at this place, to a great amount; as we shall be retired from the
observations of the world, and can carry on the business without molestation."

My answer to Lysander was to this purport. -- You are sensible that
counterfeiting the coin of any country, (...) contrary, not only to the laws of
that country, (...) likewise to the laws of our own minds, having implicitly
engaged to observe and protect those laws, when we once take advantage of their
efficacy, to protect us in the enjoyment of our rights and privileges;
therefore, should the business succeed, according to our most sanguine wishes,
and the coin pass, to the end of time, as standard silver, yet, we should as
really violate the simple principles of justice, as though we should be
detected in passing coin so base as to serve only a temporary purpose, and die
in the hands of an innocent person. The transgression would be as absolute,
should it never transpire to the world, or be attended with any personal
injury, as though it should be proclaimed to the universe. Therefore, this
reason alone, would be sufficient to deter me from wishing such a thing to take
place.

Another very powerful reason is, the danger we run, in prosecuting such a
matter, and the ruin which would inevitably follow a detection. Glazier
Wheeler, it appears, has followed this business for fifty years, constantly --
syet he never could bring his apt to such perfection as to have his money pass
undetected. How often has he been confined, pilloried, cropped, and whipped, for
this business? How many have been involved in the same difficulty, who embarked
in this dangerous voyage with him? How then can we expect to share a better
fate? And what would be the consequence of a detection? The property which you
now possess, would be swept away; your children would cry in vain for bread;
your reputation, which you now hold so dear, would be lost forever; and you
would entail misery and infamy on your posterity. You must, then, be separated
from your companion, from your children, from your friends; confined in a jail,
a receptacle for the off-scourings of nature -- treated with contempt --
injured without pity -- made the scoff and jeer of fools. -- This, sir, is a
scene for a mind of sensibility.

The wife of Lysander heard this discourse with the utmost attention. Her
countenance was a strong index to the feelings of her mind: -- Her color went
and came: -- She now grew pale with apprehension, and now her cheeks redened
with the flush of desire -- to prevent her beloved husband from r^shing into
dangers so desperate. She remonstrated -- She expostulated -- She entreated --
but all to no purpose. Lysander was fixed, and nothing was able to remove his
resolution. He turned to his wife, with a look of that ineffable sweetness,
which overpowers the mind, and said, "My dear, I wish very much, to see you in
possession of a coach, which I shall send you in a few months."

"As to the objections which you offer, Mr. Buroughs," said Lysander, I will
endeavor to answer them in such a manner, as to give you full satisfaction, on
that subject."

"If mankind had no disposition to infringe upon the rights of each other,
there would be no need of law; -- and the whole nature, design, and spirit of
law, is to protect each other from injury* and where no injury is intended, nor
in fact done, the whole essence of law is attended to. I know the Law speaks in
general terms, because it cannot descend to particulars; there being such an
infinity, as to put it beyond the power of man to comprehend the whole in a
system: therefore, general principles must direct us in our interpretation of
law. We ought, in our conduct, to act as men possessing reason, sufficient to
direct us under the various occurrences of life, so as to vary our conduct
according as circumstances shall point out; keeping in view, and practicing
upon the spirit of law; and when we attend to this, we cannot be said, in
reality, to transgress the laws of the land, nor indeed, the laws of our own
mind; because we, in fact, do fulfill our compact with society, viz. protect
each other from injury.

"From what I have observed, I believe you will readily agree with me, that I
am right, in prosecuting my present plan, if I can make it evident, that no
danger of injury will arise to any one from it* and that by it, many will be
made better.

"Money, of itself, is of no consequence, only as we, by mutual agreement,
annex to it a nominal value, as the representation of property. Any thing else
might answer the same purpose, equally with silver and gold, should mankind
only agree to consider it as such, and carry that agreement into ^^ecut on, in
their dealings with each other. We find this verified in fact, by those bills
of credit, which are in circulation through the world. Those bills, simply, are
good for nothing; But the moment mankind agree to put a value on them, as
representing property, they become of as great consequence as silver and gold,
and no one is injured by receiving a small insignificant piece of paper, for an
hundred bushels of wheat, when mankind stamp that value upon it, by agreeing to
receive it for that amount: therefore, we find that the only thing necessary to
make a matter valuable, is to induce the world to esteem it so; and let that
esteem be raised by any means whatever, yet the value is the same, and no one
becomes injured by receiving it, at the valuation. Hence, we find the world
putting an enormous value upon certain stones, which intrinsically are of no
use; as for instance, the diamond, the carbuncle, etc. These stones cannot be
made use of in any pursuit of life. They will not serve for food, for raiment,
or for any instrument of any kind whatever; therefore, of what real use can
they be?

"Their scarcity, and certain peculiarities, have induced mankind to esteem
them; and this esteem stamps a value upon them, so that they pass from one to
another, as the representation of property: hence, the holders of them, always
have a valuable possession, and probably, always will have, which they at any
time can exchange, for property of more immediate consequence to their support,
etc.

"Had I the art of making diamonds, do you suppose I should transgress the laws
of equity, in putting that art into practice? except I should fill the world
with them, so as to destroy their scarcity, and hence, depreciate their value
in the hands of others.

"To put this art into practice, so as to enrich myself, and not destroy that
due proportion between representative property, and real property, is doing
myself a favor, and injuring none.

"Gold and silver are made use of for convenience, to transact our business of
barter and exchange, with each other, as the representation of property, it
being less cumbersome, and more easy to communicate from one to another, than
real property of any kind: hence, when there is a due proportion of
representative property, business can be transacted to the greatest advantage*
and with the greatest ease. And when the public experience a scarcity or
redundancy, they of course suffer an inconveniency: therefore, that person, who
contributes his mite, to keep the balance between these two species of property
justly poised, is a blessing to himself, and to the community of which he is a
member.

"That an undue scarcity of cash now prevails, is a truth too obvious for me to
attempt to prove. Your own observation will convince you of it. Hence, whoever
contributes, really, to increase the quantity of cash, does not only himself,
but likewise the community, an essential benefit. And, that this can be done,
in the pursuit which I have undertaken, and without endangering the safety of
any one, I will convince you by occular demonstration."

He then presented me with a bag of dollars, which he said were made by Glazier
Wheller. I poured them all out; I examined them with care, as I then thought: I
compared them with other dollars, which were good -- I could discover no
difference.

His arguments now stood all plain before me; they were collected in a line, --
and what do you think was the consequence? I blush to tell you the truth! -- I
feel ashamed of my own weakness! -- My great want of solid judgment at that
time, almost persuades me to hide the relation of this fact. These arguments
convinced me, unfounded as they were.

Lysander told me his intentions were to pay strict attention to the business,
and did not doubt his finally raising himself and family to a state of the
greatest affluence. He had already obtained a sufficiency to answer present
purposes; He should soon obtain much more. The business was at a stand, just at
present, for want of drugs, proper for carrying it forward. He intended to go
soon to Springfield, where he should obtain whatever he wanted for such a
purpose.

Lysander had not yet passed, or attempted to pass, any of his money: As I
expected to leave his house the next night, on my rout to Danbury, and to pass
through Springfield in my way, he agreed to set out with me, and go his rout in
my company. His wife had ever felt dssatisfied about this business; being
easily alarmed with the least appearance of danger, toward one in whom her
happiness was so essentially embraced; but when I drew the dreadful picture of
a detection, she grew almost frantic with fear; and when she saw that no
entreaties would prevail over his determination, she embraced the first
opportunity of conversing with me alone; and besought me in those moving terms,
which would have melted a savage, to use my influence to prevent him from
prosecuting his present undertaking.

Her grief spoke more powerfully for her, than all the oratory of a Burke. I
could not resist her importunity. The language of her countenance and actions
were irresistible. When Lysander came into our company, I began the attack in
the most vulnerable part of his fortress. I endeavored to set the distress of
his wife in its true light, before him. I recapitulated his own arguments,
which he had before used, in order to induce me "to be contented with a bare
competency." I repeated to him, emphatically, the words of Young, in his "Night
Thoughts," viz.

Why all this toil, for triumphs of an hour?
What though we wade in wealth, or soar in fame?
Earth's highest (...) ends in "Here he lies,"
I told him I knew perfectly well, his sincere affections for his wife, and his
ambition of seeing her become possessed with an equipage, etc. But believe me,
sir, Not all the pomp and splendour of riches will repay her for the pain and
anxiety she will endure on your account, for the space of one day, when you
have absolutely launched into this dangerous ocean: therefore, sir, inasmuch as
her happiness is a leading motive in your pursuits in life, you will make a
most egregious blunder in your calculations, even, provided you are ever so
successful in your undertakings.

The feelings of Lysander were moved. The struggle in his own breast was
apparent in his countenance. He sat in silence a while, then burst into a flood
of tears, -- and retired into another room. Not many minutes had elapsed,
before he returned. His countenance wore a more settled aspect. He mentioned
his weakness, with some confusion. He said he was ashamed of being seen in
tears, especially on such an occasion, not having resolution sufficient to
withstand our united attacks. "But," said he, "the business is fixed -- the die
is cast -- I have pledged my faith -- I have given my word to procure those
articles at Springfield. Not only myself, but more than a dozen others, are now
waiting for me to fulfill my engagements. Shall I, of all others, after having
agreed in the most solemn manner, to yield my aid in the prosecution of this
business, now in open violation of faith, retreat and leave them in suspense?

I feel the emotions of gratitude, toward you, Mr. Buroughs, for the warmth
of your feelings in my concerns; but this truth is manifest to me, that the
enthusiasm of your feelings, as well as my wife's, does not give you an
opportunity of reasoning cooly and heartily upon this subject. Enough has been
said -- These articles must be obtained -- and no entreaties shall deter me
from paying attention to it."

What could be done? What more could be said? Lysander's wife, I saw, was
inconsolable. What would you have done, had you been in my situation? Words had
now become entirely out of the question, and only one thing remained to be
done; -- and that I determined to do.

I told Lysander I would take his money, -- go to Springfield, -- purchase all
the articles, -- and return with them immediately. -- With some reluctance, he
consented; gave me twenty dollars for the business -- made out his account of
the articles wanted -- and directed me to the apothecary's shop, to which I
must apply for them. At night, I left them with ten thousand blessings
accompanying me.

Riding alone, through the dreary night, reflection would make me a visit. The
scenes through which I had passed, had been so rapid, and filled with the
emotions of sensibility, to that degree, as to leave but little room for
reflection.

I have now, said I, set out to perform that business, which, two days since, I
do not believe the art of man could have persuaded me to. It is a new
undertaking; but I believe not attended with danger; for the money is executed
so well, as to prevent any man from distinguishing it from standard silver; at
least, it looks as well to me, as any money; and I do not see why I cannot
distinguish counterfeit from true money, as well as others.

I think my motive for this undertaking is founded on the principles of
uprightness. I think the sentiment of friendship is the uppermost object in
this undertaking: Possibly a species of vanity might have some influence on my
mind; and that I might wish to show the wife of Lysander how ready I was to
undertake such a desperate business, to befriend her; though, in reality, the
danger consisted chiefly in her own fancy.

What would be the consequence, would one among the ten thousand events, which
(...), serve to reveal t^^e the part, which I am now about to act? What would
be the opinion of people, concerning me, but of the most disagreeable kind,
after having passed the ordeal of Pelham reports, founded on facts, which, to
the world at large, would appear very unfavorable? They would undoubtedly form
their opinion from ostensible facts, that I was divested of every principle of
honesty, uprightness, and integrity. And even, should I declare to the world,
that my intentions were not against the good of society, this declaration would
fall upon the unbelieving hearts of a multitude, prone to place confidence in
an evil report, and difficult in giving credit to that which is favorable.

These circumstances would, moreover, be attended with the following
disagreeble events, viz. Reports of my misfortunes, or crimes, would spread;
and probably be attended with that exaggeration, of which reports of that kind
generally partake, and reach my friends, connexions, and enemies; and of all
misfortunes, that which gives triumph to an enemy, is the most keenly felt. My
friends would mourn, my enemies would rejoice.

A view of these disagreeable events, which probably might happen, made a very
deep impression on my mind. I was almost ready to faint under the trial, and
thought to relinquish my undertaking. But, said I, again, should I fail upon
this first trial, what a pitiful appearance should I make in my own eyes? I set
out on this expedition with an idea that my friendship would carry me any
length. I have pledged my friendship for the performance of this business; and
shall this be said of Buroughs, that in fair weather he was possessed with
friendly sentiments, but the moment the prospect became overcast with clouds,
his friendship failed? How shall it be known whether I really possess those
sentiments of benevolence, of which I have made such a pompous display,
otherwise than by standing the trial in time of adversity? If the feelings of
Damon and Pythias were graduated upon that scale of cool deliberation, which
has appeared in my reasoning upon this subject, those God-like acts of
benevolence, toward each other, would never have been recorded of them, which
not only made Dionysius stand in mute astonishment, but left a memento, to the
end of time; to what an amazing height virtuous friendship may arise.

Contemplating upon matters, in this point of view, it gave me pain to think
that I had even hesitated, about my performing the engagements which I had
entered into. I felt a degree of guilt, which I wished to hide from my own
view; it produced a mortification which was exceedingly painful; therefore, I
determined, in my own mind, never again to allow myself to query upon the
propriety of my undertaking, but to pursue it, with unremitting attention, till
it was accomplished.

About 11 o'clock, A. M. I arrived at Springfield -- made application at the
shop where I was directed -- told the shopkeeper my demands -- and received
from him the articles according to the bill. I delivered him his money, and
departed. Stepping into the printing-office, across the way, to do some
business, I was there, in a few minutes, arrested, by an officer of justice.
The business at the apothecary's had made so little impression on my mind, that
I could not conceive, what could be the cause of my being arrested, at the time
when the officer made me a prisoner. He informed me -- and in an instant, the
whole view of my desperate situation opened upon me. I was taken before Justice
Pincheon, who treated the business with a great degree of candor. However, a
company of attornies' clerks, merchants' clerks, etc. being called together, by
this event, were very active in making observations against me, and hunting for
evidence, for fear I should not be committed for trial. After all circumstances
had been attended to with care, on both sides of the question, and the Justice
was about giving his final decision on the business, a part of the
beforementioned clerks came into the office, haulling after them a man, like
the Trojans, when they had found the Greek Sinon, vociferating, "here is a man,
who knows him! here is a man, who knows him!

When the stranger was introduced, and silence prevailed, Justice Pincheon
asked what he knew concerning me? The answer was, "that I was the greatest
villain in the world, had come to Pelham under a fictitious name, -- had there
preached, when I was unworthy of the business, -- had endeavored to kill a
number of men in Pelham, -- had cheated them out of their money," etc.

This man, you will readily understand, was a Pelhamite. He rode Post, from
Springfield to Pelham, constantly, once a week. He felt all the prejudice
incident to that people. He gave his testimony in a very categorical manner. It
was now determined that I must take up my abode in jail, and there continue,
till the session of the Supreme Court, -- when I should take my trial for
passing counterfeit money. I was accordingly committed. And now, sir, I believe
I have brought your patience to a very severe trial, by the length of my
tedious narrative: therefore, I will leave the business here, till tomorrow;
for I feel almost sick, myself, with ruminating upon the gloomy scenes, through
which I soon passed, after this.

CHAP. XIV.
-- -- Love of gain
Striks like a pestilence, from breast to breast;
Riot, pride, perfidy, blew vapour's breath;
And inhumanity is caught from man.

AS the apothecary was the only witness against me, which could be produced at
Court, I entertained warm expectations of being acquitted on my trial.

In the state of Massachusetts, many inconveniences had been experienced from
the frequent circulation of counterfeit money: therefore, the governor had
offered a reward of twenty-five pounds, L. M. to any person, who should detect
another, in making or passing counterfeit money, -- knowing it to be such.
Hence, the complainant became interested in the issue on trial, and of course,
ought to be excluded from giving his testimony.

The apothecary, it is evident, would be entitled to the reward, from
government, the moment I became convicted of the crime, for which I remained
confined, and for which I was shortly to take my trial. Hence, I felt
confident, that his testimony could not, according to every principle of
justice, and of course, would not, be admitted.

In cases where not more than one dollar is in dispute, this regulation is
invariably and sacredly adhered to, viz. that no one shall be admitted a
witness in a case, wherein he is, mediately, or immediately, concerned; and
certainly, said I, where character, liberty, and property, are all at stake,
they will not dare to deviate from this rule of impartiality.

Those, who would plead for the propriety of the apothecary's being admitted a
witness in this cause, must either deny this general rule, viz. "That a man
interested in a cause, ought to be excluded from bearing testimony in that
cause," or else the being entitled to twenty-five pounds, in case of my
conviction, did not make the apothecary interested in the case.

Immediately after my confinement, a number of speculating geniuses resorted to
me, expecting I would turn evidence for the state, and involve many more in the
situation to which I was reduced: they, therefore, were anxious to improve this
time of harvest, and enrich themselves from the bounty of Government. Hence,
they offered me their exertions in my behalf, and moreover, half of the reward,
which should be received, in case of the conviction of others, from government.

Had these speculators known with what contempt I viewed their conduct, they
might have saved themselves some considerable trouble. To speculate in human
woe, and barely for the sake of enriching themselves, reduce others to a state
of wretchedness and misery, is an object so detestable, as to excite horror, in
every feeling breast. Had their real motive been the good of society, their
object would have been laudable, but it was a matter of public notoriety, that
Glazier Wheeler had wrought openly for months past, in New-Salem; but these
heroes took no notice of him, until the moment it was known, that a reward was
to be obtained for prosecuting money-makers to conviction, then all their ardor
was in action; -- and this too, for the benefit of government.

Those, who applied to me, found their expectations frustrated; that I had no
design to communicate to them any knowledge, which I possessed concerning others:
therefore, they turned their course to different objects; and determined, since
I would not further their designs, that I should suffer the effects of popular
prejudice.

The printer, in Springfield, inserted a paragraph in his weekly publication,
not calculated to fix the most pleasing idea upon the minds of people, through
the crountry, viz. That I had been to a clergyman, under pretense of coming
from a mission among the Indians, and being poorly clothed, had stated to the
clergyman, that my clothes had been worn out, during my continuance among them.
That the clergyman had invited me to preach, and in order to my appearing in
character, offered me a suit of clothes; -- that I accepted his offer: -- and
in order to prepare myself for the exercises of the next day, had retired into
his study, begging the favor of his watch, to know how long I might allow
myself to study, previous to retiring to rest. That after the clergyman and his
family had retired to rest, I had silently left the house; -- carrying with me,
at the same time, watch, clothes, etc. And leaving this text, written on paper,
folded as for a sermon: "you shall seek me early, but shall not find me."

These matters were all calculated to fix an invincible prejudice against me,
in the minds of those people, by whom I must ultimately be tried, and
consequently deprived me of that favor, which every person ought to have, upon
a matter of such infinite consequence to his prosperity in life, I saw these
matters, and what would be the probable event.

I expected that application would be made to me, for a discovery of my
confederate, or confederates, at the session of the supreme court; and
therefore, ought to form some system in my own mind, to regulate my conduct
upon such an occasion. I ought either to discover the person of whom I received
the money, and for whom I had acted in passing it, or else I ought to exonerate
him entirely from crimination, or even suspicion; and in order to weigh these
matters in the balance of justice, it will naturally arise into view, what is
his situation, contrasted with my situation and circumstances? The connexions
which have existed between us, and our views and expectations, under that
connection?

True it is, that this act was performed solely for his advantage, not having
my own emolument in view, either directly or indirectly; therefore, ought he
not to suffer the consequence of this business? Moreover, his character stands
as fair in this county, as any man's whatever; and of consequence, he would
stand a better chance on trial, in the prejudices of people, than I should. He
is likewise a man of property, and can of consequence, make arrangements for
assistance, by counsel and friends, which I cannot expect; and even should he
be convicted, the exertions of government may be more mild toward him, than
they would toward me: for Judges are but men, and are subject to like passions
and prejudices* with other men; and it is not impossible, but that they may
feel the operation of prejudice in a trial respecting me, as well as others,
which I daily see are governed by it.

These were the arguments in favor of my making a discovery of the person from
whom I had received the money. The arguments on the other side were, That
Lysander, it is true, has a character, property, etc. to loose, and which he
moreover must loose, in a great measure, should he be subjected to trial. He
has a family, a description of which, I have already given you, which must
share his fortune in the world; therefore his ruin must bring ruin likewise on
his family. A wife, possessed of every tender feeling, must suffer more than is
possible for a man to suffer, who is calculated by nature, to endure the robust
toils of pain and hardship; and as she must suffer with her husband, in
feelings, at least, it will be involving two in misery, as great as what I can
endure, should I reveal this business respecting Lysander.

It will, likewise, involve those, who are perfectly innocent, in difficulty,
as well as the guilty, viz. Lysander's wife and children; therefore, whether
will it be better to meet the impending storm, alone, and unsupported, or else
to exculpate myself, by throwing the same burden onto six others, and all of
them entirely innocent, excepting one? Moreover, why did I undertake this
business, unless it was to hazard the danger myself, which attended this
undertaking? I am determined. The arguments are more against me, than they are
for me, and I must stand the power of this storm, thick and fast gathering over
my head.

Happy was it for me, that I was ignorant at that time, of the dreadful trials
and miseries, which I had to encounter, before I was released from a state of
confinement; -- otherwise, my courage must have sunk; my resolution must have
failed.

My blood, at this distant period of time runs cold, at taking a retrospective
view of those scenes. Since I have been writing this narrative, necessity has
compelled me to have recourse to minutes, which brought those scenes into view,
which have been a great tax on my tranquillity. I cannot now close my eyes in
sleep, without being called to act these things over again in imagination. I
start from sleep often, sweating with agony of mind, under the apprehensions
which those images present to my view.

My determination being fixed, I laid my account to conduct accordingly. Many
people visited me daily, out of curiosity, to see a character entirely new, the
public being fully possessed with the belief, that I had absolutely stolen a
watch and suit of clothes from a clergyman, and had left him the text
beforementioned; -- and all I could say or do, had no influence to make them
believe to the contrary.

Some said this clergyman was Doctor Huntington of Coventry, and some said it
was Mr. Trumbull of North-Haven; but those two gentlemen, denying any such
transaction toward them, said the matter was a fact, but who the clergyman
was, was unknown.

It appeared that the world were determined not to give up any unfavorable
idea, which had once been broached concerning me, let it be ever so unfounded
or improbable. Therefore, their ears were open to every breath of slander,
which was puffed against me.

My visitants would often look at me, when relating matters of fact, with an
arch significance, declarative of their knowing the bottom of the business,
notwithstanding all my plausible declarations. I do believe, if I had set out
with warmth, to prove to the world, that I was a man, and not a woman, that a
great number, from that circumstance, would have been able at once, to look
through the deception, which I was endeavoring to lay them under, and known for
certainty, that I was, in reality, a woman; so strong was the desire of
mankind, at that day, to elude my deceptions, which they though it I was master of,
to the utmost degree.

In this situation, you will readily conceive it could hardly be expected, that
I should run clear of a verdict against me, let the proof be ever so
inadequate; for the wisest and most considerate of men will be influenced in
their reasonings by those popular clamours, more or less; and they cannot avoid
it, so liable is human nature to err in the devious path of life.

The speculators in government bounties had now taken Glazier Wheeler, who was
likewise committed for trial; this man you will likely have a curiosity to be
made more minutely acquainted with, as he will make somewhat of a figure in
this narrative. He was a man tottering under the weight of years, having long
since, to all appearance, been a presumptive candidate for the grave. He was a
man of small mental abilities; but patient and persevering, in any manual
pursuit, to admiration. Credulous in the extreme, which subjected him to the
duplicity of many, who had resorted to him for his work: inoffensive and
harmless in his manners, simple in his external appearance, and weak in his
observations on men and manners. He had spent all his days in pursuit of the
knowledge of counterfeiting silver, so as to bear the test of essays. He had
always been unfortunate, and always lived poor.

This was the man, concerning whom, the world had said so much, and who was to
take his trial at the same time with me. One other, by the name of Jones, was
likewise committed, either for counterfeiting, or passing counterfeit money;
which, I do not recollect. Likewise one by the name of Cook was in confinement,
to take his trial for burglary. These were the men, who waited for the approach
of the court, with fearful apprehensions of the event.

Many circumstances had taken place, whilst I lay confined here, which served
to give me a pretty sanguine dependence on my own abilities. I had written a
scroll of ribaldry, and entitled it "the HayMow Sermon," representing my
exploits in Pelham, at Rutland, etc. and delivered this often to those, who
came to see me, as a phenomenon. I found many applauded this as a witty thing,
until I finally began to think it so myself. The flattery of those, who were
willing to alleviate the miseries of my situation, by making me at peace with
myself, had such an operation on my mind, that I seriously began to think
myself a man of some consequence, and was determined to let this circumstance
be fully known at court, when I should have an opportunity of displaying all my
abilities, in such a conspicuous manner, as to create admiration in the minds
of all.

This was the state of things when I was called to the bar, and my indictment
read, The Judges on the bench, at this time, if I remember right, were, Messrs.
Cushen, Sargent, Sumner, and Dana. The attorney general was Robert Treat Pain,
of whom you have heard much mention made: yet, sir, as this is so extraordinary
a character in the department of our Jurisprudence, I will give it you more
particularly in this narration. Mr. Editor.

AS Judge Pain sustains a station of importance, in the judicial department,
in Massachusetts, I wish to cast a veil of candor over his foibles, and
suppress whatever may tend to injure him in the minds of the public, in this
narrative, which was given to a friend: it being essentially necessary to
support a due degree of respect toward those, who remain in offices of
eminence, in order to enable them to execute their (...) to the benefit of
society.




In the indictment I was charged with passing two pieces of base metal -- the
counterfeit of Spanish milled dollars -- knowing them to be such, etc. To the
indictment I plead not guilty. I had no counsel at this time -- owing to the
following reason, viz.

When I was first committed to confinement, I expected to be in want of more
money, than what I had on hand, for my expenses in jail, attorney's fees at
trial etc. Therefore, I sold my horse, saddle and bridle, and had a promise of
the money in ten days; -- but to my no small disappointment, have not received
my pay to this day: of consequence, at the time of trial, was entirely
destitute of money.

Being wholly unacquainted with the practice of the gentlemen of the bar, at
that time, I had embraced the opinion that they never would attend to the
application of any, without an advanced fee. This idea I afterward found to be
entirely groundless. Under this apprehension, I applied for no help, having no
money to remunerate a counselor for his assistance.

This being the case, I stood alone in the business, which communicated an idea
to the gentlemen of the bar, that a confidence in my own abilities induced me
to look with indifference on their assistance. This, of consequence, did not
serve to ingratiate myself into their favor. This was not all. In my address to
the jury, I flung out some hard expressions, against them, owing to my mistaken
idea of their venal practice; all which served to create myself enemies,
without the least apparent advantage arising from it.

I have often thought that a retrospective view of a thousand foolish
calculations which people make, in the days of youthful inexperience, and the
thoughtless unmeaning impetuosity, with which they pursue these objects of
calculations, would serve greatly to lessen the resentment, which the wiser
part of mankind often feel toward them.

After I had plead to the indictment, the attorney general arose and opened the
cause to the jury, stating, in the course of his observations, that I had been
a most abandoned character, leading a life of iniquity from the beginning; that
I had been a counterfeiter not only of the coin of the country, but had
likewise counterfeited a name, a character, a calling: all which seemed to
communicate this idea to the world, that I had given aloose to the practice of
every enormity; that my wickedness had at length found me out; and, that I
should now suffer a punishment due to my long course of crimes.

After he had closed, he proceeded to call on his evidences. When the
apathecary came on to the stand, I objected to the court, against his being
admitted, being a person interested in the business. After having heard the
arguments pro and con, the bench took the matter under consideration, and
determined that his evidence might be taken: giving for reason, that it had
before been determined; and that the reward which government had offered, would
militate against the conviction of crimes of that nature, rather than promote
it, if the complainant should be excluded from giving testimony.

As soon as this determination of the court was declared, I pretty much gave up
the idea of being acquitted. However, I thought it necessary to make the last
defense I was able to: therefore, after the witnesses were examined, I began my
address to the jury, and in the course of my observations, took notice of the
remarks of the attorney general; that he had, contrary to every principle of
law and justice, asserted facts, in open court, apparently, with a wicked
design, to fix a prejudice in their minds, in order to prevent my trial's being
impartial, not even attempting to produce evidence to support the base
assertions, which he had made.

I continued still further: -- I am astonished, said I, to see all justice and
virtue fled from the bench. That those characters, whom we are taught to
revere, on account of their eminent station, should so far debase their own
importance, as to remain in silence, when the most flagrant violations of all
rules of order are perpetrated before them in open court: therefore, gentlemen
of the jury, I turn to you as the only support, which now may be depended on,
for the enjoyment of our just rights and privileges.

And now, sirs, what do you think of this rant? I know what you will say, viz.
that it was the ebullition of a mad, hair-brained, fellow. My seelings, it is
true, were wounded by the operations of the attorney general, and I verily
expected to punish all those, whom I thought to blame in the business; but how
weak was my reasoning upon such a subject! How mad the part which I acted! I
soon found to to my cost, that in the room of punishing others, I was
irritating that power, in whose grasp I was embraced.

I continued my remarks to the jury, upon the evidence which had been exhibited
against me, with as much argument as the case would admit of. The
attorney general answered my remarks, and the Judges summed up the evidence,
and stated the business to the Jury, not in a very partial manner. The jury
retired, and in about one hour returned with the verdict of GUILTY!

The sentence was soon pronounced, -- which was to this effect, viz. That I
should stand one hour in the pillory, and remain three years confined to the
house of correction, without the corporal punishment, which generally is
inflicted on those, who are sentenced to said house. Glazier Wheeler's sentence
was the same -- excepting an addition of twenty stripes, and to be cropped. Jones
was sentenced for two years to the house of correction, and twenty stripes.
Cook, for burglary, was sentenced for two years to the house of correction, an
hour in the pillory, and ten stripes.

I was remanded to jail, there to contemplate the gloomy prospect before me, of
spending three years in a state of close confinement. I expected this state of
imprisonment would be in the common jail of the county, there being no other
house of correction provided. Here the horrors of my situation began to open to
my view! I saw an eternity in meniature before me, consisting of one continued
scene of gloomy horrors. Shut (...) the enjoyment of society, from performing a
part among the rest of my fellow mortals, to make some establishment for
myself, in this state of dependence; and from tasting the sweets of liberty,
for which we had so lately fought and bled.

How is this, said I to myself, that a country, which has stood the foremost in
asserting the cause of liberty, that those, who have tasted, in some measure,
the bitter cup of slavery, and have known, from hence, the value of liberty,
should so soon after obtaining that blessing themselves, deprive others of it?
I know, that it will be said, that for my crimes, I am deprived of liberty,
which is according to every dictate of justice; whereas, America was only
struggling for her natural rights, when exercising the principles of virtue.

I have no idea of calling in question the justice of the American cause, but
only advert to the situation and feelings of the people in this state; to show
that they feelingly knew the value of liberty; and therefore, it appears more
strange, that they should wantonly trifle with this valuable treasure. It has
been abundantly said by the leading men in this state, that life without
liberty is not worth the possessing. This was abundantly urged to the people in
time of the war; and it was urged with great truth and propriety; therefore,
that the same characters, upon a revision of the criminal code, with a pretense
of mollifying those laws, which were sanguinary and cruel, should substitute
slavery, for Death, is, to me, conduct truly enigmatical.

As this narrative will not admit of entering into a political disquisition of
the subject, I shall content myself with barely stating facts, which have
abundantly come to my knowledge, from seeing the operation of this system of
servitude upon men. These facts I shall relate from time to time, as they
naturally connect with the narrative; and ^^presume* sir, you will think with
one, that in political reasoning, strongly marked this legislative act.

CHAP. XV.
Deluge and conflagration, dreadful powers!
Prime Ministers of vengeance! chained in caves!
Distinct, apart the giant furies rear;
Apart; or such their horrid rage for ruin,
In mutual conflict would they rise, and wage
Eternal war, 'till one was quite devoured.

THE evening after my sentence, the prisoners, in the room adjoining, were
endeavoring to make their escape. Their attempt was overheared by the jailor,
who came into the room, where I was, about 12 o'clock at night, with the high
sheriff, who with his drawn sword, threatened to put me to instant death, for
making the attempt to break jail. The cold contempt, with which I treated his
threats, stung him to the quick; he lowered on me with an eye of malignancy. He
cried "ah! ha! But roughs, you are in my power, and I Will make you know it,
before I have done with it you." He, by this time, had learned his mistake, by
hearing the prisoners, in the other room, crawling out of the hole which they
had made.

This circumstance serves to show the prejudice which the high sheriff had
conceived against me, by his concluding, without the least evidence, that I was
making an attempt to break jail; however, this I found was a pretty general
opinion among people at this time, that I must be conversant in every species
of outrage, which was going forward, and consequently, when any thing of that
nature was known to be on foot, they were very confident of my being interested
in it.

It was thought that the jail in Springfield was insufficient to hold me
securely, and therefore, concluded to remove me to the jail in Northampton,
another half-shire town in this county; they accordingly put this determination
in execution; removing all the prisoners at the same time. I was confined with
a large chain around my legs, secured in the most critical manner, and then
bound fast to the wagon, in which I was transported; it being twenty miles
between the two places. In this situation, carried through the country, as a
spectacle to the inhabitants, I will not attempt to describe to you my
feelings, because I know the attempt will be in vain. There is a language of
the heart, which we cannot express, it so far exceeds the descriptive powers of
speech: yet, by comparing our own feelings, in different situations, we may
give the nearest guess, what our feelings would be, under other circumstances,
and hence by this rule only, can you judge of my sensations upon this voyage to
Northampton.

It was on Sunday, when we were carried through the country, on our journey to
Northampton: and in the room of attending the usual solemnities of the day,
people thronged the roads, to see this procession, when we passed, the people
would inquire with eagerness, who was the minister, being known more by that
appellation, than I was by my own name. When the minister was pointed out to
them, some would shout with joy, considering that I was now detected,
notwithstanding that amazing fund of subtilty, which I could use when I had
occasion. Their ideas of their own judiciary became highly exalted, in their
opinion, for said they, "this man has been all over the world, playing pranks
in all countries, but could never be bro't to justice, owing to his amazing
subtilty, until he came among us, and we have showed him what is what -- he
finds by this time, that we are not such fools as he thought for." Some
examined my looks with great attention, to see if they could distinguish where
that depth of knowledge lay, which had set the world in an uproar. Some few
dropped the sympathetic tear over our wretched state, apparently sensible that
we belonged to the same human family with themselves, and were capable of
suffering equally with others.

About sunset, we arrived at Northampton, and were consigned to the abodes of
misery. The ponderous doors growled on their reluctant hinges! The rattling of
bolts, bars, and locks, reverberating through the hollow apartments of this
dreary abode, made such an impression on my mind, that with difficulty I
supported myself under this situation. The appearance of the Ceberus of these
infernal abodes was equal to every poetic description of the Janitor of hell.
Hail, ye infernal Powers! said I, who inhabit these regions; assemble your
forces, gather your strength, and keep high carnival today, in consideration
of those victims, which have now fallen a sacrifice at your shrine.

I was confined in a room on the ground floor alone, and shut out from the
possibility of seeing any company. This was a situation which left me to the
corroding pangs of thought. However, these thoughts were, in the end,
calculated to fortify me against impending troubles. I reflected on my
imprudence at the time of trial. On the desperate voyage I had undertaken for
the sake of befriending others; on the consummate folly in our plans for
wealth; and upon three years' siege I must now undertake against the walls of a
prison.

But, said I, what does it signify to complain? The die is cast -- my fate is
fixed -- and at the close of three years, what will it matter, whether I have
lived in affluence or been confined in a dungeon? Does it now militate against
my happiness to think that yesterday or last week I was in a disagreeable
situation? The present and future are the only times for enjoyment. The present
blessings we have in our power, and consequently, can partake of every joy they
grant: the future we possess by anticipation; and it is thought by many, that
the foretaste of pleasure by anticipation is greater than the participation.

At any rate, happiness is the pursuit of all, and it is evident that the
nearer we can approach to a state of content, by the same proportion we
approach to that happiness, which we are in pursuit after; of consequence, the
dictates of wisdom will induce me to throw aside care and trouble, let my
present situation be ever so disagreeable.

Not long after I was confined in this jail, there was a man by the name of
Rood put into the same room with me. This man had held a commission in the
military department of Massachusetts; and was an inhabitant of a neighboring
town; had a family consisting of a wife and one daughter, a young woman in the
bloom of life, and a pretty handsome figure.

This man, by mistake, having taken some cattle, not his own, and appropriated
them to his own use; some people were so impolite as to charge him with theft.
This charge was carried before the Supreme Court, and there he was fined about
seventy pounds, if I mistake not. As the circumstances of this Rood were
somewhat embarrassed, he could not pay the fine which the court had laid upon
him. Therefore, the prospect was, that he must lie in jail a long time -- until
he should be able to pay his fine, and this he had no apparent chance for doing.

This man had a genius somewhat singular. His stature was about six feet. He
had an upright bold look; possessing a small share of learning. He was fond of
using far-fetched and hard sentences, in order to appear like a man of letters.
He was very fond of using high sounding words, and had a most singular talent
of palming himself upon the vulgar, for a man of real information. He was
cunning, out not politic, sociable and amusing, but not edifying.

Finding himself in this embarrassed situation, Lieutenant Rood determined to
extricate himself by any mean which he should find in his power. As he was not
possessed with those delicate feelings of uprightness, which would subject him to
a hurtful system of honesty, he determined to have recourse to any measure,
which would answer his purpose.

We were soon joined by another, who was committed by the name of Warner; but I
believe his real name proved to be Hutchins. This man was apprehended for
passing counterfeit bank-bills, and committed for trial, at the next court of
quarter sessions, to be holden in March following.

This man was wholly destitute of literary knowledge, and also unacquainted
with men and manners. He was simple, and destitute of intrigue, but possessed an
inviolable attachment to secresy, when any thing of that nature was committed
to him. He had a great share of enterprise, but was wholly destitute of system.

Under these circumstances, I found many designing characters had made use of
him, as a tool to effect their nefarious purposes.

Having this company, that eternal series of ennui, which had hung like a
leaden mountain upon me, was now in some measure removed. The privilege of
conversation was now restored, and amusement in some measure occupied our
attention.

When I have been debarred the privilege of seeing and converting with others,
the bare fight of a man has involuntarily and unaccountably raised a sensation
of joy in my mind, greater than you can easily conceive, even when I had not a
possibility of speaking to him. This, I think, is a strong evidence that we are
all descended from one common origin, and that a certain attraction of cohesion
operates upon the human race, and will so continue till we all return to that
fountain from whence we originated, and form an union as perfect as is formed
between the river and the ocean when their waters become one.

The scanty allowance of provision, which we received at this place, made us
feel severely the pains of hunger. Those, who had friends near them, commonly
received an additional supply from them, but those, who had only what our
keeper allowed us, to supply the calls of nature, often felt the griping hand
of hunger, in addition to other inconveniences. All these circumstances made me
feel an inconceivable uneasiness at my confinement. I would walk backward and
forward across the room, by the whole day together, ruminating upon the
posibility of making my escape. How I longed to be at liberty, is beyond my
power to tell. Often would I wish that I was possessed with the ability of
passing from place to place, with the same facility, that we could discern
objects at a distance, in this place and that place. -- How quick would I then
leave these hateful abodes, and wonton in the sunbeams of liberty! -- How
easily could I then elude the iron grasp of this petty tyrant, who triumphs
over the miseries of the wretched few under his control.

Often would I contemplate upon the situation of the beggar, who gained his
daily bread by the cold hand of charity, and yet walked at liberty, free as the
air in which he breathed, capable of going to any place to which his fancy
directs him, without let or hindrance; I compared his situation with mine, and
in the comparison, I fell infinitely short of his state of happiness.

I was determined to try some measure for my escape from this place. I peeped
into every corner of the room -- I surveyed all the barricadoes with which I
was environed -- I contemplated every possible measure which occured to my
imagination. I at last concluded to begin my operation upon the chimney way,
hoping that I could, by taking up the foundation of the chimney, get to the
ground, and by that mean, undermine the jail, and make my escape that way. I
laid the plan before Warner and Rood, for mutual consultation and approbation.
Warner, at once, entered into the scheme, and promised his assistance. Rood
refused to lend his assistance, but encouraged us to proceed; suggesting that
the thing probably might be accomplished.

I soon saw into the drift of Rood. He determined to take advantage of our
success, if we proved fortunate -- if otherwise, he thought to exculpate
himself by saying he had no part in the business. He had acted the part of a
sycophant toward the jailor and the high sheriff, from the time of his
commitment, hoping ^through their intercession, to gain some alleviation from
the court of their sentence, at the next session.

Notwithstanding the assistance of Rood was not to be expected, Warner and I
were determined to make the attempt, immediately after the approach of night,
as that was the only time in which we could work, without an immediate
detection. Therefore, after the time of retirement, we pulled off our coats,
and went to work, with a great degree of energy, upon the stones in the
chimney. We soon almost filled our room with stones and rubbish. In this
situation, we experienced great inconveniences for the want of light, being
obliged to have recourse to pine slivers pealled off from a board, which kept
one hand constantly employed in feeding the blaze, lest it should be
extinguished, which would at once defeat all our purposes.

As I was the strongest of the two, I kept Warner seeding the light, whilst I
labored like Sisy^phu^ in rolling huge stones out of the chimney-way. Happy
should I have thought myself at that time, if Hercules like, I could have
turned the course of some mighty river under the jail, to have assisted me with
its force, to sweep away those huge rocks.

I labored and toiled without intermission, till about midnight, when coming to
a rock I could not possibly get out of the hole, I for a moment despaired of
success, after straining with all my might, a number of times, to no effect.
Rood, seeing the situation in which matters stood, jumped out of bed, and
helped to lift the stone from its place, and then returned again into bed.

I again renewed my labor, and had overcome the greatest part of the
difficulties before us, when the light became extinct for want of fuel, the
board being all consumed. I tried to pursue the business in the dark, but found
it in vain, and therefore was obliged to quit our undertaking. How much would I
now have given for a farthing candle! but wishes were as vain as our
expectations were unfounded. The necessity of our relinquishing the pursuit was
absolute, and therefore with a sullen reluctance I yielded to the force of
necessity.

I did not entirely lose all hopes of succeeding yet, by this method. As soon
as day light should afford an opportunity, I determined to renew my labor, and
if by good fortune our Cerberus should not make us a visit till some time in
the morning, I was still in hopes of making the breach soon enough, to leave
him to his own agreeable reflections, when be came to search our room, which he
constantly did every day. Therefore, at the dawn of day, I again renewed my
labor, with increased animation. I struggled and toiled with the huge rocks in
such a manner as to establish the belief, that in the course of an hour, I
should again fl^t upon the wing of liberty. But O! horrid to related the
thundering noise of the jailor, in opening his ponderous doors, throwing back
the many bolts, and turning the keys of the enormous locks, at once defeated
all my expectations of freedom. The mighty castles which I had been building in
the air, came tumbling over my head, like a sweeping deluge.

The jailor came into the room, and what was the scene pictured to his view?
Rubbish, rocks, stones, and dirt, filled the room! Two men almost naked,
covered with sweat and dust!

The door was again immediately shut, and the jailor retired, but his absence
was almost momentary. He returned with a band of flinty hearted Myrmidons to
assist in the execution of his diabolical system of revenge. We Warner and
myself.
were taken by those patrons of humanity, tied to the grates, and received ten
lashes each, on our naked backs, with a horse-whip. Immediately after this, we
were put in the dungeon, where we lay two days, and were then removed into
another room.

The day after we were confined in the dungeon, the high sheriff came to the
jail, and threatened to put Rood into the dungeon with us; this threat had the
desired effect. Rood declared he had given no aid, assistance, or advice, in
the business of breaking the jail, but on the contrary, used all the arguments
and entreaties to induce us to desist, which were in his power: and moreover,
said he, -- "when I saw they would not give up the attempt, I got out of my
bed, and went to the window, in order to call the jailor, but when Buroughs
saw what I was about, he came up to me with his penknife, and threatened to
stab me, if I proceeded; therefore, I was obliged to desist."

This contradiction happened to take place where I overheard it all. I called
to Rood, in the midst of it, and informed him that he was a liar, that he had,
in reality, been aiding and assisting in our efforts for breaking the jail;
that had he conducted with ingenuity in the business, I should have been
willing to have him exculpated from blame, but when he manifested a disposition
to heap additional censure upon me, for the sake of making himself stand high
in the opinion of others, I supposed it a just tribute to my own vindication,
to set matters relating to him, in their true light.

This I expected would be heard by the high-sherriff likewise, as they two were
in conversation together; and my main object, in making this declaration at
this time, was to prevent Rood from building himself up in the opinion of the
sheriff, at my expense.

When Rood found I had detected him in his duplicity, he entreated the sheriff
to put him into a room separate from me; dreading, as I suppose, my just
vengeance upon him, for his perfidious conduct. He promised on this condition,
to give information concerning any attempt of the prisoners to break jail. He
was, of consequence, put into another room.

The second day of my confinement, nearly night, I heard a terrible clanking of
massy chains, approaching toward my apartment. The door of the dungeon was
opened, when lo! horrid to relate! a deformed Vulcan A Blacksmith.
attended with his grisly Cyclops, A Journeyman Blacksmith.
carrying with them a huge iron chain, and all the tools for their infernal
purpose!

I was ordered into another apartment, and to work went those engines of
cruelty. They, in the first place, made fast a flat ring around my leg, about
six inches wide and an inch thick. This was connected with a chain weighing
about 36 lb. and ten feet in length. The other end of the chain was fastened to
the timber composing our floor, with a staple driven in with a sledge, which
made the whole jail tremble. After I was fixed in this manner, they left me to
my own reflections, inwardly exulting at their mighty power, in making a poor
wretch secure from enjoying the cold comfort of hoping for better times.

O! ruthless mortals! said I, why so infatuated! am not I a member of the same
family with yourselves? am not I capable of suffering the same woes with
others? Place yourselves in my situation for a moment, and try to regale your
feeling, in such a condition. Even suppose a brother, a child, or any near
relative, or friend, in my situation: Would you conduct toward him as you now
do toward me, who am a stranger among you? Surely you would not. Does not the
language of nature, does not the principles of that benevolent religion of
which you make so great profession, teach you to treat the stranger with
kindness? How then is it that you pinch me with hunger, mangle me with whips,
confine me in a dungeon, etc. as though you envied me the enjoyment of the
liberty of walking a room of twenty feet square? You have confined me to a
space of half that dimension; and this confinement too, performed in the most
cruel manner!

Would any of you, who are walking at your ease, enjoying the sunshine of
liberty, if placed in my situation, lie down tamely under the burden, and not
exert yourselves for freedom, when you possessed a faint ray of hope, that you
may obtain it by exertion?

You, who have never felt the burden of confinement, can have out a faint idea
of its nature: hence, you esteem it as it feels to you, and treat those who are
^n^er its pressure, according to your feelings.

I lay in this dismal situation about a fortnight, if I remember right. My leg,
by this time, was worn by the iron around it, till the skin was quite off. In
this situation, I became entirely impatient. My sufferings I thought
insupportable. I cursed the day in which I was born. I cursed my friends, and
all the human race, in the bitterness of my anguish! Well was it for Warner,
that I was confined with a chain, at that time, lest happily I should have vented
my rage on him in the overflowing of my distress. I roared with anguish! I
raged like a Bedlamite! --

The obdurate heart of my Cerberus was not moved by my situation, he was
terrified, and durst not approach me. Yet that adamantine barrier which
fortified the avenues to his soul, from the approaches of compassion, remained
entirely unimpaired* and prevented the least motion of pity from disturbing his
repose.

There are certain situations of suffering which will make a man mad -- will
take away every exercise of rational conduct -- will reduce him to a state of
desperation, -- so that he will rush into the most desperate danger. This was
my situation at this time. I was determined not to endure these trials any
longer; -- and, in the language of the poet, -- to end them "by taking arms
against myself, and all my woes at once."

I ruminated upon the means of accomplishing this design. Various were the
plans which offered to my view, but none appeared so eligible to answer the
state of my mind, as the terrible element of fire. Therefore, I determined to
set fire to the jail, and Sampson-like, make a sacrifice at my death, which
should atone for the cruelties I had suffered in my life!!!

The flooring of the jail was laid with two thicknesses of timber, -- each
thickness being about fourteen inches and over these timbers, a floor of inch
boards. The boards which composed the floor I cut away, in such a manner as to
be able to take up a piece about two feet long, the cracks between the timbers
were about two inches wide, into which I dropped coals of fire, which fell down
to the ground, twenty eight inches below the floor, among shavings and other
combustible stuff. The air drawing in strongly, at the place where the fire
was, it soon began to rage with great violence. I replaced the board in its
former situation, placed my straw, which served for my bed, on the board, and
lay down, with great composure, viewing my sufferings as fast hastening to an
end.

The floor being so tight as not to admit the blaze into the room, it sought a
passage elsewhere, and soon burst out, through the underpinning and blazed up
to the height of the caves of the jail, about twenty feet! this was a scene
possessing more of the horrid sublime than any thing I ever met with during my
life.

At the dead hour of night, when all nature was lost in forgetfulness, as Young
emphatically expresses it.

Night, sable goddess! from her ebon throne,
In ^^yless majesty, now stretches forth
Her laden scepter over a slumbering world;
Silence, how dead! and darkened, how profound!
Nor eye, nor listening ear, an object finds:
Creation sleeps. It Is as the general pulse
Of life ^ood still, and nature made a pause,
An awful pause! prophetic of her end.
And let her prophecy be soon fulfilled;
Fate drop the curtain! I can loose no more.
In this situation to see columns of smoke and fire rolling up with a majestic
power, enveloping me around, was a scene which surpasses all description! I
viewed the operation of the flames with a tranquil horror! I now felt myself
exalted above the operations of the petty tyranny of those, who had exercised
the rod of severity over me. Your reign, said I, will be shore, and I shall not
fall altogether unrevenged. It may serve as a memento to others, not to drive
those to desperation, who have the misfortune to fall under their power.

I soon found that the fire had loosened the staple, which consined my chain to
the floor; therefore, I was at liberty to walk from one end of the room to the
other, contemplating the progress of this dreadful devouring element.

By this time, the prisoners in the room over head were awakened, alarmed, and
began to cry out for help. The jailor was aroused, the inhabitants gathered,
and the bolts, bars, and locks, were in motion. They immediately came into my
room, and finding me loose, conveyed me into the dungeon.

Whilst I was in the dungeon, I heard the bustle among the people, in putting
out the fire. From the expectations of some, I thought the danger increased,
and from the operation of others, I thought it diminished. My mind was wavering
between hope and fear, till about 4 o'clock in the morning, when I found the
noise decreased until it became entirely silent. I now concluded they had
subdued the fire, and of course, I should be called to an account as
disagreeable, as when I attempted to break jail.

The scene following, of all the scenes of my life, strikes my mind with the
most distress in relating. To paint it according to the existence of facts, and
the sensations arising from those facts, is an arduous task, too great for me
to undertake, till I have refreshed nature with a little relaxation by sleep,
and application to other objects, which will turn my mind a while from the
disgust, which the contemplation of this subject creates. Therefore, sir^
accept my sincere wish for your welfare, my desire that you may never taste
that cup of adversity, which I have drained to the dregs.

I am, Dear Sir, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
-- -- It Is only change of pain,
A bitter change! severer for severe;
The d^^ to^ short for my distress! and night
F'en in the zenith of her dark domain,
Is sunshine to the color of my fate.

ABOUT 9 o'clock in the morning, I heard the usual tumult at entering the
outter door of the jail. I saw a crowd were entering and passing along
theally-way, previous to their coming to the dungeon door! The door opened! The
high sheriff, jailor, and about twenty more entered! I saw by the appearance of
things, that I must prepare for the worst possible event. The sheriff advanced
with a cocked pistol, which he presented to my breast, and swore by GOD, that
if I offered to resist, he would put me to instant death. He had an idea that I
had become desperate, and would sacrifice my own life for the sake of ridding
myself from the misery I was under, and obtaining revenge, for the injuries I
had suffered.

I called him a poor despicable cowardly wretch, to advance upon a poor,
helpless, unarmed man, in the manner he assumed. I told him I placed his utmost
malice at defiance, and challenged him to do his worst. I told him I expected
every thing base and cruel from him, ever sensible that the ignoble spirit,
which possessed a coward, led to cruelty and barbarity. That I had been punished
ignobly once, for nothing; and therefore, I determined he should have something
for his next attempt, which should make his cowardly soul tremble with fearful
apprehension.

He ordered his posse to advance and seize me. They advanced and laid hold of
me. As soon as they had made me secure, the sheriff took hold of my hand and
twisted it round, so as to make the pain very sensible. I thought he would have
wrung my arm off my shoulder. I was led out of jail in this manner, into the
yard. I was then tied fast to the grates, and stripped naked.

The reason why I was carried into the yard was, that this mild distributor of
justice, might have a better opportunity to give his whip full scope, without
impediment. He improved his opportunity, and with a whip commonly known by the
(...) (...) of hunting-whip, he laid about me with all his vengeance, for about
five minutes. I then was taken down, and Warner put in my place, who received
twenty lashes. We were then re-conveyed into the dungeon; when I was loosed
from the iron I had about my leg, and in lieu of that, a large ring was put
about each leg, with an iron bar running from one to the other. This bar was
bolted to the floor. I then had an iron about my waist, and bolted to the
floor: after all, I was hand-cuffed and pinioned.

The sheriff then came to take his farewell, and parted with some hearty curses
for my incorrigible conduct. The curses he received back again with interest. I
was now left to myself, a gloomy spectacle of helpless misery. This was in the
month of December, in the year '85, a remarkable cold month, and my confinement
in this situation, continued until January, '86, being thirty-two days, in the
whole.

Here I was deprived of fire, of clothing, and exercise, till the time was
nearly expired; and even the pitiful allowance of straw to lie on: but all this
was nothing, compared with what I suffered with hunger.

Those, who know the cruel effects of hunger, are the only people who can
understand me, when I relate these facts. But few people have ever felt its
effects: therefore, should I relate this story to people in general, not many
would know what I meant.

I had not been in this situation many days, before I began to experience the
severe effects of the cold. As I could not stand, walk, nor step; the only
recourse I had to keep my feet from freezing was rubbing them against an iron
spike, a little from my ^^et, perhaps three inches, which had either never been
driven into the floor entirely, or else had started back by some mean, the
space of about four inches. This I wore very smooth with a perpetual friction.
No person was allowed barely to lo^k through the little aperture into the
dungeon. This little hole was secured by a door, so as to hide every object
from our sight.

About the seventh or eighth day after my confinement, in this pandimoneum, the
pains of hunger became excruciating. Gladly would I have eaten my own flesh. I
even had a hankering desire to (...) the excrements out of the vault, but that
was ou^ (...) my power. All my thoughts were occupied upon victuals. I could
not conceive what I had been about through life, that I had not eat^^ more when
I had the opportunity.

I could not possibly conceive of the idea of a man satisfied with eating. That
a man could be glutted with food, so as to loath it, was a fact established in
my mind, by my own personal experience -- yet, at this time, I could not
believe it; indeed, I thought I knew to the contrary.

Had I been possessed of an empire at this time, I should have parted with it in
a moment, for a supply of food for the present necessity. It is said that
hunger will break through a stone wall, but I (...) that hunger will carry a
man the greatest length of any thing in nature. It destroys the feelings of
humanity, and makes a man a savage. (...) his nature a ferocious feeling, which
(...) more to the tiger than to a being possessing the milk of human kindness:
therefore, take the mi^^est couple that ever lived, reduce them by famine to a
state of extremity, and you will see the fond husband tearing from his beloved
partner the food upon which her existence depends. Nay, more, you will see, in
this situation, the tender mother refusing her dying infant the smallest
pittance of sustenance to its expiring entreaties!

Must not the mind of sensibility shrink with horror at a sight so dreadful?
And this have I experienced in a land of christianity! A land where great
professions of humanity and christian benevolence have been made! In charity to
the inhabitants, I now believe they did not know the extremity of my
sufferings. At that time I did believe it, and that they concurred in the
business; but I know my situation did not admit of cool reflection and candid
reasoning upon the subject. I begged, I entreated, of the keeper of these
infernal abodes, for bread, but my entreaties were given to the winds. I raved,
I swore, I tore, cursed and lamented, but all did not move his ob^^rate
feelings. After the fifteenth day the rage of hunger began to subside. Nature,
^^ed with the struggle, gave way, and began her retreat. I grew faint and sick.
There was a gloom hung over me, which is entirely inexpressible. Nothing did I
ever feel of the kind before or since; and how to describe it to you now, I am
entirely at a loss. I know if I undertake, I shall not succeed in giving you an
image of the most distant resemblance.

I grew sick of life, I hated the idea of ever mixing again with the world, I
wished for death with a^ impatient ardor. There is a situation, sir, when life
is no more s^^et. There are circumstances, under which life becomes a burden,
and is no longer desirable. This was my situation. I began to console myself
with the hope that my miseries would soon have an end in the arms of death. The
approach of this grim tyrant now was the most pleasing object of my
contemplation. Here I found a balm for all my wounds -- "To rest from my
labors" in this world, was the height of my wishes. Here was a pleasure in the
prospect which assuaged the rage of my pain, and calmed the boisterous emotions
of my mind.

I had now become emaciated to a skeleton. My beard had not been cut, during
the time of my being in the dungeon, hence it was about two inches long. My
hair had not been combed, which stood in every direction. From these
circumstances, I had more the appearance of some savage beast of the forest,
than any thing appertaining to the human species. I now looked for the speedy
end of my toils, I found my strength daily decreasing, and concluded that
nature must soon march out of her fortress, and give entire possession to the
king of terrors.

Matters being in this situation, one morning about 11 o'clock, I heard the
outer door of the jail loosed from it is bolts and bars. The door looking
through the little aperture into the dungeon was opened, and the name of
Buroughs was vociferated by the jailor. For him to have any business with me
at that time of the day, was what had not happened for thirty two days before,
and what could be his business now, I could not conceive. -- The objects of
life were so far out of my view, that I thought at first to pay no attention to
this call, but upon more mature reflection, I rose up as far as I was able, and
looked through the little hole. I there saw a man whom I did not recognize, a
stranger. He called me by my christian name, when he spoke to me. Who it was
addressing me thus familiarly I could not tell. I told him he had the advantage
of being unknown to me, while I was known to him. He asked me if I did not know
my uncle?! I surveyed him with some attention, and at length saw he was my
Mother's oldest Brother.

He appeared to examine my condition with as much attention as his situation
would admit of. He entered into some general observations upon the nature of my
folly in setting the jail on fire, and attempting to break out. He lamented the
distressed situation in which he found me, and handed me two dollars to supply
my present necessities. He then retired.

Immediately after this, the jailor's wife came into the (...) told me if I
wanted any victuals she would supply me with it. How this declaration sounded
in my ears, you will more readily conceive, than I can describe. To have a
prospect of a speedy supply of food, again recalled the desire of life. My
feelings were in arms, and all the vigor of desire was again rekindled in my
bosom. I told her I wished for something to eat immediately, and on her
informing there was nothing ready dressed, I besought her to fetch me some
bread, that I might be eating, whilst she was making ready something else. She
brought me a brown loaf weighing about four pounds.

With what pleasure did I view this precious morsel approaching me. I half
devoured it with my eyes, before I got hold of it. How sweet was the taste! how
exquisite the pleasure! Warner laid hold of the loaf and tore away about half
the contents. Yes, said I, thou fellow sufferer! eat and be satisfied! the day
of bitterness is over, we have the promise again of food, sufficient to supply
the calls of nature!

The bread was almost instantly gone, but the cries of hunger were not
appeased. Soon however the wife of the jailor came with strong tea and toast. I
was astonished she brought so little, but she understood my situation better
than I did myself. We eat up the recruit of food in a moment. I entreated for
more, but could not obtain it, under near an hour. When I had received my third
portion, and we had eaten it, Warner began to experience terrible pains in his
bowels, and I thought, for some time, he must have expired under the operation.

The same characters, who had made their appearance, when I was bound in the
manner described, now entered the dungeon again, and to work went hammers and
files, and in about half an hour, I was freed from the terrible load of iron,
under which I had groaned for thirty two days.

When I was liberated from these irons I had almost lost the use of my limbs;
my feet would hardly answer my desire for walking, for both of them had been
touched with the frost, and the irons on one of my legs had been put on so
tight as to cause a swelling, which ended in a sore about six inches long, and
which has never yet gotten entirely well.

I was removed out of the dungeon into an upper room, which was much more
comfortable than the one I had first occupied. Here I received food as often as
once in three hours, through the next day. Yet I could not be satisfied, my
appetite was keen as ever, even when I was so full as to prevent me from
swallowing more. This continued to be the case for the space of a fortnight
longer, when I found my appetite regulated upon the common scale of eating.

At this time, my Uncle wrote the following letter to my Father, giving him
some account of my situation in Northampton jail. --

Charlton, January 7 th, 1786. BELOVED BROTHER AND SISTER,
I HAVE been at Northampton twice within this month past, visited your son
Stephen each time. The first time, I found him chained down in the Dungeon, for
attempting to burn the jail; and also for attempting at another time, to dig
out through the chimney. I expostulated with him, with regard to his former
conduct, endeavoring to show him his folly in trying to break and burn the
jail. I obtained a promise that he should be let out of the Dungeon. The second
time I was there, which was this week, I found him in the common prison
unchained, I found him very needy each time, and particularly the first, his
allowance being very short. I let him have two dollars the first time, which I
believe he made a good use of; the second time I found him destitute of a
shirt, I got him a new one, an let him have thirteen and four-pence in cash.

As I am in a few days going to the General Assembly in Boston, it is not
likely I shall see him again until spring, although I have lately been in
something of a habit of visiting at Northampton. Being in haste and the bearer
in waiting shall only subjoin, that I am

your loving Brother. EBENEZER DAVIS.

Rev. E. BUROUGHS.

After the receipt of this letter, my Father wrote to an acquaintance of his in
Northampton, by the name of Strong, to pay some attention to my needs, afford
me what my necessities called for, and draw upon him for the amount of expenses
incurred.

By some strange fatality, when this letter arrived, Capt. Strong either
thought, or wished people to believe he thought it a forgery of mine. He paid
no attention to it, and the report was soon circulated, that I had forged a
letter in my father's name and sent to Capt. Strong; and even at a very modern
period a gentleman of some eminence, from Northampton, has repeated this false
report, in those places, where he knew it must be attended with very
disagreeable consequences to me.

And now, sir, permit me to digress a moment from the course of the narrative,
and offer a few remarks upon the very singular scenes through which I passed in
this jail.

As you, sir, have been long in the practice of the law, you will more readily
conceive of the illegality of these transactions.

The fundamental principles upon which our liberties and privileges are founded
are the trial by jury, that no unnatural and cruel punishments shall be
inflicted, and that a person shall never be punished, but by due course of law.
These leading principles, I believe, are never to be deviated from, except in
case of rebellion, when the state is in danger: then martial law may operate;
and even when* martial law has its operation, it is necessary to have matters
of fact established by evidence, and the voice of a majority of three, at
least, to warrant a punishment. In the punishments inflicted on me none of
these preliminaries have been attended to, but I have been subjected to the
arbitrary will of a petty tyrant. He punished when his inclination was for
cruelty, and inflicted what kind his pleasure directed. It may be urged that I
had made myself liable to punishment, by my conduct in jail. This being
supposed, which I by no means believe, yet, to punish me without a legal trial,
was as absolutely contrary to every dictate of law and justice, as though I had
been in fact innocent. -- It may further be said, that my sentence confining me
to the house of correction, made me liable to the punishment of the master of
the house at his discretion. If this be the case, we take away from one class
of citizens a right, which we have very justly been tenacious of, and have
subjected them to a state of as abject slavery, as the negroes in the
West Indies. And even if this doctrine is well founded, yet the injustice of
their conduct will receive no extenuation, for Warner was punished equal in
kind, though not in quantity, with myself, although be was only committed for
trial, and of course must be innocent in the eye of the law, until he should be
convicted.

As the narrative will not admit of treating this business largely, I have
given you only the leading ideas, which possess my mind upon the subject,
knowing your ability to state them in your own view, much more clearly and
logically, than what I shall do.

About this time Philips, of whom you have heard mention, was committed to this
jail, and lodged in the room where I was first confined; likewise one Hinds was
lodged in the room where I now was. This Hinds was committed for adultery with
the wife of one Wallace, and the woman herself was kept in the common
dwelling house of the jailor. One Norton, who was charged with the murder of a
man by the name of Brown, was committed about this time, and confined in the
dungeon. It appeared from all the information I could gather, that the
circumstances of this business were of the following nature, viz. Norton, being
a house-joiner, was on a new building, laying shingles, when Brown came by, and
in a playful manner, threw stubble at Norton a number of times, which impeded
him in his work. Norton was a man hasty and petulant in his temper. He told
Brown if he did not desist, he would come down and give him a floging. This
threat induced Brown to continue his folly with more eagerness, to show that he
did not regard Norton's threat. With this, Norton immediately descended the
ladder, came up to Brown, and a scuffle ensued. Some blows passed, at length
Norton gave Brown an unlucky stroke, after which he never breathed again.

Norton seeing that Brown was absolutely dead, made his escape, and left the
country. He had been absent about twelve months, when he became known in some
part of Connecticut where he resided, and was apprehended and brought to
Northampton for trial.

From experiencing the treatment* I had received in this place, I had, through
mistake, formed an idea, that Norton would have no chance for justice at the
time of his trial; I found likewise he entertained the same idea of this matter
himself. I sincerely wished him out of their hands, and felt willing to yield
him any assistance which was in my power.

Matters were in this situation when, one night about 12 o'clock, I heard a
whisper as though it came from out of the room, calling me by name. I sprang up
and ran to the window, but found the voice did not come from there. I then ran
to the door* -- but there again was disappointed. Where the noise came from, I
could not conjecture, which still continued. I at last bethought me of the
pump, leading into the vault, under the jail. I ran, and uncovering the pump,
could easily distinguish the voice of Norton, who had gotten down into the
vault. He entreated me to let him have a knife, for "by that," said he, "I can
make my escape." Had it been a diadem, for ought I know, I should have parted
with it, to have assisted him at this moment. I took the knife, and tied it to
a string, and let it down. I then covered the pump, lay down, and reflected
with a great degree of pleasure upon my affording some small assistance to
befriend a human being whom I never saw. Truly, said I, this conduct has been
guided by the principles of philanthropy.

I soon fell into a sound sleep: -- my slumber was refreshing and sweet: -- I
felt entirely at peace with myself, under the fullest conviction I had acted
according to the plan of the good Samaritan. I did not know that any in the
room were awake, at this time; therefore, I thought myself the only person
possessed with this secret. The next day, Hinds was taken out of the room where I
was, and let into the alley with the woman, ^^r a criminal connection with whom,
he was confined. They remained together about an hour, when he was put back
into the room where I was. (...), I heard a number of people entering the outer
door of the jail, and the clanking of chains, as though some internal purpose
(...) in agitation. I listened with attention, and soon heard the dungeon door
open: when, to my surprise, they cried out that Norton was gone. I did not
expect he would so soon have made his escape; and now felt the exultation of
joy, on the account of his success. My joy was soon damped, by hearing another
voice, soon after, crying out, "here he is! here he is!" Norton, at this time*
was so busy at work in the vault, that he never heard any of the uproar, until
a youngster, putting his head down into the hole he had made, saw him at work.

They soon got him up and made him fast in irons: after this, they came into my
room, took me out, carried me into the room where I was formerly confined, and
there made me fast, with my old chain.

Here were Philips and Warner. Soon after the jailor had left us, I began to
discover the amazing ability for contrivance which Philips possessed. He freed me
from my irons in ten minutes. We then all went to work to make the hole larger
through our pump into the vault under the jail. This we effected, to my
surprise, in the space of about six hours, so that a man, when stripped naked,
could let himself down through it into the vault. This hole was made in such a
manner, as entirely to secure it from the observation of those, who per^^^^ally
searched the jail, Even should they examine the hole itself, they would not
discover its ^^ing otherwise than what it was originally, so perfect was
Philips master of what he undertook, of such a nature. We wrought with
assiduity all the night following, and had made such progress in diging out,
that we arrived at the stones of the underpinning of the jail, they being sunk
about four feet into the earth.

The prisoners, in the room out of which I was taken, and especially Hinds,
were of opinion, they heard a noise, on the night that we were at work in the
vault, but the other prisoners suspecting how the case really was, and being
somewhat jealous of Hinds, endeavored to persuade him, that it was a matter of
mere conjecture, not founded in reality,

The next day, I found Hinds and his paramour were put into the alley together,
as formerly. Placing myself in a situation, where I could hear their
conversation, I became acquainted with a very singular and curious
circumstance, viz. that Hinds had entered into an agreement, to discover
whatever plan should be in agitation, for the purpose of breaking the jail, and
was to receive, as a compensation, liberty to be alone with his Miss, one hour
in the course of every day. That in consequence of this agreement, he had given
information of my helping Norton to my knife, and that he was about breaking
jail. In consequence of which information, Norton was discovered, and I was
again confined in irons.

Hinds told his prostitute, that he had heard the noise of somebody diging, and
believed Norton was attempting to break out again. This noise, said he,
continued through the whole night. After this interview, they were both
replaced in their former situation.

Soon after this, the jailor, and a number with him, made a visit to the
dungeon; carrying lights with them, in order to search every hole and corner.
After about an hour's investigation, they gave up the pursuit, as fruitless;
concluding that Hinds was mistaken in his conjecture, or else the breach was
^^made in an other room. They, therefore, came into the room where I was
confined, and after searching some time, concluded some mistake must have
existed, with regard to the conjecture of Hinds. The jailor even looked into
our pump, and could discover no manner of breach, which we had made: however,
he thought that the hole was so large, as possibly to admit a small boy down
it; and therefore, determined he would make it more secure.

You will naturally ask the question, with regard to my irons, whether this was
not a suspicious circumstance, as well as the noise? This business was fixed
equally secure with the other. After I had been liberated from my irons, by
Philips, he made them answer a number of other purposes, in the prosecution of
his plans; and likewise prepared them in such a manner, that I could slip them
on my leg, in half a minute, so as to wear the appearance of remaining closely
chained: this I always did, when I heard the jailor entering, so that by this
mean, I remained undiscovered.

After the search was over, I called to one of the prisoners in the room with
Hinds, -- Grinold by name, who was a person holding such conduct as Hinds had
been guilty of, in the utmost abhorrence, and related to him a simple account
of facts, respecting Hinds. Grinold immediately began an altercation with
Hinds; they soon proceeded to blows -- and Hinds, who was as great a coward as
he was a villain, soon cried enough; but this subterfuge did not answer his
purpose. Grinold still continued to bear him, alleging that such conduct as
Hinds was guilty of, did not entitle him to the common usage, under such
circumstances.

In the afternoon, the jailor came into my room, and the blacksmith with him,
and after taking up our pump, placed two bars of iron over the hole, and spiked
them to the timber. This, I thought, was an effectual security against our ever
again getting into the vault. But no sooner was the jailor gone, than Philips
showed me how mistaken I was in my conjectures. Not more than six minutes after
their departure, before we had all the irons loosed from their place: and that
was effected in this manner, viz. We took the chain that was around my leg, and
put it under one of the iron bars, and fetching it round, fastened it together,
over the bar, with a key made of one of the links. After this was done, we took
an oaken bench, about ten feet long, made of a slab, as much as four inches
thick, in the middle, and put the end of this bench into the bite of the chain;
placing it in such a manner as to gain a great purchase, we lifted the bar in
an instant, drawing out the spikes with ease.

Immediately upon the setting in of night, we again went to work, but had not
continued many minutes before the outer door of the jail opened, and in came a
number of people, and passing our door* went up to the prisoners over head.
Here Hinds had an opportunity of giving the hint to the jailor, that he had
something to communicate to him. Therefore, after the people had finished their
business with the prisoners, the jailor took Hinds out into the alley, and
there learned that we had broken again into the vault. Upon this information,
the jailor came into the room, and removed all the prisoners into the dungeon,
excepting myself, being in (...) so securely confined, that he remained at ease
with regard to me.

After all matters were again settled, I silently let myself out of irons, went
down into the vault, and wrought hard all night. By morning, I had dug through
the underpinning, gotten outside the jail, and all that remained now, was to
break through the frozen ground, which was about eighteen inches, as I
conjectured. I thought my operations through this night, had been so silent, as
to prevent a discovery from any one; but I was mistaken. The least noise in the
vault, founded strong through the pumps; these being the only apertures,
through which the sound could escape; therefore, its whole force was carried in
one direction.

In the morning, the jailor took Hinds out of the room, where he had left him
the night before, having put him into a separate room from Grinold, for fear of
a repetition of that chastisement, which he had so largely tasted the day
before; and by him received information, that somebody had been at work in the
vault all night. After this information, Hinds was put back into the same room
again, being a room-mate with Rood.

About ten o'clock in the morning, the jailor, attended with his blacksmiths,
came into the dungeon, and removed the prisoners back again into my room. They
searched the dungeon, with a great degree of care, to see whether the prisoners
had broken through into the vault, but not finding any breach, they were a^ a
loss to account for the report of Hinds, not conceiving it possible for me to
be the person, owing to my irons. However, after a while they came into my
room, and searching the irons around my leg, they discovered the deception,
seeing at once, with what case I could take my irons off my leg, when I wished.
They then searched the iron bars, which had been spiked to the floor, and found
them pulled up. They looked at me with a stare of astonishment, not conceiving
how it was possible for such a thing to be effected with what tools we had.

The blacksmith retired -- and in about an hour, returned -- bringing with him
an iron bar of twice the magnitude of the former, and six spikes, about twelve
inches in length, and ragged, in such a manner, as to prevent a bare
possibility of their ever being drawn. This iron bar he placed across the hole,
and with a heavy sledge, drove in the spikes, looking round exultingly on me,
saying "Buroughs, if you get down here again, I Will come and take your place."
After he had driven in his spikes, and put all things in order, he came and
examined my irons, fastened them on again, so as to prevent my getting loose,
as he vainly boasted.

I now lost all hopes of liberty, by that method which we had been pursuing,
viewing it impossible, ever to get the iron from across the hole, if I should
get free from my irons around my leg; but again, I was taught to admire the
vast ability of Philips; for before the outer door of the jail was locked, I
was freed from my irons, and the bar across the hole was torn away. This was
done while the jailor was shutting, bolting, and locking, the doors; so that
the noise which we made, might be so blended with his noise, that it should not
be distinguished by the prisoners over head, viz. Rood and Hinds, in such a
manner as to lead to a discovery. This had the desired effect. Not the least
suspicion was entertained of our operations, so quick was Philips, in seeing
every advantage, which oportunities offered, for the prosecution of our purpose.

However, I found all the abilities, which appertained to Philips, were set
down to my credit, so stronly were all possessed with the opinion, that I was the
soul of every enterprise, of such a nature. And from the efforts which he made
in this room, many were of the opinion that I had preternatural assistance. For
say they, "no irons will hold him, and no fortification will stand against him."

You will be curious, sir, I presume, to learn the method, by which we effected
such a surprising seat, in so short a time, as to liberate me from irons, and
tear away the huge iron bar, which was spiked so strongly across our pump-hole.
This I will give you a description of.

You will recollect that one end of my chain was fastened to the floor, the
other end around my leg, the length about ten feet; and the ring about my leg
was flat. The dug was a^ inch larger in diameter, than my leg.
Making the chain into a ring by the beforementioned process, we ran the end of
our oaken bench into it, and placed the ring, which was around my leg, under
the bench, and bent it down ^ight to my leg; then turned it one quarter round,
and bent it back again: this we repeated three or four times, and the ring
broke. We, immediately, after this, hoisted the bolt confining the chain, by
the same process.

After all, we took up the pump, and fixed our chain around the iron, on the
pump-hole, as formerly, and proceeded again according to the same plan. I
thought it a piece of madness to think of drawing these spikes, and made
observations to that amount: Philips paid no attention to what I remarked, but
pursued his plan: and when we all jumpped on to the bench, to pry up the
ironbar, the heads of the spikes flew off, in a moment; the bar was torn from
its place, and the whole jail trembled.

I now considered my escape as certain, having nothing but the frozen ground to
break through, which I expected to effect, in the course of an hour. Therefore,
when night progressed so far in her course, as to carry people generally to
their beds, we all stripped, and went down into the vault, with as much silence
as possible, that we might keep Rood and Hinds in ignorance of our operations;
but this we found impossible. We soon heard them take off the cover from their
pump, and listen to the noise in the vault: However, as we soon expected to
make our escape, we did not so much dread their hearing us at work, not
expecting they could give any information to the jailor, till next morning,
when we should be far from his restraining power.

We were vigorous in our operations, till we had broken the frozen ground, so
as to discern the snow -- I communicated this circumstance to Warner, who was
near me, and he, imprudently, in the warmth of his feelings, told one near him,
that in ten minutes we should be at liberty. This he spoke so loud, as to be
heard by Rood and Hinds.

They hearing this, immediately called to the jailor, and informed him that we
were breaking out. The alarm flew rapidly; people gathered into the jail-yard,
with lanterns, and discovered the hole, which was almost large enough for a man
to pass through, whilst others entered the jail, and turned us all into the
dungeon.

CHAP. XVII.
Wake the lion's loudest rear,
Clot his shaggy (...) with gore,
With flashing fury bid his eye balls shine;
Meek is his savage sullen soul (...) (...)!

OUR fond expectations of liberty were again blasted. We found ourselves
confined in the dungeon, and two spies to watch all our motions. It appeared
that Fortune delighted in raising my hope, in order to tantalize me with
disappointment. There was a strange fatality attending all my undertakings! The
most flattering circumstances were, in the end, attended with effects of the
severest nature. Misery was my portion, notwithstanding every effort to the
contrary. I now saw no way but that I must lay my account, to wear away the
three long redious years, to which I was sentenced, in jail!

Early the next morning, I was, contrary to my expectations, taken out of the
dungeon, and reconveyed into my old room, which was considerably larger than
the dungeon, and there saw preparations for punishing me again, with the
horse-whip. I had a sharp pointed penknife about me, which had been often
sought for in vain, by the jailor. I pulled out this penknife, and opened it,
and told the jailor, I would positively put him to death, if he dared to
inflict that punishment on me again. I stood, at this time, in one corner of
the room, where I could not be attacked only on one side. The jailor ordered
those with him to take hold on me, and secure me; but none chose to run the
risk: for I had declared, with equal determination, that the first, who offered
to approach me, should feel the weight of my arm.

Matters remaining in this situation, the grisly locking tyrant was abashed and
confounded, not daring to approach me himself, to execute any of his hellish
plans, -- he therefore gave up the object.

About this time, the blacksmith and his apprentices came into my room, with
all my former load of irons, to confine me as he formerly had done, in the
dungeon. Having succeeded so well with regard to the punishment of whipping, I
determined to try the same experiment again, and see whether it would keep me
out of irons. I, therefore, refused to have any chains put on me. The
blacksmith came toward me in a threatening manner, with his hammer lifted, as
though he would strike me; but seeing me stand, as though I was determined to
execute my threat, with my penknife, he gave back. They soon left the irons
lying on my floor, and all departed from the room. I expected they were gone
after a recruit, but in this, my fears were disappointed.

About one o'clock, the same day, I was taken out of this room, and put into
the upper loft, with Grinold. Philips and the rest, who were in the room with
him, were taken out of the dungeon, and put back into their former place of
abode, after the breach was secured. I believe it was effectually secured this
time, for I never heard of their breaking it again: but by what process they
made it so strong, as to prevent the prisoners from making another breach, I do
not know, never being put in that room any more. It was currently reported that
the devil had assisted me, in my attempts to break jail. Many foolish people
would apply to me for a discovery of matters unknown to themselves; as things
lost, stolen, etc. -- and when I refused to pay any attention to their
application, alleging that it was out of my power, they would look wisely at
each other, and observe, "that I was not permitted to do such things, it being
against the articles of my league!" --

It being now the last of January, if I rightly recollect, news was brought us,
that all the prisoners, who were sentenced to the house of correction, were to
be removed to Castle-Island, in the harbor of Boston, there to be confined to
hard labor. This news had but little effect on my mind, being as yet entirely
ignorant of the place, its situation, the state of prisoners on it, or the
treatment which I should receive there. The idea of being again carried through
the country, in the manner I had formerly been, a spectacle to surrounding
fools, gave me most sensible pain; but whether I should be in a better
situation there, than what I was in at Northampton, was wholly unknown, and I
had no evidence, by which I could form my conjecture.

Early one morning, a number of deputy sheriffs came into the jail, and bade us
prepare for our journey to the Castle. They chained the prisoners two together,
placing the chain about one leg of each, then put them into a sleigh, and drove
off.

When I came to breathe a pure air, and to contrast the prospect of surrounding
objects, with the gloomy mansions which I had left, you cannot conceive the
ardor of my feelings for liberty. Every object, which my eyes beheld, was a
loud proclaimer of my miserable state.

Oh! said I, to myself, could I run about like yonder little boy, who,
regardless of his privilege, looses its enjoyment, -- then should I feel like
the lark, that, escaped from its cage, flits into the air, and claps its wings
for joy. I wondered people should feel so indifferent about my situation. I
equally wondered at their not skipping with joy, because they were at liberty
themselves. I thought if they had known the feelings of my heart, they would
have arisen to a man, and granted me that liberty, which my heart so ardently
panted after. It appeared to me, sometimes, that the sensations of my mind must
be apparent to them, and that under this circumstance, they would actually
grant me relief. Yet, in the bitterness of my soul, I found these ideas all
chimerical.

Certainly, said I, did those very characters, who were instrumental in placing
me in this state of confinement, feelingly, know my whole heart, they could not
resist the language of nature so far, as not to wish me at liberty. I know that
even the Pelhamites themselves would have cried his punishment is enough -- his
sufferings are equal to his crimes. -- Then, why will ye yet torment me? Why
will you gall me any longer, with the chain of slavery? -- The answer is, the
course of law has brought you to this, and we cannot reverse its mandate. But,
said I, what is law, but the voice of the people? and what is the voice of the
people, but the language of the heart? Does not every day's experience teach
us, that cruel and severe punishments serve to harden, rather than reform the
vicious? Ought we not to consider ourselves as members of one and the same
family, and to adopt those rules and regulations among ourselves, as a society,
which will, in their operation, be congenial with such an idea? Surely, this is
the idea, which the language of nature strongly inculcates upon our minds.
Should we not shudder with horror, if a Father treated his child, as the laws
of society treat each other? When do we hear of an unnatural parent chaining
his child, confining him from the enjoyment of liberty, and placing him in such
a situation, as to make him an object of contempt and scoff to the rest of his
children, without feeling that indignation in our bosoms, which such an
unnatural action merits? Between parents and children, the voice of nature is
heard in its simple state, without being perverted by the sophistry of those,
who are blind to the laws, which bind mankind together, as brethren of the same
family. Is there not a spirit of nobleness in man, which (...) the lash of
tyranny, in whatever shape it (...), which manifests all the love and
partiality of children, toward those laws, which discover the care and
protection of a parent toward them? View the conduct of the Parent of nature,
toward his children! "He causes his son to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust." He grants his parental
kindness to all his children, without distinction, and watches over the wants
of the smallest part of the works of his hands. Is his example worthy of
imitation* or are we wiser than our Maker? I have often read with the highest
delight a fable invented by Dr. Franklin, to show, in a familar manner, the
arrogance of man, in his attempts to place his own wisdom, above that of Deity.
The Doctor represents Abraham as grossly abusing a stranger, whom he had
invited into his tent, because he was an idolater, and did not worship God
according to his method. The fable states, that at midnight; God called unto
Abraham, and inquired for the stranger, Abraham recapitulated his treatment* of
him, which was done said he, because he worshipped not thee." God took
occasion, from this, to show Abraham the folly of his reasoning, for said he,"
have I nourished and cherished this man ninety and nine years, notwithstanding
his rebellion against me, and could not thou, who art thyself a sinner, bear
with him one night."

As we traveled through the country, I again found the curiosity of people had
brought them together in many places, where we stopped* there a philosophic
mind would have found ample scope, for contemplating the human character. We
cannot discern the operation of the human heart in man, until we are in such a
situation, as to prevent his wearing a disguise. This situation must be very
abject, and then we become of so little consequence in society, that the notice
of man is remove from us, and he acts in our presence without disguise; viewing
our approbation or disapprobation as immaterial to his prosperity. Under such a
situation, the human character becomes really known, and he, who has ability
with this knowledge to learn such regulations as will tend, in their operation,
to promote the highest good of society, is called upon, by that duty which man
owes to man, to assert the cause of truth, with regard to these important
points.

Under this view of matters, I have clearly stated my sentiments to you, upon
these subjects. I know you to be a man of so much observation, as to know, that
severe laws have the most fatal tendency, not only upon the criminal part of
society, but likewise upon every member. Every thing, which tends to destroy
the principles of humanity, serves to eradicate from the human breast that
benevolence and compassion toward mankind, which is the bond of perfection in
society.

When we see the father of a family conducting with mildness toward all his
children, treating them all as equal members of his household, and never
permitting the ebullitions of wrath and malignity to operate toward any; at
the same time, we see them inheriting their fathers meekness, and compassion.
Benevolence marks their ways, and harmony brightens all their paths. But on the
contrary, where we see the parent becomes the tyrant, punishing the faults of
his children, with the unrelenting hand of rigor, executing judgment unmingled
with mercy; we see a family possessing the feelings of cruelty, lost to the
god-like principle of mercy, at war with themselves, and governed by those
ferocious feelings, which disturb the tranquillity of mankind.

The same principles operate upon the great family of mankind. Where we find
severe laws operating among a people, or mild laws executed in a cruel manner,
we see the influence of this, upon the manners of the people, to be very great.
It gradually roots out the feelings of benevolence and compassion, and in their
room, implants the sentiments of cruelty and severity.

The body of mankind can judge of things only in a very partial manner. They
are taught, in the first place, to revere the laws; they are taught, in the
second place, to believe that the laws are founded in justice: from this
consideration, they are lead to treat others, as they see the law treats its
subjects; to cherish the same spirit, which they see manifested in the
execution of the laws; therefore, if the law, or the mode of executing it, is
severe and cruel, they will of consequence imbibe a spirit of severity and
cruelty.

Having treated these matters so largely in our conversation, it will be
needless for me to say more on the subject. I believe we are both agreed in
this sentiment viz. that the laws and the manner of their execution do,
ultimately, form the manners and morals of a people; and the best criterion, to
form an estimate of the laws and regulations of a people by, is their manners
and morals.

On the first day of our journey toward the Castle, we dined at Belchertown.
Here I found an assemblage of many characters. Some were led here by an anxious
desire of seeing me perform some feats of dexterity, in eluding my guard,
concluding that I should not remain with them, longer than to arrive at this
tavern. Whether they expected I should evaporate in a flash of fire, or
disappear in a cloud of smoke, or whether they thought I should, Faustus like,
fix my guards, like pillars of stone, immoveably, to some spot, until I could
leisurely walk away, I do not know; but it was apparent that something they
expected would be done. The least movement I made, their eyes were upon me, the
least word I spoke, their ears were open, and their attention alive. When I
moved they made way for me, as though destruction would fall upon them, if they
obstructed my passage. It gave me pain to see the apparent fear, that many
manifested upon this occasion. I endeavored to persuade them that their fears
were groundless, but all to no purpose. Some I found took this opportunity of
showing their courage to the world, by letting the bystanders see, they were
not afraid to insult me. One man even ran his fist into my face, making his
boast that he would venture me, as great a man as I was, but took very good
care to keep so far distant from me, that I could not reach him, being chained
to Glazier Wheeler, so that I could not move, only when he moved, and the old
man having the infirmities of age upon him, could only move with a degree of
moderation.

While the scoundrel continued his insults, one of the sheriffs came into the
room, I think his name was White, and observing the unprovoked abuse, struck
the villain across the head, with the hilt of a hanger, and felled him to the
floor. This spoiled the fun of this courageous fellow.

After dinner was over, the Landlady came to the high sheriff, and informed
him, that one of her silver spoons was missing, and she said it was impossible
for any one to get it out of her cupboard, which had not been unlocked, unless
it was Buroughs; therefore, the high sheriff set about searching me for a
silver spoon, stolen out of a room, in which it was known I had never been, but
before the search was over, the good lady informed him, that the spoon was
found.

We soon moved from this, and arrived that night at Brookfield.- Here I found a
little respite from that perpetual attention, to the various whims, false
opinions, and strange ideas, which people had formed of my character. But even
here, I was accosted by a grave looking old gentleman, smoking his pipe in the
corner. I had observed him sometime, sitting in silence, but now and then
glancing his eye upon me, at length taking his pipe leisurely from his mouth,
spitting carefully in the (...), and adjusting his looks, with some precision,
he turned and addressed me as follows: "Buroughs, I have had a desire to see
you, for some time, I have heard much of you. -- I know your uncle Colonel
Davis, and had he given ear to my advice, he would have been a great gainer;
but he did not, and the time is now passed, for him to profit by his dear
bought experience; however, I can give you advice, which you will find to your
advantage, should you be endowed with wisdom sufficient to follow it. Your
extraordinary conduct has made mankind form very strange conjectures concerning
you, and many throw a great degree of blame upon your conduct; but as for
myself, I cannot say I think your crimes unpardonable, or indeed very heinous,
excepting one, and that was, the flagrant transgression of the principles of
gratitude toward the Clergyman, whose clothes and watch you stole."

Here I interrupted the Orator, in the midst of his discourse, by my ardor to
set him right in his mistaken opinon of this business; I told him the story of
my stealing a watch and suit of clothes from a Clergyman was entirely
unsounded, as no such circumstance had happened to any Clergyman in this
country; that this was an old anecdote, new vampped and handed to the world, as
a modern occurrence, the approbium of which, a good natured populace were
willing to fix on me.

He looked me full in the face, with a sarcastic sneer, pulled a news paper out
of his pocket, and turned me to a paragraph, relating that I was the person,
who had stolen the clothes, watch, etc. After I had read this paragraph, the
old gentleman said. "Now Mr. Buroughs, I hope you will not undertake to
correct my judgment again. When I form an opinion, it is not on slight
evidence, therefore, since you have set up your opinion, in opposition, to
mine, I shall let you pursue It; you may repent when it is too late."

He then turned from me, put his pipe into his mouth, and remained silent the
rest of the evening, notwithstanding all my endeavors for a further explanation
upon this business.

The next day we proceeded on our journey. In the course of this day, I could
have made my escape, if I had been chained to any body but Glazier Wheeler. I
went out of the house, where we stopped to dine, accompanied by only one
person, and he, being impatient at staying out in the cold, went into the
house, and we remained by ourselves, as much as half an hour. I proposed our
escape to Wheeler -- but the severity of the weather, the infirmities of age,
and the uncertainty of success, operated so strongly on his mind, as to deter
him from concurring in my proposal. We returned, and I flattered myself, that
this apparent instance of my peaceably remaining confined, when I had an
opportunity of making, at least, a trial for escaping, would make my keepers
more remiss in guarding me; but in this I was disappointed.

I found the guard were all in commotion, when we went into the house, at our
being left alone so long; and they took special care ^^ver to fall into the
same error again.

In the course of this day, we made a stage at a public house, where I found a
number of the Pelhamites. They had been to Boston, and were on their return.
They were affected at seeing my condition! They dropped the tear of compassion!
They pitied me! They offered me, as a token of their benevolent feelings, as
much punch as I would drink. Whether some of their more benevolent feelings, on
the present occasion, did not proceed from the efficacy of the punch, which
they themselves had drunken, is a question, I shall by no means undertake to
answer.

In the course of this day's journey, we met with Mr. Baldwin, minister of
Palmer, of whom mention has already been made. The good old gentleman was truly
affected: and, in stead of reflections, which I expected, he lamented my
untimely fall; wished I might meet with some alleviating circumstance in my
sentence, before the expiration of my confinement.

We arrived at Little Cambridge, and tarried all night. The house where we put
up was filled with people. I found the good lady of the house giving her
daughters a lecture, on the propriety of keeping out of the room, where the
prisoners were. But, as these young females possessed the curiosity natural to
their sex, they endeavored to pursuade their ma'am, that the danger, which she
feared, was more in her fancy, than reality. The prudent mother, however, cut
her daughters short in their arguments, by telling them, in the most peremptory
manner, that they should not go into the room where Buroughs was; for, said
she, "he has a faculty to lead any body astray: why, there is Pelham now, where
he preached -- he undertook to preach to people, that it was lawful for him, to
lie with all the women in town, and he carried his point so far, as to lie with
every man's w^^e; and then ran away and left them; but if he should offer such
a thing to me, I Would show him, he want in Pelham."

After this harangue of the careful mother, her conduct through the remainder
of the evening did not manifest so great a fear on her own account, as what she
had shown on account of her daughters: but whether she meant to give me an
opportunity of making such proposals, as on her part, would lead to a discovery
of her impregnable chastity, or whether her attention was the pure effect of
humanity, I shall not undertake to tell, not being in a capacity to give
information upon that subject, having made no advances toward her, through the
course of a long tedious evening.

A sober-faced clergyman entered into conversation with me, upon the events of
my life. I found him entertaining all the acrimony attached to offended
dignity. Says he, "what an enormous crime you have been guilty of, by bringing
an irreparable disgrace upon the order of Clergy, in assuming that character,
with all your vile hypocrisy about you; and as though that was too little, you
preposterously exhibited the works of others, and not your own. You have taken
the most direct measures to overturn all ^^^er in civil and religious
societies, by making the character of a clergyman appear in a ludicrous point
of view to the world; a character, of all others, which ought to be held most
sacred: and which, of all others, has the greatest influence to the good order
of society."

My answer to the clergyman was to this effect. "Seeing, sir, that you are
professedly the ambassador and representative of him, who has commanded us,
"in lowliness of mind to esteem others better than ourselves;" who was despised
and rejected of mankind; who was set at naught by the rulers; and declared that
his kingdom was not of this world: I say, sir, that seeing your dignity in this
character is encroached upon by my conduct, I feel most heartily sorry for
touching your highness in this respect."

The clergyman was stung with this reply, and retorted, that, "I might find
that the government would teach me how to carry myself to my superiors. After I
had been kept to hard labor on the Castle two or three years, my courage would
be cooled, and my manners mended, etc."

We arrived at Boston the next day, about 11 o'clock -- stopped and dined at
the Sign of the Lamb. I found many of my former acquaintance now shunned me, as
though I carried some pestilential disorder about me. One in a particular
manner, who was a class-mate of mine in College, coming in sight of the sleigh,
in which the prisoners were conveyed, and discerning me in the sleigh, stopped
short -- ran into a shop contiguous,*and viewed me through the window, with
great attention.

Afte dinner, we were taken to the commissary's store, who provided for the
Castle, and all the prisoners, excepting myself, received their clothes; which
consisted of a party-colored suit. I was entirely willing to be excused from
receiving this bounty from the state.

After the clothing had been delivered, we were taken to long wharf, put on
board a small sail-boat, and left the main land, for the Island, on which the
Castle stood. As we put off from the wharf, the people standing on this, and
the neighboring wharves, gave three cheers -- declarative of their
satisfaction, in our leaving them, for a state of confinement. We returned
three cheers, immediately after; endeavoring to retort their insult, by letting
them understand, that we were also glad to leave them, even for a state of
confinement.

We soon arrived on the island, were conveyed into the Castle, our irons taken
off, and we left to view the situation, in which we were now confined.

This Island is situated three miles below the town of Boston, its figure being
nearly circular, containing eighteen or twenty ac^^s of land. The main channel
of the river runs on the east side of this island, very near the shore, and not
wider than would be sufficient for two vessels to sail up abreast -- of
course, the east side of the island is much the strongest fortified. A platform
extends the greater part of the east side, on which are mounted cannon,
twenty-four and thirty-two pounders. This platform is nearly the height of the
island.

Nearly on a level with the water, at full tide, is a place where another tier
of cannon were placed, during the time in which the British had possession of
it; but destroyed by them, and never since rebuilt. The remaining part of the
island is but very indifferently guarded by fortifications.

The buildings, when I came on to this island, were the Governor's house,
standing upon the most elevated spot on the island, under which was what was
called the bum-proof, in which we were confined; a stone magazine, barracks for
the officers and soldiers, and a blacksmith's shop.

On this island I found a company of fifty soldiers, commanded immediately by
three officers, viz. In the first place, Lieutenant Perkins, formerly holding
the title of Major in the continental army. Secondly, Lieut* Treat, and
thirdly,-Burbeck, holding an Ensign's commission, if I mistake not, and doing
the duty of gunner. The Lieutenant Governor of the state, was Captain of this
company.

When I first came on to this island, there were in all, only sixteen
prisoners. The principle part of them were kept at work in the blacksmith's
shop. The remainder did little or nothing. Our provision was one pound of
bread, and three fourths of a pound of meat, per day.

The officers, who were in commission here, were of the following description,
viz. First, major Perkins a man of about six feet high, well proportioned, and
strong built; possessed with care, fidelity, and great attention to his duty, as
a military character. He was a man of sentiment and feeling, His courage was
unimpeachable, having tried it myself, as thoroughly as was necessary to learn
that circumstance: notwithstanding his personal courage, he stood in such fear
of his superiors in society, that he could not always maintain such a state of
independency, as to act himself. His military education had taught him
obedience to his superiors, and he now maintained that principle, with a degree
of mechanical exactness.

Major Perkins had a family living on the island with him. This family
consisted of Mrs. Perkins, whose amiable and compassionate conduct has left the
most grateful feelings in my heart, and a number of children,how many, I do not
recollect.

Lieutenant Treat was a man about five feet ten inches in height, trim built,
and slender; more fond of appearing in the fashion, with regard to his dress,
the cock of his hat, etc. than he was to raise the garrison to the highest
pitch of military fame. There was nothing very positive in his character. He
was by no means a bad man, and as for his goodness, it did not appear with such
eclat, as to place him in a very conspicuous situation in society.

Ensign Burbeck, may be described by comparing him to a petulant boy, of about
fourteen years old, who had never been taught or restrained by parental
authority. He was more fond of his dogs, than of any other society; playing
with them by the day together.

Immediately after my confinement on this island, I began to look about, to see
whether a possibility for escaping remained. I viewed the building in which I
was confined. It was made of bricks, the walls of which were five feet thick,
laid in cement, which was much harder than the bricks themselves.

I searched every corner for a spot upon which I could work, without detection,
-- our room being searched every day, to see whether the prisoners had made any
attempt to break away. I, at length, hit upon a place. There was a chimney at
one end of our room, grated in a very strong manner, about twelve feet above
its funnel, which was sufficiently large for a man to go up. About three feet
above the mantel-piece of this fireplace, I concluded to begin my operation.
Here I could work, and not have my labors discovered, unless very critical
search was made up the chimney. I had not been at work long, before I had made
a beginning of a hole sufficiently large to crawl through; I then took a board,
and blacking it like the chimney-back, made it of the proper size, and put it
into the hole, so that the strictest search could produce no discovery.

The prisoners in the room with me were seven in number. These prisoners were
all turned out to work, about sunrise, when the doors of the prison were again
shut, and not opened again until 12 o'clock, when the prisoners came from work,
and continued half an hour: they were then taken back again to work, and there
remained until sunset. Therefore, I had as much as sixteen hours in the
twenty-four, in which I could work upon this brick wall, which work I
continued, with the most unremitting attention.

The labor was incredible! I could, in the first place, work only with a large
nail -- rubbing away the bricks gradually, not daring to make the least noise,
lest the sentries, who stood round the prison, should overhear me at work, and
thereby become discovered. One night I rubbed the bricks so hard, as to be
overheard by the sentry, standing on the other side of the wall. The alarm was
immediately given, and the guard and officers rushed into the room, to detect
us in our operations. Fortunately, I overheard thesentry tell the sergeant of
the guard, that Buroughs was playing the devil in the jail. The sergeant ran
to inform the officers, and I had but just time to put my board in its place,
and set down to greasing my shoes, when the officers entered, and with a great
degree of sternness, inquired where I had been at work? I told them that I had
been rubbing some hard soot off the chimney, and grinding it fine, to mix with
the grease, and put on to my shoes. They laughed at my nicety about my shoes,
that I should wish for slick shining shoes in this situation.

Major Perkins, knowing my inattentiveness to dress, could not so readily
believe that blacking my shoes was the only object in view: he, therefore, made
a very strict search for some other matter, which should account for the noise,
the centry had heard* but, after a fruitless pursuit of such an object, they
gave over their search, concluding, that one among the thousand strange whims,
which marked my character, had prompted me to set about blacking my shoes, at
that time.

After they were gone, I felt as strong a disposition to laugh at them, for the
deception under which they were laboring, as they did, whilst present, to
laugh at me, for the whim of greasing and blacking my shoes.

This temporary check was of the utmost importance, in my further prosecution
of this business. It made me more careful for the future, not to pursue my
labors with too much impatient impetuosity, a falling I ever was subject to.

The prisoners in the room were merry, on the occasion of my turning the
suspicion of the officers, so entirely from the real object, to another very
foreign from it. They thought it a manifestation of ability. In fine, I had
gained such an ascendency over the prisoners, that they implicitly gave up to
my opinion, in all our little matters: and more particularly, when any
contentions arose among them, I generally succeeded in amicably terminating the
difficulty, without their proceeding to blows.

My conduct toward all, I determined, should be marked with the strictest
impartiality. I not only satisfied my own mind, in the business, but likewise
took the greatest pains to show them, that I meant to be an impartial friend,
toward all parties. When they fell into disputes and bickerings, I would
address them to the following purport, viz. "Gentlemen," (even the convicts
were fond of good words, and would listen, when I called them gentlemen, much
sooner than when I addressed them by a less elevated epithet) "our situation,
you are all sensible, is very miserable; do the best we can, it will not be
tolerable: but when, in addition to slavery, we render our society hateful and
irksome to each other, by falling into broils and wrangles, it then becomes a
hell indeed, and answers the strongest wish of our inveterate foes. I know
there are many circumstances calculated to harrass and sour your minds; to
render you peevish and petulant; to make you at variance with the whole race of
mankind: but, to indulge these feelings, only renders your case worse, rather
than better; it gratifies your enemies, and serves every purpose, which they
could desire: therefore, as wise men, I expect you will act with prudence, with
regard to your own comfort, and to the views of those, who wish you ill."

Even the convicts had reason sufficient to hear these arguments with
attention, and they generally practiced according to this direction: so strong
is that principle, in all men, to listen to the voice of friendship.

I determined to be more careful, in prosecuting my labor on the wall, for the
future, and check that impatience, which often hurried me on, beyond the
dictates of prudence. I now wrought with the greatest caution, and made slow,
but sure advances. After I had been employed in this business about a week, I
found I could work to greater advantage, if I had a small iron crow; therefore,
I ordered one of the prisoners, who wrought in the shop, to make me one, about
a foot long, and sharp at one end. This he found an opportunity to do,
undiscovered by the overseer, and brought it to me.

I found that with this crow, I could pry off half a brick at a time, without
the least noise: after I had worn a hole with my nail, sufficiently large, to
thrust in my crow. The rubbish which I took out of the wall, I put, every
night, into a tub, standing in our room for necessary occasions, and this was
emptied by one of the prisoners, every morning, into the water.

After I had labored with unceasing assiduity, for two months, I found, one
night, after I had pried away a brick, that I could run my arm out of the
prison, into the open air. This circumstance made my heart leap with joy. After
such a length of labor, to find my toils crowned with such apparent success,
gave me a tone of pleasure, of which you can have no idea.

Upon examination, I found the breach through the wall, was just below a
covered way, so that it would remain unseen, in the daytime, unless discovered
by some accident. I had measured the height of the covered way, by a
geometrical operation,-not being permitted to come near it: and this was done
with an instrument made by my penknife. That penknife which had done me such
excellent service in Northampton jail.

When the prisoners saw my measurement was exact, their idea of my profound
knowledge was greatly raised; and they appeared to entertain the most sanguine
assurance, that their liberty was certain, when their operations were directed
under my auspices.

After I had found the hole through the wall was entirely secreted by the
covered way, I proceed to make it sufficiently large to pass through.

After all this was accomplished, one difficulty still remained. The centry
standing on the covered way, would undoubtedly hear us in going out at this
hole; and moreover, if we should be so fortunate as to get, unheard, into the
covered way, yet we must come out of that, within five feet of the place, where
he stood; and therefore, could not prevent a discovery.

Under these circumstances, we found it necessary to lie quiet, until some
rainy night should remove the centry from his stand on the covered way, to some
place of shelter. This was generally the case, when the weather was foul, or
uncomfortable, unless some special cause should detain him to this particular
spot. I recollect, that soon after the officers had found me blacking my shoes
with soot, the sentinels kept their post, invariably, on the covered way, in
every kind of weather; but they had, by this time, become more at case in their
feelings, and consequently, would, at such time, retire into an alley, leading
through the bomb-proof.

CHAP. XVIII.
Where now my phrenzy's pompous furniture?
The cob-web cattage, with its ragged wall
Of mouldering mud, is royalty to me!
The Spider's most attenuated thread
Is cord, is cable, to man's tender tie
On earthly bliss; it breaks at every breeze.

WE did not wait many days for the happy moment, before we heard the sentry
leave his station on the covered way, and enter the alley, for shelter from the
rain.

About 11 o'clock at night, I made the necessary arrangements, for the
expedition. The Island being in a circular form, I ordered seven men to go
round it to the south, whilst I went round to the north. The reason, why I did
this, was of the following nature, viz. There was a wharf on the western shore
of this island, where the boats were kept, and a sentry placed over them.

It was necessary, after we had escaped out of the bomb-proof, to procure a
boat, in order to transport ourselves off the island; and as there were none,
except what were immediately under the eye of the sentry, the only alternative,
which remained, was to make the sentry a prisoner, and carry him off with us.

As this was a business, in which some nicety of conduct was necessary, I chose
to trust no one to execute it, but myself; and therefore, ordered the seven
prisoners round the island, a different way, from what I went myself, and
directed them to advance to within fifteen rods of the sentinel, and make a
noise, sufficient to attract his attention toward them. This would bring the
sentry between me and the other seven prisoners; and when he was turned toward
them, I should be at his back.

Having made these arrangements, all the prisoners, silently, crawled out of
the hole, following them myself, as soon as I saw they all had passed, without
any accident. We all met at the spot appointed. I told the men to be cautious*
not to be in a hurry -- not to be in any purturbation -- but to proceed
leisurely and considerately, to the spot appointed. I told them to be five
minutes in getting to the spot.- I then left them. I hastened round, and
arrived as near to the sentry as I thought prudent, about one minute and an
half, before I heard the noise from the other men. At the noise, the sentry
turned, and hailed. "Who comes there?" No answer was made. Immediately on
seeing the attention of the sentry turned from me, I arose from my position
flat on the ground, and advanced as near as twenty feet, and lay down again.
Immediately the noise from the seven men was again renewed -- and the sentry's
attention was fixed to the object of the noise. He again hailed, in a very
peremptory manner, cocked his gun, and made ready to fire.

By this time, I had arisen from the ground, and advanced to within about eight
feet of the sentry, when I heard the piece cock, and saw him present it! I
immediately darted at him, seized him in an instant, and clapped my hand over
his mouth, to prevent him from making a noise, which should alarm the other
soldiers on guard. When I first laid hold of him, he started -- and attempted
to get from me, making a noise through his nose, as though very much terrified:
crying "eh! eh! eh!" I told him that the least noise from him should produce
instant death; that I would rip his guts out, the first moment he proved
refractory.

After I had sufficiently terrified him, I took my hand from his mouth, and
told him that no harm should befall him, so long as he behaved in a peaceable
manner. I took his gun and cartridge-box from him.

The other prisoners now coming up, we all went into the barge, carrying ten
oars, and put off.

It was now about half an hour past twelve, at night, it being extremely dark
and rainy, and nothing to steer by, except mere conjecture. We were ignorant of
the time of tide, whether it was ebbing or flowing; and consequently could not
tell which way we drifted: however, we determined to row until we came to some
land.

I set myself in the stern sheets, steering the boat, Richards, the sentry, set
in the bottom of the boat, between my legs. The gun with the fixed bayonet lay
by me, and the cartridge-box hanging by my side. The other men were at their
oars, rowing the boat. We had proceeded about far enough, as we judged, to be
in the middle of the channel, between the island and Dorchester, whether we
meant to direct our course.

It was now demanded of me, by one of the men, who ^at forward, rowing the
boat, what I meant to do with Richards? As I did not know where we should in
fact land, I was undetermined in my own mind, what I should do with him, when I
came to land, and gave an answer to that amount. The person asking this
question, looking upon his escape as certain, began to put on airs of
consequence, and answered me in a sarcastical manner, "well, Captain Buroughs,
as you have had the command until you do not know what to do, it is best for
some other person to take it, who does know what to do;" and then turning
himself to Richards, continued his discourse, "and as for you, Mr. Richards,
you will please to walk overboard, that we may not, after this, hear any of your
tales told to your brother swads A (...) word signifying soldiers.
. If you walk over without fuls, it is well, if not, you shall be thrown over,
tied neck and heels."

When I heard this insolent treatment, and dastardly language, I could hardly
conceive what it meant.

Unprovokedly to throw Richards into the water, was a manifestation of a
language of the heart, which appeared to me so unnatural, that I could not
believe the person using it, to be serious. Yet I could not conceive any
propriety in using it in any other light. Richards himself was terrified. He
began to supplicate me, in the most moving terms, to save him from the
destruction, which was ready to fall upon him.

His entreaties made such an impression upon my mind, that I should have given
him my assistance, if I had been opposed by every man in the boat: however, I
did not yet believe, he was in that degree of danger, which he appeared to
apprehend; but was soon undeceived by the three forward hands shipping their
oars, and coming aft.

I endeavored to expostulate, but to no effect. I saw they were resolutely bent
on their diabolical purpose! I saw the disposition of the infernals pictured in
their operations. I let go the helm, started up, and swore by the ALMIGHTY,
that I Would send the first to hell, who dared lay a hand on Richards. The poor
fellow, at this time, lay in the bottom of the boat, trembling with agony, and
crying in the most piteous manner. The blood flew quick through my veins. The
plaintive cries of Richards vibrated upon my heart, and braced every nerve. At
this moment the first villain, who had proposed this infernal plan, laid hold
of me by the shoulder, to prevent my interposing between Richards and the
others, who were about throwing him overboard.

When I found his hand gripping my shoulder, I immediately reached my arm over
his back, caught him by the waist-band of his breeches, and dashed him to the
bottom of the boat. The moment of my laying hold of him, I determined to throw
him into the sea, and why I did not, I have never since been able to tell.
After I had thrown him into the bottom of the boat, I caught the gun, on which
was a bayonet fixed; this I brought to a charge, and made a push at the man
nearest me, who drew back -- took his seat at the oar -- when all again was
quiet.

We continued rowing, until we struck fast on the ground, but could see no
land. We left the boat and waded about, until we discovered the shore. When we
came to the land, we could not determine, on what place we had fallen. We were
soon satisfied, however, by the drum on the Castle, beating the long-roll, and
immediately after, beating to -- arms. We heard the alarm in that direction,
which plainly pointed out, that we were somewhere near Dorchester-Point. We saw
the Castle in an uproar, and all the signals of alarm, which are usually made
on such occasions.

After we had found where we were, the three men, who engaged in throwing
Richards overboard, left us, and went away together. I then told Richards, that
he might go where he pleased -- that he must be sensible I had saved his
life,-even at the risk of my own; therefore, the dictates of gratitude would
reach him a line of conduct, which would not militate against my escape. This
he promised in the most solemn manner. He was warm in his expressions of
gratitude toward me. I believed him sincere -- He departed. --

In this transaction, I enjoyed a sensation of pleasure very exquisite. To
receive the tribute of a grateful heart, flowing from a stream of sincerity,
was a circumstance, which, in a measure, counterbalanced many evils, which I
had experienced.

We had all lost our shoes in the mud, in getting to dry land; therefore, had
to travel barefooted. It was the space of an hour and a half, after we had
landed, before we found the way off this point of land; the night being
extremely dark, and we all strangers to the ground.

After we had found the road, I told the four men, who were with me, that the
better way would be to separate, and every man shift for himself. This
observation struck a damp upon all, who were with me -- they entreated me to
tarry with them, until the night following, when they could have a better
chance of getting clear of the country, without detection: -- they seared
falling into the hands of their pursuers, if I left them. They felt a certainty
of escape, if I remained with them.

My compassion was moved, and I acted directly contrary from what, I knew, was
according to a system of prudence. We agreed to remain all together, until the
next night.

The day began to dawn, and we found it necessary to look after some place, to
which we could retire, from the observation of the inhabitants, all the men,
except myself, being dressed in the uniform of the Castle, and of course, would
be noticed by the first observer. Some proposed retiring into a swamp, and
secreting ourselves in its dark recesses; some proposed the plan of going into
the the first grove of woods, and climbing up to the top of some trees, and
securing ourselves that way: To these proposals I made the following reply: "it
is likely, that as soon as day light has fairly appeared, the inhabitants of
the country will be alarmed; and warm pursuit will be made after us; and every
place, where the inhabitants will think it likely that we should hide, will be
searched by them, in the most critical manner. No places will be sought more
thoroughly than thick swamps, and high bushy trees: therefore, it will be our
best way to hide where the people will not look after us, if such a place may
be found. For my own part, I had rather take my chance, under present
circumstances, in the open field, than in a swamp, or at the top of a tree.

The object of the swamp and woods were immediately relinquished, and they all
seemed content to leave the matter to my judgment entirely. We traveled on
with rapidity about one mile further, and then came into a little thicket of
houses, and a barn standing immediately on the road among them -- this barn we
all entered, and found two mows of hay.

I ascended ore mow, and having taken up the hay by flakes, near the side of
the barn, to the depth of six feet -- three of us went down, and the hay sell
back into its former situation, covering us entirely over at the same time. I
had ordered the other two to go on to the other mow, and do as they had seen
me. They accordingly went, and I supposed all secure.

Not long after this, there came a number of women into the barn, to milk the
cows. Soon after, I heard children round the barn, as though they were in
pursuit of something with a dog. I soon found that a skunk was their object,
under the barn. However, when the women had finished milking their cows, the
children were all ordered into the house, this day being Sunday.

To my astonishment and surprise, the two men, who had gone on to the other
mow, now came over where I was, and told me, they could not find a place to
hide, "and indeed," said they, "we do not like to be so far off, for it appears
to us, that we shall be taken, if we are!" How I felt under this situation you
will readily conceive, by supposing yourself in my place, and people expected
into the barn every minute to fodder their cattle! I jumpped out of my place,
told them to lie down in a moment, covered them over with hay, and returned
into my place, just as the young men came into the barn, to take care of their
cattle.

They came on to the mow where we were lying, and took the hay from it, for
their cows; but made no discovery; and yet, notwithstanding all this, one of
our men, by the name of Burrel, whom I had covered over with hay, was asleep,
before the young men went out of the barn, and snored so loud, as to be heard;
but the men did not know what noise it was, nor where it came from.

Immediately after these men had left the barn, I again jumpped out of my hole,
went to Burrel, who had uncovered his head entirely, waked him, and
expostulated with him, in the severest terms. "This is the consequence," said I
"of attending to your request of remaining with you. Your own heedless
disposition, not only exposes yourself to be found, but likewise involves me in
the same danger. Is it a matter of such indifference to you whether you are
again taken, that you can tamely and calmly fall a sleep, at the moment when
you are surrounded with danger?

"If no regard to your own safety will influence you on this occasion, yet, I
should suppose you might pay some attention to my welfare, seeing it was by
your earnest entreaty I continued with you, being influenced by no other motive
than compassion toward you. If nothing else will answer, I will have recourse
to the means which are in my power; and if I find you a sleep again, I will
positively put you to death; and this I think will be entirely just, if no
other measure will answer to ensure my safety."

I was of opinion this threat would answer the purpose, for which it was
intended, viz. that fear would operate upon him so strongly, as to prevent his
sleeping in such a situation for the future.

We lay quiet all the forenoon, without any accident: during this time, I
endeavored to make some arrangements in my own mind, for my future conduct. I
concluded, that I should be able to reach the state of Rhode Island by the next
morning, when I should be no longer obliged to travel under cover of the night.
When I could, again, mix with society, without viewing them as my open and
declared enemies.

We heard the various bells ringing at Dorchester meeting houses, for the
exercises of the day. The forenoon meeting was finished, and the first bell,
for the exercises of the afternoon, was ringing, when a number of men came into
the barn, to put a horse into the chaise, standing on the barn-floor. The
streets were full of people going to the meeting house. A number of children
came likewise into the barn, with the men, and climbed on to the mow, where we
lay secreted, looking for hens' nests. At this moment Burrel began again to
snore, which brought the children immediately to the spot where he lay, and,
his head being uncovered, they saw it, and cried out, "Daddy, Daddy, here is the
skunk! here is the skunk!" It hardly appeared credible to the old gentleman,
that a skunk should be on the hay-mow, he therefore manifested some doubt, as
to his children's report, but they were determined he should believe them, and
affirmed it again with warmth "it certainly is a skunk, Daddy, for it has got
ears."

The peculiar manner, in which this was uttered, made the people, on the
barn-floor, think something uncommon was there. They accordingly ascended the
mow, to the number of eight or nine, in order to satisfy themselves concerning
this matter. By this time Burrel awaking, saw he was discovered, and began to
pull the hay over his head. Those, who were on the mow, saw it, and were now
convinced, that the children, in fact, had seen something, that had ears. They
took the pitch-fork and moved the hay, which lay over these two men, and
immediately saw that they were convicts, escaped the preceding night, from the
Castle.

The barn was instantly filled with people from the street, on the alarm's
being given of these men.

Through the whole scene, from the first opening of the barn by the men, who
were about putting the horse into the chaise, till this time, my feelings were
of the keenest kind. When I had succeeded with all my plans for escape thus
far, when I had endured, with so much patience, a course of such incredible
labor, as what I performed in breaking through the bomb-proof; when I had,
furthermore, overcome the difficulties of making the sentry a prisoner, of
preserving him from death, of finding the land we sought, through the thickest
shades of night, and the uncertainty of being drifted out of our course by
adverse tides; and then by a retrograde course of incidents, to be deprived of
the object, to which all these labors were directed, was a prospect which
filled my mind with the keenest anxiety, and kept my fears in a perpetual state
of alarm.

Burrel was a man of great stupidity, and I feared his senseless conduct more
than any thing else. You will wonder at my continuing with him! I wonder at it
myself. My weak side was an inconsiderate compassion. I did continue with him,
and too late I saw my error. However, I acted the foolish part in another
respect, viz. by not taking him into the hole with me, where I could have kept
him perpetually under my eye. He was very disagreeable, and the object of being
freed from a momentary inconvenience was so powerful on my mind, at that time,
that for this paltry consideration, I lost my liberty for more than two years.

I heard the children around the hay-mow, with the utmost pain. I heard
Burrel's snoring, with indignation and horror! I now almost gave myself over
for lost! But what were my sensations when the people ascended ths mow and
discovered these two convicts, plainly seeing who they were by their dress.

However, all hope of escape was not lost. I thought it yet possible to remain
undiscovered, if the two convicts behaved with any prudence, seeing we were so
far under the hay. The question was asked, "what had become of the other
prisoners, who had made their escape?" Burrel answered that he should not tell,
"but if they were any where in that barn, they are right down there," pointing
with his finger to the spot where we in fact were. With this information, they
began the search again, pitching the hay from the spot, till they came down to
the place, where we had been secreted.

The feeble twig, upon which my last hopes remained, was now broken, and I sunk
into a state of despair. All my fond hopes were lost in a moment, and I found
myself only fallen into a state of greater wretchedness, in the room of being
liberated from my former misery. -- "Is this the reward" said I to the
inhabitants, for saving one of your number, but a short time since, from the
devouring jaws of death, ready to swallow him up? But a little time since, he
stood in need of my pity. I granted him that compassion, which nature has
taught me to show. I now stand in need of your pity; will you not grant, what
you, in a like situation, would request? Remember that this world is a state of
revolution. -- You may yet see the time in which you will want the exercise of
compassion, ever from me, however improbable the present appearance. You would
then lament not having shown that compassion, which you would stand i^ need of
yourselves.

"You can hardly imagine that my escape can produce any injury to you, (...)
^^all leave you, and shall never return to a place, where I might be in danger
of confinement.

"You, who are parents, may have children in my situation. Would not your
hearts yearn with compassion toward a child in my condition? Would not you
feel the most earnest desire, that some breast, softened by the tender emotions
of compassion, would say unto your child go; enjoy the blessing, which nature
bestows; wonton in the streams of liberty, and celebrate the day of jubilee?
Would not the strong emotions of gratitude fire your heart, toward such a
benevolent part of creation. -- Would not such a compassionate action appear to
you more lovely than the beauties of the morning; more glorious than the sun in
his majesty? this, surely you would say, is a narration of Deity; a spark of
the fire of love, manifested by nature's God in the daily dispensations of his
providence to man."

All my entreaties were to no effect. The minds of people were so fortified
against every observation, which I made, that the ideas of pity or compassion
were shut entirely out. -- They knew not my feelings, therefore could not
judge, with regard to that conduct, which I thought they ought to exercise
toward me. They had never been in my situation, hence could not view it in its
proper light.

We were all carried to a public house, and kept there, until a guard came from
the island and conducted us back again.

Immediately upon our landing upon the island, I was ordered into irons. This
was a circumstance proving the ideas existing here, of my being the soul of
every enterprise; and indeed, they had pretty good evidence to found their
opinion upon, considering that I was the only person remaining in the room, out
of which we escaped, through the day, without being turned into the shop to
work; and their recollecting the circumstance, likewise, of blacking my shoes
with foot, in order to account for the noise which the centry had formerly
heard; the reason of the noise being now more clearly understood than formerly.

The next morning we were all summoned with great pomp and ceremony before the
three officers, ^^^ing as a court martial, The law of the state of
Massachusetts making Castle Island a place for the confinement of Convicts, had
subjected them to martial law while remaining there.
and there heard an enumeration of the crimes laid to our charge, which
amounted to five in number viz. first, breaking the jail, second, carrying the
centry from his post; h^d, taking the arms and ammunition of the garrison and
carrying them away; fourth, taking the boat belonging to the gorrison and
carrying it off the island; fifth, and lastly, deserting from our state of
confinement.

Of all these crimes we were found guilty, and received sentence of thirty-nine
stripes for each, with the cat -- o'ninetails, amounting in all to one hundred
and ninety five lashes; we however obtained a remission of ninety five, and
received one hundred only, the next day at sun sitting.

The three prisoners, who went away by themselves, were likewise this day
retaken and brought onto the island, tried and sentenced; therefore at
sunsetting, there were eight of us brought to the whipping post, stripped and
punished according to the sentence.

The centry, whom we had made prisoner, had returned onto the island, the
morning after his captivity, and had given a very just relation of the events
which had taken place, while he was our prisoner; of consequence, when the
punishment was inflicted on me, it was a name rather than a reality. The
others, and more particularly three of them, were punished with great severity,
the flesh flying off at every stroke.

CHAP. XIX.
Enchanting pleasure dances in our sight,
And tempts us forward by a treacherous light.
But while thy flattering smiles, our thoughts inflame,
Though prov'st to us a mere fantastic name,
A fair delusion and a pleasing cheat,
A gaudy vision and a soft deceit.

I FOUND that my humanity to Richards had made a partial impression, in my
favor, upon the minds of people in the towns contiguous; but this impression
was soon lost in forgetfulness, and no more remembered, when the event was a
little removed from view, by the hand of time. You may now hear my name
mentioned a thousand times, together with a thousand circumstances respecting
my adventures through life, without ever hearing the least mention made of this
circumstance, though the fact was a matter of as much notoriety, as any event
of my life. You may hear the mouths of people filled with anecdotes relating to
me, of the disagreeable kind, through all parts of the country -- nay, more, --
all the reports which have circulated through the world, for many years past,
of that species, which serves to place the character in a vicious point of
view, have been placed to my account, and are now related as facts not
admitting the least doubt. Hence, the anecdote of the watch and clothes stolen
from the Clergyman, etc. etc. form a detail too long for me to insert in this
narrartion. It has ever appeared, that an ungenerous principle has influenced
mankind to relate the dark circumstances, which have composed my character --
and that they have shrunk from the relation of any facts, which have worn the
appearance of my being clothed with humanity, as though the most baleful poison
was attendant on such a relation. Such a fondness is there in the human heart,
to bring into view, such circumstances, in the character of others, as will
exalt themselves, in a comparison between their own conduct, and that of others.

About this time, the shops were fitted up, sufficient to receive all the
prisoners, with conveniences for making nails. Therefore, I was put to work in
in the shops, and taught to manufacture nails; but the lessons which I received
here, (...) but little effect upon my progress in acquiring (...) noble art.
That unaccountable stupidity, which I ever possessed, had an unusual influence
upon me, at this time. It is true, I could make a nail, equal to any thing you
ever saw, of the kind, in beauty and elegance; but the slowness with which I
executed this, was a circumstance of great complaint by the overseer,-not being
able to finish more than five in a day; which cost more than ten times the
value of the nails, in coal and iron: therefore, it was determined, that I
should be more expeditious in my work. I obeyed the commands of those, who were
over me. I made, the next day, five hundred nails; but they had as many heads
and horns, as the beast we read of in Scripture.

This did not answer the purpose intended. I was reprimanded in severe terms,
but all did not signify. When I made good nails, I could not overgo five in a
day, and when I made more, they were as varied, in form and magnitude, as the
ragged rocks upon the mountains.

The plain truth of the business was here: I viewed the transactions of the
government toward me, to be enemical and cruel. I felt none of that confidence
in her treatment, which a child ought to feel toward the government of a kind
parent. I considered that she had declared open war against me; and would take
every opportunity to oppress me. Under this view of matters, I meant to make
those arrangements, in my conduct, which we see one nation making in their
conduct, toward another, with whom they are at open war.

Whether I had just grounds to view matters in this light, I leave to your own
judgment; meaning, with regard to that, only to relate simple facts. True it
was, I had suffered may unusual, cruel, and illegal punishments, since I had
been under the displeasure of the government; but whether the odium ought to be
thrown on individuals or the government I leave for you to judge. I know my
situation did not admit of that cool and rational thinking upon these subjects,
which real justice required: however, my design is not to justify that line of
conduct, which ought not to be justified; neither do I intend to criminate that
conduct, which I think justifiable; because some might be pleased to criminate
it themselves.

Viewing matters as I then did, I was determined to withstand every effort,
which my overseers should make, to render me profitable in my situation; and
how far I succeeded, in my undertakings, you will be able to judge, by the
after relation.

About this time, the prisoners, whom I left in Northampton, for trial, came on
to the Island, according to their sentence, viz. Philips, Warner, Rogers, and a
number of others, whose names I have forgotten.

I was determined to defeat the business of making nails, entirely: and,
accordingly, entered into a plan for that purpose.

There was a large well, about six rods from the shop, to which we used to
repair for water. The well was twenty feet deep, and the water generally near
the top. We took our nail-rods, broke them in pieces, put them into the
water-pail, carried them to the well, and flung them into the water. This we
continued for the space of three weeks, until the well was nearly filled with
iron. The return of nails did not half pay for the first cost of the rods, so
that the commissary was determined to send no more rods to the island;
supposing it a waste of the public property. However, the overseer urged
another trial, and the commissary, with reluctance, consented to send down a
small quantity of nail-rods, for the last trial. This circumstance, I was
informed of, by the boat-men, who went after the rods: I, therefore, exhorted
the prisoners, to stand this last trial, with courage and perseverance. They
universally promised to remain inviolate to their trust, and I pleased myself
with the speedy accomplishment of my plan.

The universal excuse of the prisoners, for not returning more nails, for the
iron which they had received, was their inability. They constantly insisted
upon it, that they could not make more nails out of the iron -- all agreeing in
one excuse, and all returning much the same quantity of nails, in proportion to
the iron they received; it was thought that the business would not answer its
design: and, therefore, was about being dropped. Yet, the overseer was minded
to try one more experiment, to see whether the business would bear a profit, or
whether it would not.

The law, regulating the treatment toward convicts, on the Castle, had
strictly prohibited the allowance of spiritous liquors, under any
consideration: therefore, many, who had been formerly great drunkards, were now
wholly debarred their favorite enjoyment: and moreover, being so long
habituated to immoderate drinking, and being now wholly deprived of the use of
it, they had experienced, in reality, great temporary inconveniences, with
regard to their health, as well as to the cravings of appetite unsatisfied.
Hence, the prospect of spiritous liquor, to these, would have a very powerful
effect. This the overseer was sensible of;-and, accordingly, offered a gill of
rum, to every one, who should return so many nails, out of such a weight of
iron.

This bait I saw. I expostulated with the men, to beware of the treachery. I
used every argument in my power, to convince them of the necessity of this
self-denial I endeavored to show them, that far from kindness, this rum was
offered them, as the most fatal poison they could drink. They were all
convinced, and all seemed resolute to put in practice my advice But, when the
rum was brought into the shop, and they saw the precious morsel before them,
they fainted under the trial! They could not resist the temptation! They
weighed the iron, and returned the full tale of nails: -- they drank the
delicious liquid. They returned into the prison with exultation -- they were
rich -- they felt far exalted above my situation; -- being able to gain a gill
of rum a day, whereas, I was unable to perform one tenth part of the task
required.

"Now," said they, "we shall be able to earn a gill of rum every day!" This
appeared so great a state of happiness, when compared with what their case had
been, that they were almost contented with their situation. They began to
despise my wisdom -- to think that my head did not contain so much, as they
were before inclined to believe it did. They, exultingly, said, -- "This never
would have been the case, if we had followed your advice. We must have a little
sense, now and then, as well as you, all the time." I had no disposition to
contradict these haughty Patricians. -- "Perhaps, said I, before tomorrow
morning, you may find yourselves sunken to your former Plebeian state of
servile wretchedness." I had rather see the operation of such profound
penetration, than undertake to contradict one of these Knights of the Pot, with
all his greatness, armed capapee. I lay down in sorrow, repeating the following
words of Young, as a lullaby to sooth my disappointed feelings:

To man, why step-dame Nature so severe?
Why throw aside thy masterpiece half wrought,
While meaner efforts thy last hand employ?
Reason's progressive instinct is complete,
Swift instinct leaps -- slow reason feebly climbs,
Brutes soon their zenith reach -- their little all
Flows in at once, -- in ages they no more
Could know, or do, or covet, or enjoy. --
Were men to live to equal with the su^,
The Patriarch-pupil would be learning still;
Yet, dying, leaves his lesson half unlearnt.
AFTER the prisoners had performed their task the next day, and returned their
nails in full tale,-to their astonishment and sore mortification, they found no
rum was to be dealt out to them. They made application for it, but received in
return the bitterest reproaches, and heavy curses. They were given to
understand that they should now do their tasks,-and that too, without a reward.
I found, when they were shut into the prison, at night, that they had fallen
greatly from their state of exaltation, which they felt the night preceding,
They were, now, not so rich,-so great,-nor so wise.- They could now see the
propriety of my expostulations: but alas! they saw it too late.

Seeing the success of this experiment had such a salutary effect, in
discovering the real cause why the prisoners had not been more profitable in
their labors, the overseer thought to make me change my plan of conduct, as
much as the others had changed theirs: -- but, in this attempt, he found me
possessing what the West India-Planter would call fullenness, or incorrigible
obstinacy, in one of his slaves. Those who felt friendly toward me, would call
it manly resolution: others, who were enemical, would call it deviltry,
wickedness, etc. so that it would have as many different names, as there are
different feelings toward one, in those who relate it. You, sir, may call it
by what name you find propriety will dictate. The fact was, that by length of
time, I did not become any more profitable in my employment.

About this time, there was a change of overseers. The first, whose name was
Bailey, was by no means a bad man. He had something of the petulant and
whimsical about him, but this was only the ebullition of a moment, and his
governing character was reasonable, humane, and feeling.

In the room of the former, there came, to occupy his place, a man whose name
was Rifford,-ignorant, stupid, cruel, barbarous and unfeeling. He was a
blacksmith by occupation,-and hence, it was thought he would answer a better
purpose to superintend the nailing business, than one who was entirely
unacquainted with such work.

He had not been long on the island, before the prisoners began to feel the
severity of his arm. When he was offended, he made use of any thing which he
could lay his hand upon, to chastise those, who gave him the offense: hence,
the prisoners were unmercifully beaten with clubs, tongs, bars of iron, or any
other missile weapon, which should come to hand. It was impossible to avoid the
disagreeable effects of his anger. He would often be in a rage, when no one
could account for it; and at other times, would suffer himself to be treated in
such a manner, as no man of sense and dignity would allow: -- hence, I found
the old adage,-"it is hard to deal with a fool," most sensibly verified in this
instance.

My prospcts did not, by any means, reconcile my feelings to my situation. I
yet panted for liberty, with an ardor of desire, beyond description. I viewed
every situation in which matters were placed about this island. I endeavored to
concert some plan to turn them to my advantage. I finally settled upon a
resolution of making one bold and daring push, to make myself master of the
place. This plan I did not hastily enter upon, without (...) weighing all the
circumstances, which might probably attend such an undertaking.

There were at this time, about forty-five prisoners confined in this place, a
motley assembly of characters, from various nations in Europe, as well as
America. These were a class of people of the most abandoned principles,
hardened in the school of vice and danger; consequently, I believed them to
possess the most unshaken courage, and daring fortitude of any class of men
inhabiting the globe. How I was deceived in this opinion, you will learn by the
relation following.

The bomb-proof, where we were confined, was about eighty feet in length,
fronting the south, having only one door, which looked likewise to the south. A
yard, with pickets, about six feet high, enclosed the front of our prison. The
area of the yard was about one fourth of an acre. -- This yard was made in a
square form,-and a guard-house composed a part of the yard, standing in the
southeast corner. There was a passage through the house, by which the soldiers,
on guard, could come in and go out of the yard.

The ground around this yard was considerably higher, than what it was within,
on every side except the west, where the gate was placed, through which we used
to go to our work in the shop. There was a brass field-piece placed about ten
feet from the guard-house, upon the highest ground on the island, loaded with
grape-shot, and a supply of ammunition constantly by it, for the purpose of
preventing vessels from passing the Castle without liberty.

The Governor's house stood on the bomb-proof, and having a walk upon the top
of it, a sentry constantly stood there, to observe vessels, andc.

A sentry constantly walked in the yard, to observe the motions of the
prisoners; to keep them from coming out of the prison, until the moment in
which orders were given for them to turn out to work: to give the guard notice
at such times, who were all under arms, the moment that our doors were
unlocked. This guard consisted of a sergeant, corporal, and twelve privates.

There was a row of barracks, a little distance north of the Governor's house,
in which the garrison soldiers lived. The officers' barracks were about forty
rods westward of our prison, down the hill, contiguous to the water. The shop,
where we were confined to labor, was about forty rods beyond the officers'
barracks, in a southern direction.

When we were turned out of our prison, to be taken to the work-shop, three
sentries attended us, who perpetually stood round the shop, to hinder any
prisoner from leaving it. Here we continued till 12 o'clock, and were then
taken back to the prison, where we continued half an hour, then returned to the
shop in like-manner, continuing our work till sunset. After we had finished our
day-labor, we were put into the prison, and confined according to the usual
manner, by placing a couple of iron bars across the outside of our doors,
making them fast by letting them into two staples.

Matters were in this situation on the island, when I concerted the plan of
making myself master of this place. My idea was to watch some favorable moment,
to rise on a sudden, and take the garrison by surprise, when they were most off
their guard, and least prepared to defend such an attack.

I endeavored to weigh every circumstance, relating to the time, and manner,
how to make this attack upon the garrison. I communicated my views to Philips,
of whose courage and valor, I had the highest opinion, I had likewise the
firmest confidence in his wisdom, to plan and pre-concert a system, which would
embrace every advantage, that the nature of the thing would admit.

Various were our ideas upon the subject. Many schemes for executing our plans
occurred; but ^one of them, when thoroughly investigated, but what had many
difficulties, almost insurmountable. Once, we had determined in our own minds,
to embrace the opportunity of coming from work, rush upon and disarm the
sentries, who were guarding us, -- and, with our hammers, and the arms, which
we should take from the sentry, make a general assault upon the rest of the
garrison.

This we found attended with the following difficulties, viz. The least unusual
movement by us, would be discovered by the sentry on the Governor's house, who
would instantly give the alarm to the guard, and to the soldiers in the
barracks, where arms were always ready; and they, being more in number
considerably than we, and being all armed, would undoubtedly overcome us with
ease, seeing they would likewise had the advantage of the ground, being at the
height of the hill, and we at the bottom.

But, this was not all. The guard were within a few paces of that field-piece,
which commanded the island, and when once in possession of that, could subdue
or destroy us, in opposition to every effort, which we could make. Moreover,
when we came from the shop to the prison, the commanding officer, Major
Perkins, had ever his attention upon us, and observed all our movements, with
the greatest attention.

This scheme was attended with so many difficulties, which appeared
insurmountable, that we laid it aside as impracticable.

We then thought of embracing the opportunity which Sunday offered to rise on
the garrison. Every Sunday, the soldiers and prisoners were assembled, in one
of the barracks, to attend Divine Service. The soldiers occupied one end of the
barrack, and the prisoners the other. The garrison generally assembled without
arms; and, of consequence, were not so formidable in that situation, as when
they had their guns in their hands loaded, and bayonets fixed. The guard,
however, kept their places, which rendered this project alike impracticable.

The greater number of the prisoners were, at this time, in irons; and, of
consequence, when we should attempt to make prisoners of the soldiers, a
scuffle would unavoidably ensue; and, as they would out-number us, we should
have but a bare possibility of succeeding; even with the soldiers in the
barrack, seeing so great a proportion of us were in irons; and should we
succeed in this respect, yet the guard would unavoidably be alarmed; and being
in possession of the field-piece, they could, with the greatest ease, sweep us
away.

These difficulties were thought too great, to make the attempt upon the
garrison in that way: they were of course given up as impracticable.

We, finally, agreed upon the morning as the best time to execute such an
insurrection.

We were awaked by the overseer about half way between daybreak and sunrise.
Immediately after the words "turn out, turn out," had been given by the
overseer, he retired -- and was generally absent about half an hour, when he
returned -- and finding us all dressed, turned us out, and took us to the shop
to work.

The doors of our prison were not fastened in this interim. The guard were
under arms, and the sentry walked backward and forward before our door, to
prevent any from going out.

My reasoning upon the prospect of success, attending this undertaking, was of
the following nature. "It is now warm weather," said I,-it being the last of
May, or the beginning of June -- "therefore, sleep has the most powerful effect
upon man, in the cool of the morning: -- this will prevent the officers and
soldiers sleeping in the barracks, from being so easily awakened and aroused.
The first and most difficult object is the guard. They are, at such times,
under arms, and therefore, under a situation far superior to ours: but, as we
could out number them, and as I entertained an opinion of the prowess of the
prisoners, far beyond that of the soldiers, I think, pretty probable, we may
succeed in making them prisoners. After that object should be effected, then it
will be easy to become (...) the field-piece,-and when that is obtained, we are
masters of the island at once.

"When we become masters of the island, we are in a situation, which will place
us upon a footing of no mean standing. We, by being masters of the garrison,
become likewise possessed of the command of the harbor of Boston -- of all the
vessels going out and coming in; -- therefore, can appropriate them to what
use, we find the exingences of the (...) will require. We shall likewise be in
possession of provision, arms, and ammunition of every kind. Warlike stores
will be in our power, of every kind, should we find occasion to use them. I
think that the prospect of escape by water, after we have overcome the
garrison, will be more eligible than to attempt another flight by land: and as
it will be in our power to arm a vessel, and equip her, every way, for defense,
and along voyage, it would be almost impossible, even should they pursue after
and overtake us, to master us at sea. We shall likewise be able to prevent
their following us, from the harbor of Boston, with any great strength, by
blowing up the magazine, and spiking the cannon. In this situation, I would
leave the enemical shores of America, and rather seek an asylum, among the
inhospitable inhabitants of Barbary."

These were the outlines of my plan; and I determined to make one powerful
effort to carry it into execution. Either to lose my life in the cause of
liberty, or else gain a glorious freedom. And now, sir, before I go on to the
relation of this insurrection, permit me to make some reflections upon my
situation, and the operations of my mind under it.

I had ever a warmth of feeling in following any object of pursuit, perhaps,
peculiar to myself. From the first moment of my imprisonment, I felt a degree
of insupportable impatience at confinement, and an ardent desire of the
enjoyment of liberty, entirely beyond description. The various unfortunate
attempts, which I had made for the purpose of liberating myself, did not serve
to cool my ardor for obtaining this object; but, my desires for liberty
increased, in proportion to the time of my remaining confined, and the
misfortunes attending it.

Reasoning upon the various occurrences which had been closely concerned in
bringing me to this state of wretchedness, and upon the motives by which I had
been actuated, under every scene through which I had passed, I concluded that
my punishment was greater than I ought to bear. And even at this day, I am
under great doubts how I ought to have acted, through all those trying scenes.
I know much is due to government. Personal inconvenience is to be born, rather
than government should suffer any injury; and for this plain reason, viz. that
upon the uninterrupted administration of justice, by government, depends the
welfare of the whole community. But, there are circumstances, under which a man
may be justifiable, in opposing, at least, the despotic transactions of cruelty
in government, toward an individual. Whether this was the case with me, sir, I
leave you to judge.

I had suffered, during my state of confinement in Northampton, the most
unheard of course of illegal cruelty; and that too, in a very notorious manner,
-- so that the branches of government must universally be apprised of it. And
this punishment was inflicted likewise by one of the officers of government.
Therefore, under such circumstances, whether I had not just reason to suppose,
the most cruel, arbitrary, and unjust measures, were prescribed against me by
government, your own good sense will determine. This officer never received the
frowns of government for his conduct, but remained in high favor to the day of
his death: -- neither was I ever compensated for the injuries, which I here
received.

Moreover, when the scene was reversed, and one of their number became
dependent upon my will, for his life, his liberty, and his safety; and under
that situation, I had put my own life at stake, to save his; and had shielded
and protected him from danger in the time of his distress, -- after this, as
soon as I had fallen into the hands of government, what was their language?
Why, that I should receive an hundred lashes at the post!!

I recollect to have read an account respecting a York, who was a slave in
Malta. He was asked by a Maltese merchant "why he wore that aspect of perpetual
gloom on his countenance, and now and then appeared to struggle to suppress the
starting tear?" The Turk replied "Can it appear strange to you, that I should
lose enjoyment, with the loss of that, which is the foundation upon which we
build all our joy?" "What would you do, said the Maltese, to gain your
liberty?" "Ho, by Allah!" said the Turk, "name the conditions: -- Place danger
and death before me, in their most horrid forms, -- and if I do not pay the
price, then say that Hamet is not worthy of liberty."

When I heard this story of the Turk and the Maltese, my feelings entered,
immediately, into the meaning of the Turk's observations. I could there
discover and read the language of the human heart, notwithstanding he was a
Turk. My heart panted to tell him, -- "Yes, thou infidel Turk, get thee hence
from the land of christianity, and enjoy the pleasures of liberty, even in thy
unbelieving country."

His feelings were what mine had been: -- the language of the heart is the
same, among Turks and Christians,- Jews and Gentiles, etc. etc. etc.

Shame on that heart that never felt
A fellow-creature's woes; --
Yet tenderly affects to melt
In pity -- for a rose.
Sir, accept my most sincere wish for your happiness, combined with your
family's, and believe me to be, etc.

CHAP. XX.
-- -- -- " O, cruelty!
Thy touch, thy dead'ning touch, bat steeled the breast,
Where, through her rain-bow-shower, soft pity smiled;
Has closed the heart, each God-like virtue blessed,
To all the silent pleadings of (...) child.
At thy command he plants the dagger deep,
At thy command exults, though nature bid him weep!

IT was on Sunday, when I made my arrangements among the prisoners, for our
great effort, -- appointing the morning following, for the time of operation.

There were thirty-five prisoners, in whom I placed the utmost confidence, as
to their courage, and undaunted resolution. Ten of them I had selected to be
with me, in taking the guard; and twenty-five I had left to be headed by
Philips, who were to repair immediately to the barracks, and secure the
officers and arms; intending, if possible, to accomplish the business without
bloodshed.

After I had made the necessary dispositions, I exhorted the prisoners, "to be
firm and courageous; to abstain from all acts of cruelty, which were not
absolutely necessary; and, above all things, to pay the strictest attention to
the orders given, that all might act in concert; to abstain from spiritous
liquors." And this I meant to make more certain, by knocking all the casks on
the head.

As taking the guard was much the most difficult part of this business to
execute, I had selected our ten of the most desperate fellows, among the
prisoners, to follow me. I told them that I did not wish for them to go farther
into dangers than I went myself -- that I expected them to follow and support
me, as far as I went, and no further. To this they all agreed, without the
least hesitation; and confirmed their agreement by the most solemn assurance,
that they would remain by me till death or liberty.

After all matters were adjusted upon this system, we went to bed with all our
clothes on, so that we might arise the next morning, immediately after the door
should open, and the overseer should depart.

After I had laid down, the importance of the scene before me kept me from
closing my eyes through the whole night.

Ha! not a breath of wind! no gentle breeze,
To fan the darksome gloom! no riffled wave
Disturbs this silent port of life, nor moves
The sleeping calm; a death-like silence reigns.
These storms of wrath, that often by tyrants breach'd,
Have shook the trembling world, now die away:
In whispers lost -- the froth of beighten'd pride
Beats on the rocks, and w^^nas itself to death:
The pomp of Kings, the sycophan^^ breath
Of soothing flatt'rers, and m^nea! crowds,
The voice of slunder, the destructive blasts,
Of envy, self-distracting, softly seem,
Like dying thunders in a distant cloud.
Gently to vanish from the list king car.
Death, rigid death, impartially declares
That man is nothing but a heap of dust,
Clav^^^ld, insensible. Wipe from thy cheek
O man! the s^ft emasculating tear;
For die thou must: Just as by Nature's streams,
In easy mazes roll thin limpid tides,
A tribute to the main. That art thou born
For short-lived glory,-pre-ordain'd to die.
The thoughts of obsequies, convulsions, groans;
It Is these distract thy soul. The kiss of death
Is soft and harmless. Golden rest attends it;
And from dissolves the fearful dream of life.
Nature's great law is Death. -- As rising flames
seek their congenial place, and mount to heaven.
Thus haste we to our end. The bloom of youth
Expels our infant years: -- Then hoary age
Encroaches on the man, and shuts the scene.
I WAITED, with impatience, for the approach of morn. This, of all nights,
through my life, appeared the longest. I often arose and went to the grates, to
see if I could discern any signs of day. At last the moment appeared! I heard
the overseer enter, and vociferate with great clamor, "Turn out, turn out," --
and immediately departed.

I arose with precipitation, and hasted to gather those, who were destined to
act different parts in the business, into bodies by themselves. I observed a
few got out of their beds, with some reluctance. Philips, I saw, appeared
extremely pale, -- I asked him what was the matter? He told me he felt sick. I
answered, That the moment did not admit of attention to sickness. He came to
the spot, and took charge of his men. I ordered one of my men to secure the
sentry, in the yard, the moment I gave the signal for starting. He took a stick
about three feet long, and two inches in diameter, and stood ready to execute
his part.

When I came to the spot, where I could observe the guard, I saw them under
arms, and standing in the door of the guard-house, with their bayonets fixed.
This sight was by no means calculated to ensure our success; but not knowing
what exertion would effect, I determined to make the push, at all hazards. I,
therefore, clapped my hands, the signal for rushing -- and sprang forward
toward the guard-house, -- expecting the ten, whom I had appointed to that
business, were close following me. The soldiers, seeing me coming toward them,
presented the points of their bayonets, to prevent my entering the guard-house.
I parted the bayonets with my hands, and disarmed two men, in a moment. This I
did by a sudden jerk, when I caught hold of these two guns. I immediately
turned the bayonets toward the soldiers, when they gave back, and I entered
the guard-house. I pronounced immediate death, upon any one, who dared to
oppose me. I ordered them, in a very peremptory manner, "To lay down their
arms, and retire behind the guard-bed." They obeyed -- two road their escape,
and fled out of the guard-house, giving the alarm to the officers and soldiers
in the barracks, together with the sentry on the Governor's house.

When I entered the guard-house, I carried with me two guns, intending to give
one to the first, who followed me, in order that he might prevent any of the
guard from escaping through that door, and to secure the other myself: wishing
to prevent any alarm, until the other party of twenty-five had time to get to
the barracks; but imagine, sir, my disappointment and astonishment, when I
looked and saw myself alone, without one of the prisoners to assist me!!

When I first started, Philips' courage failed -- He turned and ran into the
room, out of which he came -- undressed, and jumpped into bed. The rest, seeing
this, were all struck with a panic -- ran back, and went to bed: thinking, by
this mean, to make the officers believe, that they had no part nor lot in this
business. Therefore, I found the guard my prisoners, and myself a prisoner to
the guard.

I saw the soldiers and officers, from the barracks, running toward the
guard-house, with their clothes in the utmost disorder -- some half dressed,
and others naked, a shirt excepted. Seeing the day was lost, I turned, and ran
out of the guard-house, making again toward the prison, carrying my guns with
me. The sergeant of the guard, who, but a minute before, had been begging his
life, (...) (...) most abject state of fear, now began to bustle toward me
with his gun, as though he had been in close contest from the beginning, and
intended to sacrifice me to his fury, -- he ran after me, hallowing,
"Buroughs, you devil you, I Will kill you, I Will kill you." I turned indignant
toward the coward, and threw my guns at him, with the points of the bayonets
forward. One of the bayonets took his hand, and entered the skin about an inch.
At this, he bawled out in the bitterest manner, "I Am wounded, I Am killed!"

The officers and soldiers rushed into the prison, laid hold of me, and brought
me again into the yard. Major Perkins, with his sword, Lieutenants Treat and
Burbe^k, with their rattans, were all lashing me at once, with the greatest
violence. (...) this crisis, the sergeant, whom I had wounded, came up with his
gun, and struck me over the head with all his might. The blood flew quick into
my face, I moved suddenly toward the pitiful villain, -- at which, he ran --
making a noise more like a car^, than a man.

I was then confined by a pair of heavy irons, commonly called shackles, taken
to the whipping (...), and there received an hundred stripes, which were laid
on in a very serious manner, causing the blood to stream at every stroke, so
that my shoes were ^^led by the time I was taken down.

This, sir, was a heavy stroke, too much even for my iron constitution to
support. I fell (...) (...). A fit of sickness succeeded, which continued abo^^
three months, making the prospect doubtful, (...) my career might terminate. O!
happy, thrice happy, should I have been, had I fallen here! and closed the
troubled scene of life! "O terque, quaterque beati, queis Trojae sub maenibus
altis, contigit oppetere!"

During my sickness, I had to contend with inconveniences of no small
magnitude. There was no provision made for the sick; therefore, salt beef and
bread were all the necessaries provided for me by government. A medical
gentleman, from the town of Boston, influenced by the mere emotions of
compassion, visited me, under this scene of distress, and administered to my
necessities. The name of this humane ornament of nature, I have forgotten, but
think it was Elliot.

My back was extremely sore; and having a pair of heavy irons on my legs, I
could lie in no other position, than (...) my back. Major Perkins wished to
liberate me from the irons around my legs, during the fit of sickness, but was
absolutely for bidden by his superiors, until near two months after my
punishment, when he was allowed to take them off.

My situation, and course of perpetual suffering, caused me to repine bitterly
at the hand of providence. It appeared, that I was marked out, as an object for
the heaviest strokes of misery, to be reiterated upon, until I should be
finally swallowed up, by the power of their force. Why, said I, should all this
befall me? Do these misfortunes happen as a punishment to vicious conduct? and
am I so self-blinded, as not to be sensible of my own unheard of wickedness?
For certainly, if the wickedness of my conduct has been equal to my sufferings,
I have been of all mankind the most abandoned. But, said I (...), is this
reasoning just? Do the wicked alone (...) while the just are in a state of
constant prosperity? Let us advert to facts, for evidence upon this subject.

I behave that matters of fact will prove, that the best of men have suffered,
in this state of imperfection, in an equal degree with the worst. We will
instance Socrates and Aristides, of the anci^^^^ and the unmortal Columbus,
among those of a mere modern date.

Many instances might I produce even among ourselves, were innecessary; but one
moment's reflection, upon this subject, is enough to confute the idea entirely,
of a person's misfortunes being any evidence of his moral turpitude. Then why
it is, that some are marked out, in the course of events, to endure the
heaviest strokes of misfortune in one continued serves, is, to me, an
inexplicable mystery in the course of Providence.

Since I started into life, how has my course been checkered! even Death, the
last resort of the wretched, has fled from my approaches, as though cautious of
his friendly presence, administering comfort, rather then terror. Is it not
strange, that death should join with mankind, and even refuse the morsel
afforded on his embrace, in order, to fill up my measure of sufferings?

When I set the jail on fire, at Northampton, I thought it our of the power
malice itself, to prevent the approach of the moment of my quietus, but was
disappointed; I then expected to have found an end to my trouble, in the cold
embrace of death, in the dungeon, and here I found the tyrant eluding my
pursuit. When I rose on the garrison, it appeared to me certain, that I should
meet with death or liberty, but alas! in both was I deceived; then surely, said
I, this punishment added to sickness must close the eventful scene; but horrid
to relate I was reserved for woes, which yet untold, made my former sufferings
vanish away, as not worthy of notice.

Are these matters painted to you, sir, in colors to high, for the simple
statement of facts? No, sir, indeed they are truths,-the force of which I must
feel, while I sit poring over the scenes; though they are past and gone, yet
have left a mortal sting behind.

Soon after I was able to walk about, I was visited by a gentleman, whose name
I never recollect, without feeling that warmth of affection, and glow of
gratitude, which fills my soul with rapture. This gentleman's name was Summers.
He was my father's sister's son. He commanded a vessel then in the harbor of
Boston. He possessed an enlarged mind, which looked above the clamor of vulgar
prejudice; and where he saw the course of humanity lead, he pursued his way,
let it be ever so unpopular. This gentleman made me a visit, even against the
custom of the world. He was the first relative, that ever came, or sent to me,
on this gloomy place. He saw my necessities -- He administered to my relief --
He poured the balm of consolation into my wounded mind -- He conducted as a man
ought to conduct, who is governed by a spirit of true benevolence. -- He
continued to visit me from time to time, during the whole course of my
confinement on this island.

Having been disappointed in my efforts for an escape, and that too, by the
cowardly, perfidious conduct of my fellow prisoners, I pretty much gave up the
idea of making any further attempts, for my liberation; but concluded to
reconcile my mind, in the best manner possible, to the idea of wearing away the
time of my confinement.

I, therefore, told Major Perkins, that I would give up the idea of ever making
another attempt for escape, if he would not put me in irons, give me the
liberty of the island, and not subject me to the direction or authority of
Rifford, the overseer. Major Perkins believed me sincere. He ever had occasion
to believe what I told him, by way of contract, while I was under his care.

He agreed to allow me the privileges which I requested, provided I would
discover any attempt of the prisoners to escape. I told Major Perkins, that
being under the same condemnation with the other prisoners, I had no intention
to purchase any privilege, at their expense. That I should, by no means, give
them any aid, in their escape; neither should I be a hindrance to them. After
some days trial to obtain my promise, for discovering any attempt of the
prisoners, to procure their liberty, without success, he agreed to my proposal;
and gave me liberty of going to any part of the island, without a sentry to
attend me.

This was a great degree of freedom, compared with what I had enjoyed; and,
therefore, most sensibly felt. My situation was as eligible, as the nature of
things would admit: and I, even in this state of servile wretchedness, began to
look forward, with the pleasing expectation of better days.

Whatever different ways mankind pursue,
O happiness! it is thee, we keep in view!
It Is thee, in every action we intend,
The noblest motive, and superior end!
Thou do the scarcely-finish'd soul incline;
I^^ first desire, and constant though it, is thine!
(...) infant breasts are swayed by thee clone,
When pride and jealousy are yet unknown.
Than art, of all, our waking tho'ts, the theme;
We court thee too in every nightly dream.
Whither the roads that to perdition lead;
Or those that guide us to the stars, we tread;
Thine, is the hope, the inestimable prize,
The glorious mark, on which we fix our eyes.
ABOUT this time, an incident took place, which gave me the most sensible pain.
At a certain (...), a number of people from Boston, came on to the island,
among whom was Thomas Cushen, son to the Lieutenant Governor. When these people
came among the prisoners, they asked money of them, as was the general custom.
Cushen took a dollar out of his pocket, and gave it to me; telling me, at the
same time, to give each of the prisoners a glass of rum, out of the avails of
the dollar; and departed without waiting for an answer.

The prisoner, who had been instrumental in obtaining the money, entertained an
idea of his being entitled to a larger share of the dollar, than the others;
and therefore, proposed a division with me. My reply was, that the money was
given to me, for a particular purpose; and as I accepted the gift, I had
implicitly pledged my faith, to execute the trust reposed in me. I told him,
that a glass of rum must be given to each prisoner, if the dollar would
purchase a sufficient quantity for that purpose; and that I should perform
that, as soon as I could obtain permission of Major Perkins.

I, accordingly, made application to the Major, for liberty to give the
convicts a glass of rum. He told me, that it was out of his power to grant my
request, at that time; but that Governor Cushen would be on the island, in a
few days; that he would consult him on the subject, and see if it would answer,
to grant such permission.

While I was waiting the issue of this business. Thomas Cushen came on to the
island again; and the prisoner, Mount by name, who had asked him for money
before, now made application again, for more money. Cushen answered Mount, that
he thought it a shame for him to ask for money again, so soon after leaving a
dollar with Buroughs for them all. Mount told him, that Buroughs had kept the
money himself, and the other prisoners had received nothing. Cushen then asked
for an explanation of the business. I told him how the matter was situated; and
rejoined, that I would divide the money, if that was agreeable to his feelings.
He left me without an answer. Not long after, Cushen being in company with a
number of gentlemen in Boston, amongst whom was a Mr. May a rational
philanthropist, he, in a pompous declaration, respecting his own excellent
qualities of heart, related, that he had given three dollars to Buroughs, for
the prisoners, and, that Buroughs had appropriated them to his own use,
refusing to participate with any others, in the benefit of the money.

Mr. May entered with warmth, into the subject, and when he saw me,
expostulated upon the impropriety of my conduct; and when I gave him a simple
narration of facts, he seemed to hesitate about giving credit to a report, so
different from Cushen's.

This circumstance, you may think, was of too small consequence to find a place
in this narration; but the reason why I relate it, is the disagreeable effect
it had upon my mind; having met with but very few incidents, which have given
me keener sensations, than this trivial occurrence.

As the remaining part of my confinement was ended, without any very remarkable
occurrence, I will not dwell upon the uninteresting events; but only observe,
that the terms of agreement between the Major and myself, were ever kept
inviolate by both parties. I will, likewise, give you an extract of some
letters, which passed between me and my friends, while I remained here, and
then pass from the disagreeable prospect.

The first letter I received from that uncle, who had relieved me in
Northampton: -- It was to the following amount:

Charleton, April 20 th, 1788. BELOVED NEPHEW,
I sincerely wish, and hope, that your long and painful confinement may prove
an advantage to you, by giving you time to reflect, seriously, upon your past
misconduct. As that was in your tho'tless and youthful days, and as you have
now arrived to the age of maturity, I beg of you to consider with yourself,
seriously, what an awful and disagreeable situation you will soon be in, after
you are liberated, if you should enter into an unlawful course of life. As you
have now, by experience, tasted the evil nature of transgression, and are now
in a situation to figure to yourself the happy condition of those, who, by a
course of honest industry, procure for themselves and their dependents, an
honorable and honest living through life. I wish you may exercise that wisdom,
which nature has given you, to learn the difference between a regular life, and
a course of unlawful pursuits. You must be sensible, that you will not only
render yourself happy, by a course of regular conduct, but will greatly
increase the happiness of your relations, and all, who wish you well. We all
hope and desire, that you will be so kind to yourself and to us, as to coolly
and faithfully improve the good sense and reason, which the all-wise Being has
so bountifully bestowed upon you; and I think, that under the influence of this
reason, you will immediately after your liberation, repair to your parents, or
to my house, or to some of your relations, who can help you to business, and to
those things you will be destitute of, and without which, you will be very
uncomfortable. By doing this, you will avoid many great and trying temptations,

I am in no doubt but by a steady uniform course of well doing, you may
re-establish your reputation, and again be a servicable member of society. On
the contrary, should you again, at this time of life, return to bad courses,
every one would despair of your ever reforming, and you must be lost forever,
which may the all-wise Being enable you to prevent, by a wise and virtuous
course of life, for the future, is the sincere desire and prayer of

your most affectionate uncle. EBENEZER DAVIS.


Soon after the receipt of the foregoing letter, I received another from my
Mother's youngest brother, to the following import:

Oxford, May 12 th, 1788. DEAR NEPHEW,
A recent opportunity has given me the pleasure of hearing, that your conduct
has been good and unexceptionable, since your unfortunate attempt on the
garrison. I entertain the most ardent desire that it may continue.

Your long and severe confinement is almost at an end. Soon again you will
taste the sweets of liberty, of which you have been deprived so long. I should
advise you, by all means, to return to your friends. You are, and will be,
destitute of clothes, when your time of servitude has expired, therefore,
without clothes; without friends; without money; and coming off the Castle with
the prejudices, which mankind entertain against one, who has been confined
there, you will find it impossible to gain a subsistence among mankind, in an
honest way, without you come to your friends, who can help you to those things,
which you will stand in need of.

-- I remain your affectionate uncle. JONATHAN DAVIS.


Hanover, October 16 th, 1787. DEAR CHILD,
IT is not our present object to lay open to your view the bleeding hearts of
your Parents. The attempt would be in vain; for it is wholly beyond the power
of language to express. If the reports be true, with respect to the atrocity of
your conduct, we cannot but acquiesce in the measures taken by government to
punish such acts, which are pregnant with ruin to the civil community. Did we
pay attention to nothing but the yearnings of our hearts toward you; did we
consult nothing but the dictates of natural affection; to part with an only son
in this manner; to consider you as being lost to God, to your parents, and to
your generation; is a consideration which would swell the tide of our sorrows,
and render them like an overflowing deluge. But we fully believe, that our
times and changes are in God's hands; that he has given us this cup of
trembling, and that it becomes us to be still under this severe stroke of his
rod. What further trials he may mete out for us, in his dealings with you, we
know not; but this one thing we know, that in relation to any thing, that may
concern you, in future, it becomes us to cast all our care upon God, and to
leave you in his hands.

When we recollect, that there is yet a probability, that we may see you again,
and behold in your conduct, the fruits of repentance, for your misconduct; we
cannot help feasting our hearts, with such a pleasing contemplation. Nothing
which this world could afford, would be a greater comfort to us, than your
return, under such a situation.

In the mean time, it is our ardent and pressing desire, that your behavior
and conduct may be framed in such a manner, as to be to the good acceptance of
those, who are appointed to have the oversight of you, during the remainder of
that servitude, to which you are confined.

It has ever opened the avenues of grief, and added fresh anguish to our
sorrows, to hear of any attempts in you, to get free from your confinement, by
unwarrantable measures.

It would be acceptable to us, to have a line from you, specifying the state of
your mind, and what your purposes are, in relation to your future pursuits. In
the mean time, take this as a testimony of love intermingled with the most
heartfelt grief and anguish, from

your afflicted and sorrowful Parents. E. and A. BUROUGHS.


Castle-Island, November 27 th, 1787. HONORED AND DEAR PARENTS.
Your favor of the 16th ult. was duly received. Were I to undertake to
describe the sensations which it created, I know I should fail in the attempt.

Notwithstanding my being considered as an outcast among mankind; and under
that consideration, treated as the worst of villains, and vilest of of slaves,
yet it has not dissolved that tie of natural affection, which binds me to
those, who gave me breath.

To undertake a vindication of my conduct, is an object entirely out of my view
at present; but would suggest, the same natural course attends common fame,
when applied to me, as it universally has done, when applied to any other
person or object; therefore, wish you to make those allowances, which candor
will dictate, under my peculiar situation.

Could you read the language of my heart, you would there see the most sincere
desire for your comfort, through life. My situation is such, I am sensible, as
to offer no very pleasing view to the minds of Parents toward a child; yet, it
is a situation, which at present is out of my power to alter. The time will
come, when I shall again be called to act my part on the stage of life, as a
member of the civil community; that time will discover whether the principles
of virtue are the governing laws of my mind. I feel my task too arduous and
difficult. Life's path is environed with errors, thick on every side. I shall
have the passions and prejudices of a hard hearted world to combat, whether I
shall be competent to the task, is yet in the womb of futurity. It must be a
most pleasing object with me, once more to mix with society, upon honorable
terms, and enjoy the blessings of friendship, after being shut out from those
enjoyments this length of time.

As to the object of my pursuits, after my time of servitude shall expire, I
heartily declare, that I have not fixed upon any. I should receive any advice
upon that subject, from you, with pleasure.

As to the state of my mind. I view myself as an inhabitant of a vacant
desolate country. There are none, amongst all the world, to whom I feel that
glow of friendship, together with an equality of station, which renders society
pleasing. Long as I have remained in the converse and society of this motley
collection of characters, of which the convicts are composed, yet I have no
relish for their society.

Should I receive no assistance from my friends, at the time of my departure,
from this place. I must leave the island absolutely naked. Having long since
parted with all my own clothes, to satisfy the calls of hunger.

I am with duty and esteem, your affectionate son. STEPHEN BUROUGHS.

E. and A. BUROUGHS.

About three weeks previous to the expiration of the time of my confinement, my
uncle Ebenezer Davis, came to see me on the island, brought me some clothes,
and gave me money, sufficient to provide myself with what things were
necessary, to my making a decent appearance, and likewise to support myself on
the road to his house. The happy moment arrived! how beautiful was that day! of
all the days of my life, this was the most beautiful and serene. The very
heaven and elements were in unison with my feelings. I, for the first time, for
the term of thirty months, dressed myself in clean decent apparel. I heard the
sentence from Major Perkins, "Burronghs you are free" with a sensation of joy
that is inexpressible. My heart bounded like the roe on the mountain! I went
into the boat, the sea was smooth, and the wind was calm! the heavens were mild
and serene; the sun was beautiful beyond description! the boat glided over the
smooth surface of the waters, with a facility that was enchanting!

Sweet memory, wasted by thy gentle gale,
Often up the tide of time I turn my sail,
To view the sary ha^nts of long lost house,
Blessed with far greater shades, for fresher bowers,
Having now ended in my narrative a tedious and bitter confinement, which
lasted me three years and five weeks. I will here end this letter. I wish to
make some reflections upon the nature of the punishment by servitude; and as
that will take up too much time for this, I will reserve it for the subject of
another letter. In the mean time believe me as usual etc.

CHAP. XXI.
Blessed be that hand divine which gently laid
My heart at rest, beneath this humble shed.
The world's a stately bark, on dangerous seas,
With pleasure seen (...) at our (...).

AS I intimated to you, sir, in my last, that the subject of this letter would
be a consideration of the nature of punishment by servitude; I now take up that
matter in obedience to my promise. -- This is a subject, of which I have felt
the operation in some measure; and therefore, may be thought to know its
natural effect upon the human heart, as well as most men.

The object of punishment ever ought to be the preservation of the good order
of society, by a reformation of those, who are disorderly through a vicious
disposition, or a mistaken apprehension of matters.

The honesty of a legislative body will ever point at that, and their laws will
ever effect that, where a sufficient fund of information directs their
legislative acts.

Whether the system of servitude, upon its present establishment, does answer
the purpose of producing a reformation in the disorderly, is the question now
under consideration

There was, on the castle, an assemblage of characters, from various parts of
the globe: some old in iniquity, and others but timid beginners, in the ways of
transgression. Here, the objects of honor and promotion were reversed. In a
winter evening's tale, you would not hear the feats of virtue recounted, as a
recommendation. These were objects treated with contempt. On the other hand,
that person, who could relate the most desperate and daring transgression, of
the laws of national justice, was considered as the most honorable character
among the prisoners; while those, who were novices in wickedness shrunk from an
examination of their deeds, and felt a degree of littleness, because they had
nothing worthy of giving themselves a name, among those heroes of the night.

The natural effect of this you will easily conceive. Where our ambition leads,
we generally make progress. Those, who would blush at the thought of their
illicit conduct, when they first arrived at the castle, would now sooner blush
at the small part which they have acted, in the way of transgression.

They would listen with attention, to the acts of those, whom they considered
as their masters in iniquity, this is a lesson, but too easily learnt. Their
whole object was discovering and inventing means to carry their diabolical
purposes into execution, immediately upon their liberation. Finally, this of
all others, was the most perfect school of vice, that I ever saw. For a man to
remain uncontaminated by this society, after continuing in it a number of
years, he must have more solid philosophy, than I believe mankind generally
possess. Under these circumstances, how can this institution serve to reform
the morals of men?

Facts prove, that instead of becoming good members of society, the convicts
have, generally, taken to a course of the most atrocious transgressions, after
their liberation.

Indeed, the situation of the prisoners is such, when they are liberated, that
all motives for doing well are taken away. They generally, at that time, find
themselves naked, moneyless, and friendless. Their previous confinement on the
castle is a sufficient objection to their being employed in business;
therefore, supposing them possessed of virtuous principles, what can such
virtues do, in this situation. They have the same necessities to supply, that
other men have, and where they find, that government has not only confined them
to servitude, for a number of years, but has, moreover, taken away the prospect
of earning a small pittance of bread, by industry, will the feelings of nature
allow them to consider any obligation which government requires, as binding?

I saw the effects of this system of servitude, whilst I was a prisoner on the
castle. I published my sentiments upon the subject, for the consideration of
the Legislature. Little attention was paid to my reasonings, in so low a
situation. Had these sentiments come from one in a more exalted station, they
might, perhaps, have been understood better, and the reasoning, upon such a
subject, been more clear and convincing.

I will not detain you with any further observations upon this subject, but
proceed in the narrative.

I went immediately to the house of -- Devens Esquire. with whom I took breakfast,
having received a previous invitation for that purpose, before I left the
Island.

Immediately after breakfast, the good old man, taking me into a private room,
entered into conversation upon my present prospects. I told him, that I had
concluded to repair to my uncle's, at Charleton, who had supplied me with
necessaries, for my appearing again in the world. It appeared to rejoice him,
to hear that I was not left friendless. He said, he had it in contemplation to
help me, if no other person appeared for that purpose. He gave me counsel, as a
parent would give to a child. He appeared to be interested in my future
welfare. He presented me with a dollar, wishing me to accept it, as a token of
his esteem, and good wishes. After this, I immediately repaired to Long Wharf,
where Capt. Summers lay, with his vessel. I here met that Philanthropist, upon
the shores of liberty, who had so often relieved my distress, in a state of
slavery. My sensations, at this meeting, were exquisitely pleasing. I tarried
with him two days; and during that time, an accident took place, which gave me
an opportunity of feeling the extremes of pain and joy, in a very short space.
The matter was this:

Capt. Summers, coming into his cabin, at a certain time, where he had left me,
missed his watch, which, he supposed, he had left hanging in the cabin. He
inquired of all the hands, whether they had seen or taken his watch, from the
place where he left it. Their answers were in the negative. He asked if any
body had been on board the vessel that morning, they said no. I saw his
countenance was troubled. He felt in a situation too delicate to know what
measure to take. My feelings, at this time, were as disagreeable as though I
had been covered with burning embers. I knew that the appearance must be, that
I had taken the watch. No other person could take it. The watch was gone. What
a horrid figure of ingratitude, I must now make, said I, in the mind of that
man, above all others, to whom I wish to appear amiable! A single word was not
uttered for the course of half an hour. A dismal gloom hung over the
countenance of every one present; at length, we were all relieved by the
arrival of the mare, who brought the watch on board, having carried it to a
watchmaker to have some work done to it, which was necessary.

The sight of the watch instantly dispelled the gloom from every countenance,
we all felt the effects, as though a shock of electricity had operated upon us.
Capt. Summers burst into a laugh, patting me on the shoulder, saying, "One
hundred dollars would not make me so glad as the sight of that watch."

My sensations were too violent for utterance, I could not reply. I felt
wounded to death, that, even for one moment, a jealousy should remain in the
breast of Captain Summers, of my treachery toward him; yet, what gave me such
exquisite pain was, that circumstances were in such a train, that he could not
avoid such a jealousy.

I visited a number of my acquaintance during this short residence in Boston;
among whom was a Mr. Bingham, who was contemporary with me in College. This man
had a warm heart, friendly to mankind, scrupulously nice in every principle of
justice, regulating his conduct by the exactest rules of propriety.

After this I took leave of all my acquaintance in Boston, and measured back
that road, which, nearly three years before, I had been carried through bound
with chains, o Glazier Wheeler. Before I left Boston, Capt. Summers offered to
supply me with a sum of money, for my present necessities; but as I had a
sufficiency already for my traveling expenses until I should arrive at my
uncle's, in Charleton, I declined accepting his offer, seeing he had been so
bountiful toward me already.

It was in the month of September, when I walked through the country. To visit
again the varied scenes of nature; to be at liberty, and without the least
restraint, ramble through the country, was a luxury of enjoyment which only
those can feel, who have been in my situation.

Hail, memory hail! in thy exhaustless mines
From age to age, unnumbered treasures shine!
Thought and her shadowy broad thy calls obey.
And place and time are subjects to thy sway!
I arrived in Charleton, the second day after my leaving Boston. As no
immediate business offered, I concluded to turn my attention to manuel labor,
until some opportunity should offer, for my attending to other business. I went
to work among the common laborers of my uncle. This was somewhat mortifying;
but I was determined to endure any inconvenience, rather than give the least
idea to any of my friends, that I was not willing to use such means as I
possessed, to gain an honest support. I continued in this business, about one
month, hoping to obtain a school, in this, or some of the neighboring towns,
as soon as the season should approach, for that business.

I will here give you an extract of a letter from my uncle to my father, about
this time.

Charleton, 25 th October, 1788. DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER,
Your son, Stephen, is now with me, and has been, the greater part of the time,
since his having left the castle. He works very steady with my folks on the
farm. He has some prospect of teaching a school within this town, or in Oxford.

He wishes you to write respecting your desire, relating to his further
pursuits; whether you would have him try to obtain business in these parts, or
return home, in order to enter into business with you. He appears to have
ability for farming, and as you have a large farm, should he prove tolerable
steady, he would greatly tend to ease you of a great deal of care and trouble,
and it would, likewise, be advantageous to him.

He must have some way for a subsistence; and there is none attended with less
temptations, than husbandry.

A few days since, I received your letter by Mr. Curtis, previous to which, I
had supplied your son with clothing, so as to come to my house, from the
castle, and agreeably to your desire, shall continue to supply him, with what
is necessary.

I am your loving brother, EBENEZER DAVIS.

Rev. E. BUROUGHS.

Charleton, 25 th October, 1788. HONORED AND DEAR SIR,
You will see by the date of this letter, that I am at liberty from the trying
scenes of tedious confinement, which I have endured for such a length of time.
The various occurrences of an unhappy course of misfortune has left no very
favorable impression upon the minds of the public, concerning me. I know I
have suffered greatly in your esteem, in consequence of this likewise, which
has added no small degree of poignancy to my sufferings. I hope to justify
myself to you, at least, by my future conconduct. To a sensorious world, I have
no idea of making the attempt, with an expectation of success.

I have been in this place about one month, paying some attention to manual
labor. I could wish for every degree of counsel, respecting my pursuits at
this critical juncture, that a parent can bestow.

I remain with sentiments of affection and duty, yours etc. STEPHEN BUROUGHS.

Rev. EDEN BUROUGHS.

Sometime in the month of November, I engaged to teach a school, for one month,
in the town of Charleton. The inhabitants being fearful of employing me for any
longer term, until they should find, by experience, whether I would conduct a
school with regularity and propriety. I began this school with fifteen
scholars, at the expiration of the month, I had forty five, I was then engaged
for two months, which took all the public money, which had been raised, for the
purpose of schoolling. My wages, for these two months, were raised; and I found
to my no small comfort, that my conduct had given universal satisfaction. When
the two months were expired, my school consisted of eight forty members. A
number of young men, from various parts of the country, had resorted to my
school, in order to obtain the higher branches of information.

When the time of the last engagement had expired, the people composing this
district assembled, and raised money for the continuation of this school, one
year longer, this was a thing entirely unknown before in that town. The season
for schoolling, heretofore, in this town, was three months, in the winter, and
the same length of time, in the summer. The summer school was taught by a
woman, which school consisted of small children.

I now found myself settled in business, and rising fast in the esteem of
those, with whom I was connected; yet, under all these circumstances, I was by
no means at ease. My mind was perpetually worried with a fear, that some of the
ten thousand of the unfortunate occurrences, which had heretofore befallen me,
might again destroy my present pleasing prospects.

My former sufferings had left such an impression of horror on my mind, that I
could not close my eyes in sleep, but what these terrible scenes would be
present to my view, and I compelled to act them over again. For years after
this, nay, to the present moment, sir, I often start from sleep, reeking with
sweat, under the intense misery of my fancied horror.

I will, here, give you a copy of a number of letters passing between me and my
friends, and then pass on to more important scenes.

Hanover, January, 6 th, 1789. DEAR CHILD,
It is truly a matter of rejoicing to us, that the time of your severe trials,
by a painful confinement, in a state of bondage, is now expired; and that you
have now returned, once more to taste those sweet of liberty, which are always
dear, next to life itself. But much greater joy will it afford us, to see the
evidence of your hearts being effectually turned from those ways, which had
well nigh proved your ruin, in relation to both time and eternity; well knowing
that without this, your release from a state of confinement, will finally
operate to no other purpose, but bringing you into a state of far more awful
bondage, than you have ever yet experienced; in relation to any advice you
desire from your parents, respecting your future objects and pursuits, we know
not how to be any more particular, than we have already expressed to you in our
former letters. You must be sensible, and every feeling of nature itself, will
teach you, that it must needs be highly acceptable to us, to have you return
home, and live with us, only provided, you bring with you a child-like temper,
and act out a spirit of genuine repentance, for your former conduct, and ways.
To invite your return to us on any other terms, we cannot, with any real
sincerity of heart. And if it shall be agreeable to your inclination, to return
to us, on the conditions here mentioned, your object in life must be pursuing
the labors of the field. I have neither capacity nor inclination, to introduce
you, under present circumstances, into the business of any other calling in
life. And in reference to such an object, you must necessarily consult your own
talents and inclination; for any person, of your age and experience, can better
judge for himself about the calling in life, for which he is best furnished,
than another can judge for him, and your own conduct, in relation to such an
object, must be governed by your own judgment. We earnestly pray for your best
comfort, in relation to time and eternity; and rest

your affectionate Parents, E. and A. BUROUGHS.

STEPHEN BUROUGHS.

Charleton, February 25 th, 1789. HONORED AND DEAR SIR,
Yours of the 6th of January was received about a week since. My
acknowledgements for your favor I have paid by the earliest opportunity.

In the letter I wrote you last fall, you will recollect an intimation of my
wishing for your advice upon my future pursuits in life. Not receiving any
answer in that letter, I engaged in the school for a year, and cannot now leave
it; my promise being given to keep it, that term of time.

In this undertaking I consulted my uncle Ebenezer Davis, who was full in the
opinion, that I ought to enter into the business, which then offered, on
account of the uncertainty of having another opportunity of equal advantage.

Your welfare and happiness lie near my heart, and should be exceeding glad to
make you a visit, but at present, such an object is out of my power.

I remain in the bands of filial affection, your dutiful son. STEPHEN
BUROUGHS.

Rev. E. BUROUGHS.

Boston, December 22 d, 1788. DEAR SIR,
I received your letter, and gave it proper attention. I am glad you have
hitherto, met with so good success. You are sensible "you must creep "again"
before you can go." I wish it were in my power, from good grounds, to encourage
you with respect to business this way; but I have no disposition to deceive
you. -- You will meet with better encouragement in the country, than in town. I
advise you to go to your father, as soon as you are out of business -- he is
able to help you, and I pray be may be willing -- I rejoice to hear you conduct
well, and, by all that is endearing in this, and in the future world, I entreat
you to maintain your good resolu^^^^.

In the utmost haste, I am your sincere friend and humble Servant, CALEB
BINGHAM.

Mr. S. BUROUGHS.

Matters continued in this train, without any material occurrence. I lived in
the house of one Williams, a very considerable man, in that part of the town
where I taught the school. -- He was a man of a feeling heart, was ready to
assist the needy, and administer comfort to the wretched. I was treated in this
house, by the good old people, more like a child, than a stranger. All the
tenderness and care of a parent toward a child ever marked their conduct
toward me. Some time in the summer, D. Bacon received a letter from my Father,
the contents of which was to our satisfaction.

I had settled in my mind, to make my father a visit, in the course of this
summer; therefore, hired a horse of one Curtis, formerly a clergyman, for this
journey, and made my visit, in the month of July, after an absence of nearly
four years. To revisit again the scenes of early youth Childhood's loved g^^ap,
behold in every scene,
The tangled wood-walk and the tufted green.
gave a pleasing sensation, tender and soothing. Not long after I had been at
my father's, my horse, playing in the pasture, fell and broke his leg. This was
a calamity which I felt in a very sensible manner. I had grown so timid, that
any object of misfortune was viewed in its most terrible form. I started at
every danger, and grew pale with apprehension. I have, since, wondered at my
feeling this misfortune so sensible. In order to ease my mind, my father
procured me another horse, and not only wrote himself, but added the
testimonial of one of his neighbors, to his account.

I returned to Charleton, and the September following, was married to the
daughter of my uncle, Ebenezar Davis.

This circumstance opened a new field of contemplation. To view myself in the
relation of a husband and parent; to feel the attachment, which such a relation
constituted; you, sir, who stand in those relations, yourself, can more easily
judge of my feelings, than I can describe them. When I became the head of a
family, perfectly calculated to render the domestic life happy; and saw myself
established in such business, as would supply their necessities, I was
satisfied -- the height of my ambition was gratified -- I enjoyed a flow of
uninterrupted felicity, for days and for months. The enjoyment of my fireside
was now a source of pleasure, which I, before, had never a distant idea, was
the portion of mortals. It was indeed too great to be of a lasting duration. I
received the warm congratulations of my friends, on my prosperity. Every event
took place to please. All things swam gently down the tide of time, and lulled
my feelings to repose, in the lap of security.

I have made a transition in my narrative, over about a year of the time, after
my marriage, without entering into particulars; having drawn out the narration
to such a length, already, as to fatigue my own patience; and I believe, sit,
that were it not for your tenderness to my feelings, you would long ere this
time have told me, "Buroughs, your story being both lengthy and gloomy, it is
time to desist." Gloom is the chief I have to entertain you with, in the after
relation; therefore, the most distant hint, that the story is too melancholy to
give entertainment, I will discontinue.

I will here give you a few extracts from those letters of congratulation,
which I received, in these days.

Hanover, February 21 st, 1790. DEAR CHILD,
I have only the privilege to seize a few hasty moments, to inform you of our
safe arrival, on the fifth day, from the time of our taking leave of you, and
our friends at Charleton. It is impossible, for the want of time, to be
particular in any matter -- would be glad to express our sentiments upon. That
we are greatly comforted, with the prospect of your being useful in life, would
be superfluous to say. You well know, that nothing can be a source of greater
comfort to us, that pertains to the life that now is. We remember the kindness
of your customers to you with sensible emotions of gratitude; and desire that
our love may be presented to them, as opportunity may offer. Tell Mr. Williams,
that his kindness, and that of his family, had made a deep impression upon us.
Inform Deacon Bacon, that my cordial salutations to him accompany this letter,
as also to Elder Green. I have it in view to write to the Deacon, as soon as
opportunity will permit. At present the want of time forces me to a close; and
with fervent prayers, that you and your companion, may be taught of God, to
walk as heirs of the grace of life, and for the highest comfort of you both, in
relation to time and eternity:

We remain your affectionate Parents, A. and E. BUROUGHS.

STEPHEN BUROUGHS.

Hanover, March 20 th, 1790. DEAR CHILD,
IT is needless to remind you, that whilst we behold a prospect of your being
useful in life, in your present calling, we partake of that satisfaction, in
the prospect, which proved in its operation, like a most reviving and
comforting cordial. As soon as you come to know the heart of a parent, you will
understand in a different point of view, from what you can now, how the welfare
of a child, is an object that is dear and precious, to such a degree, that in
comparison to this, every other earthly treasure is of insignificant and
trifling importance. Amidst your present objects and pursuits, that relate to
the concerns and comfort of the present life; I would (...) add to our joy, to
see the evidence (...) each of your hearts are reconciled to the (...) of that
God, who is the giver of happiness, and the object of have to every soul, who
is made wise to salvation. Whilst you are looking into the nature of religion,
we wonder not, that you are ^^^entimes tempted to t^rup^e, whether there is any
thing in religion, whilst you form an estimate of it, by the lives of the
generality of its professions. Whilst you discern that in quits, in its various
shapes, abounds amongst them, take heed that it does not prove a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense, to you. If it should, it is a certain
evidence, that you have had recourse to a false rule, to form your estimate of
religion by. If the things, which you behold and hear, in the conduct and
conversation of professors, operate in this manner, to worry and perplex your
minds, and you are ready to enquire, "Is there any thing in religion? can there
any good thing come out of Nazareth?" I would only reply, in the words of
Philip to Nathaniel "Come and see" make the trial, and then judge for
yourselves. By making the trial, understand me to mean, that you look into the
spirit of that temper, which the word holds up to view, and let your hearts be
fully reconciled to such a spirit, and governed by such a temper, and I well
know, you will want no other evidence to convince you, that in this wisdom
there is such a treasure, that all the things you can desire are not to be
compared to it. That you may both enjoy the happiness of the social life, in
the mutual exercise of such a temper, toward each other, is a prayer, that is
pregnant with the most genuine love, that our hearts are capable of
experiencing toward you.

We remain your affectionate Parents, E. and A. BUROUGHS.

S. BUROUGHS.

Boston, November 20 th, 1789. DEAR SIR,
I Thank you for another letter, I am happy to hear you are so well married, I
am glad you have thrown away ambition; I am glad, likewise, that you retain it
in so great a degree; for there are two sorts; you are ambitious of rising into
fame, upon the basis of virtue. I charge you, fling not away that ambition. You
may not rise, however, in the eyes of the world; but you will rise in yourself.
For what more exalted situation can any mortal wish to arrive at, than to be
able to adopt the words of the apostle, "I have maintained a conscience void of
offense, both toward God and toward man," or to that effect. This, you know,
is what you and I must aim at, or we never can be happy; and with this, we
shall be happy, however the world may think of us.

People here are not yet disposed to believe you are reformed, in reality; I
will believe it, and you must, for once, disappoint the world. I feel greatly
interested in your welfare, I seem to anticipate the joy of your parents at
your reformation.

It so happens, that I am always in a hurry when I receive your letters, or I
should be more particular.

We have lost one of our children since I wrote you. I am afraid the bearer is
gone, for I did not receive your letter in season.

My compliments await your lady -- I should be glad to see you both. The next
time I go to Connecticut, I shall visit you.

I am, dear sir, your faithful friend, and humble servant, CALEB BINGHAM.

Mr. S. BUROUGHS.

Stratfield, February 2 d, 1790. SIR,
I HAVE received yours, I thank you for the respect you express, which also
gives me great satisfaction, for your acknowledgement to me, that I have been
instrumental of giving you relief, in time of distress, which is no more than a
duty, which rational beings are bound to do for each other, exclusive of the
bonds of relation. I also rejoice to hear that your behavior is agreeable, and
that you have gotten an agreeable companion, and that you are in prosperity. My
business was such, that I could not have an opportunity to wait on your father,
please to excuse me to him, as I understand he is bound to your town, before he
returns. I wish to be remembered to your consort, your mother, and your uncle
Davis.

These from your affectionate cousin. STEPHEN SUMMERS.

Mr. S. BUROUGHS.

Thus you see, sir, that my portion of happiness was complete. All that was
possible for man to enjoy, I now experienced, I was raised to the utmost
pinnacle of bliss. But I was only raised to be thrown from my exaltation, to
the deepest abyss of wretchedness and misery.

It appears to me, that fortune, to show the extent of her power, had curiously
interwoven a train of circumstances, of all others, the most delicate; and of
all others, the most calculated to make me ^^^^nerble by her shafts

From the castle, from a state of confinement, as a slave; from a state where I
had suffered a course of unexampled cruelty; to fall among a people, of all
others, the most agreeable, humane, and benevolent; to find among them a
readiness to give or to all my virtues, notwithstanding the clamor against me;
to make use of my abilities, where they found them useful; and to treat me as a
member of the general family of mankind, was a situation, which rendered me
most feelingly happy. Here I found a society, which I could enjoy, upon terms
of that easy access, which renders it so grateful.

Here was a theater upon which I had exhibited in such a manner, as to raise
the desponding hopes of my friends, to a state of the most sanguine
expectation, on, relating to the part, which I should perform, as a member of
society. Here I had contracted such a tenderness for a fond wife and our
helpless offspring, as to loose the desire for my own prosperity, in my anxiety
for them. My own personal benefit was, now, but a secondary consideration, and
only viewed of consequence, as it contributed to ^^nder them happy.

Here I had a family; here were friends of near connection; and here was a
society, among whom I enjoyed the social pleasures, in their highest per^^^^;
consequently, I felt the most ardent desire (...) myself agreeable, and
endearing to all (...).

(...) the moment, when I had obtained the highest (...) nor my ambition, when
I became completely (...), in the enjoyment of all my hearts desire; (...)
hurled from this summit of happiness, and (...) under the weight of one general
wide extended ruin; to see myself in a moment, stripped of every enjoyment my
heart held dear, and reduced back into that state of confinement, from which I
had so lately been liberated, was a situation, in which all the powers of mind,
and the strength of nature, operated and combined, to render me completely
miserable. Alas! thou unhappy companion of my life, how changed our prospects!
but a little time since, when all nature smiled on our endeavors, to promote
the welfare of our mutual concern, a rising family: even our hearts were
exhilarated, our minds were soothed, and our souls filled with delight, with
the playful smiles, and openning mind of a tender infant! but alas! those
scenes are fled -- fled "with the years beyond the flood" -- fled alas! beyond
the reach of hope! No more shall my heart be made glad by the fond embrace. No
more shall the sun rise to cheer my fond hopes, my rising expectations. But
midnight and death shall howl their horrid dirges around my bed! misery and
melancholy shall spread their sable veil over every part of my life, and after
my exit from this stage of trouble, furies shall shriek a doleful requiem to my
departure.

I find, sir, that I am wild and unconnected in my relation. The gloomy scene
crowded upon me, before I was ready to give it a place; and I, involuntarily,
find my pen continually delineating those melancholy circumstances, I beg
pardon for my irregularity, and will recall my wanderings,

I am sir, etc.

CHAP. XXII:
A part how small of the terraqueous globe
Is tenanted by man! the rest awaste,
Rocks, deserts, frozen seas, and burning sands;
Wild haunts of monsters, poisonous stings, and death:
Such is earths melancholy map! But far
More sad! This earth is a true map of man
So bounded are it is haughty lord's delights
To woe's wide empire; where deep troubles toss
Loud sorrows bowl, enven^^^d passions bite,
Ravenous calamities our vitals seize,
And threatening fate wide opens to devour.

IN prosecuting the design of this letter, I must confess that I am at a loss,
how to describe those events, of which I wish to give you a just idea. I know I
shall fall infinitely short of my own wishes. The scene was so crowded with
incidents, that it will be impossible to relate them, in such a manner, as to
keep them clear and distinct, so as to render them entirely intelligible. Under
this view, I have thought it the better way, to give you extracts of letters,
relating to these events, interspersing them with some explanatory remarks, and
filling up any deficiency, by an additional relation.

To understand the after relation, in as clear a manner, as the nature of the
thing will admit, it will be necessary to give you the characters of some
persons, who were active in my misfortune. And to begin with the chief engine
of this business, viz. Israel Waters. This man was a near neighbor to me,
during my living in my own family, When Waters first commenced his career in
life, he was extremely poor, illiterate, ill favored, and of a sour morose
temper; hence he remained, for a long time, unknowing and unknown. A number of
fortunate circumstances happening in the course of his business, he attained a
handsome property. When he found himself to be a man of property, he grew
unaccountably presuming and haughty. He had, heretofore, remained among
mankind, without attention or notice, but, now manifested an ardent ambition to
start into consequence in the world.

His first effort was to rise in the military line. He stood for the command of
the company of which he was a member, not sparing of his purse on the occasion;
but was defeated in his pursuit. He then stood for the lieutenancy, and after a
length of time, obtained his object.

The Captainship becoming vacant, a number of times, he endeavored, by the
dint of electioneering, to obtain that office; his exertions were ineffectual,
and he threw up his commission in a pet, and joined a company of horse.

Toward this company, he truly acted a benevolent part, had his motives been a
regard to the real prosperity of the company: but his after conduct made it
evident, that electioneering was his object, in assisting various members of
the company, with those articles, which their finances did not allow them to
procure, without inconveniency. Notwithstanding every exertion which he made,
the choice of the the company fell upon a deserving man, and of course, he
occupied the second place in this company.

Whilst he held the office of lieutenant, in the company of light house, the
rebellion broke out, which, you will recollect, was termed Shay's rebelion. --
This produced animosity among neighbors, and almost every man became a
partizan. The militia were called upon, and Waters, with the rest of his
company, went into service, against the insurgents. Here he had an opportunity
of hearing much said in favor of government, and likewise against those, who
should oppose her measures.

Having been disappointed, in all his efforts, to become a man of that
consequence in society, to which his restless ambition had lead him; he
expected, that he had now discovered the only sure road to preferment, viz. by
making himself so strong a stickler for government, that he would be taken
notice of, and promoted.

Under this view of matters, not having ability to distinguish between a real
and pretended assistance to the laws of the country, he became the pimp, rather
than the friend of government.

My rising so suddenly and rapidly into esteem had given this man great
umbrage. "What" said he "shall this mushroom of a night be rewarded and
caressed by mankind, whilst I have been laboring years in the pursuit, and
spent great part of my time and interest in this business, and yet be
neglected"? The comparison was too mortifying; and of course, he fought to
remove that object from sight, which gave him so much pain to view. He was but
too successful in his undertaking.

He had made his calculation upon answering two purposes, in rendering me
obnoxious to the laws, viz. gratifying his own private spleen, and gaining the
commendations of men in office, who, he expected, would be gratified, at my
downfall; hence, after my calamity, he made his boasts, that he esteemed the
honor he had done himself, in that business, so highly, that he would not part
with it for one hundred pounds.

Another character in this business, was one Elice Putney, an old girl, who had
not borne the character of a Lucretia; and of consequence, finding herself at a
low ebb, calculated to make some bold efforts, to do away a jealousy there was
remaining upon the minds of many, that she was by no means exposed to suffer on
account of her virtue. No way appeared so eligible to this antiquated heroine,
as to raise a report, of her having withstood some violent attacks, upon the
castle of her honesty. This being the case, you will hear, in the after
relation, how she succeeded in her undertaking.

The following character, who maintains a place most in dignity, in this
narrative, is Daniel Bacon. This man is as punctual in telling his great
religious exercises, as any man you will generally meet with. Take his own
account for your evidence, and you will believe him to be the best man living;
but, when you examine him critically, by his works, you will find it necessary,
to place much to the account of human frailties, if you continue to believe in
his goodness. He is a man possessing a very tenacious memory, relating to
matters which make in his own favor, and the contrary, he has a happy faculty
in forgetting.

His wife comes forward, in the next place, and clearly demonstrates, that she
is bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. They are both endowed with small
mental abilities, timid, and fearful of meeting with danger, on every occasion.

About six months previous to my marriage, two daughters of D. Bacon attended
my school. As I taught a school in the evening, separate from the common
school, many scholars, who attended in the day, likewise attended in the
evening. After I had dismissed the school for the day, I generally made a
practice of tarrying at the school-house, until the time for opening that in
the evening, in order to make some necessary arrangements.

More or less of the scholars, who lived some distance from the school,
likewise tarried. At a certain time, the elder of D. Bacon's daughters remained
with me in the school house, during the intermission, between the two schools.
A number of circumstances happening to throw a certain enjoyment, full in my
view, the temptation was too powerful. I fell before it. The fatal moment was
past. It could not be recalled. After I had retired from school, the object had
its full operation upon my mind. This was a moment of calmness. This was a
moment in which the examination of my conduct gave me the keenest pain

I considered that my situation had been the means of gaining easy access to
her virtue. That she had been taught to put the most implicit confidence in my
instruction. That the example, in me, would have a fatal influence on her
principles of virtue.

These considerations gave me no small degree of uneasiness, I lamented my
untimely folly, but too late, I lamented it. I took the earliest opportunity of
repairing the injury, so far as was now in my power.

Not long after this, the same opportunity offering again, at the school house,
I entered into conversation with the girl, on the subject. I endeavored to
give her a statement of my own views on the subject. I expostulated with her in
the warmest terms, upon the impropriety of ever swerving from the path of
virtue. I intimated to her, that from the principles of integrity, as well as
tenderness to her own welfare, I should keep this business a secret from every
person living. It is true, I gave her no charge to keep this unhappy business
buried in her own breast. I presumed, that the laws of delicacy and self
preservation would have been sufficient for such a purpose, but in this I was
deceived.

She divulged the secret among some of her companions. By little and little, it
gained ground, until it came to the knowledge of Israel Waters. He embraced the
opportunity to make such arrangements with the parents of these girls, as to
carry his diabolical plan into execution. He pretended great concern for the
welfare of the girl's character, and said he wished to save her free from
imputation of blame.

Matters being under this situation, one morning, about the dawn of day, I was
awaked, and made prisoner by a sheriff, Waters, and a number of others. I was
immediately carried to the house of Waters, and kept closely confined, until
the evening succeeding, when there arrived two lawyers, one to act as justice
of the piece, and the other to advocate the cause, in behalf of the state.

A circumstance somewhat curious, that these gentlemen should come twenty
miles, to make inquiry into a matter, when there were four justices living
within the distance of four miles, who were equally competent to make the
inquiry.

I was brought before the justice, and heard the complaint read, which
contained allegations against me, amounting to a rape. To this, you may depend,
I plead not guilty.

When the girl was examined, she would not stand the test, but declared that I
only had made the attempt to ravish her, without success.

To my astonishment, I found two others were called upon to give testimony,
viz. Elice Putney, and a younger sister of the first mentioned girl. They all
testified to the same import, that I had laid violent hands upon them, in
various places, and exerted all my abilities to proceed with them to acts of
iniquity; but they had made such noble resistance, as to overcome my greatest
exertions, and fairly out matched me in strength.

After they had finished their evidence upon these matters of offense, the
justice made out my m^ttimus to jail, for trial at the next supreme court, to
be holden six months afterward, for an assault with an intent to ravish.
Notwithstanding, the court of quarter sessions had concurrent jurisdiction with
the supreme court, in causes of this kind, and sat, if I mistake not, four
months sooner.

The girls, D. Bacon, and wife, were bound over to give testimony at the
sitting of the court etc.

To undertake a description of my feelings, under this situation, would be as
fruitless, as to attempt to give a blind man an idea of colors. I hate to
dwell upon the scene, long enough to give you the general occurrences which
took place.

It makes my head run round in a maze, to dwell long enough upon these matters,
to bring them again into view, so that I may state them in order. I rejoice
that I may turn you to the perusal of some letters, which will lead you into
the knowledge of facts, without my writing them over again.

MY DEAR,
AFTER the scene of last night, you will not wonder at my feeling all the
horrors of my situation. On the way, not a word said. All hushed with that
dismal silence, which betokens the feelings even of those, whose occupation is
cruelty. About midnight we arrived at the goal, and after some difficulty, the
Cerberus of this place of human woe was aroused, and procuring a number of his
massy keys, the ponderous doors growled on their hinges, to open to my view and
anticipation the regions of horror and despair. The doors again were closed,
and all the bolts responded to the iron force of their massy keys; the scene
around me is beyond description; through the remainder of the night, my mind
was overborne by the weight of what had taken place, in such a rapid
succession, for twenty four hours before: nature gave way, and I sunk into
forgetfulness. I awoke with the light, but not to stupidity. The mind became
vigorous and clear, by a moments relaxation, all the avenues of sensibility
were open; the positive and relative horrors of my situation came rolling upon
me, like a torrent of destruction, threatening instant desolution. All my
flattering prospects in life, in a moment, blasted. A wife, whom I adore, an
infant, and only child, lost in a moment, by the merciful hand of justice! O!
horrid profanation! to call that by the name of justice, which nature recoils
at with disgust. Is this the lot of man? to have his soul filled with complete
happiness; to be possessed with every object, which could gratify his remotest
wish; in order to be thrown from the enjoyment of all, to render his misery
absolute! I now your feelings upon these trying events. I know the various
maneuvers, which will be made use of, in order to prepossess your mind against
my conduct, and of course in favor of the proceedings of those persons who
have combined together for my destruction. In order to counteract their
designs, I could have recourse to arguments, entreaties, and persuasions; but
all these I despise. If I possess your confidence, to such a degree, as that
you will be able to resist the various efforts made use of against me, I then
possess every thing in you, that I wish for, and short of that, there is
nothing for which I am ambitious. I wish to see you, even in this dreary place
of confinement. I know you must be shocked at the prospect, which you will find
presented to your view, should you come to this "place of torment!" but
notwithstanding, I cannot say, but what I wish to see you, even here; that is
all the remaining comfort, which now even glimmers before my eyes, and how long
that spark of consolation may remain, I know not. If I should be deprived of it
before tomorrow's dawn, not more strange should I esteem that, than thousands
of occurrences, through which I have passed, since I began my melancholy career
in life. What a host of flattering friends and humble servants, had I, two days
since, but now where are they? Not one, who dares to show his head. The town of
C -- n will no more contend in what part of it I shall reside. So well do I
know the baseness of the human heart, that for one shilling, I would part with
all my chance of friends, in this wide world, (yourself excepted.) And yet,
whose prospects of unalterable friends were stronger than mine. Am I altered?
am I changed? am not I the same in name, and nature, in feeling, and in
sentiment? but my prospects are blasted, and my friends are vanished. Why do I
write thus lengthy? because it looses me from my situation for a moment. Write
to me. Say (...) to dispel the gloom, for a moment, even if it be matters not
founded in fact.

I remain with tenderness and affection. STEPHEN BUROUGHS.


MY DEAR,
I WAS mistaken in not valuing the friendship of those, who made professions in
time of prosperity. I find to my surprise, there are some real friends, and
even those, who dare profess it to the world, strange! Those who dare assert
the cause of innocence, notwithstanding the power of oppressors! Captain I -- r
was here this day, and offered to become sponsor for the payment of 250l. on
condition of my being liberated, till court. Cannot our friends, or relations,
I might more justly say, be prevailed upon to give bail for the other 250l? I
shall think it very surprising if strangers will show more kindness, than the
nearest relatives. I find that the opinion of the world is much more
favorable, than I expected. Many independent minds view this matter as they
ought, according to the evidence which has been offered. For a girl to pretend
that violence had been offered her, six months before she makes the matter
known, even to her nearest intimates, and seek the company of the person, who
had offered the violence, perpetually and continually, until just before the
discovery is to take place is, to me, a line of conduct hardly credible, and to
the candid world appears ludicrous, to the last degree. Yet, notwithstanding
the ridiculous foundation upon which this matter rests, my enemies exult in the
prospect of bringing ruin upon my head, by supporting the charge of violence
against the virtuous, the modest, and amiable L -- y E -- n; who, from her own
story, (did we not in charity disbelieve her), would make herself one of the
most barefaced w -- r's, who disgrace her sex, and bring a blush upon the check
of every modest woman. Yet, I know the ^^rld at large can believe an infamous
report, (however incredible in itself,) so much readier than a good one, that
my apprehensions have been much alarmed, by the great exertions, which are now
making, left such an invincible prejudice should be raised against me, as
greatly to mar the equity of the trial. I know upon that one circumstance,
rests the whole expectation of my enemies; should they not succeed in that,
they must fall with the rapidity of Lucifer; therefore, no pains will be
wanting, on their part, to effect their purpose, in such a way; if I obtain my
liberation by full, I think they must be disappointed, in their warm
expectations. Strange the man should be so blind to his own happiness, and to
the part he ought to act, as to use his exertions for the misery of his fellow.
The ills of life by the common course of nature, are many, and hard to be
borne; and our situation requires all the sympathy, commiseration, and
compassion of each other, to render it tolerable; but, when to the common ills
of life, the artificial cruelty of vengeful mortals is added, then is the cup
of bitterness completely filled; then shall we find racks and gibbets,
pillories, and whipping posts. The inventors of those very engines of cruelty
will boast of their superior lenity, declaring themselves with great
oftentation, to be the happy few, who have ever known the feelings of
compassion toward each other, exulting at the exact of their humanity, so
superior to that of the Turks, Russians, and barbarians. Mistaken wretches! and
because they can find some more cruel than themselves, they deem this matter a
sufficient evidence, of their own great goodness; but should they for a moment
make the comparison, between their own conduct, and the real standard of
benevolence, viz. the conduct of Deity, how would they be abashed and shrink
with astonishment, at their own baseness. Where do we find prisons and tortures
prepared by him, for offending mortals? does he take advantage of every lapse,
which he sees in us, to wreck his vengeance? should he do this, how few would
have the leisure to pursue his neighbor's destruction? Should matters turn out
in such an unfortunate manner, as to render it difficult to obtain liberation,
on bail, immediately, I wish you to come to W -- ^ soon, if you find it can be
affected without difficulty, otherwise, you will do well to defer your journey
for the present.

I remain etc. STEPHEN BUROUGHS.


DEAR SIR,
YOURS of the 20th ult. came safe to hand. I read it with pleasure, because any
thing coming from you gives me pleasure, but more particularly, that which
speaks your mind, and partakes of the nature of sentiment. You mention a desire
to see me, I do not think I can come to W -- r until court, the reasons are but
too well known to you, already; and these reasons appear to me conclusive;
however, I wish to act with prudence and deliberation on the matter, and shall,
therefore, await you opinion on the subject. The prospect of bail is entirely
out of the question, owing to the influence of -- --, however terrible such a
condition, yet you must bear it, and I wish you may do it with composure, and
not think of riding yourself of confinement, by any illegal measures. The fatal
consequences, should you succeed, will be but too sensibly felt by me. The
country you must leave. I must then remain forsaken, incumbered with a helpless
infant, and what is more, uncertain what to hope for, or what not to fear.
Almost any situation, to me, would be preferable to that. I tremble at the
thought, that it is even possible for such an event to take place. Is your love
toward me sincere? and can you bear to leave your country, to leave me, and
your babe, without a friend, upon whom we shall have the confidence (...) and
support?

I remain, in haste, your loving wife, SALLY BUROUGHS.


MY DEAR.
YOURS of the ^th instant arrived yesterday; my feelings were variously
affected by its contents. Your intimation, of what comes from me gives you
pleasure, was truly an intimation of the most pleasing kind to me; but, what
was the difference of (...) feelings, when you tell me you shall not come (...)
W -- r until court. Do you imagine I can wear away five gloomy months, without
one drop of comfort, mixed in this cup of bitterness? can this conduct be
consistent with the duty you owe to me, Can it be consistent with that love,
which you profess, to forsake me, in this time of difficulty? This is the time
for trial, this is the time for the serious proof of the affections of our
friends. I have seen your father twice, since I saw you, I talked with him
relating to his intentions, concerning you, and whether he was willing you
should come to W -- r, on a visit, he did not give me a decided answer, either
in the negative, or affirmative.

He appears to be apprehensive, that so soon as my liberation takes place, I
shall, with indignation, quit the country, and entirely leave you, or else
carry you to regions unknown to him. Did he know the feelings of my heart, on
that subject, his ideas would undergo a revolution, and he would reason with
more candor.

In relation to my affection toward you, I think that you must be perfectly
sensible, that it is stronger than the powers of misfortune. You ask me if I
can leave you and flee my country; would you ask the tender mother if she will
leave her helpless infant? or the turtle dove, whether she will leave her mate?
It is for you, my Sally, that I live; it is for you that I endure the (...) of
life. Should I leave you, what then would became of my Sally, the idol of my
soul, the delight of my eyes? my soul shudders at the thought, and recoils with
horror at the reflection! may the cold hand of death sooner close these eyes,
so accustomed to sorrow, than such events should happen. You can hardly
conceive of my feelings, in this situation of wretchedness; they are like the
boistrous ocean in (...) of tempest; confusion and distress, anguish and
despair, perpetually assail me; I rave with madness, and grow fullen with
disappointment. My sleeping moments often flatter me you are present, I awake
to disappointment, and curse my dreams, for openning all my wounds afresh, and
causing the blood of affliction to flow in streams anew. The clouds of darkness
which now hang over us are thick and gloomy, but must not they be soon driven
away? will not that God, who knows the secrets of the heart appear for injured
innocence? By the united advice of my friends, I have engaged Mr. S -- g of A
-- rather than M -- k. Sunday morning, I have just openned my eyes from a
pleasing dream, (...) thought I was at liberty with you, and enjoying all the
sweets of social life, the rapture of this scene overpowered my sleep, and I
awoke; but to what did I awake! to behold myself alone, environed by the gloomy
walls of a jail, composed of huge rocks and massy bars of iron, without the
hope of even seeing you until court: I say wrong, I have hopes of seeing you
soon, and must not be disappointed. You desire me to make myself contented. You
may as well desire the drowning man not to seize on every substance within his
grasp.


DEAR SIR,
YOUR favor of the 11th I received. It was with gratitude I received it, You
intimate a dissatisfaction at my declining a visit to you. But think not, sir,
that it is for the want of affection, that I abstain from coming to see you.
The disagreeable necessity I may hereafter be under, of subsisting upon the
help of my friends, makes me fearful of taking measures, which will offend
them. Notwithstanding, since you so earnestly desire it, I shall try every
proper measure to see you.

I have heard that you have made attempts to break jail. I cannot answer for
the truth of these reports. I think ^t the better way to lie quiet until court,
however disagreeable the idea may appear, and not run any risk by trying to
extricate yourself from confinement, by unlawful measures. Should you succeed,
you would labor under very great embarrassments, on account of leaving the
country; if you have any regard for an afflicted wife, or an infant child, once
the delight of your soul.

It is impossible to conceive the anxiety that perpetually fills my mind,
relating to these unhappy events. Sometimes I am, ready to give myself over for
lost, thrown out into a troublesome world, to endure, alone and unsupported,
the hardships and distresses incident to such a situation. But alas! how can I
harbor such a thought? you certainly cannot wish to deceive me. You must be
entirely sensible of my affection toward you.

I hear so many reports, and observations, that at times, my fears almost
overcome me. May God graciously support the under those trials, which I am now
called to pass through.

I remain, with the warmest affection, your loving, though afflicted and
sorrowful wife. SALLY BUROUGHS.


December. 28 th. MY DEAR,
IN answer to yours of the ^1st, I have to communicate, that a degree of
satisfaction was received in that letter, which is entirely inexpressible.
There is a something in receiving testimonies of attachment and esteem, when we
are in adversity, which is exquisitely grateful; on the other hand, to
experience injuries and abuse, at such times, is far more insupportable, than
when we are in common prosperity.

Respecting those reports of my attempting to break jail, they are as unfounded
as many others, which have been in circulation, I have not the most distant
idea, under present circumstances, of making any such attempt.

You mention your anxiety, on account of the reports, and observations, which
you continually hear made. To furnish you with what evidence the nature of the
thing will admit, I shall refer you to that line of conduct, which you have
been acquainted with in me, from the knowledge you ever had of my person and
principle.

You entertain a fear of my abandoning you, after my liberation. This appears
to me strange. When I have once found a friend, I do not easily let him go,
even in a state of the greatest prosperity. My soul was formed for friendship,
and when I find a friend, who can endure the storm of adversity, I do not think
there is, in the nature of things, an equivalent to be received in exchange,
for such a friend. When you consider, that in addition to all these
considerations. I stand in the relation of a husband to you, and of a parent to
our infant; can there remain the most distant jealousy i^ your mind, that I
shall forfeit all claim to every principle of integrity, under these
obligations!!

Surely, my dear, if you take all* these circumstances which I have mentioned,
into your serious consideration, it will be an effectual bar, against the
effect of the suggestions, of those meddling characters, who wish to destroy
your peace of mind.

That you may enjoy every blessing, which the kind hand of providence bestows
on mortals, is the fervent prayer of

your affectionate husband. STEPHEN BUROUGHS.


January 3 d. DEAR SIR,
ALTHOUGH I am at liberty from actual confinement, yet I partake of the
affliction, which environs you on every side. I wish it was in my power to
grant you some relief; and could you point out any way, in which such an object
can be effected, most gladly will I attend to it. It i^ now nearly two months,
since I saw you, and God only knows, what I have endured since. It is not the
want of friendship, which keeps me from seeing you. My thoughts, by night and
by day, are with you, and drink deep of the cup of affliction, which is set
before us. I dread to ****************************** I am determined to make
you a visit, as soon as convenience will admit, unless you think the reasons
against it are too great to be dispensed with. The conflict between ***********
has been greatly trying, but it is now decided. I am determined, in future, to
regulate my conduct, according to the wishes of my unhappy (...), let the
feelings of others he as they may.

I shall wa^^, with anxious expectations, for your answer to this letter,
specifying your wish, with respect to my coming to Worcester.

And now, dear sir, accept the advice of one, who, in the warmth of (...) and
affection, feels ardent* desirous for your welfare and prosperity.

The time of your affliction cannot endure always. There must be an end to
these trials. Therefore, sir, I wish you would compose yourself under your
situation, and remain as contented under it, as the nature of the thing will
admit. Look forward to happier scenes, that await us hereafter, in spite of all
the malice of the Demons of discord. It cannot render your situation any more
tolerable, to suffer yourself to be thus overborne, by the wig^ht of your
misfortunes. Let us bear with (...) the stroke of misfortune. Let us show to
the world, that we can rise above the malicious strokes o^ all our enemies.
While I give this advice, I hardly know how to fallow it myself. My sorrows
make me almost frantic with grief; but I am in (...), that by long exertions, I
shall be able to render them more tolerable.

I remain, with constant fidelity, your loving wife. SALLY BUROUGHS.


12 th January. MY DEAR,
YOURS, of the 3d instant, I gratefully acknowledge; in it I traced the marks
of the truest affection. How grateful to my heart these tokens of esteem, in a
time of adversity. There is a luxurency of enjoyment in sympathetic friendship,
when the d^^^ful knell of woe tolls in my cars, which beggars all description.
In your letter, you advise me not to feel my misfortunes. Do you know that we
were both made to feel. And what nature has done, we shall find hard to undo.
Your advice was founded, I know, upon the principles of true benevolence, but
think -- you mistake, in some measure, the operation of the human heart.

The most certain manner of lessening our agonies is, to give way before their
pressure, and confess we feel their force. Fortitude is but a dream; for where
lies the merit of being insensible to the stroke of adversity, or in
dissembling our sensibility? If we are insensible, that is entirely owing to a
happy constitution, formed by the hand of nature. This blessing is only
obtained, as the gift of heaven, in our f^^mation. No art or assiduity of ours
can ever acquire it.

If we dissemble our feelings, we only endeavor, by artifice, to persuade
^^pers, that we enjoy privileges, which, in fact, we do not enjoy; and while we
endeavor to appear happy, we feel all the pangs of internal misery; and all
the self repoach of endeavoring to deceive.

Nothing is more certain, than that tears and groans grow out of pain; and when
misfortunes oppress, it is our duty and interest to take refuge under such
coverts, from the storm, as we can obtain. To fly for support to friendship. To
fly for support to wailings and lamentation, or to any thing, which will
alleviate our distress.

It is said by Philosophers, that our passions are the source of all our
miseries; this has been a subject of abundant declamation. I own that they are
the source of all our misfortunes; but they are, at the same time, the source
of all our pleasures; therefore, the study of our lives ought to be, not to
dissemble an absence of passion; but to repel those, which lead to vice, by
those which direct to virtue.

Your visit was a most grateful circumstance; there is a pleasure in seeing
you, even here, though intermingled with grief, which is a great alleviation to
my state of distress. Next to seeing you, is the pleasure of receiving your
letters. I wish you to favor me with this latter agreeable circumstance, as
often as convenience will permit.

I remain, with the warmest sentiments of affection, your loving husband.
STEPHEN BUROUGHS.


5 th February DEAR SIR
YOURS, of the 12th of last month, was handed me this morning. Since I was at
Worcester, I have written to daddy Buroughs. I hereby send you enclosed, a
copy of my letter.

You may think, that my anxiety for your welfare, led me to take such measure,
in the course of my advice, as would not answer the put, ^se* which I had
designed. What I expressed, was the overflowings of my heart. You, undoubtedly,
will make such use of it, as your superior judgment will point out. I have the
most ardent desire for your prosperity. I suggest such ideas for its
accomplishment, as my weak capacity will produce. Perhaps, I view matters too
much on the dark side. But, when I take a view of what has happened to you,
since you came upon the stage of action; of the invincible prejudice, mankind
have rooted in their minds, against you; and of the horrid effects of
prejudice; I cannot but tremble at your approaching fate.

We often view with horror, the effects of superstition upon the mind of man,
in matters of religion. We have seen the most sensible of men led into such
acts of barbarity and cruelty, as have disgraced the human character, by the
shocking influence of superstition. I find that superstition is not, alone,
confined to matters of religion. Its rage is equally great against a character
unpopular, from any other cause. A character however leaded with infamy,
retaining the principles of virtue, is the greatest ornament to human nature,
of any part of her existence. Many regard virtue, only as it is attended with
applause. Those, who are really virtuous, regard it for the internal pleasure,
which it confers. Such models, I wish were held up to view, as worthy of
imitation.

Believe me to be, with sentiments of the sincerest affection, your loving and
dutiful wife. SALLY BUROUGHS.


HONORED AND DEAR SIR,
YOU will hardly entertain an idea of my attempting to lay open to your view,
the bleeding anguish of my heart; the distressed situation to which your s^n is
reduced; and the agony of mind, I endure on that account: This is beyond the
power of language. It must require a very (...) mind, and an heart of great
sensibility, even to figure, the most distant resemblance, of this horrid
situation.

To give you some idea of these events. About 3 o'clock in the morning, the
room in which we slept, was broken open, by a man by the name of Israel Waters,
attended by a sheriff, and a number of others, who seized your son, and with a
very imperious tone, bade him get up, immediately, and dress himself. He was
then conveyed to the house of this Waters, who was a near neighbor, or rather
lived in the neighborhood, where he was kept, through the next day, closely
confined.

It appeared, that this Waters' had, of his own self moving will, intermeddled
in a matter, in which he was neither mediately, nor immediately concerned; had
applied to a justice, living at the distance of twenty miles, to make inquest
into these matters of charge, although a number of justices lived in the
viginity; had brought forward an attorney, to exert himself in the business, to
your son's disadvantage; under these circumstances, you will not readily
suppose, that Waters acted from a principle of the strictest uprightness, in
this prosecution; neither sought for an impartial investigation of the business.

The charges were truly of a heinous nature; but the evidences brought forward,
in support of these charges were of a kind, too ridiculous to mention. There
may be something in this business, which is se^^ by the gentlemen of the law;
but as for my own part, I cannot see the most distant (...) of evidence, to
support the charge. Add^^ to this, your son's conduct, ever since my
acquaintance with him, has not borne the most distant appearance of such a
principle, either in his treatment of me, o^ his conduct toward others. Under
th^se circumstances, you cannot wonder at my feeling very different, upon this
subject, from what many would wish, who have raised a clamor against him.

And now, honored and dear sir, let me ask you, what would be your sensations,
should your bosom companion be taken from you in such a barbarous and cruel
manner, thrown into prison, there to remain confined a long time, without some
benevolent friend would appear and give bail? I know the bail is excessive, but
I can procure one half of the security, from one of my neighbors; therefore,
let me beg of you, sir, to come down, and see your unhappy son.

Were you under similar circumstances with us, would you not wish, would you
not expect, that your Parent would afford you relief, under such a situation? I
am perfectly sensible, that you will run no risk, in performing this act of
kindness.

I do not feel a willingness to receive a denial, to this request, so much
depends upon your granting my petition.

Had I the most distant jealousy, that any danger would attend this act of
kindness, I should not presume upon this petition; but, as I feel the most
unlimited confidence in every engagement being performed on our part, I cannot
dismiss the subject without entreating you, by every sentiment of justice, of
humanity, and parental affection, of compassion to the sufferings of your
unhappy children, to listen to this request, and grant my petition.

I remain your dutiful, though afflicted and sorrowful daughter, SALLY
BUROUGHS.

Rev. EDEN BUROUGHS.

I was confined, notwithstanding until the sitting of court. When I was brought
to the bar, I found three endictments against me, each charging me with an
assault, with an intent to commit a rape. To the several charges I plead, not
guilty.

At this time, there were on the bench, as judges, Dana, Robert Treat Pain, and
Nathan Cushing; James Sullivan, attorney general.

A large concourse of people had assembled on this occasion; and many evidences
produced in behalf of the commonwealth, to substantiate the charges, which are
brought against me.

After the evidences were gone through, on both sides of the question, and my
counsel had made their remarks on the business, the attorney general arose, and
addressing himself to the audience, made some very severe remarks upon the town
of Charleton, for employing me in the business of teaching a school; and
observations, yet more severe, upon the clergyman of the town (Mr. Campbell)
for giving his approbation to such a business; and moreover, for even showing
compassion to me, under my present situation.

Mr. Campbell, who was in court, arose, and beged leave of the court to offer
one word, by way of reply, to what the attorney general had observed, relating
to him; judge Pain commanded him to sit down. Mr. Campbell replied, "that he
should, by no means have made the request of addressing the audience, upon this
occasion, had not his name been drawn into question, in this very (...) and
extraordinary manner, being th^^ publicly charged with blame, and that too, in
the most wanton manner, when it was no way connected with the cause upon trial:
under those circumstances, he thought himself warranted to ask, and insist,
upon the privilege of answering the ungenerous aspersions, which had been
thrown upon his character." Without answering his reasons, judges Dana and Pain
ordered him, in the most peremptory manner, to sit down. He accordingly
desisted, and sat down.

(...) account for this very singular conduct, I will offer you what evidence I
ever received upon the subject. Mr. Campbell, who was a man of feeling, has
often expressed his sentiments upon my imprisonment etc. as being too severe;
this highly displeased Waters, and-he threatened, that Mr. Campbell should be
disabled at court, if he did not change his sentiments. This, I suppose, was
the punishment contemplated.

After the attorney general had finished his address to the audience and jury,
he sat down; and judge Cushing arose, and summed up the evidence to the jury in
a very clear, candid, and impartial manner. After he had sat down, judge Pain
arose and addressed the jury in a speech of an hour's length.

This was a subject, in which he appeared engaged, to the last degree. In the
course of his observation he took notice of every circumstance, which made
against me, either in the feelings of people, or in point of law.

After him, followed judge Dana, in a speech or equal length. After exhausting
himself, in pursuading the jury, that I was guilty; after repeating the severe
remarks against the town of Charleton and Mr. Campbell, he desisted.

You will take notice, that at this time, two juries were sitting, upon two
endictments. The next morning, one jury returned the 1 verdict, guilty. The
other, not guilty.

Immediately upon this, I was again endicted for two other crimes, founded upon
the same facts, and supported by the same evidence, as was exhibited upon the
former endictments, viz. "open, gross, lewd, and lascivious conduct." To these
charges, I plead not guilty, but afterward, by the advice of my counsel,
entered a retraxit, and plead guilty.

My counsel alleged, that one jury had already, upon the evidence, brought me
in guilty of attempting to ravish -- "That it would not be so extraordinary,
for them to find me guilty of the crime now laid to my charge, as it was for
them to return a verdict against me, on the other endictment; and, if they
should return an unfavourable verdict, the court, it was probable, would be
more severe in their sentence, than what they would, should (...) throw myself
on their mercy, by pleading guilty."

I objected to this, for the following reasons, viz. "I am accused," said I, of
open lewdness. According to the account of the witnesses, every thing which
took place, was in private; therefore, how it can be said, that open lewdness
is proved by this testimony, I cannot conceive. Open lewdness is every thing of
that kind, which the law censures and punishes; therefore, it appears to me
plain, that only a bare possibility remains for a jury to be so far lead
astray, as to think the endictment supported." Notwithstanding these
objections, my counsel did not alter their opinion, therefore, I submited, and
plead guilty.

Immediately after this, the following petition was presented to the bench.

To the Honorable, the Justices of the Supreme Court of the State of
Massachusetts;
MAY it please your honors, to accept the petition of an unhappy female, borne
down under a weight of almost insupportable grief. May a view of her distressed
situation find the tender avenues of sensibility, and plead in her behalf, for
mercy and compassion to attend the terrifying sentence of judgment.

My husband, the tender companion of my life, is now about to receive sentence
of your honors; and O! for the sake of mercy, the brightest atribute of Deity;
for his sake, who has been the kindest, and tenderest of husbands, both in
prosperity, and the more gloomy moments of adversity; for the sake of my peace
of mind, already torn with the most poignant grief; spare him, as much as may
be consistent with the important trust reposed in your honors.

I beg for his restoration to his family, as soon as your honors may think it
consistent; and I will watch over him, with all the diligence of anxious
solicitude, that he shall be a strict observer of the laws of the land, and a
benefit to the community.

May I not be permitted to suggest, that I cannot but view his conduct, with
respect to the crimes of which he now stands convicted, in a very different
light, from what they appeared to the court; being particularly acquainted with
circumstances, which my relation to him prevents me from exhibiting in
testimony.

I have found his conduct, ever since our acquaintance, marked with strict
fidelity, and must think, from his persevering conduct, for more than two
years, that his prevailing desire is to be an unshaken supporter of the laws of
the land.

May the unerring fountain of wisdom guide your honors, in the paths of duty,
and give you the consolation of being good and faithful servants. May the
gentle influence of mercy be your portion through life, and through an endless
eternity.

-- Thus, prays your sorrowful and humble petitioner. SALLY BUROUGHS.

Whether all these things served to molify the feelings of the Bench toward
me, you will more readily judge by the sentences themselves, which were to this
effect; -- "That I should receive one hundred and seventeen stripes on the
naked back; -- should stand two hours in the pillory; -- should si^ one hour on
the gallows, with a rope around my neck; -- that I should remain confined in
prison, three months; -- that I should procure bonds for good behavior, for
seven years; -- and pay the charges of prosecution.

I was remanded to prison. I was afterward led to the place of execution, I
suffered two thirds of the punishment, which was comprised in the sentence. A
day was appointed for the execution of the remainder. Previous to this time, I
left the jail, the country, and my enemies, to their own reflection.

In addition to my account, I will subjoin an extract of a letter, from a
gentleman of high respectability, and an old practitioner of law, who was
present, through the whole transaction, to a friend of his upon this occasion.

An Extract of a Letter.
WE have, undoubtedly, many inducements to regular, honest, and moral habits. I
believe our liability to suspicion, when outrages against morality occur, or
the deeds of darkness are developped, without their author, and to the
imputation of a thousand irregularities and vices, of which we are entirely
innocent, is not the smallest. The world in general, for the same reason, it
calculates, that the fun will rise tomorrow, because it rose to day, imputes to
him, who has been once in a fault, the commission of an hundred others.

This truth was very strongly proved to me, a few weeks ago, in the trial of S.
B. at the supreme court, at Worcester. Three bills of endictment were presented
against him, for three several assaults, upon three young women, with a
felonious, though baffled intent, each time, to commit a rape. The charges were
solemn. A cloud of witnesses was gathered round him, to bear testimony to the
facts. The intended victims to his violence were there also. The prisoner, on
arraignment at the bar, plead, not guilty, to the several endictments; and put
himself on the country for trial. S. the attorney general managed the
prosecution on the part of the commonwealth; and S. S. and L. were advocates
for the prisoner.

It was not to be wondered at, if the trial of the man, who preached the sermon
on the haymow, to the Pelhamites, of whom, while a prisoner on the castle, many
curious and diverting anecdotes had been told, and were still freshly
remembered, had collected an uncommon assemblage of both sexes, of women
especially; when we add the nature of the offense to the consideration.

The witnesses for the commonwealth were first examined. The three girls, who
had suffered the injury for which the prisoner was arraigned, were the most
material. They told their stories so pertly, that their declarations seemed to
be rather memoreter, than impromptu. I do not recollect all the particulars of
their testimony: but could not help reckoning up the strong inducements the
poor girls had, to patch up as good a story as they could, to vindicate their
own characters; enough of the circumstances of the transactions, through
accident; or their own carelessness, had already leaked out, to render their
virtue questionable; the world would make its own comments -- The prisoner had
been with them in private, and used them indelicately. If they had fallen
unwilling victims to his lust, it was not their fault. But then, though their
virtue remained as spotless as before, that indescribable something, that
creature of our whims, that power to charm the men of this world, was weakened;
and though they might still make as good members of the church, they would not
prove such luscious brides.

One of the girls testified, that the prisoner (one evening, after he had
dismissed his school, and after the other scholars were gone, she being left
alone with him, in the schoolhouse) attempted to persuade her to indelicate
indulgences; took hold of her; behaved quite unseemly; and made some exertions
to induce her to comply; not however, sufficient to require very strong efforts
to prevent him, or cries to raise help, necessary: That at another time,
afterward, as she was returning home from school, in the evening, in company
with others, the prisoner overtook them, was riding, and, as she had some
length of way to walk, persuaded her to get up behind him, offering to carry
her home: That having rode some distance with her, he stopped his horse, and
took her from behind, and placed her before him; and behaved quite indecently;
but, that upon her resisting, he desisted.

Another of the girls said, the prisoner, one day, finding her in the barn, had
attempted the same thing, much in the same manner.

The third said, he had enticed her one evening a few rods from the house, and
they coming to a fence in their walk together, he took her up in his arms, and
lifted her over, and pulled her down upon the ground, and attempted
familiarities similar to the others; that on her making resistance, he
desisted. She did not cry out; and I have forgot whether she, or any of the
others gave any reason, why they did not.

This is quite an abridgement of the testimony; but I believe it contains all
the material facts and circumstances; and is accurate and particular enough, to
furnish data for an opinion upon the nature of the offenses.

The jury, who tried the prisoner on the first endictment, gave their verdict,
guilty. The verdict of the second jury was, not guilty. The attorney general
then entered a nole prosequi to the third endictment; and the prisoner was
immediately arraigned to answer to two new bills, charging him with open and
gross lewdness, and lasciviousness. To them he plead guilty. And it appeared to
me his conduct amounted to no more, in either of the cases; though the court,
in stating the evidence, and giving their opinion to the jury, on the two
trials, were strongly set against the prisoner. It will at any rate, I believe,
be allowed, that if the prisoner merited the charge, he was, in one instance,
quite original in the manner of the offense. Who, but he, would ever have
thought of attempting to commit a rape, on horseback? surely, if he had
succeeded, the world might well say, he had fairly outquixoted Don Quixote
himself. And if B. had really attempted, what the girl said he did, a few
evenings before, in the schoolhouse, her consenting to put herself, a second
time, in his power, was no very strong proof of her discretion. At least, we
must suppose, her jealousy at the schoolhouse had not occasioned her very
serious alarms.

The affair at the barn, and that also by the fence, were transacted so in the
very neighborhood of help, if it had been wanted, as to render the charge of
his having attempted to commit a rape, in either of those cases, incredible. We
cannot imagine any rational being would attempt to commit such an offense in a
place where, if proper resistance was made, and efforts used, he must certainly
be discovered and prevented. And if such resistance was not made, he could not
be concluded guilty of the crimes charged against him I believe the conduct of
the prisoner, in these instances, if impartially scanned (allowing that the
girls told the truth) would be judged nothing more, than so many resolute,
earnest, and persevering attempts, to seduce them. With the generality of
those, who have heard of the conviction, it is possibly a matter of
indifference, whether he was really guilty, as charged, or not. To them, the
remembrance of many hard things, report has said of him, that he has been a
prisoner on the castle, would suggest the probability, that he had been highly
culpable in this instance, and produce their approbation of the verdict against
him; especially, if to these were added the consideration, that the offense was
at the lowest estimation of it, a gross indelicacy, a high outrage upon all the
rules and principles of decorum and propriety.

It is difficult, in such a case as this, to extend to a prisoner at the bar,
circumstanced as B. was, all the liberality of that excellent maxim, which
instructs us to presume the respondent innocent. Yet we are all equally
entitled to justice; though, undoubtedly our courts are more liable to do
injustice to such a character as B. than to one that has fewer blemishes.

Is there no material difference between the crime of seduction, and that of
committing a rape? neither of them is very praiseworthy, besure: and each may
be much aggravated by particular circumstanstances. But our legislators make a
wide distinction* and the difference is very obvious to common sense. Is it
material or not, that we observe a distinction? I imagine the poor culprit, who
is appointed to receive chastisement for his crime, would (...) ^eel
indifferent, whether he should be whipped or hanged for stealing.

Thus you see, sir, facts, upon which you have to form an opinion, relating to
this very surprising trial. I have endeavored, so far as my judgment would
serve, to treat the characters, concerned in this business, with as much
tenderness, as the nature of a faithful narrative will admit. Wantonly to
traduce a character, is a species of conduct I wish by all means, carefully to
avoid; and where it has not been necessary, in order to give a true narrative
of the the facts, which I promised, I have studiously suppressed any such
emotion.

Possibly, these matters may not appear to you, as they have done, and still
do, to me. I know they cannot strike the mind of any, in that feeling manner. I
have made but a faint representation of of them -- I cannot communicate those
ideas and sentiments, by writing, so fully as what they appear to my view, by
contemplation. However, we are apt to estimate the feelings of others by our
own, and judge that they will view matters in the same manner, as we do
ourselves. In this estimation we often ^ine ourselves mistaken. Hence, it is
thought by many, that, that person, who feels most indifferent toward an
object, is in the best situation to form a true estimate, relating to that
object.

I differ in sentiment with those who hold this doctrine. I know we are often
hurried into error, by the operation of our attachment to certain objects. Our
possions, our appetites, and our zeal combine to produce this effect; hence,
many conclude that it is necessary to feel perfectly indifferent toward an
object, in order to form a true estimation of its quality. We must feel
interested in an object, either directly or indirectly, in order to call sorth
ou^ intention toward it, sufficiently to examine its merits. When we feel
indifferent, toward an object, we pay no attention to it, and of course remain
ignorant; respecting it; therefore, are incapable of forming a just estimate
concerning it.

A person, who has no principle of humanity, or compassion, may heir of the
exercise of cruelty: It is a report, which finds no place in his feelings, he
is indifferent* as to its existence; therefore, we readily see, that he would
be an unequal judge, as to the merits of the report.

Having a mind of sensibility, I know these matters will have their due
operation, on your feelings, and under this consideration, I shall ever receive
your observations with attention, and pay due regard to your ideas, upon any
matter, wherein you may think different from me.

That there is such a thing, as right and wrong, I believe, is not called in
question, by any; and that we are all, in some measure, capable of judging with
propriety, upon this subject, is equally allowed. -- That we may, and are, led
astray, many times, in forming an estimate, of the principles of distributing
justice, is a truth, I shall by no means deny; but then we have all, I believe,
a sufficient knowledge, to distinguish upon the general principles of justice,
at least, where we allow the operation of reason, without the embarrassments of
prejudice.

When we find a private person injured by a public body, many circumstances are
combined to lead the candid mind astray, in the investigation of such a
subject. Here error is most likely to take place. Popular clamor will be
raised against the injured person -- this is like the noise of the waters of
Niagara -- his swallows up the small voice of the individual.

We find the great Alexander, when the leading man of the world, committing
acts of cruelty, injustice, and oppression; a prospect of which, at this day,
makes the blood curdle with horror; yet, those very actions were extolled in
the most extravagant manner, by his contemporary sycophants; and mankind gave
him the most flattering encomiums, where they ought, upon the simple principles
of sight, to have execrated his conduct.

This is a specimen of public opposition to private individuals, and the
effects that fellow, which I believe will hold good pretty generally, even in
our days. Public characters are as liable to the ^malignant passions, as other
men, they are as prone, likewise, to be led astray, by the various causes that
^erve to lead mankind astray, as others, but when they find themselves in an
error, hey falsely suppose, that it derogates from their dignity, to
acknowledge their error, and repair the injury, which they have perpetrated, or
even to have it suspected, that they have been in an error; how false this
system to the dictates of reason; how can the human character appear in a more
exalted point of view, than by showing a readiness to acknowledge and repair
the injuries, which our own misconduct has occasioned?

I recollect to have read an anecdote of Julius Caesar, which places his
character in the highest point of exaltation, of any part of his conduct. It
was of the following nature. One day, when Caesar was in the forum, surrounded
with the Patricians, or Nobles of Rome, a certain slave, belonging to him,
sought his manumission from his master. Ceasar, being employed about weighty
matters of the Commonwealth, paid little attention to the solicitations of his
slave. After repeated importunity, to call the attention of his master, to the
subject, which lay so near his heart, the slave received a denial to his
request, for his freedom. When he saw, that no further hope remained, he
reproached his master in the bitterest terms -- and this too, in the most
public place in the city of Rome.

What was the conduct of the truly great Julius, at this time? His attention
was called to the examination of his own conduct, in order see whether the
reproaches of his slave were founded on good grounds; or whether they were, the
mere ebullitions of wrath, proceeding from disappointment. O^ the examination,
he found he had really injured the slave. His reply was such, as will support
his fame, as long as the name of Julius Caesar is known, "you are right, said
he, in reproaching me, for not doing you justice -- it is the only alternative
you have for redress -- I grant you your freedom, because I aught -- I further
grant you six hundred sestertii, because you had fortitude to accuse me of
injustice, when I was guilty"!

Will not this conduct appear admirable to every candid mind, in love with
truth? A very erroneous idea prevails, with many, that men in eminent stations
never ought to have their conduct called in question, until the last extremity.
This I am sensible is a doctrine very pleasing to many, who possess places of
eminece, and maintain them, perhaps, by the strength of it. But that man, who
can adopt the words of Brutus, in his answer to Cassus, "for I am wrapped so
strong in honesty, that your words pass by me like idle winds, which I regards
not," will never feel himself exposed to loose his influence upon society, or
be injured by the closest examination into his conduct.


CHAP. XXIII.
Calamities are friends; as glaring day
Of these unnumber'd (...) sight;
Prosperity puts out unnumber'd thoughts
Of import high and light divine, to man

I HAD determined to end my narrative, for the present, with the foregoing
letter, but, as my journey to the westward is prolonged another week, I will
devote my leisure moments, during this week, to form a farewell address to the
best of men, and the dearest of friends.

Perhaps you may feel some what interested in the continuation, and issue, of
my narrative. Your intimation of such an idea, has had a powerful operation on
my mind, to induce me to gratify your request. You wonder I do not publish. Are
not these scenes too disagreeable to be called again into view, and more
particularly into public view? I wish I could forget, that they had ever
existed; yet, I cannot say, that I am entirely without some consolation for
these afflictions. They have learnt me a lesson, which no other school can
teach. They have learned me to feel the woes that others suffer. They have
learned me to contribute of the small portion, which I possess, to alleviate
the distresses of others; and in this, Sir, there is a sensation grateful,
beyond all description.

It is not without pain, that I view my prospect of leaving you, and your
agreeable family, for a season. Were it not for the prospect of being sooner
able to provide for my own family, I think no motive, however lucrative, would
induce me to leave my present agreeable situation; but, sit, notwithstanding I
am surrounded with this agreeable society, and in it enjoy a great portion of
happiness, in the social line, yet, I cannot feel entirely at ^ase, whilst my
family is at a distance.

We find, that this situation appears desirable from the time of our first
coming upon the stage of active use, (...) in a matrimonial state. Both sexes
are looking forward to this, as the end of their pursuits; (...) when due
attention is paid to the ^^^ness, and such connection formed, as the laws of
nature enjoin; I believe, that man arrives to the greatest state of happiness,
he is capable of enjoying -- It has ever appeared to me, however, surprising
that so little attention has been exerted to form such connexions, between the
two sexes, as are congenial to nature. I am inclined to believe, that no one
need be left destitute of a partner, entirely calculated to render each other
as happy, as what things in this world will admit, should a regard be had to
tempers, feelings, views, etc. previous to forming the matrimonial connection.

Various are the objects, which occupy the attention of mankind, in their
pursuits after happiness, none, perhaps, more than riches and power. When these
are obtained, they give a momentary spring to enjoyment; but, soon the soul
reverts back to its former state, and is left without any greater sensations of
happiness, than what are enjoyed in a state of poverty and impotence;
therefore, but a very small difference remains between the poor and the rich,
the humble and the powerful, as to actual enjoyment.

Did we act as philosophers, we should turn our attention from those objects,
which a length of experience has taught us are futile, in our pursuit of
happiness; and place our thoughts upon such subjects, as are calculated, by
nature, to grant us that enjoyment, which we are ever seeking after. All this
may be found in friendship; and the greatest friendship is formed in the
intimate connection of matrimony.

We find many times jars feuds taking place in families. The husband and wife
drag on a life, through a course of bitter recriminations. From a view of these
matters, many are led to despise and ridicule the married state. Were we to
reprobate every condition, in which some do not happily succeed, there is no
calling or pursuit in life, but what would f^ll under our animadversion. But
one striking evidence, in favor of the happiness enjoyed, even in the most
disagreeable matrimonial connexions, is, that a separation is dreaded, and
never had recourse to, only in cases of the last extremity; as Young
pertinently expresses Like pevish Man and Wife,
United jar, and yet are (...) to part.
I believe, sir, you will think me very wandering in my observations, and
preaching a doctrine to one, who stands in little need of instruction, upon
this head; seeing your family connexions are such, that you need no arguments
to enforce the necessity of enjoying your self, in your situation. I know, sir,
your situation, in that connection, is peculiarly agreeable; therefore, I
considered, that you would not only see the truth of my observations, but
likewise ^eel it; and it is a pleasure to preach to those, who feel the truth
of our doctrine.

I have determined, here, to give you a relation of some events, which took
place in the course of my life, in point of time, some earlier, than where I
have arrived; but, which could not be introduced (...) the course of the
narrative, without interrupting the order,; therefore, I concluded to omit it,
until some convenient time, in which I should not break in upon the relation of
that chain of events, which appeared to be more closely connected together. --
I give you the relation of these incidents, in order to illustrate one of the
reasons, why popular prejudice had arrived to such a pitch, against me.

I was, one day, traveling in Massachusetts, and late at night, put up at a
tavern, where I was a stranger, as I apprehended. Soon after I arrived, being
fatigued with the journey of the day, I retired to rest. This was previous to
my marriage. About ten at night, I was awaked by some body at the bed side.
Upon my opening my eyes, I recognized the person, as an old acquaintance, whom
I had not seen for several years. I asked him where he lived -- How he came
there -- and by what means he became possessed with the knowledge of my being
in the house? At these questions he stared at me, with a countenance of
surprise. He asked me where my wife was? I was equally surprised at this
question. "How, said he, do you wish to conceal the matter from me? I am
acquainted with the circumstances of your marrying -- -- of your carrying her
away, and to endeavor to hide it, from me, argues no very honest design, in
you."

You will not a o^der at my surprise being increased, by these observations. I
told him, his conversation, to me, was wholly unintelligible, that he talked to
me of a wi^e, etc. that I never was married, and what he meant by his
observations about -- -- was an enigma to me, never before hearing the name of
such a person, that I was an absolute stranger in the town, and supposed myself
equally unknown, in the house, until I was awaked by him.

His declaration brought on an explanation. He told me, that a man, (...)
himself Stephen Buroughs, had been ^n that town, had become acquainted in a
respectable family, had, in oposition to all the efforts of the family, married
a daughter, and carried her away; alleging, that he was going to Hanover, to
live with his father, and that they had received no information from their
daughter since.

I observed to this young man, that I thought it surprising, that he should be
deceived by the artifice made use of. That he certainly must have known whether
the person was in fact, what he pretended to be. He answered, that being absent
on a journey, during this time, he never saw the person; that had he even been
at home, the deception might have passed undiscovered: for no one doubted, as
to his being the person, whose character he had assumed; and without accident
had thrown him in my way, I might never have seen him.

After this conversation, the young man left me, and soon again my eyes were
closed in sleep. I had not slept more than an hour and a half, or two hours*
before I was again aroused from sleep, by the same young man; when I had awoke,
I saw in the room an old man and his wife, they approached the bed, the woman
broke out into the bitterest lamentations, crying "it is not he, -- is ruined,
gone off wi^h a vagabond, no one knows where." The father's countenance was a
picture of distress, though his sorrows did not break forth, with such
ungovernable rage. Here was a scene truly affecting. The distress of the
parents was exquisite; and what gave the greatest poignancy to their sufferings
was, they were left without hope.

Whether they have ever found their daughter I am not able to say, having never
seen or heard from them since.

At another time, passing through a part of Connecticut, I called at a tavern,
for some refreshment, where I had been previously acquainted; I was asked, with
some surprise, how I had made my escape from jail. This question immediately
introduced a dispute, between the landlord and myself. He affirming that I had
been committed for theft, and I with equal assurance denying it.

This dispute produced so much noise, that I was apprehended, and carried back
to jail, as they supposed; but when we arrived, what was the surprise of may
landlord, and the constable, when we found the Stephen Buroughs, who had been
committed for horse-sterling, quietly remaining, where he was first confined.

The facts, upon which this laughable mistake took place were of the following
nature, viz. A certain person had been apprehended, and committed to jail,
under a suspicion of horse stealing. My Landlord, who had formerly known me,
heard that a person, by the name of Stephen Buroughs, had been committed to
jail. This immediately fixed an idea in his mind, that I was confined under the
suspicion of theft.

For some reason, the person, who had been committed, chose to assume my name
and character, which circumstance not only deceived my Landlord, but likewise
caused the report to be circulated, that I was detected in horse stealing.

Had I conducted the business a little different, when I was accosted by the
Landlord, perhaps the matter would never have come to an explanation. He did
not seem inclined to apprehend me, at first; but, when I treated his assertion
with some harshness, he manifested a disposition to let me know, that I was in
his power; and that he would exercise that power, unless I soothed his
resentment, by more gentle measures. How he felt when the mistake was
discovered, you can more easily conceive, than I can discribe. His sensations
were not of the most agreeable kind, you will readily imagine. Indeed, sir, I
felt a degree of compassion toward the man, under that situation,
notwithstanding, his conduct had not been of the most grateful kind.

A number of instances, similar to these, have occurred since I came upon the
stage of action. You will readily understand, what consequences would naturally
proceed from such events. I found the world ever ready to give credit to such
reports -- When mankind had once formed an unfavorable opinion, it was hard to
eradicate such an idea, even by the most pointed evidence.

I recollect at a certain time, when I was among a people, who did not know my
real name and character. -- Among them, I gained a credit and standing of the
pleasing kind, long before my real name became known. -- I happened at this
time, to become acquainted with a certain physician, who came from a part of
the country, continuous to where I had formerly lived. In the course of our
acquaintance, he told me, "that he was acquainted with a certain character, by
the name of Stephen Buroughs, who, of all others, was the most singular. That
he was a person possessed of the greatest abilities, of any man he ever kn^w."
In order to Illustrate more fully the truth of his observation, he related many
anecdotes concerning me, of the humorous kind, which I had never heard of
before. "How I had deceived many people in the most surprising manner, and to
the general diversion of the country. How I would still continue to deceive
them, notwithstanding all their precautions against me. How I would steal from
the rich, and give to the poor; and that people were afraid to prosecute me,
because I would ever find some shift, to evade the business; and would, more
over, always steal again from the person, who had attempted the prosecution;
however," continued the Physician, "I could ever discern, in his countenance,
the features of design. There ever was the appearance of deceit in his looks;
and I should have known him to be a rogue, had I never heard of his character.
I believe," continued he "that the countenance of a man, is a strong index of
his natural disposition position; as for instance, if you will permit me to
make the comparison, without conceiving that I am attempting to flatter, I
never saw a more striking contrast; than between the designing, deceitful
countenance of Buroughs; and your open, frank, and candid, countenance. I have
generally found men wearing such characters after acquaintance, as the
expression of their countenances had indicated, in the first place."

You will readily conceive, sir, that I smiled at the harangue of this
physiognomy. He remained at ease, in the enjoyment of his own opinion, for a
while, but the bubble soon broke, and he was fairly exposed to public view,
without the thinest veil for a covering. M^ real name and character were soon
developped to the public, and all his knowledge in physiognomy was discredited,
immediately, and even* a great share of that science, of which he was really
master, fled at the same time. So fickle is the multitude -- so prone to run
from one extreme, into the other. This simple circumstance produced the fa^l of
the poor Physician.

Thus we see, sir, that every person, be his situation in life what it may,
more or less exposed to revolution, misfortune, and disappointment. Those very
means, which we make use of, to answer our purposes of promotion, and
exaltation, are often the direct and only causes of our calamity. We all wish
to be happy, and all use such means to obtain happiness, as our judgment points
out. From daily experience we learn how incompetent we are, to form right
estimates of the various effects, which will follow the measures we pursue;
therefore, he, who depends upon the uncertain occurrences of events, for his
happiness, builds upon a very slender foundation, and will most assuredly find
the chances run against him.

For these (...) j^ys the could can (...) kn^w;
In gentler climes their silver currents flow.
Often at the silent, shadowy close of d^y.
When the (...) grove has s^ng his parting lay;
When pensive Twilight in his (...).
Slowly ^^cends to meet the evening (...);
Above, below, aerial (...).
From hanging weeds, brown (...), and (...)!
A thousand (...) ^ills that (...) thought
Stealing (...) on the (...) of night.
So often the finer movements of the (...).
That shun the shore of pleasure's (...).
In the still shades of calm (...),
And breathe their sweet (...) harmonics.
I have often wished that my memory was sufficient to retain a recollection of
all the mistakes, which I have either made myself, or have seen others make,
during the course of my life. From such a circumstance, I think I should be
able to learn, whether any general cause existed in nature, which produces our
miscalculations, or whether they always arise from a general weakness of the
mind, which is incurable. From what observations I have been able to make, I
rather think the evil may in some measure be remedied, but I believe not
entirely cured.

Should we lay a right foundation for happiness, and rear our superstructure
upon that foundation, we should all find an indiscribable advantage arising
from such a procedure. I have once before hinted, that mankind were generally
in pursuit of riches and power, in order to render themselves happy; that this
pursuit is not calculated to contribute to our happiness, but on the contrary,
to militate against it, will appear evident, when we take a candid view of the
subject.

That all mankind are descended from one common origin, and partake of the
nature and feelings which are common to each other, is not only allowed by the
united voice of all, but is likewise demonstrated by the united voice of
nature, perpetually crying in the bosom of every person. -- Being all descended
from the same origin, we are all upon the looting of brethren of the same
family, entitled to equal privileges, and immunities. Being members of one and
the same family, we have a common interest in the prosperity of each
individual, which composes this family. -- This is the language of nature;
however, we may have our minds perverted, by error and corruption -- hence, we
find a language speaking within us, that we cannot silence; a language that
speaks strongly in terms of compassion, toward those in eminent distress. Who
can stand still, and see another fall into the fire, without reaching forth the
hand of assistance? Who so insensible to the pleasures, which he derives from
society, that he will retire from them, with indifference! Are not all equally
dependent on each other, for the comforts which are enjoyed in life? Has not
our great parent constituted the order of things in wisdom, so that by
following his laws, we arrive at the most exalted state of perfection, which
things in this life admit?

It is a truth, I believe, apparent to every one, that all cannot possess power
and riches -- nay, the greater part must ever remain without these
acquirements; therefore, he who strives for power and riches, endeavors to
take from the general good of the whole, and appropriate to his own use. He
endeavors to invert the order of nature, by depriving others of equal
privileges, in order to add to his own, and by inverting the order of that
wisdom, which has bountifully provided for all her children, misery will ensue,
confusion and disorder will run through the body, and many inconveniences will
be felt, by every member of the community.

On the contrary, when we feel the affection of brethren toward each other;
when the welfare and prosperity of each member of society become, in a measure,
our own, how changed the scene! how happy the prospect! our griefs become
lessened by communicating them to others -- our joys are increased, by the
participation of our friend! the disgraceful passions of hatred, envy, malice,
and revenge, are lost for want of support.

When we set out in life, under the auspices of this disposition, and pursue
such a course; we are in a situation not exposed to loose our enjoyment, by
every puff of misfortune. We are inaccessible to the malignant passions, the
great disturbers of human repose. In this line of conduct, we follow the
directions of nature, and answer the purpose, for which we were designed
Property, even riches, acquired by industry, (not by power) are of use, to
contribute to our happiness; by rendering us capable of lessening the
necessities of our brethren, and fellow members of society.

O ye blessed scenes of permanent delight!
Full above measure! lasting beyond all bound!
A perpetuity of bliss, is bliss. --
Could you, so rich in rapture fear an end,
That ghastly thought would drink up all your joy
And quit in Paradise the realms of light.
Safe are you lodged above these rolling spheres;
The baleful influence of whose giddy dance
Sheds sad vicissitudes ox all beneath.
These ideas, to me, have ever appeared as matters of high importance; and I
wish to see some abler pen go deeply into this subject, and try the experiment
thoroughly, to see whether mankind can be reasoned into their own good. Should
you, sir, devote a few of you leisure moments, to such an object, it might be
attended with very salutary effects. It is said, "that mankind are daily
growing in useful knowledge." Perhaps this may be true, in a partial sense, but
it appears to me, that the state of society, in the days of the Spartan and
Roman governments, was much more congenial to nature, than what we are under at
present. -- At least, we do not find such striking instances of affection
toward the public welfare, among any of the modern Patriots, as what was
instanced in the conduct of Lycurgus, Reguius Cincin^tus, etc. etc.

I have just hinted at a number of subjects, in the course of this narrative,
which may appear to you somewhat mistimed considering the primary object was
bearly a narration of facts. Ye, sir, this manuscript will ever be a memorandum
of those subjects, at which I have barely hinted; and as your attention is
occupied, by your station in society, with political objects, there remains a
bare possi^^^^y of such a memorandum's being of service, in calling some of
those subjects into view; as this country as happily situated, on many
accounts, to pursue political inquires, without the ^mbarrassments attending
preconceived opinions and settled systems; I feel the more desirous, that the
truth of these observations may be decided by experiment. Should they be
productive of good to the community, even in the smallest degree, I shall feel
the benefit of an essential reward, for suggesting those things. Should they,
on the contrary, be found to be a system of error; I shall place them to the
account of the many mistakes I have made through life, and rest satisfied, that
I wished to have them productive of good.

Whilst I am absent, you will have sufficient leisure to peruse the manuscript,
and detect the errors, which I have been guilty of, and rest assured, that I
shall ever receive any suggestions of yours, upon that head, as an additional
mark of that sincere friendship, which you have ever manifested,

After you have sufficiently perused the present narrative, if you should wish
for a continuation, I will attempt to gratify you, as soon as my situation
shall again become so settled, as to admit of writing.

Entertainment of the highest nature, generally consists of a due variety, and
I find people most fond of buying books of entertainment; where novelty,
melancholy, humor, joy, and triumph, are interchangeably the leading features
-- hence C^arissa Harlow is condemned for being too gloomy -- Young's Knights
Thoughts fall under the same censure -- the critics say there is a want of a
variety. That our compassion is wounded, but never gratified. That our disgust
is excited against certain characters. That the rewards of vice are set forth,
but nothing on the pleasing side. That virtue is not rewarded. That our
compassion is not relieved, and that of course, we feel nothing but painful
sensations. All these observations, I know, will apply with propriety to my
narrative. I should have been glad to have interspersed something of the
pleasing kind, among the relation of misfortunes; but, I could not do it
consistently with the character of one, who had a regard to truth in his
history.

Should I pursue hereafter the history of the remaining part of my life, you
may not be more pleased, than what you are with that already given. It is true,
that I passed through many scenes entirely new, and partaking, in some measure,
of the humorous kind; but, that uninterrupted course of severe trials, which I
have experienced from the beginning, never forsook me, until I arrived in this
hospitable town, where I have met with that attention and kindness, which has
in a measure been a counterbalance to my former misfortunes.

This observation, I believe, may not be misplacen, that when ever I have
suffered a temporary respite from the stroke of calamity, my feelings have been
more alive to the enjoyment of my situation. The comparison has ever been
striking, both to my view and feelings; and of consequence, all the force of
happiness had its operation upon my mind; without any impediment.

Another observation, I believe, ought to have a place here, viz. that our
minds after giving way to the strokes of calamity a while, will regain their
vigor and pristine state of tranquillity, under the most trying situation;
hence we often find among our slaves (I blush to write the word) a degree of
tranquillity and evenness of temper, which is wanting in the more exalted
stations of life. Visit the prisons, and you will find many in those
situations, who are desperate, wearing in their countenances a content of
insensibility produced by despair.

I recollect, when I was in the dungeon at Northampton, and every prospect of
relief was out of the question, that I felt a degree of calm or sullen content,
under my situation. I really thought, that I rejoiced in it, because, said I,
"the end will soon come to all my sufferings." These were my sensations, so
long as the prospect of better days was out of the question; but, as soon as
the sound of relief had reached my ears, these images fled like the "baseless
fabric of a vision, and left not a trace behind.

The mind, when out of her bias, is ever struggling for a state of rest, or
tranquillity, and according to the strength she possesses, gains that situation
sooner or later. There are but very few minds, but what will gain that
situation, ultimately, let the strokes of adversity be ever so heavy. It is
true, that some are overpowered; the powers of their minds are broken, and they
either become delirious, or else sink to the grave, under the pressure of
misfortune. Of all situations in life, that is the most dreadful, which
produces death or dilirium, by those wounds, which the mind has suffered.

You intimate, sir, that you wish me to give a particular description of the
people, in the different states, their manners, their local peculiarities,
their particular customs, their economy, property, industry, genius, and
tempers; likewise, the nature of the soil, in different parts of this country,
the price that land bears, the quantity and kind which it produces, the
different methods of agriculture, the different facility of obtaining a living,
etc.

You require of me a task, which I do not think myself competent to perform,
with accuracy; however, in my next attempt, after my return, I will endeavor
to gratify your request, in as great a measure, as my opportunity furnished
materials for, when I made the tour of the United States.

My situation was such, when I made a journey through the states, that I had an
opportunity of observing many things, which other travelers have not; on the
other hand, travelers in general, have an opportunity of observing many
things, in the course of their traveling, which I had not; therefore, sir, if
you can gather any thing from my observations, on those subjects, which you
have requested, either profitable or amusing, I shall be heighly gratified with
my performance.

Baron Tr^nk observes, that he once traveled in his coach through Poland, that
he thought he was acquainted with the people, with their manners and genius.
But afterward he was compelled to travel through this country, in a most
abject situation, and under the necessity of begging his bread. Then it was he
discovered his mistake. He found them to be another, and very different people,
from what be had apprehended in his former tour. So true it is, that mankind
will wear the veil of deception, generally, in all countries.

My situation, in respect to property, was somewhat similar to the Baron's, in
his last tour through Poland, but to the honor of humanity, be it said, that in
many places, I found a very different reception, from what the Baron met with.
Yet, in some instances, the unfeeling heart, wore a prominent appearance in the
character of the inhabitants of the country.

In different states, I found a great difference in the manners and morals of
the people; in their refinement, feelings, and sentiments; and in different
parts of the same states, I found this variation equally great. The causes
which produce this, I will not undertake to assign: however, shall wish to hint
my ideas respecting it, when I enter on that subject. Could the causes of these
variations be traced, and clearly understood, they would be of the utmost
service to society, and an object worthy the attention of every benevolent mind.

There is something in the system of education, yet undiscovered, which, I
believe, would have the most effectual operation upon the world of mankind, in
forming their minds in such a manner, as to render them fitted for the
enjoyment of society, without the interruption of those irregularities, which
overthrow the happiness of the social state. That denomination of people,
called Quakers, have brought their mode of education to the greatest state of
perfection, of any class, with whom I have been acquainted. We find a state of
the utmost order among them, and this too, founded upon the most simple
principles. Their manners and conduct savor very strongly of their education.

Having never been educated to the business of farming, it cannot be expected,
that my mind was sufficiently enlightened upon that head, to make such
inquiries, and observations, as would tend to throw light upon the subject;
though perhaps this might afford an inquiry of the greatest utility to society,
were it taken up, and pursued, by some one able to perform the task. True it
is, that many different methods are made use of in agriculture; these methods
are in a measure local, retained by those, who have been in the custom of using
them, and parted from with reluctance for others, not so common, but perhaps
more useful.

What circumstances of that kind came to my view and observation, I will
mention. Perhaps you may draw some ideas from them, which may be new and
useful, but I have no expectation that you will many.

Relating to the subject of Land -- the price which it bears in different parts
of the states, the quality, situation, convenience, etc. which it possesses,
its quality and kind of produce, the nett proceeds which it averages to the
possessor, in different places, are all objects, which have claimed a
considerable share of my attention, when opportunity has invested me with a
chance for observation. I have, moreover, had my attention much occupied by the
different degrees of industry and economy, which have marked the characters of
different people.

It has been the practice of the greater part of writers, to speak in general
terms, respecting the subject, of which they are treating -- this mode has
undoubtedly its advantages; but perhaps it may not embrace all the advantages,
which a more minute description would afford; as for example, should a a
writer, in general terms, describe the state of Georgia, as a fruitful country,
abounding with the conveniences and luxuries of life, etc. the reader would,
undoubtedly, obtain an idea of its being a country, in which property might be
acquired with a degree of facility. Yet he could hardly form an accurate
estimate of the particular occupation or business, which would afford the most
considerable and ready profit. Whether a capital would be absolutely necessary
in order to prosecute business, and if necessary, how large that capital must
be. He could not form an estimate of the difference in the profit, which he
would realize by relinquishing business in one state, and removing to another;
as for instance, from Newhampshire to Georgia; and of consequence, could not
determine with propriety upon such an object, should it be presented to his his
view. On the contrary, should the cost of an acre of land, in the state of
nature, be shown; the additional cost to render that acre productive, the
profits which the land would afford, both in Newhampshire and Georgia; then the
reader would be possessed with data, by which he might state his calculations,
and form an accurate estimate of the object of acquiring property, both in
Georgia and Nehampshire, and learn the advantage, if any, that one would have
over the other; and how great that advantage would be.

Thus likewise, by a minute description of the price, which articles of
importation bear in the two states; the price of those for exportation; the
quantity and quality of those articles; the demand for them; the facility of
importing, and exporting; the price of living; the mode of dealing etc. would
give a sufficient fund of information, for any one to decide upon the subject
of merchandise in either state; so likewise for mechanics, and every other
employment which admits of profit.

This is a system of writing, which I do not recollect to ever have seen; and I
have somewhat wondered at the circumstance. There are advantages to be derived
from such a method, sufficiently great to claim the attention of the literary
world; and, I believe such a method would afford more useful instruction to the
philosopher, the politician, the farmer, the mechanic, and the merchant, than
any other, which has been made use of. This method draws the picture of men and
manners to the life, and gives every man an opportunity of viewing, and making
his own reflections upon it.

When we are, in this manner, made acquainted with countries, men, manners,
customs, (...) in the more minute departments, we have data to form our own
opinions, relating to the various causes, which produce the difference effects
upon (...); and are not dependent on others for an opinion respecting them.

When I traveled through the states, my situation and circumstances did not
admit that extensive opportunity for information and observation, upon these
subjects, which my propensity lead me to desire. However, what observations I
was in a capacity to make, I paid the strictest attention to form, with as much
accuracy, as my judgment would allow. I did not settle down upon an opinion,
until I had satisfactory evidence of the just principle upon which it was
founded. Should I ever again travel through the states, I should devote my
attention greatly to such an object; and endeavor, upon the most thorough
plan, to investigate all the little secret springs, which set the wheels of
society in motion.

Should the population and emigrations into these states, be as great, for one
hundred years to come, as they have been for the same time past, what (...)
multitude must this continent contain (...) seems to be swiftly hastening
forward her events, to fill up the measure of time!

Here is a vast field for the philosophic eye to view; perhaps there may be
more ^ffected for the good of society, during the continuation of the American
settlements, improvements, inventions, and experiments, than ever took place at
any other, or perhaps, at every period, since time began. The philanthropist
will be induced to labor with redoubled exertion, in this field, owing to the
animating prospect of success, which he will have in view, as a reward for his
labor.

Did the philosopher have nothing more in view, than his own, particular
benefit, this would be a sufficient motive for him to be incessant in his
researches, after that knowledge, and improvement, which would tend to the
general good; there is a general connection which does, and must exist, in the
world; and no man discovers and communicates useful knowledge to mankind, but
he himself will reap the advantage.

No discovery, in its crude state, but what admits of improvement. When it is
flung open to the world, every person has the opportunity of amending,
improving, and altering, as judgment and experiment will (...), until it is
brought to perfection; and then every member of society enjoys the privilege,
which such improvements produce.

A stronger motive, than all these considerations, has (...) influence upon the
mind of the real philosopher. To view himself as able to promote the happeners
of his brethren, the common stock of the human race; to see himself
contributing to increase their joy, comfort, and prosperity; to behold the
various circles of society, wearing countenances (...) of care and remorse; to
see the tender (...) among more intimate degrees of (...) indulged in their
utmost latitude, without the cloud of care to intervene, or the corroding sting
of disappointment! this is a luxury of enjoyment, a feast of pleasure, beyond
the utmost conception of the voluptuous epicure! and the more deeply we dip
into these enjoyments, the keener is our appetite for their relish. These bring
no alloy, no pain, no disease. No evil attends their indulgence, no repentance
grows from their use.

And now, sir, permit me to address this wish to you and family -- That the
perfection of all these grateful sensations may be enjoyed by you, in their
fullest measure. That as your family increases, their opening minds may drink
deep of this principle, and enjoy the effects, so long as they continue to
occupy a station upon this stage of mutual dependence. That the most striking
examples of filial, parental, connubial, and fraternal affection, may pervade
the whole body; and when such a series of time has rolled away, as to admit you
among the higher orders of beings, in that state, where we are but little
acquainted, may the memory of you and family be called into view, with the most
grateful emotions, and pleasing sensations.

I remain, Dear Sir, with sentiments of the warmest esteem -- Your much obliged
Humble Servant, STEPHEN BUROUGHS.

J. G. Esquire.
ERRATA.
Page 48, 11 line, from top, over read up. 223, 3 do. poetry, house read hours.
230, 8 do. from bottom, eight forty read eighty four. 264, 19 do. line, from
top, disabled read disobliged.

