THE DEMOCRATIC JUDGE: OR THE EQUAL LIBERTY of the PRESS, AS Exhibited,
Explained, and Exposed, In the Prosecution of WILLIAM COBBETT, For a pretended
Libel against The King of Spain and his Ambassador, BEFORE THOMAS M'KEAN, Chief
Justice of the State of Pennsylvania.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST-CHURCH

March, 1798.

Advertisement.
I KNOW it has been thought, that I was afraid to publish an account of the
prosecution carried on against me by the State Government of Pennsylvania, at
the instance of the Spanish Minister. I can readily excuse people for
entertaining this opinion, because the American press is become the most tame,
the most humbled, the most abject upon the face of the earth; and because I
count it no dishonor not to be thought a match for the dangers to which I am
exposed. The opinion will, however, be found to be eroneous. I have, in the
following sheets, exhibited this unparalleled proceeding to the world in its
true colors; and I take this opportunity of declaring my fixed determination
to persevere in rendering equally notorious, every fact, of which such like
proceedings shall put me in possession. -- My daily occupations leave me but
little time for undertakings of this sort; but my just resentment, though slow
in its operation, shall not be less sure in its effects.

WILLIAM COBBETT.
Philadelphia, March 9 th, 1798.
INTRODUCTION.
JUDGE M'KEAN, the Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, in his charge to the Grand
Jury (of which the reader will see enough by-and-by), observed, that the
liberty of the press was a phrase much used, but little understood. This, in a
public servant, as all the democratic officers call themselves, is making
pretty free with the understanding of the sovereign people, and of a people too
whom the Congress have declared free and enlightened, and would have declared
the " free-est and most enlightened in the world," had it not been for their
desire to avoid all cause of offense toward the free and enlightened French.
See Censor for December, 1796, for a full account of this humiliating business.


The Judge was certainly wrong. No people understand what the liberty of the
press means better than the Americans do. No one knows so well how to
appreciate the value of a thing, as he who has long enjoyed, and then lost it.
Had the Judge called the liberty of the press a thing much talked about, much
boasted of, and very little enjoyed, I would most readily have subscribed to
his assertion; for, of all the countries under the Sun, where unlicensed
presses are tolerated, I am bold to declare, and the contents of this pamphlet
will establish the truth of my declaration, that none ever enjoyed less real
liberty of the press than America has for some years past.

I do not say, that this liberty has been abridged by any positive law; on the
contrary, I know well, that several of the State Constitutions hold out a
something (not very intelligible to be sure) that would seem to extend the
liberty of printing beyond the limits prescribed by the English law. Nor do I
pretend, that this dangerous abridgment of American freedom is to be attributed
to tho change, which the revolution has produced in the name and nature of the
government. I will not, for a moment, be said to insinuate, that the press is
become not free, merely because the government is become republican. No; I
think, the people, when they adopted this form of government, expected, as they
certainly were led to expect, an extention of this, and every other important
branch of their liberties. What I contend for, is, that, some how or other,
this liberty has been abridged; the exercise of it, either by popular
prejudice, by the influence of party, the fear of mobish violence, or of
governmental tyranny, has been, and yet is, most shamefully and disgracefully
restrained.

To enter into the causes, which have produced this fatal effect, would be to
revive the remembrance of what I wish may ever remain buried in oblivion. I
will therefore content myself with proving the fact; and to do this to the
satisfaction of every candid mind, I need go no farther back than my own times.

When I first came to Philadelphia, I was charmed with the literary liberty,
which its inhabitants seemed to enjoy. I saw pamphlets in every window, and
newspapers in every hand. I was, indeed rather surprised to find, that those
pamphlets, and these newspapers were, something like a certain Judge that I
had heard of, all on one side: but, said I to myself, this must be the fault of
the authors and editors; and it leaves, the more room for such as have a mind
to write on the other side. With this agreeable but delusive notion in my
brain, I sat down contented under the calamity of reading daily, in common with
my poor fellow citizens, about eighteen or twenty long columns of the vilest
and most insipid trash that ever was stamped upon paper.

Long did I hope, and expect, to see something like a manly and effectual
opposition to this flood of falsehood and partiality; but I hoped and expected
in vain. At last, it was my fate to enter the field. I had long felt a becoming
indignation at the atrocious slander that was continually vomitted forth
against Great Britain; and the malignancy of Priestley and his addressers at
New York brought it into action.

The OBSERVATIONS on the emigration of this restless and ambitious demagogue
contain, as I have elsewhere remarked, not one untruth, one anarchical,
indecent, immoral, or irreligious expression; yet, when I came to offer it for
the press, the bookseller was afraid it was not popular enough. He was far, as
he said, from disapproving of the work; but it was too much in favor of Great
Britain, and on this account he thought it would endanger his windows, if not
his person.

This man's fears seemed to me perfectly absurd. The pamphlet said not a word in
praise of Great Britain, generally. Indeed, policy had led me to speak rather
harshly of that nation in one passage or two; and so evident was this, that the
British Critics, though they pay the author compliments far beyond his merit,
cannot forbear to lament, they say, that so enlightened a mind should still
harbor a rancour so implacable. These people, though certainly not less
penetrating than GOOSY TOM in the common affairs of literature, would have
laughed at the idea of broken windows and basted carcasses.

However, notwithstanding the ridicule, which this remark of the BRITISH
CRITICS is calculated to throw on the apprehensions of my bookseller, now the
worthy partner of LLOYD, subsequent events have proved, that those
apprehensions were not entirely groundless: for, although he did publish
several succeeding pamphlets from the same pen, without incurring a penalty of
any kind, yet no sooner was the real author known, than he began to see, and to
feel too, that BRADFORD understood the American liberty of the press far better
than he did.

During the publication of the rest of the pamphlets that issued from
BRADFORD's, I had often to contend with his scruples and his fears. In
particular, I remember, that my calling the French minister ADET, no Christian,
was very hard to be surmounted. The French had openly and most blasphemously
abolished the Christian religion; and the Convention, who had sent out this
ambassador, had even formally denied the being of a God; yet, so high was this
bookseller's notions of the liberty of the press, that he was afraid to publish
a sentence, in which the French minister was said not to be a Christian! If as
much had been said of the English minister, though false, he would, I am pretty
confident have had no scruples at all.

It was no sooner discovered that I was PETER PORCUPINE, and that I had taken
the excellent house and shop, that I now occupy, in order to carry on the
printing and bookselling business, than the French faction began to muster
their forces and put themselves in battle array. Several infamous publications
appeared in BACHE's paper, declaring me to be a deserter, a felon, a thief who
had fled from the gallows, etc. etc.

Strong in my innocence I steadily pursued my course, and, thank God, my
steadiness was attended with success. Stung at the contempt with which I
treated these abominable attempts on my character, another mode of injuring me
was fallen upon. A threatening letter was conveyed under the door of my
landlord, the base object of which the letter itself will best explain. It is a
performance that should ever find a place in a work that treats of the
unrestrained liberty of the press. Here it is.

Mr. John Oldden, Merchant, Chestnut Street. SIR,
A certain William Cobbett, alias Peter Porcupine, I am informed is your
tenant. This daring scoundrel, not satisfied with having repeatedly traduced
the people of this country, vilified the most eminent and patriotic characters
among us and grossly abused our allies the French, in his detestable
productions, has now the astonishing effrontry to expose those very
publications at his window for sale, as well as certain prints indicative of
the prowess of our enemies the British and the disgrace of the French.
Calculating largely upon the moderation or rather pusillanimity of our
citizens, this puppy supposes he may even insult us with impunity. But he will
ever long find himself dreadfully mistaken. 'Tho' his miserable publications
have not been hitherto considered worthy of notice, the late manifestation of
his impudence and enmity to this country will not be passed over. With a view
therefore of preventing your feeling the blow designed for him, I now address
you. When the time of retribution arrives, it may not be convenient to
discriminate between the innocent and the guilty. Your property therefore may
suffer. For depend upon it brick walls will not skreen the rascal from
punishment when once the business is undertaken. As a friend therefore I advise
you to save your property by either compelling Mr. Porcupine to leave your
house or at all events oblige him to cease exposing his obominable productions
or any of his courtly prints at his window for sale. In this way only you may
avoid danger to your house and perhaps save the rotten carcass of your tenant
for the present.

A HINT.
July, 16th 1796.

It will be remembered, that I instantly published this letter, accompanied
with comments, in which I set the authors (for they were many) at defiance; but
I did not mention then a circumstance that it is proper I should mention now.
There was, on the morning in which I received the letter, one of the judges in
my shop. I showed it him, and apprized him of my intention of publishing it in
the manner I afterward did; but he advised me against it, for fear of the
consequences. This proves his opinion with respect to the protection the
liberty of the press would receive in Philadelphia.

No violence, however, did succeed. But the election for members of Congress
was approaching; and, as the free men would then be assembled, it was feared by
my friends; indeed, it was generally understood, and publicly talked of, that,
on the election night, my house was to be gutted. And, lest the sons of liberty
should be uninformed of the business, and consequently unprepared for it, the
same wretch BACHE (the Grandson and pupil of Old Franklin) reminded them of it
by an inflammatory publication signed AN AMERICAN, which, after a series of the
most atrocious falsehoods, concludes thus: -- while I am a friend to the
unlimited freedom of the press, when exercised by an American, I am an
implacable foe to its prostitution to a foreig^er, and would at any time assist
in hunting out of society, any meddling foreigner, who should dare to interfere
in our politics. I hope the apathy of our brethren of Philadelphia will no
longer be indulged, and that an exemplary vengeance will soon burst upon the
head of such a presumptuous fellow. -- Justice, honor, national gratitude, all
call for it. -- May it no longer be delayed.

An American.




The American who can read this without blushing is an object of contempt, of
scorn; a neutralized animal that has no idea of national honor, and that would
sell his country, were it in his power, for a single Louis d'or. Yet such there
are, and in abundance too.

A publication like this, the direct and avowed object of which was, to
instigate the free men to devastation and murder, should, one would think, have
been noticed by the magistrates, particularly under the eye of a Chief Justice,
whom we shall by-and-by see so zealous and so watchful. But, no. It attracted
the attention of no one, or at least no one took any measures to prevent the
intended assault. My house and my family might have been burnt to ashes; we
might all have been dragged into the street and murdered, and, I sincerely
believe, not so much as a constable would have held up his staff to arrest the
assassins We were, however, prepared for their reception. We should not have
fallen unrevenged. Some of their souls would have taken their departure from my
door-way on their journey to hell.

It is here that I ought, and that I do with pleasure, acknowledge the
generosity of several gentlemen of the city (many of whom I never saw), who I
was afterward assured, had formed the resolution to summon the magistrates,
and to come to my aid in person. One gentleman in particular, whom I did not
then know even by name, went in disguise among the groups of free men to
endeavor to find out their intention. I wish I durst name him now; but my
gratitude to him forbids me to do it. When liberty comes to this pitch, I think
it ought to assume some other name.

But, what was the most shameful, and what is most directly to the point before
us, was, this audacious, this cutthroat attack on the liberty of the press,
was suffered to pass unnoticed, not only by all the other presses in this city,
but by all the presses in the continent. There are, perhaps, two or three
hundred newspapers published in the United States, and not one of them have
ever whispered a word in condemnation of it, from that day to this.

If, however, it was proper to destroy me; if " Justice, honor, and national
gratitude" demanded my blood for exercising the liberty of the press, that same
" Justice, honor and national gratitude" did, it seems, require my enemies to
exercise that liberty in perfect safety. No less than seven pamphlets were, in
this city, published against me in the space of ten days. It is a pity they
cannot now be found above ground. Had they lived, they would have been a
lasting honor to the country that gave them birth, and particularly to the
equal laws and impartial judiciary that tolerated them. They were, all
together, a composition of brutality, slander, and villainy of every sort and
description, that would have disgraced hell itself. The anonymous scoundrels
who wrote them vied with each other in baseness and atrocity; and one of them,
who seemed resolved to have the pre-eminence in infamy, and for whom
everlasting damnation is too mild a punishment, insinuated that my wife was a
whore! -- And all this, only because I had written with success against a
nefarious French faction. This is American liberty of the press!

Were I to set about recounting all the instances of persecution I have
experienced; all the menaces I have received; all the vexations through the
channel of the post office, etc. etc. I could fill fifty volumes like this. The
written threats, which I have now by me, to assassinate or poison me, or fire
my house, amount to some hundreds. Nor is this species of baseness confined to
this city or this state. There is hardly a post mark of an American town, which
I cannot, and which I will not, show stamped on some infamous production,
intended, in some way or other, to restrain the liberty of my press.

I shall wind up this series of injuries, of base machinations and brutal
autrage, that have been attempted against me, with an anecdote, which cannot
fail to give the reader a high opinion of the decency, candor and justice to
be met with in Pennsylvania. -- A great beef-headed purblind creature, that
calls itself a young lawyer, and whose pleading bears an infinite resemblance
to the bleating of an overgrown calf, observed to * * * * * just before the
court sat, that it was quite wrong to honor me with a legal punishment; and
that, if I had censured him, as I had done some other of the patriots, he would
have clapped a pistol to my breast and blowed my brains out! -- There now,
leaving the bull aside, is a noble sentiment for you! What sort of justice has
a man to expect, where such language can, in such company, be held with
impunity? -- However, I will never fly to the law to shelter me from the
vengence of this bellowing animal, who, instead of standing erect before the
bench, ought to be placed on all fours before a rack and manger. I will never
fly to the law, or to any thing else, to shelter me from the soft horns of this
half-grown, blinking, bloated cornuto.

I should now enter into a recital of the persecutions, of various sorts, which
other printers, not devoted to the French, have experienced; but this would
lead me too far. I cannot, however, omit noticing one remarkable instance of
patriotic liberality and justice.

Richmond, Virginia, April 4, 1794.
About two weeks ago, a piece was published in the Virginia Gazette, requesting
all true republicans to wear the national cockade, in hoour of France, which,
it seems, was not well received by the Aristocrats. The next day another piece
came out, in another of your papers, signed, " A foe to distinctions,"
ridiculing the measure, comparing those citizens who adopted it to fools and
madmen, which so irritated the republican party, that some of them waited on
the printer, and demanded the author. He told them, he did not know who he was,
and would go before a magistrate and take his oath of it. I assure you he was
greatly alarmed on the occasion, and I think has lost much of his interest by
it. -- They were not satisfied with this; but, in the evening erected a
gallows, fixed it on a wagon carriage, hung the poor fellow up in effigy, and
paraded through the streets beating the rogue's march. At last they stopped
before the post office door, and burnt him with repeated shouts and huzzas. --
I am confident, if they could have found the author, he would have suffered the
same fate as the effigy; at least they would have complimented him with a suit
of American manufacture, extracted from the lofty pine, and the filling taken
from a goose. -- You see what the Virginians dare do -- what they do to enemies
of liberty -- and I sincerely hope all who are inimical to the cause of
America, or France, may meet a similar reward.


This extract is taken from BACHE'S paper, No. 1044; and the circumstances of
the base transaction that it recounts were pretty exactly as it describes them.
This printer was exhibited as a rogue that merited to be hung and burnt; and
his author if found, would have actually suffered this ignominious fate: and
all this for writing and publishing -- what? -- A sensible essay, advising the
people not to make themselves appear like fools and madmen, by adopting the
fantastical fopperies, or rather by ranging themselves under the colors, of a
foreign nation! -- Will any one pretend to say, that, in a country where such
unjust, tyrannical, and inhuman proceedings could take place, and pass
unpunished and unnoticed by the civil power; will any one have the effrontery
to say, that, in such a country, there is any thing worthy of being called, the
liberty of the press? -- But, no more. It is mere mockery to talk of it.

Now, in answer to all this, some precious villain, deep leaned in the jargon
of the Rights of Man; or some temporizing drivler from the canting school of
modern republicanism: some infamous BACHE or trimming NOAH WEBSTER, will tell
me that nothing which I have here advanced, tends to prove the press to be in
thraldom. They will say, that so long as it remains unshackled by the law! so
long as the law does not invade its liberty, it is free. -- No; it is not so.
The law is made to protect the weak and the injured, as well as to punish the
guilty. The law which declares, that a man shall have such or such a right,
guarantees to him the enjoyment of that right therefore, the law which says,
that " the printing presses shall be free," pledges the faith and honor of the
nation to protect them in the exercise of their freedom; and to fail in
yielding them this protection, is as much a breach of the national says as is
an actual invasion of this freedom by the law; for, where is the difference to
the printer, whether the law itself restrain his press, or suffer it to be
restrained? I think I hate a tyrant (and I think I have reason) as much as most
men do! but I would much rather a tyrant should order my rights to be
surpressed, than have them rifled from me by his tools, a brutal and ferocious
mob

For want of this so necessary protection it is, that the infernal French
faction have, aided by certain men in power in most of the State Governments,
got the real liberty of the press into their possession, to the almost general
exclusion of their opponents. For want of this protection it is, that the
friends of the Federal Government have been abashed, humbled, silenced, and, in
many instances, induced to change sides: and, it is for want of this
protection, that we at this moment see such numbers of insipid, tame and
trimming papers, which, under the cowardly guise of impartiality, are a
disgrace to literature, a dishonor to the country, a clog to the government,
and a curse to the people.

I have now, I think, and in pretty plain language too, proved, that, some way
or other, the liberty of the American press has been most scandalously attacked
and restrained, notwithstanding the law declares, it shall be perfectly free.
What the law itself, and those who administer that law, are capable of
performing in this way, under the free and equal and lenient and humane
government of poor Pennsylvania, it is the object of the following pamphlet to
expose to a deceived and infatuated world.

AMERICAN LIBERTY of the PRESS, etc. etc.
WHEN I undertook the publishing of a daily paper, it was with the intention of
annihilating, if possible, the intriguing, wicked, and indefatigable faction,
which the French had formed in this country. I was fully aware of the
arduousness of the task, and of the inconvenience and danger to which it would
expose both me and mine. I was prepared to meet the rancorous vengence of
enemies in the hour of their triumph, and the coolness of friends in the hour
of my peril: in short, to acquire riches seemed to me quite uncertain, and to
be stripped of every farthing of my property seemed extremely probable; but let
what would happen, I was resolved to pursue the contemplated object, as long as
there remained the most distant probability of success.

Among the dangers, which presented themselves to me, those to be apprehended
from the severity of the law appeared the most formidable; more especially as I
happened to be situated in the State of Pennsylvania, where the government,
generally speaking, was in the hands of those, who had (and sometimes with
great indecency) manifested an uniform partiallity for the sans-culotte French,
and as unifom an opposition to the ministers and measures of the Federal
Government. These persons I knew I had offended by the promulgation of
disagreeable truths; and, therefore, it was natural, that I should seek for
some standard as a safe rule for my conduct with respect to the liberty of my
press.

To set about the study of the law of libels, to wade through fifty volumes of
mysterious tautology, was what I had neither time nor patience to do. The
English press was said to be enslaved; but, when I came to consult the practice
of this enslaved press, I found it still to be far too free for me to attempt
to follow its example. Finally, it appeared to me to be the safest way, to form
to myself some rule founded on the liberty exercised by the American press. I
concluded, that I might, without danger, go as great lengths in attacking the
enemies of the country as others went in attacking its friends: that as much
zeal might be shown in defending the General Government and administration as
in accusing and traducing them: and that as great warmth would be admissible in
the cause of virtue, order, and religion, as had long been tolerated in the
wicked cause of villainy, insurrection, and blasphemy. What ever rancour might
be harbored against me in the breasts of particular persons, I depended on
shame to restrain the arm of power: I thought no officer or officers of state,
would, in this country, dare to deal toward an honest man with a rigor which
had never been experienced by the vilest of miscreants. Alas! all this I
thought, and all I thought was wrong; as the following sheets will most clearly
evince.

Before I enter on the account of the groundless prosecution which this
Pennsylvania state government has compelled me to sustain, it is necessary to
notice some steps that were taken by my enemies previously thereto.

Some time in the month of August last, the Spanish Minister Don Carlos
Martinez de'Yrujo, applied to the Federal Government to prosecute me for
certain matters published in my Gazette, against himself and that poor
unfortunate and humbled mortal, Charles the fourth, King of Spain. The
government consented, and I was accordingly bound over, before the Honourble
Judge Peter's, to appear in the Federal district court, which will meet next
April.

Of this preparatory step to a fair and impartial trial the Don was informed.
But, it would seem, the information was far from being satisfactory to him;
for, he delivered in a memorial to the Federal Government, requesting (for what
reason I leave the reader to determine) that the trial might come on before the
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, of which court M'Kean is Chief Justice.

Thus foiled in the grand object, a new scrutiny was, without much regard to
decency, set on foot; new pretended libels were hunted out; and, an application
to prosecute me was made to the government of Pennsylvania. It is hardly
necessary to say that consent was speedily obtained. A bill of indictment was
prepared by the attorney General of the state, and a warrant, of which the
following is a copy was issued to sieze me.

Seal. Pennsylvania ss. The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to the Sheriff of the
County of Philadelphia, to the Constables of the City of Philadelphia, and to
all other OUR Ministers and Officers within OUR said City and County, Greeting.
For as much as the Chief Justice of OUR Supreme Court is given to understand
by the information, testimony, and complaint of credible persons, that WILLIAM
COBBETT of the City of Philadelphia, printer, is the printer and publisher of
certain infamous and wicked libels against His Chatholic Majesty the King of
Spain, the Chevalier Charles Martinez de Yrujo envoy extraordinary and minister
plenipotentiary of His said Catholic Majesty to the United States of America,
and of the Spanish nation, contained in public journals, or newspapers called
PORCUPINE'S GAZETTE, numbers 114, 115, 121, 127, 156, 160, 163 and 180, in the
said City of Philadelphia, tending to defame the said, King, envoy and
minister, and the subjects of the said King, to alienate their AFFECTIONS AND
REGARD from the government and citizens of the United States of America and of
US, to excite them to hatred, hostilities and war against the said United
States.

Therefore WE command you, and every of you, that some, or one of you attach
the aforesaid WILLIAM COBBETT, so that you have him as soon as he can be taken
before OUR said Chief Justice, to answer US of the premises, and be further
dealt withal according to law: -- And have you then there this precept. Witness
the Honorable Thomas M'Kean, Doctor of Laws, Chief Justice of OUR Supreme
Court, at Philadelphia, the Eighteenth day of November in the Twenty second
year of the Indepence of the United States of America, and in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety seven.

THOMAS M'KEAN.
True Copy. Jor. Thomas.
Nov. 18, 1797.
If I did not well know, that all instruments of this kind, coming from under
the hand and seal of a Judge, are, by privilege immemorial, exempted from the
lash of criticism, I should most certainly be tempted to try my hand on the
warrant. -- For instance: the Commonwealth is called US, and this may be proper
enough, as the Commonwealth, in the modern style, means the citizens thereof.
But, what shall we make of the passage, where it is said, that I endeavored to
alienate the affections of the Spaniards from the citizens of the United States
and of US; that is, from the citizens of the United States, and from the
citizens of US; and this last sentence means, from the citizens of the citizens
of the Commonwealth! In the name of mercy what is all this! Is the form
intended to convey a notion, that the citizens of Pennsylvania have other
citizens under their control and government; or that the citizens of the
Commonwealth are their own citizens, and that WE govern US? -- A projector some
few years ago received a prize medal from the philosophical society of
Philadelphia, for having invented an American language. I wonder if this
warrant be a specimen of it?

But, let us return to more solid matter.

The trifling circumstances attending an arrest and giving bail are scarcely
worth relating; but, sometimes, trifling circumstances serve to convey a more
correct idea of the character of the parties concerned in a transaction, and to
guide the reader to a more just appreciation of their motives, than the longest
and most labored general account of their conduct.

The Sheriff (whose civility and candor I have every reason to applaud) came
to my house, for the first time, at twelve o'clock; and he was ordered to have
me before the Judge at half past one. Thank God, I am not versed in arrests;
but, I believe, this is the first time, that ever a man, prosecuted for a
libel, was pinned down to the short space of an hour and a half to prepare for
going out and to procure himself bail. The English reader (for this pamphlet
shall be read in England) will observe, that this government of Pennsylvania,
is that which is everlastingly boasting of the mildness and humanity of its
laws.

I was not so destitute of friends as, perhaps, the Judge expected I was. Bail
was procured, and we were before him at the appointed time.

He asked us to sit down. I seated myself on one side of the fire, and he on
the other. After he had talked on for some time to very little purpose (at
least as to the effect his talk produced on me), he showed me certain
newspapers, and asked me if I had printed and published them. To this I
replied, that the law did not require me to answer any questions in that stage
of the business, and that, therefore, I should not do it. At this reply, though
a very prudent and a very proper one, "he waxed exceeding wroth." He instantly
ordered me to get off my chair and stand up before him, though he himself had
invited me to sit down. This species of resentment, so becoming in a Judge,
excited in my mind no other sentiments than that which I dare say it has
already excited in the mind of the reader.

The next document, which follows in due course, is THE BILL OF INDICTMENT; the
IGNORAMUS Bill of Indictment. -- Go over it with attention, I beseech thee,
reader; or else, take my word for it, you will be just as wise when you have
done, as you are now. You must have your eyes well about you; keep a sharp look
out for parenthesises and quotations; and, above all you must hold your breath
to the bottom of a paragraph; if you cannot do this, you will no more understand
it than you would the croaking of a frog or the cakling of a goose. --
Therefore, again I say, attention!

OYER AND TERMINER; November Sessions, 1797.
Philadelphia County ss.
The grand Inquest of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, upon their oaths and
affirmations respectively, DO PRESENT: That WILLIAM COBBETT, late of the City
of Philadelphia, in the County of Philadelphia, Yeoman, being a person of a
wicked and turbulent disposition, and maliciously designing and intending, to
vilify and defame the person, character, and government, of His Chatholic
Majesty, Charles the fourth, King of Spain, and to disturb and destroy the
peace and amity and concord, now happily subsisting between the same and the
United States of America; and also, to vilify and defame the person and
character of Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo, the minister plenipotentiary and
envoy extraordinary from His Catholic Majesty, the said King of Spain, to the
United States, ON the seventeenth day of July, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety seven, at the City of Philadelphia, in the
County aforesaid, wickedly and maliciously did print and publish, and cause to
be printed and published, a certain scandalous, false, and malicious libel, of
and concerning His Catholic Majesty the said King of Spain, and of and
concerning the said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo, the said minister
plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary from His said Majesty to the United
States, in a certain news-paper called PORCUPINE's GAZETTE, which said
news-paper was then and there printed and published by the said WILLIAM
COBBETT, and in the form of observations, signed by an old soldier, and
directed and addressed for PORCUPINE's GAZETTE; in which said libel are
contained; among other things and expressions, diverse of false, feigned,
scandalous, and malicious matters, according to the tenor following, to wit: --
Ever since Spain has been governed by princes of the Bourbon family, the
Spanish name has been disgraced in peace and in war; every important measure
has been directed by the crooked politics of France -- This connection, like
the abscene ha^ers of old, contaminates whatever it touches. But never has this
been so c^uspicu^ as in the present reign, and more especially at the present
period The degenerate prince that now sways the Spanish scepter [thereby
meaning His Catholic Majesty, the said King of Spain] whom the French [the
French Republic meaning] have kept on the throne merely as a trophy of their
power, or as the butt of their insolence, seems destitute not only of the
dignity of a king, but of the common virtues of a man; not content with allying
himself to the murderers of a benevolent Prince who was the flower of his
family, he [His Catholic Majesty the said king of Spain meaning] has become the
supple tool of all their [the said French Republic meaning] most nefarious
politics. As the Sovereign [His Catholic Majesty the said King of Spain
meaning] is at home, so is the minister abroad, [meaning the said Don Carlos
Martinez de Yrujo, the said minister plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary
from His said Catholic Majesty, the said King of Spain, to the United States]
The one [meaning His Catholic Majesty the said King of Spain] is governed like
a dependent, by the nod of the five d^spots at Paris; and the other [meaning
the said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo, the said minister plenipotentiary from
His said Catholic Majesty] by the directions of the French Agents in America.
Because those infidel tyrants [The French Republic and their agents meaning]
had thought proper to rob and insult this country and its government, and we
have thought proper, I am sorry to add, to submit to it, the obsequious
imitative Don [The said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo meaning] must attempt the
some; in order to participate in the guilt, and lessen the infamy of his
masters. [The French Republic and their agents meaning.]

AND ALSO; the said WILLIAM did then and there, in the same news-paper, and
connected with the libel aforesaid, print and publish the false, feigned,
scandalous, and malicious, words and matters, according to the tenor following,
to wit:

In the present state of things, the independence of the United States is
little more than a shadow; it [the independence of the United States meaning]
is really not worth what it cost to acquire and support it; and (...) stop can
be put to the progress of faction and foreign interference. [the interference
of the said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo, and the government of His said
Catholic Majesty meaning] instead of a bl^^ it [the independence of the United
States meaning] will 'ere ^ng be a burden, which even the v^ssals of Prussia
would not take off our hands as a g^ft. AND the Grand Inquest aforesaid, upon
their oaths and affirmations aforesaid, do FURTHER PRESENT; that the said
WILLIAM COBBETT, being as aforesaid, and designing and intending as aforesaid,
ON the twenty fourth day of July, in the year aforesaid, at the City and County
aforesaid, wickedly and maliciously did print and publish, and cause to be
printed and published, a certain other false, scandalous, and malicious libel,
of and concerning the said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo, the said minister
plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary from the said King of Spain to the said
United States, in the form of a communication, in which said last mentioned
libel are contained, the false, scandalous, and malicious matters and things,
according to the tenor following, to wit: after such examples how can it be
wondered at, that an advertisement should appear in our public prints, giving
notice of a swindling assignment of his estate by a member of Congress, in the
vicinity of the Capital, for the purpose of d^rauding his creditors, or that
our people should ^in the French maranders, and pillage the property and
threaten the lives of their defenseless countrymen, under the flag of these
pirates, or that we [the people of the United States meaning] are so abused and
humbled as to submit with patience to the public insults of a friv^ Spaniard,
half Don and half Sans-culotte. [meaning thereby the (...) Don Carlos Martinez
de Yrujo, minister plempotentiary and envoy extraordinary as aforesaid]

AND the Grand Inquest aforesaid, upon their oaths and affirmations aforesaid,
further do present, that the said William Cobbett being as aforesaid, and
designing and intending as aforesaid, ON the thirty first day of July, in the
year aforesaid, at the City and within the County aforesaid, wickedly and
maliciously did print and publish, and cause to be printed and published, a
certain other false, scandalous, and malicious libel, of and concerning the
said King of Spain, and of and concerning the said Don Martinez de Yrujo, the
said minister plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary of the said King of Spain
to the said United States, in which said last mentioned libel, among other
things, diverse false, scandalous and malicious matters are contained, according
to the tenor following to wit: -- What will his magnanimous majesty say, when,
by the result of Don Y^^i^^'s [the said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo meaning]
conspiracy with B^unt [meaning a conspiracy, or crime, for which WILLIAM ^OUNT,
heretofore a Senator or the United States, was impeached by the House of
Representatives of the United States, and expelled from the Senate thereof] and
his appeal to the people, this political puppet [the said Don (...) Martinez de
Yrujo meanin^] shall have brought on a war with America; when the standard of
liberty shall be unfurled ^n the isthmus of Darien; then his Majesty [his said
Catholic Majesty the King of Spain meaning] may perhaps find, that the free
born sons of America are not that dastardly race of cowards, which the
submission to the insults of his [the said King of Spain meaning] ^eacher us
and piratical ally [the Republic of France meaning] and taught him to believe
them; -- to the great scandal and (...) of his Catholic Majesty the King of
Spain, of his government, and the said Don Carlos Martinez de Yrujo minister
plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary from his said Catholic Majesty the said
King of Spain, to the evil and perni^us example of all others in the like case
offending against the act of assembly in such case made and provided, and
against the peace and dignity of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

JARED INGERSOLL, Atty. General.
WITNESS.
Hon. THOMAS M'KEAN, Esquire. sw. exd. Dr. CHARLES CALDWELL, sw. exd. Dr. JOHN R.
COXE, sw. exd. WILLIAM BRADFORD, sw. exd. WILLIAM MITCHELL, sw. exd. ISAIAH
THOMAS, sw. exd. PATRICK DELANY, sw. exd. EZRA SERGEANT, at present in
Virginia, therefore cannot be examined. STACY BUDD, affirmed, exd. ARCHIBALD
BARTRAM, affirmed, exd.

IGNORAMUS. William C^t^, Foreman.
I, EDWARD BURD, Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and Clerk of the ^o^ts of Oyer and Terminer and general Goal
delivery, holden before the Justices of the said Supreme Court for the said
Commonwealth, hereby certify, that the foregoing sheets contain a true Copy of
a Bill presented to the Grand Jury, at a Court of Oyer and Terminer and general
Goal delivery, holde^ before the said Justices, on the twenty seventh day of
November last, for the county of Philadelphia, and that the said bill was
returned IGNORAMUS by the said Grand Jury.

Seal. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the seal of
the said Supreme Court, at Philadelphia, the seventh day of December in the
year of (...) Lord MDCCXCVII. EDW. BURD, Foreman.


The following is a LIST of the GRAND JURY
LEFT SIDE.
WILLIAM COATS, THOMAS FOREST, PETER BROWN, WILLIAM ROBINSON, NATHAN BOYS,
ISAAC FRANKS, ISAAC WORRELL, GEORGE LOGAN, WILLIAM PENROSE,
RIGHT SIDE.
FRANCIS GURNEY, ROBERT WHARTON, PETER MIERCKEN, JOHN WHITEHEAD, DANIEL KING,
SAMUEL WHEELER, JOHN C. STOCKER, JOHN HOLMES, JACOB SERVOSS, ROBERT MORRIS.


THIS Bill of Indictment, however insignificant it may be in itself, has
already made considerable noise in the world, and it will yet make a great deal
more. Papers of this sort generally travel from the court to the clerk's
office; and there they lodge in eternal sleep. But this Bill is certainly
destined to another fate. Neptune will lend his waves and Aeolus his winds to
conduct it over the deep. It will see climes that the inventors of it never
saw, nor ever will see. Little did they imagine, that they were becoming
authors, and authors of such celebrity too, as, if it please God, I will render
them.

The identical copy of this precious document of liberty, which I received from
the clerk's office, stamped with the arms of poor Pennsylvania, I shall send to
London by the next packet, addressed to MR. REEVES'S loyal society of the Crown
and Anchor. When they are infested with the reformists, or any other noisy gang
of liberty men, they will have nothing to do but show them this Bill, and say:
Here, you discontented dogs, is this what you are barking after? If it be, go
to that free country, America. I am much mistaken if the bare sight of it would
not make more converts to their cause than all the means, that their talents
and their laudable zeal have hitherto invented or employed. It is a sample of
the liberty which the disaffected in Britain are sighing after; and they would
exclaim with the old miller in the fable, "if such is the sample, what must be
the sack!"

The charges contained in the Bill of Indictment, lie buried in such a
multitude of words which mean nothing, or at least nothing to the purpose, that
they are very difficult to be understood. Some one says of a man extremely
verbose in his conversation, that "his wit is like three grains of wheat in a
bushel of chaff;" and exactly the same may with truth be said of the meaning of
this Bill. The three libels, as they are called, may all be contained in a
quarter of a page, whereas the Bill is swelled out to three or four pages. Let
us, then, sift out the three grains of wheat, leaving the chaff behind.

The best way of doing this, and of enabling the reader to form a correct
judgment both as to their import and their tendency, will be to lay before him
the three publications (in which they are to be found) entire and undistorted,
marking the pretended libellous parts in it^licks.

1st. From the Porcupine of 17, July, 1797. For PORCUPINE'S GAZETTE.
Ever since Spain has been governed by princes of the Bourbon family, the
Spanish name has been disgraced, in peace and in wa^: very important measure
has been directed by the crooked politics of France This conne^ion, like the
ouscene ha^ of ^d, contaminates what ver it touches. Burn ver ha^ this been so
conspicu^s as in the present reign, and more specially at the present period
The d^g^ne^ prince that now s^ays the Spanish scepter, whom the French have
kept on the throne, merely as a ^rophy of their power, or as the bu^ of their
insol^nce, seems distitut^ not only of the dignity of a king, but of the common
virtues of a man: not content with allying himself to the murderers of a
benevolent prince, who was the fl^er of his family, he has become the supple
^ol of all their most nefarious politics -- As the sove^ign is at home, so is
the minister abroad, the on is governed, like a dependant, by the nod of the
five despots at Paris, and the other by the directions of the French ag^n^s in
America. Because those infid^l tyrants had thought proper to r^band insul^ this
country and its government, and we have thought proper, I am sorry to add, to
submit to it, the obs^quious imitative Don must attempt the same; in order to
participate in the guilt, and less^n the infamy of his masters. -- Surely, if a
revolution is ever to be recommended, it is when a prince thus entails ruin and
disgrace on himself and his people, as Charles the 4th has done by this
alliance with the regicide directory of France. Besides what she paid to
purchase a dishonorable peace, Spain has already lost large sums in specie, a
considerable part of her navy, and a very valuable island; and if she persist
in her present stupid system of obedience, without claiming the second sight of
a Scotchman, I will pronounce her ruin inevitable -- Nothing is wanted but a
conjoint operation between Great Britain and the United States, to open a way
to all the riches of Mexico: and however Spain may deceive herself, it is not
all the crooked man^vres of French and American Jacobins, who are as much her
enemies as ours, that can long prevent it. Events are pointing, with the
clearness of a sunbeam, to the absolute, irresistible necessity of such a
coalition. The base subsidised agents of France cannot long check the just
resentment, or resist the measures of a high spirited and free people, who
scorned to receive the law from freemen, and will never submit to receive it
from slaves. The proud spirited of '76, that encountered dangers far more
tremendous, than any that now present themselves, will burst not with the
greater violence, for being so long restrained, and spreading from north to
south will bear down all opposition -- The strength of this government is
great, in its various resources, as well as in the affection of all its citi^s,
a ^w base profligates excepted; and nothing but the want of an union of
councils, and an excessive love of peace, has hitherto prevented our enemies
from feeling it We hold the sat of the French and Spanish West Indies in our
^nds; and without having recourse to the infernal practice of the French, the
arming of slaves against their masters, we are able, with a small naval aid, to
revo^ize all the kingdom of Mexico. -- But with all this respectability of
strength and character, it has been the unhappy fate of this government to
submit to violations and indignities, almost without example; and this has been
owing as much to the t^meness of its friends, as to the aud^city of its
enemies; for while these have been united and persevereing, as all conspirators
are, those have been torpid, and without any union or combination of efforts --
In ^he present state of things the independence of the United States is little
more than a shadow: it is really not (...) pa^ and supp^ (...), and unless a
stop can be put to the progress of ^on and foreign interference, instead of a
blessing, it will ^e long be a burden, which even the ^ssa^ of Pr^ssia would
not take off our ^s, as a gift. -- I remember what the tories prophesied at the
close of the revolution war. "The prospect," said they, that now looks so
bright, will soon be darkened by clouds, heavier than any that has yet hung
over you. Your government will be torn by civil factions, and you will be
tossed to and fro, like a tennis-ball, by the contending nations of Europe.
France, which you now hug as an ally and equal, will corrupt your citizens, and
soment divisions among them; by which your government will be so weakened that
it will not dare to oppose her ambitions designs. She can never forget her
being expelled from this country with disgrace, nor will she fail to improve
the first opportunity to recover some part of it. -- This is almost fulfilled
in the present unfortunate state of things, but the case is not without a
remedy, if prompt decission and firmness is adopted, on the part of government
and its influential friends. To these the great body of the well-affected
citizens look for an example. They feel the wounds of their country, they
resent them, and if properly led would speedily avenge them. They fear neither
the foreign enemy, nor the dastardly traitors among themselves, but would
rejoice in an opportunity of sacrificing to both their much injured and
insulted country. -- In what consists the principal strength of France. It is
in the poison of her principles among the mob, and corruption of her money
among rebels and parricides. These have been the base diabolical arts, by which
she has done as much as by her arms; and miserable has been the fate of all
those countries, where they have been not seasonably and vigorously opposed. If
after so many examples to teach us, we continue to fold our arms, and wrap
ourselves up in an imagined security, our turn will come next: and we shall add
one more to the gloomy catalogue of the tributatries of France. -- Therefore
let the friends of their country and its government associate at this critical
juncture, to support the constituted authorities, and to oppose their enemies
by spirited and ^ed efforts While traitors and foreign emissaries are daily
insulting the chief magistrate by virulent and inflamatory publications; when
the ministers of France and Spain, forgetting common decency, obt^ude their
appeals on the people, in order to mislead the ignorant; it is the duty of all
those who condemn such criminal conduct to declare their resolution to oppose
it.

A^ OLD SOLDIER.

2d. From the Porcupine of 24, July, 1797. COMMUNICATION. AMERICAN MORALS.
To every reflecting mind, a review of the events which have taken place among
some great political actors in the United States within a few years past, must
be attended with extreme grief, mortification, and apprehension -- with grief,
for the great depravity and corrupt^ of morals which they manifest; -- with
mortification, as they effect the honor and purity of the American character:
-- and with serious apprehension, of the consequence, which may result from the
influence of so many examples of an abandonment of integrity; not among the
commonalty, for vice in (...) ^r classes is to be met with every where, but in
(...), and ^ed stations, and in persons selected by their fellow citizens to
fill (...) of great trust, distinction and confidence. -- When we ^hold a
secretary of state, in whom pride ^e should have supplied the place of virtue,
o^ the account of the eminent and distinguished family from whom he was
descended, and with whom he was related, basely forsaking his duty, meanly
offering himself for a purchase, and battering his country for the gold of an
intriguing foreigner; when we see a great diplomatic character return from an
embassy in which he betrayed the best interests of his country to the politics
of an infiduous nation, and humbling the American people by listening to a
public abuse of them, caressed, feasted, and justified by the first officers in
the government; when a member of the senate of the United States is detected in
debauching the fidelity of the public servants, and in plotting schemes of
ambition and desperate enterprise, tending to commit the peace of his country;
when it is now notorious that representatives of the people in Congress were
instrumental in fomenting and encouraging the late insurrection in the west,
and that the principles of the chief magistrate of the state in which it
unhappily appeared, were so much suspected of disaffection, and his attachment
to the country so questionable, that it was found unsafe to confide its
suppression in his hands; when in fact, this very man, his family, and his
friends, were discovered in applying to their own purposes, without form, and
without security, large sums of money placed under the guardianship of a public
institution; when the president and cashier of an extensive bank in the
capital, and a principal officer in another bank in a great southern sea port,
connected with a man not long since in an elevated situation, are found
betraying their trusts, and embezzling the property they were paid to protect;
when a judge of the pleas is publicly detected in shop-lifting; when an officer
in a conspicuous station in the collection of the revenue is dismissed for
delinquency; when a merchant, lately a member of the national legislature, the
first some years past in a commercial character, has wantonly engaged in the
wildest schemes of speculation and expense, and in connection with a man whose
high reputation had called him to an elevated office of control and
superintendance, involving in their own fall, more families in general and
pungent distress, than a thousand bankruptcies had ever produced; when an
associate judge of the supreme court is held in duresse, for an immense debt,
contracted in visionary plans of personal ^grandizement -- when time has
brought to light, that a profound philosopher and statesman, whose same had ^ed
Europe and America, meanly and traitoro^nly consented, in the very moment of
public enthusiasm, when these states had just achieved their independence, to
place (...) in the hands of France, without condition, and without control; in
fine, when we view the second magistrate in the United States, the pr^ing head
of an independent branch of the government, erecting the standard of
opposition, rallying around it a host of malcontents, and taking a position as
the chief of a faction; when we see him openly vindicating the insults and
aggressions of a foreign nation, purposely mistating the political situation
and sentiments of the country in correspondence with a ^nt stranger -- and
courted by the plunderers and enemies of America; when all these shameful and
degrading circumstances are reviewed, what are we to think of our republican
morals? Well may we exclaim with the consellor Fauchet if this people are thus
early dec^pid, what may we expect in their old age! -- The history of the most
corrupt nation, and the most de^potie or degenerate monarchy in Europe, cannot
produce a like number of instances of such scandalous, criminal, and traitorous
conduct in their public functionaries, it may be safely affirmed, even in the
lapse of a century. After such examples, ^ow ^an it be wonde^ at, that an
advertisement should appear (...) ^ts, giving notice of a s^i^ing assignment of
his estate, by a (...) ^ess in the ^ty of the capital, for the purpose of
defrauding (...) the French marander, and pillage the property, and threaten
the lives of their defenseless countrymen, under the flag of these pirates --
or that we are so abused and humbled as ^mit with patience to the public
insults of a frivolous Spaniard, half Don and half Sans-Culott^?

A. B.

3d. From the Porcupine of 31. July, 1797. From the GAZETTE of the UNITED
STATES. ANECDOTE. From the BOURDEAUX "JOURNAL DES JOURNFAUX."
When the court of Madrid found itself compelled by the most imperious
necessity, to make peace with the French republic, it was necessary to make the
king sensible of the impossibility of continuing the war, and to resign himself
to the sacrifices imposed by the treaty of peace. I thought, said the
astonished monarch, that we had always beaten the French -- What will his
magnanimous majesty say, when by the result of Don Yari^'s conspiracy with
Blount, and his appeal to the people, this political (...) shall have brought
on a war with America. When the standard of liberty shall be unsur^d on the
^sth^us of Darien; then his majesty may perhaps find that the ^orn sons of
America are not that dustardly race o^ cowards, which their submission to the
insults of his treach^, and ^atical (...), had taught him to (...) them. And
when (...) Manuel de Godoy, Prince de la ^'az, shall come before the
magnanimous monarch, and with his finger in his mouth, tell him that it has
become necessary to preserve the valuable mines of Peru, the extensive
territory of Amazonie, Paraguay, Chili, and in short all South America, proper,
by the surrender of all possessions, on this side the ^thmus of Da^ien. It is
much to be doubted if the monarch instead of tacitly admitting the argument of
"imperious necessity," will not kick the sublime prince of peace from his
presence, and turning his attention to the origin of so great evils, will all^
a birth to Don Yarico in that commodious habitation where his respectable
predecessor to so well accommodated; all the good he has done to Spain by his
translation of Smith's Wealth of Nations, to the contrary notwithstanding.

These, reader, are the three publications, for which, under the free and equal
government of Pennsylvania. I have been harrassed with a criminal prosecution;
for which (besides the expense inseparable from all law concerns) I have been
subjected to the infamy of an arrest, and have been dragged from my home, to
the injury of my affairs and the great alarm of my wife and family.

I would not insult the respectable gentlemen, who composed the majority of the
Grand Jury, or the good sense of the reader, by any attempt of mine to prove
that nothing contained in these publications is of a libellous nature. If these
are libels, there is no book sacred or profane, which might not be construed
into a libel. Every history contains libel upon libel against kings, queens and
ministers. If these are libels, who is safe? In such a state of things a man
may draw down the punishment of a murderer on himself while he is saying his
prayers or singing of psalms.

Of the three publications, the two first only originated in my Gazette: the
other was taken from the Gazette of the United States, published by Mr. Fenno.
Of this latter circumstance I shall speak more fully, when I come to the Chief
Judge's charge.

The two publications, which made their first appearance through my means, I
have not the honor to be the writer of. They were both written by gentlemen of
this city; native Americans, men who were determined whigs during the war for
independence, republicans in principle, and firmly attached to the present
government.

In the first of these two publications, though there is certainly nothing
libellous, I am ready to confess there is a great deal of warmth; and if the
admission of an essay extraordinarily warm, abounding in strong expressions of
resentment and indignation, were ever justifiable, they most assuredly were on
such an occasion. The communication of the OLD SOLDIER was sent me at a moment,
when the city of Philadelphia, just quieted after the appeal of the French
Minister Adet, See Censor for November, 1796
rang with the daring, the degrading, the contemptuous insult, which the
Spaniard Yrujo had offered to the government of America and to every individual
living under it.

He had published a most audacious letter to Mr. Pickering, the Secretary of
State, containing a summary of all that is insolent. This letter had been
handed and hawked about the city; and had, by his secretary, been sent to every
public print for insertion. It was gone forth to the universe; and, that it
tended to degrade and defame America, we need no other proof than the following
paragraph from the London Gazette of the 14th of September. -- The Americans
are, according to our last advices from New York, paying dear for their
independence. The French take all their vessels, block up their very rivers,
punish their seamen like malefactors, and actually make them pay for the shot
they fire at them; while the Spanish Minister, with impunity, insults and
braves their poor enfeebled government. He has written to Timothy Pickering,
Esquire. their first Secretary of State (see our Gazette of yesterday) in a
language that Buonaparte would not venture to assume to his Cisalpinc
convention, or citizen Noel to the fallen and degraded Dutch: and what very
much aggravates the insult, he has, without, permission from the President of
the general Congress, communicated this letter to the people, as a sort of
manifesto, or appeal, to them from their government. Nothing of this kind, we
believe, ever before passed unresented, except in a conquered or invaded
country; and we cannot help lamenting, that so very little spirit should be
found in any people, but particularly in a people, who boast their origin from
Britons.

This paragraph, or at least the substance of it, I have seen in three London
papers and in one Dublin paper; so that, it may be fairly concluded, its
currency is by this time general, not only in the British dominions, but all
over Europe. -- And, I pray, was no one to attempt to wipe away the stigma?
Though the public papers had been made subservient to the spreading of this
deep shame and disgrace abroad, was no printer to admit any thing that served
to mark the strong indignation it inspired at home? Was the press to be free
for the Spaniard alone? Was he to be allowed to taunt and threaten and despise;
and were the poor Americans to sew up their lips, or only mutter their impotent
anger in secret? If this be so; if no man, by assuming a bold, an indignant,
and retaliating tone, was to make an effort to rescue his country and himself
from dishonor, without being harrassed with a prosecution, without hazarding
the punishment of a murderer, ours is a fallen state indeed! If this be liberty
and independence, or whatever else it may be called, God grant me the enjoyment
of its opposite. If this be freedom, may I be a bondsman, yea a very slave, to
the end of my days.

If such be justice, such the laws,
In the blessed clime where Freedom reigns,
I gladly join the tyrant's cause,
And seek for refuge in my chains.
I shall now come to Judge M'Kean's Charge to the Grand Jury; and shall,
without going out of court, take upon me to decide on its merits.

It was a charming thing this, for me to get hold of. I had long wished to
possess some such proof, some such convincing proof, of the superiority of the
American liberty of the press over that enjoyed in the " Insular Bastile,"
Great Britain; and it is to the desire that I have of giving it a portable and
durable situation, and to that alone, that this pamphlet is to be attributed:
for which kind intention I humbly hope his Honor will feel inclined to pardon
my past misdoings. His pretty works will now be read with admiration, in
countries where, I am sure, had it not been for me, his name would never have
once been articulated.

When this Charge, garnished with my simple and good-natured comments, comes to
be served up in Britain, it will be a dish for a king. The royalists will lick
their lips, and the republicans will cry, God bless us! The emigration for
liberty's sake will cease, and we shall have nothing but the pure unadulterated
dregs of Newgate and the Fleet; the candidates for Tyburn and Botany Bay.
Blessed cargo! All patriots to the backbone: true philanthropists and
universal citizens; fit for any place but England in this world, and for heaven
in the next.

The famous charge, which is to produce these excellent effects, was delivered
to the Grand Jury at the Court of Oyer and Terminer, abovementioned in the Bill
of Indictment. I shall not fill up my pages in copying the former part of it,
which the reader will, I am persuaded, readily excuse when he has read the
latter. Like two uncouth boorish visitants, the presence of the one renders all
apology unnecessary for the absence of the other.

The Judge began, as, I believe, is usual, with a definition of the several
crimes, which generally fall under the cognizance of such a court: as, treason,
sodomy, rape, forgery, murder, etc. etc. But these his Honor touched slightly
upon. He brushed them over as light and trifling offenses; or rather he blew
them aside as the chaff of the criminal code, in order to come at the more
solid and substantial sin of LIBELLING.

The weight, or rather the measure, that his Honor gave to this crime above
all others, on this particular occasion, I shall prove -- not by ratiocination,
but by arithmetic; by measurement with the aid of a Carpenter's two-foot rule;
as thus:

The Charge contains separate definitions of 32 crimes, the whole of which, in
the columns of the Gazette, occupy 5 F. 8 Inches, running measure; of which
that of LIBELLING alone occupies 3 F. 1 In. 6 P. On these dimensions I state
the following

PROBLEM. If 32 Crimes occupy 5 F. 8 In. and 1 crime occupies 3 F. 1 In. 6 P.
of how much greater magnitude ought this 1 crime to be than any 1 of the
remaining 31.

SOLUTION -- 18 Times. Thus, then, if we are to judge from the dimensions of
the Chief Justice of Pennsylvania's charge, Libelling is eighteen times worse,
more dangerous and more heinous, than robbery, forgery, treason, sodomy, or
murder!

The fact is, the Charge seemed studied to excite a horror of no crime but that
of libelling; the court seemed met for the punishment of nothing else, and I
seemed to be the sole object of that punishment. Of this the reader will be
convinced by a perusal of the Charge itself; and the cause he will find
explained in the subsequent remarks.

CHARGE. The Chief Judge (M'KEAN), after having, as was before observed, just
touched on the nature and punishment of other crimes, proceeds, with respect to
LIBELS, thus:

Before I conclude, I am sorry to have occasion to mention, that there is
another crime, that peculiarly concerns the judges of the supreme come to
endeavor to correct, it is that of LIBELLING. I will describe it at large.

Libels or libelli famosi, taken in the most extensive sense, signify any
writings, pictures, or the like, of an immoral or illegal tendency; but in the
sense we are now to consider them, are malicious defamations of any person, and
especially of a magistrate, made public either by writing, printing, signs or
pictures, in order to provoke him to wrath, or to expose him to public hatred,
contempt or ridicule.

The direct tendency of these libels is the breach of the public peace, by
stirring up the objects of them, their families and friends to acts of revenge,
and perhaps of bloodshed; which it would be impossible to restrain by the
severest laws, were there no redress from public justice for injuries of this
kind, which, of all others, are most sensibly felt; and which, being entered
upon with coolness and deliberation receive a greater aggravation than any
other scandal or defamation, continue longer, and are propagated wider and
farther. And where libels are printed against persons employed in a public
capacity, they receive an aggravation, as they tend to scandalize the
government, by reflecting on those who are entrusted with the administration of
public affairs, and thereby not only endanger the public peace, as all others
do, by stirring up the parties immediately concerned to acts of revenge, but
have also a direct tendency to breed in the people a dislike of their
governors, and incline them to faction and sedition.

Not only charges of a heinous nature, and which reflect a moral turpitude on
the party, are libellous, but also such as set him in a scurrilous ignominious
light: For every person desires to appear agreeable in life, and must be highly
provoked by such ridiculous representations of him, as tend to lessen him in
the esteem of the world, and take away his reputation, which to some men is
more dear than life itself, for these equally create ill-blood, and provoke the
parties to acts of revenge, and breaches of the peace.

A defamatory writing expressing only one or two letters of a name, or using
such descriptions and circumstances, feigned names or circumstances, in such a
manner, that from what goes before, and follows after, it must needs be
understood to signify such a person in the plain, obvious and natural
construction of the whole, is as properly a libel, as if it had expressed the
whole name at large: for it brings the utmost contempt upon the law, to suffer
it is justice to be eluded by such trifling evasions; and it is a ridiculous
absurdity to say, that a writing, which is understood by every the meanest
capacity, cannot possibly be understood by the courts and juries.

It is equally ridiculous and absurd to suppose that if a man speaks slanderous
or defamatory words of another, he may be such, and ample damages recovered for
the injury, but if the same words are put in writing or printed, no punishment
can be inflicted. Such a doctrine may gratify the wishes of envious and
malicious cowards and assassins, but must be detested by all sensible and good
men.

These offenses are punishable either by indictment, information or civil
action: But there are some instances where they can be punished by a criminal
prosecution only; as where the United States in congress assembled, the
legislature, judges of the supreme court, or civil magistrates in general are
charged with corruption, moral turpitude, base partiality, and the like, when
no one in particular is named.

By the law of the twelve tables at Rome, libels which affected the reputation
of another, were made capital offenses: But before the reign of Augustus, the
punishment became corporeal only. Order the emperor Valentinian, it was again
made capital, not only to wr^, but to publish, or even to omit destroying them.
But by the laws of Pennsylvania, the authors, printers, and publishers of a
libel are punishable by fine, and also a limited imprisonment at hard labor,
and solitary confinement in goal, or imprisonment only, or one of them, as to
the court in discretion shall seem proper, according to the heinousness of the
crime, and the quality and circumstances of the offender.

Any libeller, or person even speaking words of contempt against an inferior
magistrate, as a justice of the peace or mayor personally, though he be not
then in the actual execution of his office, or of an inferior officer of
justice, as a constable and such like, being in the actual execution of his
office, may be bound to his good behavior by a single justice of the peace.

By this law and these punishments, the liberty of the press ( a phrase much
used but little understood) is by no means infringed or violated. The liberty
of the press is indeed essential to the nature of a free state; but this
consists in laying no previous restraints upon publications, and not in freedom
from censure for criminal matter, when published Every freeman has an undoubted
right to lay what sentiments he pleases before the public; to forbid this, is
to destroy the freedom of the press; but if he publishes what is improper,
mischievous or illegal, he must take the consequences of his temerity. To
punish dangerous or offensive writings which, when published, shall on a fair
and impartial trial, be adjudged of a pernicious tendency, is necessary for the
preservation of peace and good order, of government and religion; the only
solid foundation of civil liberty. Thus the will of individuals is still left
free, the abuse only of that free will is the object of legal punishment. Our
presses in Pennsylvania are thus free. The common law, with respect to this, is
confirmed and established by the constitution itself. By the 7th sect. of the
declaration of the principles of a free government, etc. it is ascertained,
"that the printing-presses shall be free to every person, who undertakes to
examine the proceedings of the legislature, or any part of government." Men,
therefore, have only to take care in their publications, that they are decent,
candid and true; that they are for the purpose of reformation, and not of
defamation; and that they have an eye solely to the public good. Publications
of this kind are not only lawful but laudable. But if they are made to gratify
envy or malice, and contain personal invectives, low scurrility, or slanderous
charges; they can answer no good purposes for the community, but on the
contrary, must destroy the very ends of society -- Were these to escape with
impunity, youth would not be safe in it is innocence, nor venerable old age in
it is wisdom, gravity, and virtue; dignity and station would become a reproach;
and the fairest and best characters, that this or any other country ever
produced, would be vilified and blasted, if not ruined.

If any person, whether in a public or private station, does injury to an
individual, or to the society, ample redress can be had by having ^cse to the
laws, and the proper tribunals, where the parties can be heard personally, or
by counsel, the truth can be fairly investigated, and justice fully obtained:
so that there can be no necessity nor reason for accusing any one of public or
private w^ongs in pamphlets or newspapers, or of appeals to the people, under
feigned names, or by anonymous scribblers.

Every one who has in him the sentiments of either a Christian or a gentleman,
cannot but be highly offended at the cave^ed scu^tility that has raged in
pamphlets and newspapers, printed in Philadelphia for several years past,
insomuch that libelling has become a kind or national crime, and distinguishes
us not only from all the states around us, but from the whole civilized world.
Our sati^e has been nothing but ^ibeldry and billingsgate: the contest has been
who could call names in the greatest variety of phrases; who could mangle the
greatest number of characters; or who could excel in the magnitude or virulence
of their lies. Hence the honor of families has been stained; the highest posts
rendered cheap and vi^e in the sight of the people, and the greatest services
and virtue blasted This evil, so scandalous to ou^ government and detestable in
the eyes of all good men, calls aloud for redress. To censure the
licenciousness is to maintain the liberty of the press.

At a time when misunderstandings prevail between the Republics of the United
States and France, and when our general government have appointed public
ministers to endeavor their removal and restore the former harmony some of the
journals or newspapers in the city of Philadelphia have seemed with the most
irritating in^es, couched in the most vulgar and opprobrious language, not only
against the French nation and their ^es, but the very met in power with whom
the ministers of our country are sent to negociate. These publications have an
evident tendency not only to frustrate a reconciliation, but to create a
rupture and provoke a war between the sister Republics, and seem calculated to
vilify, nay, to subvert all Republican governments whatsoever.

Impressed with the duties of my station, I have used some endeavors for
checking these evils, by binding over the editor and printer of one of them,
licentious and virulent beyond all former example, to his good behavior; but
he still perseveres in his nefarious publications; he has ransacked our
language for terms of reproach and insult, and for the basest accusations
against every ruler and distinguished character in France and Spain, with whom
we chance to have any intercourse, which it is s^rce in nature to forgive; in
brief, he braves his recognizance and the laws. It is now with you, gentlemen
of the grand jury, to animadvert on his conduct; without your aid it cannot be
corrected. The government that will not discountenance, may be thought to adopt
it, and be deemed justly chargeable with all the consequence^s.

Every nation ought to avoid giving any real offense to another. Some medals
and d^ll jests are mentioned and represented as a ground of quarrel between the
English and Dutch in 1672, and likewise caused Lewis the 14th to make an
expedition into the United Provinces of the Netherlands in the same year, and
nearly ruined that Commonwealth.

We are sorry to find that our endeavors in this way have not been attended
with all the good effects that were expected from them; however we are
determined to pursue the prevailing vice of the times with zeal and
indignation, that crimes may no longer appear less odious for being
fashionable, nor the more secure from punishment for being popular.

The criminal law of this state is so pregnant with justice, so agreeable to
reason, so full of equity and clemency, that even those who suffer, by it
cannot charge it with rigor. It is so adapted to the common good as to suffer
no folly to go unpunished, which that requires to be restrained; and yet so
tender of the infirmities of human nature, and of the wives and children of
even the greatest offenders, as to refuse no indulgence which the safety of the
public will permit. It gives the rulers no power but of doing good, and
deprives the people of no liberty out of doing evil. We are now (thank God) in
the peaceable and full enjoyment of our laws, of the free administration of
justice, and in complete possession of religious, civil and political liberty.
May the Divine Governor of the world continue these blessings to us, and
impress it as a duty which we owe to ourselves who enjoy them; to those
virtuous men, who, under God, have been chiefly instrumental in procuring them;
and to our posterity who will claim at our hands this noblest inheritance, to
maintain and defend them at every hazard of life and fortune.

You may now, gentlemen, retire to your room. Inquire with zeal, hear with
attention, deliberate with coolness, judge with impartiality, and decide with
fortitude And may God overruled and direct all your proceedings to the
furtherance of justice and the happpiness of the people.

I have ever entertained the notion of an immediate superintending Providence,
and I most sincerely believe, that God did overruled and direct all the
proceedings of this Grand Jury; for they did judge with impartiality, and
decide with fortitude, though their judgment and decision were not quite
consonant to the wishes of the Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, as appeared not
only from his Charge, but also from what he hinted repecting the Jury, the day
after the Bill was returned. The day after the Bill was returned IGNORAMUS, the
Chief Justice, on the trial of Mr Humphreys for beating Bache, told the
prisoner, that, if he had thought himself agrieved by the press, he should have
appealed to the law; and added; "you may say, indeed, that GAND JURIES will not
do their duty: we have had a recent instance of that." -- On this reflection on
the Grand Jury, it is not my duty to comment. But, had I been one of the
gentlemen who composed it, I think I should have made an attempt, at least, to
defo^d my conduct and character.


So pointed, so personal a charge, I am bold to say, was never before delivered
from the Bench in any country, that has the least pretensions to civil liberty.
If it be foreseen, that a particular case, rather novel, is to come before a
Grand Jury, it is the custom for Judges, as it certainly is their duty, to
explain its nature, its tendency, and the law respecting it fully and minutely;
but never, till the 27th day of last November, did a Judge, presiding to
administer justice according to the mild and impartial precepts of the Common
Law of England, so far forget the genuine spirit of that law as to point
directly at a single offender, and to employ all the persuasion in his power to
bring down chastisement on his head.

The Charge contains every thing calculated to awaken the apprehensions of the
Grand Jury as to the effects of my conduct, and to prepossess their minds
against my person. In every thing but elegance and animation, it was more like
the zealous and impassioned pleadings of an advocate, than the calm, dignified,
and impartial accents that ever should breathe in the language from the Bench.

And, what was there, I pray, either in my character, in the particular case
before the Grand Jury, or in the general tenor of my publications, to warrant
this odious departure from the excellent rules, which had their origin in
decency and candor, and which have been rendered sacred by the practice of our
forefathers? A stranger, had there been one in court, would naturally have
concluded me to be a notorious defamer of innocence, a seditious and turbulent
troubler of the government, a sworn enemy of morality and religion; in three
words, a profligate, a rebel, and a blasphemer.

It hardly ever becomes a man to say much of his private character and
concerns; but, on this occasion, I trust I shall be indulged for a moment. I
will say, and I will make that saying good against whoever shall oppose it,
that I have never attacked any one, whose private character is not, in every
light which it can possibly be viewed, as far beneath mine as infamy is beneath
honor. -- Nay; I defy the city of Philadelphia, populous as it is, and
respectable as are its inhabitants in general, to produce me a single man, who
is more sober, industrious or honest; who is a kinder husband, a tenderer
father, a better master, a sounder friend, or (though last not least) a more
zealous and faithful subject.

Most certainly it is unseemly in any one to say thus much of himself, unless
compelledt it by some public outrage on his character; but, when the accusation
is thus made notorious, so ought the defense. And I do again and again repeat,
that I fear not a comparison between my character and that of any man in the
city: no, not even with that of the very Judge, who held me up as the worst of
miscreants. His Honor is welcome, if he please, to carry this comparison into
all the actions of our lives, public and domestic, and to extend it beyond
ourselves to every branch of our families.

As to my writings; I never did slander any one, if the promulgation of useful
truths be not slander. Innocence and virtue I have often endeavored to defend,
but I never defamed either. I have, indeed, stripped the close-drawn veil off
hypocricy; I have ridiculed the follies and lashed the vices of thousands, and
have done it sometimes, perhaps, with a rude and violent hand. But, these are
not the days for gentleness and mercy. Such as is the temper of the foe, such
must be that of his opponent. Seeing myself published for a rogue and my wife
for a whore; being presecuted with such infamous, such base and hellish calumny
in the philanthropic city of Philadelphia, merely for asserting the truth
respecting others, was not calculated, I assure you, to sweeten my temper and
turn my ink into honey-dew.

My attachment to order and good government nothing but the impudence of
Jacobinism could deny. The object, not only of all my own publications, but
also of all those which I have introduced or encouraged, from the first moment
that I appeared on the public seen to the present day, has been, to lend some
aid in stemming the torrent of anarchy and confusion. To undeceive the
misguided, by tearing the mask from the artful and ferocious villains, who,
owing to the infatuation of the poor and the supineness of the rich, have made
such a fearful progress in the destruction of all that is amiable and good and
sacred among men. To the government of this country, in particular, it has been
my constant study to yield all the support in my power. When either that
government, or the worthy men who administer it, have been traduced and
vilified, I have stood forward in their defense; ^d that too, in times when
even its friends were some of them locked up in silence, and others giving way
to the audacious violence of its foes. -- Not that I am so foolishly vain as to
attribute to my illiterate pen a thousandth part of the merit that my friends
are inclined to allow it. As I wrote the other day to a gentleman who had paid
me some compliments on this score, I should never look at my family with a dry
eye, if I did not hope to outlive my works. They are mere transitory beings, to
which the revolutionary storm has given life, and which with that storm will
expire. -- But, what I contend for, and what nobody can deny, I have done all
that laid in my power: all I was able by any means to accomplish, in order to
counteract the nefarious efforts of the enemies of the American government and
nation.

With respect to religion, though Mr. M'Kean was pleased to number it among the
things that were in danger from the licentiousness of the press, and, of
course, from poor ME, I think it would puzzel the devil himself to produce,
from my writings, a single passage, which could, by all the powers of
perversion, be twisted into an attack on it. But, it would, on the contrary, be
extremely easy to prove, that I have, at all times when an opportunity offered,
repelled the attacks of its enemies, the abominable battalions of Deists and
Atheists, with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all
my strength. The bitterest drop in my pen has ever been bestowed on them;
because, of all the foes of the human race, I look upon them, after the Devil,
as being the greatest and most dreadful. Not a sacrilegious plunderer, from
Henry VIII to Condorcet, and from Condorcet to the impious Sans-Culottes of
Virginia, has escaped my censure. All those who have attempted to degrade
religion, whether by open insults and cruelties to the Clergy, by blasphemous
publications, or by the more dangerous poison of the malignant modern phisophy,
I have ranked amongst the most infamous of mankind, and have treated them
accordingly.

After this summary defense of my character and writings, the necessity of
which I sincerely regret, justice demands that I should enter into an
exposition of the unparalleled partiality that has been exercised toward me:
and when I have done that, I pledge myself to prove, in contradiction to all
the boastings which we have heard, that the press is free-er in Great Britain
than in America.

To read the Chief Judge's famous Charge, one would inevitably be led to
imagine, that no person in this country, except PETER PORCUPINE, ever attempted
to exercise the Liberty of the press, or even that pitiful portion of it which
his Honor had the mercy to leave in our hands. All the other printers, one
would think, had been poor passive devils, and that their sheets had contained
naught but vapid songs of liberty, lying eulogies on departed rascallity, and
fulsome flattery of villains in power. But, to do justice to my brother
printers, to myself, and to Judge M'Kean, I am compelled to prove that this was
not the case.

There are certain news-printers in this country, who may be counted as a sort
of blanks: creatures that have nothing of humanity about them but the mere
exterior form and motion, and that are, in every other respect, as perfectly
logs as if they had been cut out of a piece of timber. I will not degrade
myself by a comparison between my conduct and that of these dull, senseless,
inanimate beings. Let me have the same privileges as other living active
creatures, and I am content.

The reader has seen all that could be conjured up against me in the Bill of
Indictment, which he may safely set down among the most virulent of my
publications; for lawyers and judges know very well how to single the tares
from the wheat. But, I am willing to allow him a scrutiny into every sentence I
have written or published, to which the Chief Judge's Charge can possibly be
made to apply, and then I will leave him to compare my "nefarious publications"
with the decent, candid, and true ones, which I am now about to produce from
the presses that have, and still do, espouse the cause of the enemies of this
country.

As libels against religion are certainly more heinous in their nature, as well
as more destructive in their consequences, than any that can be published
against men, however estimable their characters or exalted their rank, I shall
first take notice of a publication or two of this sort, which have escaped the
notice of the vigilent Chief Justice of Pennsylvania: and this, I think, seems
the more necessary, as the Judge included religion among the objects endangered
by the licentiousness of the press.

In the Summer of 1796, a work was published by one STEPHENS (an Irish Patriot,
who has since spunged his creditors), entitled: " Christianity contrasted with
Deism:" And, by a masterpiece of baseness, before unheard of among the most
infamous of scribblers, my assumed name, PETER PORCUPINE, was inserted in the
title page, in order to give currency to the pernicious production.

This pamphlet abounded with the most daring impiety; and, though I will not
take upon me to say that the Chief Justice ever saw it, he must have heard of
its existence; for it was not only advertised for sale but there were also a
considerable number of paragraphs respecting it, both in BACHE's and MR.
FENNO's paper.

As to the AGE OF REASON, its publication, by BACHE and others, is too
notorious a fact to be for a moment dwelt upon. This blasphemous work has been
spread all over the state, and through this city in particular.

BACHE has, for years past, and does now, publish and sell, what is called the
Republican Calendar; in which the Christian Era is supplanted by that of the
degrading Atheistical Decadery of France.

All these publications, and many more that might be mentioned, have been, and
yet are, published in Pennsylvania. Their evident and inevitable tendency, is,
to corrupt the young, mislead the ignorant, abash the timid, degrade the
priesthood, and, finally, to subvert and destroy, root and branch, the
Christian Religion and all its inestimable blessings.

I have the same opinion of the Judge's law knowledge that most people have;
but he must certainly know, that Christianity is part of the law of the l^nd;
that to deride and blaspheme it is punishable by the common law; and that it is
the duty of all magistrates, more particularly Judges, to make the law, in this
respect known, and to see it executed.

Yet, in the state of Pennsylvania, under so watchful a Chief Justice, this
salutary law, intended to preserve from indignity the religion of our
forefathers; to enforce a respect for the laws of God, and to promote our
eternal salvation, has been suffered to sleep in oblivion; while the sanguinary
Twelve Tables of Rome have been resorted to, in order to enhance the magnitude
of the crime of satirizing the Spanish king and his minister! -- Gracious God!
can the descendants of Britons ever approve of this violence on the common law
of England?

The Judge tells us that, with respect to libels, the common law is confirmed
by the constitution of Pennsylvania; and every one knows, that the common law
of America is neither more nor less than the common law of England. -- Now, it
is well known, that the publisher of Paine's Age of Reason has been prosecuted
in England; that LORD KENYON termed it a nefarious publication, intended for
the most malignant purposes; and that the jury instantly found the defendant
GUILTY. -- But England is, in this respect, no more fit to be compared with
America than LORD KENYON is to be compared with Judge M'KEAN.

I have been told, indeed, that the article of the constitution, which provides
for an entire freedom as to religious worship and opinions, forbids any
restraint on the press where subjects of this sort are agitated. If this be
true, and if M'KEAN's doctrine of libels be also true, all that the American
press has gained by the "Glorious Revolution," is, the horrid liberty of
blaspheming the Almighty!

Quitting libels against religion, let us come to those of a less horrid,
though not less odious nature.

The Chief Justice tells us, that the honor of families has been s^ained, and
the greatest services and virtue blasted; and he before told us, that this evil
it was peculiarly the duty of the Supreme Court to repress.

I have before observed, and I repeat it again and again, that innocence or
virtue was never attacked by me; and hence it is impossible that I can ever
have brought a stain on a family. Whether others have done this in
Philadelphia, I leave the reader to judge from the following passages of a
pamphlet, published here about two years and a half ago.

The subject of the author's censure, is a debate in Congress. After calling
one member an Ass and another a Snap-Turtle, he comes to a Gentleman of
New Jersey, who now fills an office of great trust under the Federal
Government, of whom and of whose family he speaks thus: Not that I would
declaim against Congress wages, for I think they ought to have at least ten
dollars a day; otherwise an honorable member from Jersey will not be able to
keep Mrs. B....... in town during the next session. "See his speech in the
House of Representatives."
-- Ten dollars, I think, will defray all expenses -- The honorable
representatives may then play cards and dice, and billiards, and do many other
things -- and Mrs. B....... may afford to knock off a few bottles of Madeira
with some of her soft rosy-nosed visitors, without sinking her honorable
spouse forty shillings below par.

From members of Congress and their wives, the author comes to the Clergy and
theirs. Few people have forgotten, that, in 1795, a Sermon on National
Gratitude was preached in this city, by a leraned Divine, then at the head of
Princeton College. In the course of this much admired sermon, the preacher took
occasion to censure the Age of Reason; and this it was that brought on him,
from our decent writer, the following attack: Notwithstanding his
consternation, he does not forget to bullyrag Tom Pain. Forty two miles did he
trudge through thick and thin, Jonah like, to save this our Nineveh by reading
a sermon, and may heaven reward his labors! May the fountains of Helicon gush
from his brains; -- And may all the curbers of the factious, sip nocturnal
inspiration from the lips of the muse of Morven, at the limped streams of
Stony-brook, nor be pestered with a d....d wife; -- May they never be dragged
head-foremost down the steps of Nassau-Hall, nor be pelted with brick bats and
potatoes.

Is this " decent, candid, and true"? And, if it be not, how came it to escape
with impunity? How came it not to attract the attention of the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania, whose peculiar duty it is to repress and correct such excesses?
-- The book was published in all the newspapers; it was sold by all the
booksellers except me; it was even hawked about the streets, and was the
subject of universal censure and abhorrence; and yet the Supreme Court never
did censure it; nor did the Chief Justice ever feel himself impressed with the
duties of his station to bind the author or publisher over!

The author was known to a certain Secretary; was even his intimate
acquaintance and companion; and his pamphlet abounds with invectives against
Great Britain, and high sounding compliments to France. His politics, I
suppose, he had the prudence to intend as a sort of atonement for his offenses.

From the staining of families let us turn to the attacks of men in their
public capacities.

The Chief Justice tells us, that, when defamatory writings are published
against persons in a public capacity, they receive an aggravation, as they tend
to scandalzie the government, etc. etc.

This doctrine, by-the-bye, I believe few men, except those in a public
capacity will relish. It is exactly contrary to the spirit, as well as the
letter, of the little pamphlet, entitled, "The Constitution of Pennsylvania."
-- In that inestimable performance, there is one Chapter containing a list of
what are there called "the essential principles of liberty," which are
positively declared to be excepted out of the general powers of government, and
fixed on for ever to remain inviolate. -- Among the precious things thus
carefully preserved, is, the liberty of the press; and it is said, that no law
shall be made to restrain any person, who undertakes to examine the proceedings
of the legislature or any branch of government. And again it says, that, in
prosecutions for the publication of any papers, investigating the official
conduct of officers, or men in a public capacity, the truth thereof may be
given in evidence.

Thus, you see, this pamphlet of Pennsylvania holds out to the world, that men
in a public capacity are more open to the censure of the press than the
sovereign citizens are, which is, indeed, no more than reasonable; but this
Judge, this learned expositor of the law and constitution, tells us, that
censorious writings receive an aggravation, when written against persons in a
public capacity!

However, be it so. Let us prefer the Judge's assertion to the declaration of
the sovereign people of Pennsylvania. Let us, for a moment, look upon their
constitution as merely intended to amuse them and the world; and then let us
see what this State Government, and this same Judge, have permitted to pass
unreproved and unnoticed, in writers inimical to the Federal Government, and
notoriously in the pay of France.

I could here produce volumes of the most attrocious calumny against the
Federal Government and its officers individually; but, besides my want of room,
I am prevented by the notoriety of the fact. Every one in America knows what I
have here generally stated, to be true; and it is therefore necessary to
introduce only a few instances for the information of foreigners.

BACHE, in his paper, No. 1037, after loading the Executive of the United
States with various false and infamous charges, says: And are we so corrupted
and debased as to give up this precious jewel (Independence) to the intrigues
of rascals and traitors, who are about to sell themselves and their country?

This is pretty well for the Executive. Now let us hear what CALLENDER (in his
History of the United States for 1796) says of the Congress in a lump -- "If a
man," says he, was to be kept a twelve month in irons, and then to be hanged
for stealing one horse, what ought to be done with the Congress and their
agents, who forcibly pilfered so many that are yet unpaid for? -- I must leave
JUDGE M'KEAN to answer this question; for he was, I believe, one of the
Congress that Callender alludes to. However, lest any offender should slip him,
the Historian takes care to include in his censure, the second, the third, and
the fourth Congress.

From the Government in general we will now come to particular members of it.
-- The Judge tells us, if publications, containing personal invectives, low
scurrillity, and slanderous charges, were to escape with impunity, the fairest
and best characters, that this or any other country ever produced, would be
vilified and blasted, if not ruined.

Now then, let us hear BACHE again; the mouth-piece of the French faction, and
frequently the companion of the Chief Justice at Civic Festivals. -- This
atrocious wretch, in his paper of the 9th of July, 1795, has the following
paragraph: -- "The day" [the 4th of July] was closed by the exhibition of a
transparent painting, with the figure of John Jay upon it. The figure was in
full stature, holding in his right hand a pair of scales, containing in one
scale, American liberty and Independence, kicking the beam; in the other,
British Gold, in extreme preponderance. In his left hand a Treaty, which he
extended to a group of Senators, who were grinning with pleasure and grasping
at the Treaty. From the mouth of the figure issued these words: come up to my
price, and I will sell you my country. The figure was burned at Kensington
amidst the acclamations of hundreds of citizens. Thus terminated the
anniversary of American Independence.

This recalls to our minds two valuable facts: 1st, that this infamous libel
did escape with impunity! and 2d, that the exhibition and actions which it
records, did also escape with impunity; and that too in this city, under the
eye of this very Judge M'Kean And, what is more, a gentleman, who, like a good
citizen, turned out of his bed to endeavor to put a stop to the scandalous and
disgraceful procession, was assaulted in a most cowardly and cruel manner, and
never obtained the least satisfaction. Not one of the rabble, nor of the
ringleaders, nor of the printers, who stimulated them to action, and who
recorded their atrocities as honorable deeds, was ever punished, or " bound
over," or even reprimanded! -- But this was a riot and a libel against a worthy
man, an officer of the Federal Government, and no tool of France; and these
circumstances must account for what cannot otherwise be accounted for.

BACHE, in his paper, No. 1460, calls the Honorable John Jay, then Chief
Justice of the United States of America, and now Governor of the State of
New York: he calls this gentleman, "that damned arch traitor JOHN JAY." -- And
yet he was never " bound over;" and yet he never was personally attacked from
the Bench; but, on the contrary, has often, since that time as well as before,
sat at the same board with the Chief Justice!

I could here name at least one hundred of the greatest and best men, that this
country ever produced, who have been vilified by this reprobate descendant of
Old Franklin; but, for the reasons before mentioned, I shall forbear the
enumeration, and content myself with an instance or two of his attacks on the
character of GENERAL WASHINGTON, for which every good man, in every part of the
world, must and will execrate the libeller and his supporters.

He published PAINE's letter to the GENERAL; ^f which he claimed an exclusive
copy-right, and which he boasted of having received from Paris for the purpose
of publication. In this work, GENERAL WASHINGTON and the CONSTITUTION OF THE
UNITED STATES, are both the objects of obloquy and reproach. The worthy old
veteran and statesman, whose endeavors have so eminently contributed to the
greatness and prosperity of his country, is called, the patron of fraud, -- an
imposter, or an apostate. -- Yet the vile printer was never bound over.

Thus was the city of Philadelphia disgraced. Thus did the Chief Justice of
Pennsylvania quietly look on, and observe the propagation of a libel, that has
excited universal indignation in the breasts of unconcerned foreigners, and for
which both the writer and the printer are censured by their very partisans.

But, this was not the last stab that the literary assassin had in reserve for
the character of this great and good man, and for the honor of America.

The day that the GENERAL closed his public labors (the 4th of March, 1797,)
BACHE, after announcing his retirement from the Office of President, says: If
there ever was a period for rejoicing this is the moment -- every heart, in
unifon with the freedom and happiness of the people, ought to beat high with
exultation, that the name of WASHINGTON from this day ceases to give currency
to political iniquity, and to legalize corruption.

Yet, we are not at the worst: for, on the 13th of March, 1797, this viperous
Grand Son of Old Franklin, accused the same eminent person of murder! brought
forward a long, formal, and circumstantial charge of cool, deliberate
assassination, committed by GEORGE WASHINGTON, late President of the United
States.

The Chief Justice has not forgotten, I dare say, that I was the only printer
in the United States (with shame be it spoken) who had the zeal and the
industry to search for the documents relative to the affair alluded to (which
took place in 1753); to expose the falacy of the charge, and to hold the vile
instrument of France up to universal abhorrence.

One would have thought, whatever might be the secret dispositions of the Chief
Justice of Pennsylvania, that outward appearances, common decency, would have
led them to take some little notice of these outrages or a public and private
character, respected, esteemed, and revered by the wise and the virtuous of all
nations. More especially one would have expected this from a Judge, who now
seems to be so anxious to preserve the reputation of " youth in its innocence,"
and of " old age in its gravity and wisdom;" who now, in order to excite a
horror against libelling, goes back to that cruel code, the Twelve Tables of
Rome, and the no less sanguinary laws of Valentinian; who, in his zeal to make
an example, does not think it derogatory to his honorable station to point at
a particular man, and call on the Jury, in express terms, for their " aid" in
his punishment; and finally, who expresses his determination to pursue the vice
of libelling with "zeal and indignation." From such a Judge, who would not have
expected an interference; who does not believe, who does not know, and does not
say, that he should have been " impressed with the duties of his station," when
the reputation of the Federal government was daily and hourly attacked in his
presence; when the fame and character of GENERAL WASHINGTON were bleeding at
every pore, and when the French printer BACHE and his coadjutors were pursuing
the Aged Veteran to his domestic retreat with all the hellish malignity of
Parisian cannibals? -- Yes, this was the time for him to be " impressed with
the duties of his station." This was the time for him to exert his authority of
binding over; to unfold and enforce the severity of the law, and establish his
character for impartiality: -- but, this time is past.

Thus have we seen the Chief Justice of Pennsylvania wink at the most daring
and wicked libels, against God and against man, that a writer can conceive or a
printer can print. But, we are not yet come to what may be properly called a
case in point.

I was prosecuted for publications levelled against a foreign prince,
government, and minister; to form therefore a just estimation of the conduct
and motives of those who urged the prosecution, we must take a sketch (and a
very slight one will serve) of what other printers have published, with
impunity, against other governments, nations, and princes.

But, before I enter on this subject, I think myself called on to make a few
remarks on that part of the Judge's Charge, which dwells, with such emphasis
and seeming dread, on the danger of offending foreign nations and potentates,
particularly the tenderhearted rulers of France and the king of the country of
the Inquisition.

After telling the Grand Jury, that I had ransacked our language for terms of
reproach and insult against every disti^guished character in France and Spain,
he tells them, that, "without their aid," my conduct cannot be corrected, and
concludes by observing, that the government that will not discountenance, may
be thought to adopt it, and be deemed justly chargeable with all the
consequences. -- Then follow an instance of the great danger of offending
foreign nations in this way: the Judge refers to history above a hundred years
back, and very gravely tells the Grand Jury, that Some medals and dull jests
are mentioned and represented as a ground of quarrel between the English and
Dutch in 1672, and likewise caused Lewis the 14th to make an expedition into
the United Provinces of the Netherlands in the same year, and nearly ruined
that Commonwealth.

This was an example in terrorem, and was evidently cited for the purpose of
impressing on the minds of the Jury, the peril that their country might be
placed in from suffering me to "escape with impunity." But, granting for a
moment, that laying a restraint on the press, for fear the effects of its
freedom should offend foreign powers; allowing that such an act is not to the
last degree shameful and debasing, and only suited to a country in the most
abject state of vassalage; allowing this, let us see if the Judge's quotation
was quite correct and candid.

Now, I say, and every one of the most superficial reading knows, that the
medals and dull jests alluded to, never were, nor are they any where (except in
this learned Charge) mentioned and represented as a ground of quarrel between
the English and Dutch in 1672, nor at any other period. HUME, who, it will
hardly bedenied, is at least as good an authority as Pennsylvania's Chief
Judge, does indeed say, that certain medals and pictures were made the
miserable pretext of a most scandalous breach of faith, on the part of the
profligate Charles II; but he tells us that the real grounds of the war, were,
the inordinate ambition of Lewis XIV, and the thirst for riches and arbitrary
power of the corrupted ministry of England, well known by the name of the CABAL.

Besides had medals and dull jests really been, as they were not, the grounds
of the war, candor should have led the Judge to continue his reference to
history a little further, and to tell the Grand Jury how that war terminated,
and how the nearly ruined Commonwealth behaved with respect to the medals and
dull jests.

Lewis XIV did, indeed, make a devastating and cruel expedition into the
Netherlands, and reduced the Dutch to the last extremity by land, while the
combined fleets of England and France nearly blocked up their ports and ruined
their commerce. In this awful state of their affairs, the two unprincipled
Monarchs made known to them their pretensions, which, among many other
humiliating terms, specified, that all persons guilty of writing seditious
libels against them, should, on complaint, be banished for ever from the
States. -- The Commonwealth, though, as the Judge says, nearly ruined, scorned
the insolent pretensions; and, following the example of the PRINCE OF ORANGE
(afterward our WILLIAM III, of glorious memory) nobly resolved to resist the
haughty victors, and to defend those last remains of their native soil, of
which neither the irruptions of Lewis, nor the inundation of waters, had as yet
bereaved them. Should even the ground fail them on which they might combat,
they were still resolved not to yield the generous strife; but, flying to their
settlements in the Indies, erect a new empire in those remote regions, and
preserve alive, even in the climates of slavery, that liberty of which Europe
was become unworthy.

This is what Mr. M'Kean should have told the Grand Jury; and, he should have
told them besides, that this brave resolution of the Dutch met with a glorious
reward; that a few months saw their gallant fleet a match for those of the two
monarchs united, and that the haughty king of France, driven by the PRINCE OF
ORANGE from fortress to fortress and from Province to Province, at last entered
his vain and frivolous capital covered with defeat and disgrace, before the
triumphal arch of St. Dennis, erected for the celebration of his conquests, was
completely out of the hands of the architect!

This is the passage of history, which, above all others, the republican car
dwells on with pleasure; this is what the Chief Judge should have related to
the jury; but, this would not have answered his purpose. Such an example of
republican fortitude and heroism would have sounded well from the lips of his
Honor; but, the Grand Jury of Philadelphia showed by their righteous decision,
that they stood not in need of examples from history to stimulate them to act
agreeably to the dictates of their conscience, and to reject with disdain every
idea of fear, that their acquitting an innocent man might bring down on
themselves and their country the chastisement of foreign nations.

Before I conclude my remarks on this part of the Charge, I cannot refrain from
noticing the very odious impression it is calculated to give the world with
respect to the government, and the character of the American nation.

It is well known, that, at the time when the paragraphs against Spain and
France were published, and when the charge was delivered, the former nation was
in the open violation of their treaty with this country, which had just then
been grossly insulted by their minister; and that the latter were plundering
its commerce in every part of the world, blocking up its rivers, lashing its
seafaring citizens like convicts, and driving its humble negociators from
their capital with scorn and reproach. These circumstances taken into
consideration, what must foreigners infer from the Charge? Will they not say,
and very justly too: such is your liberty of the press, such your boasted
independence, that, let a nation trample on your rights, deride, insult, rob,
and torture you, and your government ever stands ready to inflict the
punishment of a murderer on the first man, who, in resenting your injuries,
shall step one inch beside the line of the labyrinthian law of constructive
libels; and this cruelty it condescends to, lest its lenity to its friends and
supporters should give umbrage to an insolent and perfidious foe! -- Yes; this
will they say; and if there be an American, who can patiently bear the
disgraceful imputation; I admire his Christian humility; but I envy him not his
liberty, his independence, or his republicanism.

After all, allowing that America is so beggared in means and so humbled in
spirit; allowing these independent states to be already reduced to a pitch of
general vassalage, that renders such a sacrifice to the pride and insolence of
foreign nations prudent and necessary; allowing that the Judge made all this
appear to be true, let us return, and see what the printers of the French
faction have published against other governments, nations, and princes, without
his feeling himself impressed with the duties of his station, to bind them over.

Now, reader, prepare yourself for a catalogue of the most indecent, blackest,
and most infamously libellous expressions, that ever dropped from the lips or
pen of mortal man. The French language is very weak and steril compared to
ours, particularly in terms of reproach and abuse. Their rascals spend their
breath for half an hour in noisy volubility, to produce a faint idea of what
ours can express in one short grind of the teeth. But, all this bitterness, all
the force and fury, of this our dear mother tongue, the crafty Gaul has, we are
now about to see, had the address to bring over into his own service.

To begin with CALIENDER: this little reptile, who, from outward appearances
seems to have been born for a Chimney sweep, and to be now following the sooty
trade, made his escape from the hands of Justice in Scotland, in the year 1793,
after being apprehended as the author of a libellous pamphlet, entitled The
Political Progress of Britain.

This work, which is of considerable bulk, is nothing but a string of
falsehoods, interspersed with the most audacious libels on the British ministry,
and every branch of the Royal Family, which latter the author calls, the
ruffian race of British Kings. -- In one place he calls the Right Honorable
William Pit, a hardened Swindler, and in an other, he calls His Royal Highness
the Prince of Wales a murderer. He, in one short sentence, consigns to infamy
both the Royal Family and the people at large. "Since the Norman Conquest,"
says he, England has been governed by thirty-three sovereigns; and, of these,
two thirds were, each of them by an hundred different actions, deserving of the
gibbet; and the people seem to have been as perfectly divested of every
honorable feeling, as Majesty itself.

Well, this pamphlet, though abounding in such atrocious libels as these, and
though the author in his preface, boasts of having been obliged to fly from his
country for publishing it, was republished in Philadelphia, and was never
discountenanced by the government or the Chief Justice. Nay CALLENDER says, in
his preface, that certain gentlemen, and particularly Mr. Jefferson, the Vice
President of the United States, had encouraged him to give an American edition
of this infamous performance!

I have a dozen sources to which I could apply for libels against foreign
princes and states. BROWN has been guilty of crimes of this kind without
number, and so have DUNLAP and his successors. The CLAYPOOLES, no longer ago
than September last, calls Her Majesty the Queen of Portugal a Crazy Lady and a
Lunatic. OSWALD, to the day of his death, published at least forty libels
regularly, two days in a week; but he is dead; I shall therefore leave him, and
come to BACHE, the Chief Judge's companion at Civic Festivals.

There is not a prince or power of Europe, who has discovered the least
inclination to oppose the French, or discredit their infamous principles, whom
this caitiff printer and his supporters have not libelled in the most
outrageous manner. -- The Emperor of Germany and his generals have been called
thieves and scoundrels a thousand times; the King of Prussia, before his
defection, was called a Sharper; the Empress of Russia, in No. 1361, is called
a She-Bear. But, the British nation, government, and king, have been the
constant objects of their most wicked calumnies. Mr. SMITH of Baltimore, in
open Congress, called the King of Great Britain, a monster; a king of
sea-robbers. His decent speech was published in all the papers of that day.
BACHE, in his paper, No. 1036, says of Britain, that dishonor mark her
councils and her actions. In 1041, he calls the British a " perfidious nation."
In 1081, he calls Britain, "that proud tyrannical and infamous kingdom." In
1083, he calls the people of Great Britain, "the bloody savage islanders." The
government, in various papers, he calls, that corrupt monarchy -- "that corrupt
government," -- a mixture of tyranny, profligacy, brutallity, and corruption.
-- In the letters of Franklin, published in his paper, he calls Admiral Murry
free-booter Murray. -- In 1033, he calls His Britannic Majesty, "a prince of
robbers." In 1048, he calls him, that prince of land and sea robbers, GEORGE
III. In 1031, he says, speaking of Great Britain, I pledge you my word, that I
should heartily rejoice, if the Royal Family, were all decently guillotined.
And, finally, not to tire my readers with the abominations of this atrocious
miscreant, he puts a mock speech into the mouth of the king of Great Britain,
and makes him conclude, as under the gallows at Tyburn!

Here are insults, if you talk of insults, to foreign nations. Nor are these
the worst. A pamphlet once before quoted, called a Rub from Snub, has the
following " decent" lines; I will not call them verses.

God scourge Old England's king,
To earth the direful spring
Of tears and blood:
May all such rascals fall,
Lords, dukes, and devils all,
Biting the mud.
When Britains beast shall be
Disrobed of royalty,
Discord shall fly
But while the monster's jaws
Fixed at her vitals gnaws,
Freedom shall die.
Why should Columbia's fire,
Her ancient flame expire,
While nations rise?
Still the Brute Royal raves,
Unchains his British slaves
Fierce in your eyes.
Why did just heaven ordain
Kings and their miscreant train,
Pests to this world?
Deep in hell's ruthless flame,
Shrouded in endless shame,
May they be hurled.
Was there ever such abominable outrage as this offered to mortal man any where
but in America? No; since the art of writing was discovered, there never were
such libels tolerated against any human being, whether friend or enemy. Yet,
neither the government of Pennsylvania, nor the Chief Justice, nor any other
person in authority, ever interfered. No one, amongst all these libellers, was
ever prosecuted or bound over. Their politics were perfectly French, and all
went smoothly on.

Let us for a moment suppose (which, however, we have no right to do), that the
stupid and ungenerous prejudice prevailing against Great Britain, formed some
trisling excuse for the remissness (to give it the mildest term) of the
executive and judiciary of the state. Still, this could not apply to the libels
published against other nations and princes; some of which had, and now have,
treaties af amity with this country, and others were not, nor ever had been,
its foes.

Amongst these nations there is one, the libels against which I have reserved
for this place: I mean Spain. For three long years the King of Spain, his
government and ministry, were the subject of constant abuse and defamation.
BACHE, in No. 1028 of his vile paper, says, the slaves of Madrid will soon
shrink from the conquerers of Toulon. And in No. 1044, he has, speaking of
Spain, these words: The most cowardly of the human race; -- the Spanish slaves;
-- the ignorant soldiery of the infamous tyrant of Castille.

Now, this is the very same Prince, and the same people, that I have been
prosecuted for libelling. Compare what I have said, or rather what I have
published, concerning them; compare the passages in the Bill of Indictment with
those here quoted, and then praise the impartiality and justice of the free and
equal government of Pennsylvania* Don Yrujo never thought the honor of his
Master, when called an infamous tyrant, merited his zeal to defend it; nay, the
very printer, who thus defamed him, the DON has employed as the printer of his
insolent letter to Mr. PICKERING! This man's conduct is hardly worth notice;
but how shall we account for the conduct of the Chief Judge of Pennsylvania?
Surely the king of Spain's character ought to have been an object of his
attention then as well as now; unless we are willing to allow, that no
character is under the protection of the laws of Pennsylvania, unless it be of
persons devoted to the will of France.

But, before I conclude this comparison between what I have been most
rigorously prosecuted for doing, and what others have done with impunity, I
shall give the reader a specimen or two of the conduct of the officers of this
Pennsylvania Government (not excluding the Chief Judge himself), toward
foreign nations and princes.

The Governor (Mifflin), assisted at a civic festival, when the following
toasts were drunk; which were published in most of the newspapers. See BACHE
of 11 Feb. 1795.


Those illustrious citizens sent to Potany Bar. May they be speedily recalled
by their country in the day of her regeneration.

May the spirit of Parliamentary reform in Britain and Ireland burst the bands
of corruption, and overwhelm the foes of liberty.

The Sant-culottes of France. May the robes of all the Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and P^tentates [not excepting the king of Spain], now employed in
suppressing the flame of liberty, be cut up to make breeches.

This is pretty " decent" in a Governor; but, without stopping to remark on the
peculiar decency of his toasting a gang of convicts, let us come to another
instance of his conduct, full as " decent" as this.

At the civic festival, held in this city in 1794, to celebrate the
dethronement of Our great and good ally, Louis XVI, there were assembled,
according to the process verbal, which was sent to the Paris Convention, the
CHIEFS, civil and military, of the State of Pennsylvania. -- The process verbal
contains a letter to the Convention, in which the following honorable mention
is made of the Governor. The governor of Pennsylvania, that ardent friend of
the French republic, was present, and partook of all our enthusiasm, and all
our sentiments.

I believe they spoke truth; for the cannons of the State were fired, and
military companies, with drums beating and colors flying, attended the
execrable f^te, one of the ceremonies of which, was, burning the English flag;
and as to the sentiments, contained in the oaths and speeches (for there were
both), they abounded in insults toward almost all the princes of the earth,
but particularly the king of Great Britain.

M'KEAN dwells with great stress on the danger to be apprehended from insulting
foreign nations, more especially those with which we have negociations pending,
and the persons with whom we are to treat. Well then, all the libels that I
have here produced, against His Britannic Majesty, his ministers, and his
people; and this " decent" conduct on the part of "the CHIEFS, civil and
military, of Pennsylvania," and on the part of the Governor himself; all these
libels were published, and this conduct took place, at the very time, when MR.
JAY was in England, negociating an amicable adjustment of differences, with the
British ministry and their Sovereign!

The Chief Justice, would, I dare say, be very angry not to be thought included
among the CHIEFS civil and military of the State of Pennsylvania; but I shall
leave nothing to inference or supposition. Facts are what I love, and happily
his conduct and character is not in want of plenty to illustrate them. I could
mention one civic festival at which he assisted, where a " revolution in Great
Britain" was toasted; and another, where a toast was, Success to the United
Irishmen, then in open rebellion against their king; but, these would not, in
point of time be quite to my purpose: I shall, therefore, come to one instance
of his conduct that is so. It is a sort of companion piece to his Charge, and
it shall, for that reason, be put exactly upon a parallel with it.

Judge M'Kean's Charge, AGAINST PETER PORCUPINE. Peter Porcupine's Charge,
AGAINST JUDGE M'KEAN. At a time when misunderstandings prevail between the
Republics of the United States and France, and when our general government have
appointed public ministers to endeavor their removal and restore the former
harmony some of the journals or newspapers in the city of Philadelphia have
teemed with the most irritating invectives, couched in the most vulgar and
opprobrious language, not only against the French nation and their allies, but
the very men in power with whom the ministers of our country are sent to
negociate. These publications have an evident tendency not only to frustrate a
reconciliation, but to create a rupture and provoke a war between the sister
Republics, and seem calculated to vilify, nay to subvert all Republican
governments whatsoever.

Impressed with the duties of my station, I have used some endeavors for
checking these evils, by binding over the editor and printer of one of them,
licentious and virulent beyond all former example, to his good behavior; but
he still perseveres in his nefatious publications; he has ransacked our
language for terms of reproach and insult, and for the basest accusations
against every ruler and distinguished character in France and Spain, with whom
we chance to have any intercourse, which it is scarce in nature to forgive; in
brief, he braves his recognizance and the laws. It is now with you, gentlemen
of the grand jury, to animadvert on his conduct; without your aid it cannot be
corrected. The government that will not discountenance, may be thought to adopt
it, and be deemed justly chargeable with all the consequences.

At a time when misunderstandings prevailed between this country and Great
Britain, and when the General Government had appointed Mr. Jay, and sent him to
England to endeavor to remove them, many newspapers and pamphlets in this
city of Philadelphia, teemed with the most false, most vile, and most rascally
abuse, not only against the British nation and their allies, but also against
the very ministers, and the very monarch, with whom he was sent to treat. These
publications had an evident tendency, not only to frustrate a reconciliation,
so necessary to the peace, prosperity, and happiness of America, but to provoke
a destructive war between the two nations; and were, besides, calculated to
vilify, and subvert, all lawful and good government whatsoever.

Yet, THOMAS M'KEAN, the Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, never was impressed
with the duties of his station, so far as to use any the most feeble endeavor
for checking these evils. He never did punish, or prosecute, or bind over, or
reprimand, one of the infamous authors, printers, or publishers; but on the
contrary, when the unratified treaty was promulgated, he appeared at the head
of a committee in the State-House yard, surrounded with a vast concourse of
rabble, assembled for the evident and avowed purpose of preventing its
ratification. Here Hamilton Rowan was, on motion from the chair, welcomed with
many cheers; the rabble were called on to kick the damned treaty to hell, and
they afterward went and burnt it, with every mark of hatred and insult,
opposite the door of the British Ambassador!



There is the text, reader: make the comment yourself; for I have not language
to do justice to the indignant feelings that it excites in my breast. -- Sum up
the evidence, and judge of the candor and impartiality of the Chief Justice of
Pennsylvania. All that could be conjured up against me, was included in the
Bill of Indictment, the very harshest expression to be found in which, is, my
calling the king of Spain a degenerate Prince: while I have proved, from papers
and pamphlets now in print, and to be come at by every one, that others have
printed, and published to the world, that Mr. Jay is a "damned arch traitor;"
General Washington a patron of fraud, a legalizer of corruption, and an
assassin; that the Empress of Russia is a "she bear," the king of Prussia "a
sharper," the Queen of Portugal a "lunatic," the Prince of Wales a "murderer,"
the king of Great Britain a brute, a monster, a rascal, and a robber, worthy of
the gibbet; and, lastly, that the king of Spain, whom I only called a
degenerate prince, has been boldly declared to be an infamous tyrant! -- And, I
again and again repeat, that the Chief Justice has suffered all this to pass
immediately under his sight, unprosecuted, unreproved, and unnoticed; while my
publications have been watched with a never-slumbering eye, and prosecuted with
a rigor unparalleled; while two thirds of a charge to a Grand Jury have been
directly pointed at my person; while every severe maxim of our own law has been
sought out; and, as if all this were not enough, while the bloody twelve tables
of Rome and the laws of Valentinian have been resorted to, in order to excite a
horror of my offense, and to draw down punishment on my head, for publishing
what an enlightened and honest Grand Jury has determined, not to be libellous!

How difficult soever the reader may here find it to repress the emotions,
which such hitherto unheard of conduct is calculated to excite, I must beg him
not to indulge them, 'till I have drawn his attention to a fact, which, in the
crowd of matter, I dare say has escaped him.

I have amply proved, that the pretended libels, for which I have been
prosecuted, are to the real ones, published by others, what the glare of a
taper is to a city in flames. I have proved that the very monarch, whom I
termed a degenerate prince, has been, by others, proclaimed as "an infamous
tyrant." But, there was yet one fact wanting to render this scandalous
prosecution complete; and that fact is at hand.

The reader, by turning back to page 36, will perceive, that one of my false,
scandalous, and malicious libels, as they are most falsely and scandalously
called, did not originate with me, nor in my paper. It was copied from Mr.
FENNO's paper of an anterior date. This material circumstance was, very
cautiously and heartily, kept out of the Bill of Indictment, though the heads
and titles of the other two publications were mentioned; and there is every
reason to believe, that it escaped the attention of the Grand Jury.

The Indictment, as is usual, concludes with stating the tendency of the crime,
part of which is, the evil example of all others in the like case offending.
This is most certainly very proper: for, to prevent the effects of evil
example, is, or ought to be, the principle object of all punishments. But, how
could I be said to set the evil example, when it was notorious that I had been
far surpassed by others, who had never been called to account, and when the
very publication, for which I was prosecuted, I had copied, word for word, from
another printer, a native of the country, and living in the same city with
myself? Mr. FENNO has never been bound over. He has never been arrested: nor
has he been even spoken to on the subject. He has heard of my being prosecuted;
but he little imagines it was for his crimes.

Thus, in the capital of America, amidst all its vaunted liberty of the press,
and under the " equal" and " humane" laws of Pennsylvania, another man has been
allowed to print and publish, not only with impunity, but without reproof, a
paragraph, for the re-publishing of which, I have been seized as a criminal,
exposed to the danger of a heavy fine, of imprisonment at hard labor, of being
crammed in a dungeon, and of suffering the punishment of a murderer!

Is this your republican justice! Is this the blessed fruit of that liberty, to
obtain which all the horrors of a revolution are to be encountered, kings are
to be hurled from their thrones, and nations deluged in blood! Was it for this
that America maintained a ten years desolating war; that all the ties of
interest, of allegiance, of friendship, and of nature were rent assunder, and
that a hundred thousand of her sons were stretched dead on the plain! -- Talk
not to me of your sovereign people, and your universal sufferage; of your
political liberty and your equal rights: they are empty sounds, which I regard
not. Give me security for my person and property; or, at least, let me share
the fate of my neighbor. Send us (said the Israelites of old); Send us, O
Lord, a king, that he may render us justice. To ensure this last mentioned
inestimable blessing, is the end of civil society, and ought to be the great
object of all political institutions. Justice is the soul of freedom, as
impartiality is the soul of justice; and, without these, liberty is an impostor
and law is a farce.

I should here bid the reader adieu, leaving him to pour out his soul, like
Judge M'Kean, in hosannahs for the temporal blessings of the Representative
Democracy, which the Almighty, in his great mercy, has vouchsafed unto us; but
I have pledged myself to prove, that the British press is much free-er than
that of America; and, notwithstanding the blessings, in great mercy, vouchsafed
unto us, I fear not, that, with the indulgence of the reader, I shall make good
my promise. For the motives from which I do this I am responsible to no one:
if, however, an apology is thought necessary, let it be sought for in the
abominable treatment I have experienced.

Since the revolution, which terminated in the independence of these States,
almost every publication here, and every democratic one in Great Britain, has
held the liberty of the American press up in triumphant exaltation over that of
the press of Great Britain. How many volumes might be filled up with instances
of this fort! How many thousand times is the vain boast repeated in the course
of each revolving sun! To refer to particular publications is like seeking for
proofs of daylight or of darkness: but, there is one that I must refer to,
because it so aptly answers my purpose. It is a letter of the arch sectarian
PRIESTLEY, who, not content without companions in his fallen state, has spared
no pains to inveigle his countrymen hither. He tells the people of England, in
this letter, sent there to be published, that " Here (in italicks to mark the
contrast) Here the press is free. Here truth is not a libel. This satanic
letter contains many other assertions equally false, which I may one day or
other expose; but, at present, I notice only what appertains to my subject.

The poor Doctor was always a bold asserter; but, in the case before us, I must
confess, a more scrupulous man might have been led into the adoption of a
falsehood. The peal has been so incessantly rung in our ears. We have been so
bored with it in all seasons, at all hours, eating, drinking and sleeping time
not excepted, that it required a degree of incredulity rarely to be met with to
resist the temptation to belief. The assertion is, nevertheless false; and it
is a falsehood too, which the safety of every one (particularly a foreigner),
who touches pen or types, requires to be clearly and fully exposed.

That TRUTH may be a libel in Great Britain, and that it cannot be a libel
here, is generally believed; and is thought to constitute the difference in the
laws of the two countries, on this head. But this is no more than a vulgar
notion, taken up from ignorance, and propagated from vanity and envy. I defy
any man to produce me a single law, or a single constitution (for, "thank God,"
as the Judge says, we have many); I defy him to cite me a clause or sentence,
that says, or that leaves room to suppose, that truth may not be deemed a
libel, here as well as in England. The United States, and the individual States
of Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, Maryland, North Carolina, and
Kentuckey, each of them say, that the press ought to be free, in a short vague
sentence, of which any lawyer of a common capacity would give as many different
interpretations as there can be rung changes upon twelve bells, which are said
to amount to some millions. Pennsylvania and Tennesee say the same, and more.
They say, with the other States, and with the laws of England, that the press
shall be free; and they add, that in prosecutions for the publication of
papers, investigating the official conduct of officers, or where the matter
published is proper for public information, the truth thereof may be given in
evidence. Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Virginia, South
Carolina, and Georgia, have had the prudence to say nothing at all about the
matter; and, as to Rhode Island, its constitution is neither more nor less than
a new edition of the Charter granted them by the abundant grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion of King Charles II. Thus it stands, bound up with
the other sixteen constitutions, without the addition or exclusion of a single
word. And, all the other States, without one exception, have taken special care
to bind down their rulers never to deprive them of the common law of England,
but to preserve it inviolate to them and their children. Amidst all their
vaga^ies, when they were stark staring drunk with revolutionary triumph, they
had the good sense, the saving grace, to cling fast round this old trunk of
solid and substantial liberty. Long may they hold by it, and never suffer it to
be chipped away by quibbling statutes and partial Judges!

Hence then, it happens, very luckily for me, that, if there be any State, in
which the common law of England, respecting libels, is departed from, it is
poor Pennsylvania. And, what is the mighty "blessing" she has had vouchsafed
unto her? Why, in prosecutions for the publication of papers investigating the
official conduct of officers, or where the matter published is proper for
public information, the truth may be given in evidence. So that, you will
please to observe, Messieurs authors and printers, that, first, the person
about whom you publish must be an officer; and next, you must touch upon
nothing but his official conduct. Precious privilege! It is a mere net to catch
the unwary: it leaves not the least scope for censuring any public man
whatsoever, but seems, on the contrary, intended to shelter his faults and his
crimes from the lash of the press. By declaring that the truth shall be
admitted as evidence as to such publications only as touch his official
conduct, his private character and conduct are held up as sacred and inviolable.

But, the Judge, the expositor of the constitution, goes still further. He
tells us, that the publications, respecting the official conduct of officers,
must not only be true, but " candid" and " decent" also. This is a maxim laid
down in his charge, and every one will agree, that he was ready to put it in
practice. Comfortable writing and publishing it must be, thus penned up with
vague and indefinite epithets! Truth may be defined and ascertained, but what
publication is there, which, by some quirk or other, might not be represented
as uncandid or indecent? -- Yet, as if this left the press still too free. The
Judge tells us, that such publications, must not only be decent, candid, and
true, but, besides all this, they must "have an eye solely to the public good.
-- Here is a pretty latitude for quibble and contestation! Not only the fa^s
are to be established, and the manner and style approved of by the court, but
even the motives of the writer are to be enquired into, and may be construed
into a ground for punishing him!

One would now think that the officers of Pennsylvania were safely enough
fortified against the attacks of the press; but the Chief Justice was resolved
to guard them at every point; and therefore, after throwing up bastions in
abundance and outworks upon outworks, he surrounds the whole with a line of
contravalation, thus: Where libels are printed against persons employed in a
public capacity, they receive an aggravation, as they tend to scandali^e the
government. Charming liberty of the press! Against men thus defended, what
devil of a printer is there, who will ever dare to fire a single shot? Suppose,
for instance, that a Judge were to be guilty of some most vile and infamous
offense: suppose he were to thieve; one would think that a free press should
take some little notice of it; but you must not do it, because thieving is not
(or, at least, I am sure, it ought not to be) the official conduct of a Judge,
and therefore the truth cannot be given in evidence; and because the libel
would "receive an aggravation," as it would most certainly "tend to scandalize
the government." -- Thus is the press of Pennsylvania nailed down; but if such
a thing had happened in England, or in France previous to the revolution, the
printers would have blazoned it from one end of the empire, nay, from one end
of the world to the other; and if they could have found a conveyance to the
Moon, thither it would have went. It is right to curb such "licentious"
fellows. Their blabbing ought to be prevented; and for doing this give me not a
mighty kingdom with standing armies and letters de cachet, but give me a little
sang "Representative Democracy," armed with the power of b^nding them over at
disc^etion, and inflicting on them the punishment of a murderer.

As to the latter provision of the clause above quoted, that the truths
published must be proper for public information, it is far worse than nothing;
for, what is proper for public information is no libel according to the common
law, and therefore no truth, nor any evidence whatsoever, is necessary to
justify its publication, in the eye of that law; but, according to the new
maxim, what is very proper for public information may be a libel, if the truth
of every word of it cannot be established.

I think I have now satisfied the reader, that, in point of law, the American
press has gained nothing over that of Great Britain. But, the Chief Justice, as
if he really intended to aid my undertaking, and to do away every doubt on the
subject, took good care to tell the Grand Jury, that, with respect to libels,
the common law was confirmed and established by the Constitution itself. Where
then is the advantage derived from the new order of things? If the constitution
of Pennsylvania, which is, according to the modern application of the word, the
free-est in America; if this constitution has done no more than confirm and
establish the common law of England, with respect to the liberty of the press,
how can any man have the impudence to boast of that liberty being greater here
than it is in England, where that same common law still exists in all its
plenitude and purity, and is administered by men the most learned, independent
and righteous in the world?

Thus far then, the liberty of the press, is, in the eye the law, the same in
both countries; but this does not prove, that there exist no circumstances in
America, peculiar to it, which render the exercise of this liberty unsafe, and
of course restrains its operations. It is not only the principles professed in
a country, that we are to look to, but also the practice of that country. The
thing called the constitution of France, for example, says that the free use of
the press is a right sacred and inviolable; but this does not prevent the
tyrants from seizing the printers by scores, and transporting them without a
trial and without a hearing.

The press has been, and still is, restrained in this country, 1st, by the
notion, which has been, for evident motives, inculcated by artful men, that no
private character ought to be publicly censured. 2nd, by the very dangerous
privilege, which foreign agents possess, in having a choice of governments,
under which to bring their prosecutions. And, 3rd, by the terror, necessarily
excited in every printer, by the disgraceful and cruel punishment, to which he
is liable.

As to the first of these restraints, nothing can give us a better idea of the
extent to which it is carried, than the bold assertions contained in the Chief
Judge's Charge. He tells us, that though a publication may not reflect any
moral turpitude on the party, it may yet be libelious, if it thwarts the said
party's desire of appearing agreeable in life. This is a very comfortable
doctrine to every scoundrel, and particularly to every whore, for you will not
find one of either description, who does not desire to appear agreeable in
life. The reasonableness of this doctrine his Honor supports by telling us,
that if any man does wrong, recourse may be had to the courts of justice, and
that there can be no necessity, nor reason, for appeals to the people in
newspapers or pamphlets.

Thus, you see, if his Honor shuts up the press, he has the goodness to open
his court to us. But, if I were to see one officer of government go staggering
drunk through the street, on his return from a civic festival; or another from
the same cause, reeling into his seat, must I hold my tongue, or go to law with
them? If a swindler, a man of the basest character, the most treacherous and
corrupt of mortals, were to propose himself as a candidate for a seat in the
Legislature, must I say nothing about him; must I not throw out even a hint to
the people to warn them of their danger? If a Judge, or any other awful
character, were to be detected in shop-lifting, or in the commission of any
such base and infamous crime; or if a lady were to choose, now and then, to
relieve her husband by retiring a few months to the arms of a friend, must I
sew up my lips, and must my press be as tame and contented as the cuckold
himself?

Such may, indeed, be the practice of the American press; but is it that of the
press of Great Britain. Only compare one of the London papers with an American
paper, and you will soon see which comes from the free-est press. Is there a
crime, is there a fault or a folly, which the editors and print-sellers in
London do not lash? They dive into every assembly and every house; they spare
characters neither public nor private; neither the people, the gentry, the
clergy, the nobility nor the royal family itself, is sheltered from their
ridicule or their censure. Let any American but open PETER PINDAR's works and
the LONDON MORNING CHRONICLE; then let him read Judge M'Kean's Charge, and
blush at the boast that has been so often made about the liberty of the press.

I am far from approving of all, or of hardly any thing, contained in the works
of Pindar and the Morning Chronicle: the Chronicle is the devoted tool of an
infamous Jacobin faction, and the far greater part of Pindar's monotonous odes
are an outrage on decency, on truth, and on every principle, moral and
religious, by which a man of learning and talents ought to be directed. But,
because public censure and ridicule, when grounded on falsehood, is
unjustifiable, it by no means follows, that the press is to exercise no sort of
censorship at all; that it is not to record evil as well as righteous deeds;
that it is not to check the follies and vices of the times; that it is not to
exert its wholesome and mighty influence in society, but become the mere echo
of the bench and the bar. No; this does not follow; yet, this is the practice
of the American press.

Come to my office, reader, and look over (if you have patience) the leaden
sheets that are hither dragged from every quarter of the country. If they have
one single shaft of satire, except it be on the old hackneyed subject of
king-craft and priestcraft, I will suffer you to suffocate me by reading me
their contents. -- And what is the reason of this? Is it that this blessed
Representative Democracy, which, in great mercy, has been vouchsafed unto us,
preserves us unsusceptible of folly or vice? Is it that we are all wise, moral,
religious, and pure as the driven snow? Is it, my God! that we know of no such
thing as drunkenness, adultery, swindling, corruption, or blasphemy? Or is it
that we wish to keep these things hidden from the world? -- If this could be
done, and if silence would produce a reformation. I would willingly consent, --
not to become as tame and insipid as my brethren, but to throw my press into
the river. But, this is impossible; since whatever exists, is, and must be,
known; and since wickedness the longer it remains unchastised, the more
inveterate it becomes; since this is the case, the most rigid censorship in the
press is absolutely necessary, to check, in time, that which, if suffered to
pass unnoticed, will most certainly, sooner or later, end in general
degradation and ruin.

Yet, this timely check; this salutary and costless chastisement, must remain a
useless instrument in our hands, because, forsooth, the villain and the
strumpet desire to appear agreeable in life, and because an exposure of their
turpitude will " stain the honor of their families!" For this cogent reason,
the good and the bad, the upright statesman and the traitor, the man of
integrity and the rogue, the virtuous matron and the whore, are all to be
jumbled to-gether, and the world is to take us in the lump, or nor at all.

But, may it please your Honor, this will not do. We know well, that the world
is very illnatured, and that, when it judges in the lump, it very seldom looks
at the best side. Men of reputation, therefore, do not approve of this jumbling
work. They wish to be distinguished from those that have none. This can be done
only by the detecting of vice, and exposing it to public censure; and I beg
your Honor's leave to add one concluding observation of my own, which is this;
that I never yet know a single person, man or woman, extremely anxious to
restrain the liberty of the press, in this respect, who had not very sufficient
reasons for so doing.

The next restraint on the freedom of the American press, is, the very alarming
privilege, which foreign agents possess, in having a choice of governments,
under which to bring their prosecutions.

I have already, in the former part of this pamphlet, said how the press, in
various parts of the country, has been kept in slavery by the unpunished
violences of the domineering French faction; and, in the relation of the
treatment I have met with, I have clearly proved what every printer, of any
independence of spirit has to expect from another quarter. This situation of
things, however, has been produced by a combination of singular circumstances,
and it may probably wear away as those circumstances change. But, the evil, of
which I have now to complain, is of a nature not to be worn away by the hand of
time alone. It is built on law and constitution, or, at least, it operates as
if it were, and admits of no remedy, except by some positive act of a
convention or the legislature.

It was hoped (though, it must be confessed, with very little reason), that
America, when separated from Great Britain, would never more be affected by the
quarrels of European nations. PAIN told the people, that they would have
nothing to do but grow rich, while other nations should be at war. "Our
commerce," says he, will always secure us the peace and friendship of all
Europe. This, by woeful experience, we find to have been like all the rest of
shallowheaded Paine's predictions. But this is not the worst. Not only does
America feel the pressure of European wars, in a degree equal to that felt by
the people of Great Britain at this moment; but she is cursed with a foreign
faction in her bosom, by which she is continually curbed, harrassed, injured,
insulted, and betrayed.

The politics of the country are become so connected, so interwoven, with the
politics of other nations, France in particular, that they are never spoken of
in any other than a relative light. I verily believe, and indeed I am certain,
that, as to numbers, men are more equally divided, at this time, between the
Federal government and the French, than they were in the year 1778, between the
Congress and the King of England.

Nor does this pernicious division stop here. The State governments have their
sides. One State is called a Federal State and another an Antifederal State:
and it is notorious, that the politics of the persons, who administer these
^altern governments, are generally fixed and uniform on one side or the other.

In such a state of things, only think of the danger of allowing foreign
ministers and agents to choose the government, under which to bring their
prosecutions! Possessing this dreadful privilege, will not every foreign agent
take good care to institute his prosecutions under that government, to which
the party prosecuted has, by his politics, rendered himself obnoxious? And,
where this can be done, what sort of chance, I pray, is there for a man who
meddles with the press, and who happens to be situated in a State, where he
must of necessity be obnoxious to one of the two governments, under which he
lives?

My own case is a striking exemplification of the danger of this privilege.
Yrujo the Spaniard applied first to the Federal Government to prosecute me, and
was informed that it would be done in the Federal courts. But, this he
remonstrated against, and requested that it might be done in the courts of
Pennsylvania; in which courts M'Kean is Chief Judge. -- Now, why this request?
Why prefer one jurisdiction to another? The courts are held at the same place,
and nearly at the same time. The Judges of the Federal court are men famous for
their learning and their integrity; and, I am sure, ordering the trial in this
court ought to have been looked upon as a mark of respect to the Spanish King.
How, then, are we to account for this extraordinary request?

Leaving the reader to account for it in his own way, I shall tell him that the
request was refused; and that, then, a new prosecution was set on foot under
the government of Pennsylvania. The matter contained in the above bill of
Indictment was hunted out; and, let it be well remembered, that every pretended
libel contained in this bill, was published before I was bound over on the
first complaint. In possession of this fact, the reader will be able to guess
what the hopes of the prosecutor were founded on.

The matter in the bill of indictment, if libellous, was surely so before I was
bound over the first time. How comes it then, that it was not included in the
first complaint? This puzzled the Grand Jury. The thing appeared so unnatural
to them, that they sent for the two Attorneys General to explain the mystery;
when it was found, that they had taken care, in drawing their indictments, to
steer clear of each other; in doing which I, by-the-bye, do not mean to hint,
that either of these gentlemen did any more than his duty.

Thus was seen the singular phenomenon of a printer prosecuted by two
governments, at one and the same time, for different parts of one and the same
offense! And this is American liberty of the press!

Did Englishmen ever hear of any thing of this kind before? No; they have one
Government, one law, and one constitution for all. In their country, neither
foreigner nor native, plaintiff nor defendant, has a choice of jurisdictions,
tribunals, or judges. Where the offense is committed, there must it be tried.
They have no clashing of governments of opposite politics, under which every
printer is in hourly danger, from the intrigues of foreign agents, and is
obliged to tack and shift, like a polacre with contending winds between Sylla
and Charibdis. No; in England, all is fair and free. The path is simple: the
law is one and the same, and is equal in its operations in every place and
toward all parties. It is founded in wisdom and in justice, and is
administered with candor, impartiality, and mercy.

The third restraint on the liberty of the American press, and the last which I
shall notice, at this time is, the fear which must be naturally excited in
every writer and printer, by the disgraceful and cruel punishment, to which he
is continually exposed.

After all that we have heard and seen about the mildness and humanity of the
American laws; after all the cant of the tenderhearted Brissot; after all the
silly enlogiums on the prisons of Philadelphia, spread abroad in pamphlets,
speeches, and paragraphs; and after all the sarcastic and acrimonious invective
which the American press is continually pouring out against the sanguinary code
of Great Britain: bored with all this, I say, even to surfeiting, my present
complaint must appear very extraordinary. Let it. All that I have to do, is to
prove it well founded.

The liberty of doing any thing, is greater or less, in proportion to the
punishment that the law awards for it. I am, therefore, far from pretending
that the Americans do not, in some respects, possess more liberty than the
English. They are in less danger, when they steal, rob, forge, coin, and
murder; for, these crimes are here punished with fine, jail imprisonment,
imprisonment at hard labor, or solitary confinement; whereas, in England, they
are punished with death. But, let those, who have reason, boast of this sort of
liberty. It is not what I want. I only contend for liberty to write and to
print.

This liberty is a right, sanctioned by law, as far as a certain line, all
beyond which is called libelling. This line reaches, as I have clearly proved,
just as far in America as it does in England, and no farther. All that we have
to do then is to see, which country inflicts punishments the least severe on
transgressors; for, in that country the press must be most free.

By only casting our eyes on the Chief Judge's Charge, we shall perceive, that
the punishments are ten fold more severe in America than in England. In
England, a transgressor of the laws of the press, or, in other words, a
libeller, is punishable by fine, by imprisonment in jail, by standing in the
pillory; or by any two, or all three, of them. But, what is his punishment in
America? Why, in the first place, fine and jail imprisonment, as in England,
and to these may be added, imprisonment at hard labor, and even solitary
confinement in a dungeon, at the discretion of the court; and all this too in a
country, where the prosecutor may have a choice of courts!

As far as relates to fines and jail imprisonment, the code of the two
countries is the same; but, instead of the momentary shame of the pillory, the
American libeller, whether writer or printer, is liable to the lasting pain and
disgrace of hard labor, and to the more horrid punishment of the dungeon.
Standing in the pillory, which is the worst an English libeller can undergo, is
over in a few hours. The sufferer is then placed in jail, where he is as free
as a detention of his person will admit of. He can see, hear, read and
converse. He is at case; can be visited by his friends; nay, Callender (the
runaway Scotchman) boasts, that his associates even sold their libels in
Newgate. What is this punishment compared to continual hard labor? And what is
hard labor, or any thing else, compared to being thrown into a cell, and cut
off, not only from friends and family, but from every human being?

But, we must not drop the subject here. Punishments, as to their influence in
society, and consequently as to their restraint on the press, must be
considered relatively; for, what may be a very light punishment in one country,
may be a very heavy, and even a very cruel one, in another. In England, for
instance, robbery, forgery, murder, etc. are punished with death: in America
these crimes are punished with har^ labor, or solitary confinement. So that,
to inflict these latter punishments on a libeller here, is exactly as cruel as
it would be to inflict death on him in England.

What were the motives of the rulers, who lessened the punishment for murder,
and other horrid crimes, while they augmented the punishment for libelling, I
must leave those to determine, who boast so much about the liberty of their
press; but, this I will undertake to say, that it is most excellently well
calculated to restrain, intimidate, and over awe, every one who has any thing
to do with writing and printing. What man will ever dare to communicate his
thoughts to the public, while it is probable, or even possible, that his
writing will procure him a place in that " temple of humanity," as it has been
called, the Philadelphia prison; where, dressed in a jail uniform, penned up
amongst runaway thieving negro slaves; amongst robbers, forgers, sodomites,
and murderers; where, in short, amongst convicts of every color and of every
crime, he is employed in the polite art of pounding hemp, with the infinite
satisfaction of being exhibited to traveling philanthropists as a living
monument of American mildness and humanity? -- And, if this be too much for a
man of reputation and talents to bear, how shall he dare to brave the horrors
of a cell; to be secluded from friends, parents, wife, children, and all that
renders life worth possessing; to be barred up for months, or for years, like a
condemned malefactor; and this too at the discretion of a court, chosen,
perhaps, by his prosecutor?

Did Englishmen........... but, why do I pursue in the odious comparison? --
Did even Frenchmen ever feel a restraint like this? -- The Bastile! -- it was
bad enough, to be sure; but, a writer confined there, had, at least, the
consolation of knowing, that he was distinguished from felons and murderers.
Though far too severely punished, he was not covered with everlasting disgrace
and infamy. Literature, though the abuse of it was cruelly chastised, was not
degraded, was not rendered at once hateful and despicable, as it is by the
indiscriminating code of Pennsylvania.

Yet, notwithstanding all we have seen, the Chief Judge has the modesty to tell
the Grand Jury, from the bench, that the criminal law of this State is so
pregnant with justice, so agreeable to reason, so full of equity and clemency,
that even those who suffer by it, cannot charge it with rigor!!! -- This was
too much. He might, at any rate, have spared us the mortification of listening
to this. But, it is the fashion. Almost every public harrangue has some such
vaunting conclusion. It may be good policy, to be sure, as it tends, to keep
the people here in excellent humor, while it excites envy in those of there
nations, makes them discontented whit their lot, and invites them to cultivate
the deserts of America; but then, the greatest care imaginable should be taken,
not to lay the iron finger on such men as are not formed for passive suffrance,
and particularly if they are Britons; for they, above all others, will not
whisper their curses to the winds: they will turn their eyes toward their
native land: they will compare what they have lost with what they have gained;
nor will all the terrors of hard labor and a Philadelphia dungeon, ever, I
trust, deter them from proclaiming the account to the world.

I have now accomplished my object. I have exposed the conduct of my enemies,
and I have amply proved, that the press is more free in Great Britain than it
is in America. As to the motives by which I have been actuated, though I
frankly confess, that had I not been injured, had I not been singled out as an
object of legal vengeance, no part of this pamphlet would ever have been
written or thought of; yet, I am far from wishing to throw an odium on the
people of these States in general, and to represent them as a tame degenerate
race of mortals. On the contrary, I know that a very great majority of them
have felt, and expressed, the utmost indignation at the treatment I have
received. The decision of the Grand Jury alone, considering the charge that was
made to them, is sufficient to prove, that the spirit of true liberty is yet
alive on this side the Atlantic. That decision, and the joy which it excited
amongst all the respectable inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia, are fresh
in every one's memory, and will, I am sure, be for ever rivetted in mine. Let
it not be supposed, however, that I say this with the base motive of procuring
or preserving patronage, either public or private. I stand in need of none. My
good honest parents taught me the labors of the field, and, with these, they
taught me independence of mind. It has pleased God to bless me with health, and
with limbs to gain my bread; and, while I am able to do this by the spade or
the plough, I will never seek for wealth nor for ease, by fawning for popular
favor, or by burying my injuries in silent submission.


