GEORGIA SPECULATION UNVEILED, SECOND PART. CONTAINING THE THIRD AND FOURTH
NUMBERS; WITH A CONCLUSION, ADDRESSED TO THE NORTHERN PURCHASERS.

BY ABRAHAM BISHOP.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. M,DCC,XCVIII.

The Paging is continued from the First Part.

In title page of First Part, dele Copy-Right secured.

TO point out the wide-spread ruin, which would follow a recovery of the notes
pending in suit, and to counteract the operation of new delusions, beginning to
circulate among the purchasers of the Missisippi and Tennessee lands (for
purposes best known to the authors of them) will be left to others. My object
in these numbers is to complete the subject proposed in the first pamphlet. But
I cannot forbear to say to those, who have hitherto escaped this destructive
speculation, Touch not, Handle not, For all these things perish in the using.

Georgia Speculation Unveiled. No. III.
THE first proposition, selected from the foregoing numbers, as a subject of
evidence and discussion is, That the state of Georgia pretended to convey, in
fee-simple, the lands in question.

THE evidence of this fact is presented in the original deed of the Georgia
Missisippi Company, taken from a pamphlet published by order of the directors
of that company, previous to the northern sales.

STATE OF GEORGIA.
By His Excellency GEORGE MATHEWS, Captain General, Governor and Commander in
Chief in and over the said State, and of the Militia thereof.
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, GREETING:
KNOW YE, That in pursuance of the act of the General Assembly entitled, An
act supplementary to an act entitled, 'An act for appropriating a part of the
unlocated territory of this state, for the payment of the late state troops,
and for other purposes therein mentioned,' declaring the right of this state to
the unappropriated territory thereof, for the protection and support of the
frontiers of this state, and for other purposes, passed at Augusta, on the
second day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, and, of the sovereignty and independence of the United States of
America, the nineteenth, and by virtue of the powers in me vested, I HAVE given
and granted, and, by these presents, in the name and behalf of the said state,
DO give and grant, under and by virtue of the beforementioned supplementary
act, and securing to the state, according to the directions, reservations and
stipulations therein contained and expressed, unto NICHOLAS LONG, THOMAS
GLASCOCK, AMBROSE GORDON and THOMAS CUMMING and their associates, their heirs
and assigns forever, in fee-simple, as tenants in common and not as joint
tenants, ALL THAT tract or parcel of land, including islands, situate, lying
and being within the following boundaries, that is to say, BEGINNING on the
river Missisippi, at the place where the latitude of thirty-one degrees and
eighteen minutes north of the equator intersects the same; thence a due east
course to the middle of Don or Tom Bigby river; thence up the middle of the
said river, to where it intersects the latitude of thirty-two degrees and forty
minutes north of the equator; thence a due west course along the Georgia
Company's line, to the river Missisippi; thence down the middle of the same to
the place of BEGINNING, together with all and singular the rights, members and
appurtenances whatsoever, to the said tract or parcel of land, including
islands, belonging, or in any wise appertaining; and also all the estate,
right, title, interest, claim and demand of the state aforesaid, of, in, to, or
out of, the same; reserving, nevertheless out of the said tract of land, six
hundred and twenty thousand acres, to be subscribed by, and for the use and
behoof of other citizens of the said state, who shall choose to do the same, at
such time, at such rates, and to such effect, and in such form and manner as
are pointed out and expressed in the before mentioned supplementary act;
provided also, that the said NICHOLAS LONG, THOMAS GLASCOCK, AMBROSE GORDON and
THOMAS CUMMING and their associates shall not be entitled to dispose of the
said territory, in part or in whole, in any way or manner to any foreign King,
Prince, Potentate or Power whatever; TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the said tract or
parcel of land, and all and singular the premises aforesaid, with their and
every of their rights, members and appurtenances, unto the said NICHOLAS LONG,
THOMAS GLASCOCK, AMBROSE GORDON and THOMAS CUMMING and their associates, called
the GEORGIA MISSISIPPI COMPANY, their heirs and assigns forever, in fee-simple,
as tenants in common, and not as joint tenants.

GIVEN under my hand and the great seal of the said state this twenty-sixth day
of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five,
and in the nineteenth year of American Independence. GEO. MATHEWS. SIGNED by
His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR, the twenty-sixth day of January, 1795. EDWARD
WATTS, S. E. D.


THE Governor's deeds to the other companies, their heirs and assigns forever,
express a similar conveyance of the lands in fee simple.

SECOND PROPOSITION. The companies assumed the term, fee-simple, and all the
responsibility attached to it.
THE evidence that they assumed the term is presented in the 7th section of the
second article of the constitution of the Georgia Missisippi Company.

"The President and a majority of the whole Board of Directors and Executive
Board collectively, shall have power, and they are hereby fully authorized to
sell, and the grantees shall convey any part or parts, or the whole of the
territory and rights, granted and conveyed to the Company, to any person or
persons in FEE SIMPLE."

EVERY holder of Mississippi script was entitled by virtue of his purchase and
certificate to have and hold to himself and his heirs and assigns forever, his
proportion of the lands in fee simple. All the other companies assumed the
term, fee simple -- and the deeds to the northern purchasers generally express
a conveyance in the very words of the original deeds -- but whether expressed
or not, every purchaser is entitled to the fee simple by virtue of the public
declaration made to the world, that the lands were thus holden and conveyed.
Whenever a seller conveys lands in fee simple, he pledges his profits, his
payments and his own property on the vesting of this kind of estate in the
grantee. If the fee simple fails and he has done this ignorantly, yet he must
replace the buyer in as good a situation as the buyer would have been, had the
fee simple vested; but if he has used the expression fraudulently to allure and
deceive purchasers, he must refund the money paid and respond in damages. In
the present case it is wholly inconceivable that the Georgia companies have
acted ignorantly or under the influence of any doubt, whether the fee simple
actually vested in them, or not.

THIRD PROPOSITION. The state of Georgia never had any right to the fee simple
of the lands, conveyed to the companies.
AN estate in fee simple, is the largest and noblest estate, that a man can
have in real property. The proprietor of such estate is invested with an
absolute power to improve and dispose of his land as he pleases. Swift's System.
A fee is an estate of inheritance, being the highest interest, that a man can
have in lands. When the word fee is used with the addition of the word simple,
it denotes an unconditional, unlimited estate. The fee simple in lands being
the largest possible estate, comprehends all inferior and lesser estates, into
which it may be divided. 2 Black. 10.
This is the actual portion of estate to which the northern purchasers are
entitled.

OF the quality and value of visible estate the buyer may judge; but as the
portion of estate which the seller has a right to convey, often depends on a
long series of papers in the possession of the seller or on construction of
law, the uniform presumption is that the seller knows the foundation of his
title and his portion of estate; therefore every expression used by the seller,
expressing the kind of estate, is stricly construed and if he should sell the
fee simple, when he owned but a lesser estate, he must save harmless the buyer
from all loss, cost and damage occasioned by the failure of the fee simple. For
this purpose the buyer has no need of covenants. His right of indemnity results
from this principle of common equity, That the seller shall cause the buyer to
have that for which he received the money or securities of the buyer.

THE money of the northern purchasers has been paid or their notes have been
given for the fee simple of the lands, and if the State of Georgia owned this
unlimited estate, there must have been some time at which they began to own it
and some source from which it must have been derived.

THE author of the state of facts well aware that the right of the state to
sell the fee was all important, has assumed the burden of proving it. He first
creates out of nothing a right of pre-emption, Page 4.
then by severalingenious transmutations changes this pre-emptive right into a
right absolute in the soil. Page 12.
At the opening of his fourth page, the indians were the quiet occupants of the
lands in fee simple; but in the compass of eight pages, he has deprived them of
the fee -- has vested it in three powerful nations, humanely reserving to the
Indians a right of hunting and fishing. Minimis oriuntur magna.
To show the absurd origin of this right I present his exact words, page 4.

THE Spaniards, who made the first discovery of America, claimed a right to
exclude all other nations from making establishments in this vast extent of
country: But other nations refused to admit this absurd claim, in respect to
such parts as the Spaniards had never even visited. The Spaniards in 1521
discovered, and soon after made a settlement in East Florida. The French some
time after this, settled in Canada and from thence having accidentally found
the great river Missisippi, and pursuing its course, they discovered Louisiana,
and in 1699 settled a colony at Mobile. The English, in 1607, made their first
American settlement in Virginia -- These three powerful nations, having each
got possession of a part, disputed about the extent of their several boundaries
in these immense regions, through which an almost infinite number of Indian
tribes were dispersed. Each claimed an exclusive right of purchasing from the
natives such lands, as lay within the limits they chose to set to themselves;
the sovereignty of which they also claimed: and this right of excluding other
nations from purchasing the Indian lands, within such limits, is the foundation
of the right of pre-emption. These disputes gave rise to the war, that was
ended by the treaty of Paris, between France, Spain, and Great Britain; by
which in fact the principle of the right of pre-emption is recognized, in as
much as many Indian tribes were living within the limits of each, as then
agreed on.

IT seems that the Spaniards, who claim to have first discovered this country,
had (as they termed it) an indisputable right by the gift of Pope Alexander the
6th to the property and dominions of all the continents, islands and seas
between the arctic and antarctic poles, etc. Chandler's com. debates, vol. II.
page 52.
The French and English afterward got footing here, and these three powerful
nations not agreeing, went to war, made a peace and then recognized each others
rights. Their quarreling created the right, their treaty confirmed it!

ON this foundation is laid the whole building of pre-emptive rights and on
this is raised all the claim of the state of Georgia to the fee-simple of the
lands, described in the companies deeds. -- The author of the State of Facts
has traced the whole from this origin and if his outset were good, his
conclusions in favor of the right of the state would be plausible at least: But
what are the facts?

1st. THE Indians were the first discoverers of this country, and if first
discovery and continued occupancy gives title according to the laws of nature
and nations The law of nature consists in an application of the moral law to
the condition of man. The law of nations is an adoption of the law of nature
and an agreement in its application. This law, says Justinian, is common to all
the human race. This law guarantees to the first discoverer and occupant of any
created thing an exclusive title; so that a forcible extermination of such an
one is a violence to this law. Camb. Elem.
they had acquired an unquestionable title. How many moons or centuries they
had been here, when the Spaniards first discovered that they lived here, is to
us wholly unknown. It is enough to the present purpose, that the Spaniards did
not first discover this country, and those, who are very solicitous to decide
which has the honor of discovering this country, Columbus or Vespusius or Don
Juan, may more discerningly direct their historical researches to some tawny
warrior of some far distant age.

2d. THE discovery of the Spaniards, that this country was inhabited by
peaceful inoffensive tribes, living on fishing and hunting, gave them no right
to the soil, nor to the pre-emption of the soil; for the same law of nature
which had given to the Indians the fee as first occupants, had also given them
a right of selling it to whoever they pleased.

3d. THE gift of Pope Alexander, (being only an abridgment of his predecessor's
proffer of all the kingdoms of the earth) partakes too much of the ridiculous
to be admitted as a serious ground of claim; yet this is as substantial, and
certainly as sanctified a claim as ever was made by any christian nation to the
pre-emption of Indian lands.

4th. THAT the French discovered the Indians and Spaniards in this country, and
that the English found them all here, is no serious ground of claim against the
Indians: for they are a party deeply interested in this transaction.

5th. THAT the Spanish, French and English could not agree in the ratio in
which they might severally defraud and dispossess these first discoverers and
occupants -- and that they went to war about it -- and that they got tired of
fighting and made a treaty at Paris -- and that they then agreed on this ratio,
are rather arguments of the ravenous and insatiable spirit of those days, than
of the right of either to the soil or pre-emption of this country.

6th. THAT the king of Great Britain after this treaty, granted and patented
out this country to the minions of his court and officers of his army, is no
argument that he owned the fee or right of pre-emption; even if conquest had
given him title to any part, that could not extend to parts not conquered:
therefore his patenting from sea to sea is rather to be considered as the
vapouring of power, than as an evidence of right. But this may be otherwise
accounted for; -- the ignorance of the geography of this country, at that
distant period, and even within the present century was great. -- A man less
subject than I am to a reverence for royalty and thrones would be apt to
conceive that the kings of those days considered this continent as spread from
north to south, like a piece of cloth upon a shop board, which they as arch
tailors, were to cut into patterns according to the fancy of their employers:
indeed a map of this country, exhibits such slashing, as shows its having been,
at some time or other, roughly handled by the head servants of his Majesty's
Lords of the bedchamber.

7th. FROM the farcical parade of British charters we come to the declaration
of independence, at which time the author of the state of facts contends, that
the limits of the thirteen British colonies, as fixed by the king's charters or
letters patent, were admitted as the bounds of the jurisdiction of each,
without regard to the tribes of Indians living within such limits. This is a
new way of sliding up a title. Pray were the Indians a party to this admission
and confederation? Did they agree to be subject to such jurisdictions? Are they
to suffer the loss of all things to pay for the introduction of white people
among them? Or are they laboring under some hidden curse, which the policy of
the wiseacres of this world is forever to conceal? They have been suffering and
retreating, till one would think that even power and avarice would say, it is
enough. If there ever was reason for swarms to rise from older countries and to
settle in this, they have already more than room enough for their hives: but be
that as it may, the Indians now live in the country, described in the companies
deeds. Their progenitors lived there long before the days of Columbus. They
have occupied and improved it -- they have never abandoned it, nor been driven
from it, and by the United States are recognized in treaties. The northern
people have been accustomed to purchase land of Indians willing to sell, and
the purchasers have regarded the Indians as lords of the soil, till deeds were
obtained from them: So say the deeds in the records of the ancient colony of
New Haven: There the Indians conveyed the lands not their right of hunting and
fishing on them -- but can any one contemplate the lands in question and say
that the state of Georgia owned the fee, so that Gov. Matthews could with
propriety convey the lands in fee simple? For such is the expression in the
deeds, In fee simple as tenants in common and not as joint-tenants. There is no
such thing. The state of Georgia do not now pretend to the fee: The above words
were inserted for the purpose of delusion. Congress disavow the idea of states
claiming the fee of Indian lands. If the term could ever have been tolerably
applied to any part of the Indian country at any period, since the settlement
of this country; yet certainly the application of it to lands situated as these
are, is wholly absurd.

By the laws of nature and nations, and by the laws of the United States the
Indians have a right in fee and possession to all the lands, described in the
companies deeds, and to all the attributes of this right as fully and
absolutely as the people of Connecticut can have to their lands, and no act of
discovery, conquest, or occupancy, has ever vested any white nation with any
semblance of title to these lands. No act of dereliction or disuse on the part
of the Indians has ever left a moments opening to any possible claim of this
kind -- hence the repeated declarations of the state of Georgia -- their
negociations with Congress -- the nature of sovereignty -- the implications of
the Con. of the U. S. -- the extent of boundaries claimed by the state, and the
treaty of peace; so much insisted on by the author of the state of facts amount
to nothing, because they are built on nothing. It Is not enough that three
powerful nations recognized each others right to the fee or pre-emption of
Indian lands. Such a right must first have existed; else a recognition was
absurd. That it did not exist has been shown as clearly as a negative
proposition can be shown, and a plausible affirmative on the origin of this
right has never been ushered into our world. The long continued, actual and
peaceable possession of the first discoverers is an instant and ample
confutation of all that can be said in favor of the right of the state of
Georgia to sell the fee of these lands.

I HAVE dwelt thus fully on this subject, because the state of Georgia in the
granting act expressed a conveyance of the fee-simple -- because the grantees
in their deeds to the northern purchasers expressed a conveyance of the fee;
because the State of Facts published by the companies declares (page 12) the
right of the companies to have been a right absolute in the soil -- and because
under the influence of these delusions the advocates for the granting act are
attempting to confound this subject by applying to it all the mazy principles,
which in foreign countries have been drawn from feodal systems and landed
tenures.

FROM the premises may be drawn the following conclusions.

1st. THE Georgia sellers, in selling the fee of those lands, sold that which
they did not own -- the granting act was no good evidence of a title to sell
the fee -- nothing has passed by their deeds and the consideration of the
bargains has wholly failed. I say wholly, because from my premises the right of
pre-emption, if it existed, would be as worthless as the claim to the fee is
unfounded; but suppose that the right of pre-emption were of some value; yet
the seller is not obliged to admit it even as a partial consideration: For if a
man declares to the world by an advertisement or verbally, that he owns the fee
of a house and land and offers them for sale and I buy them of him, and it
afterward appears that he had only a lease of them, I am not obliged to open
an account current with him -- charging him the purchase money and crediting
him with the value of the lease; but the whole bargain is vacated, because the
fee, which was the essence of it, did not exist. This is good law, whether
accredited by the books or not. The above case would be more parallel, if the
lease were to expire the next hour after the execution of the deed; for then
the value of the lease would be just paramount to the value of a right of
pre-emption to the Indian lands in the present case.

THE ready answer to this has been, You must have known the facts about this
business, when you bought. My reply is, then we must have known that those, who
circulated these pamphlets and who declared to us that they owned the fee, were
impostors at the time of our purchase, which is hardly supposable. But if any
one suppose it, he may be assured that we did not know it 'till afterward.

2d. IF the fee of the lands was pretended to be conveyed; yet if in fact the
fee did not pass -- clearly the books on landed tenures must be closed; their
principles cannot apply for reasons before stated. The purchasers are not to be
driven to all circuities and formalities necessary for a recovery on an
unfounded sale of the fee, because the sellers used the term fee. On a
conveyance of lands which do not exist, or of lands inaccessible, the purchaser
need not be outed and disseised; before he can recover against the seller.

FOURTH PROPOSITION. All which the deeds of the northern purchasers can
possibly contain is the Georgia right of pre-emption.
THIS right is of such description, that a rescinding act is completely fatal
to it. But before we come to this act, it may not be amiss to consider the
numerous circumstances, which render this pre-emptive right of the least
possible value.

1st. THE pretense of this right is a standing act of rebellion against the law
of nature, which gives lands to the first occupants: It is contrary to the
avowed principles of our settlement in this country -- a constant violence done
to the Indians, by depriving them of an inherent right of selling to the
highest bidder -- and a wanton grasping for territory beyond the exigences of
this, and probably of any future, century.

2d. A PRETENSE of this pre-emption, though holding its right foot on the
British charters, and its left on the treaty of peace is a direct violation of
the laws of nature and nations, especially while sustained against the consent
of the natives and the sovereign will of the union. The issue of the question,
whether these lands are or are not, within the territory of Georgia is yet
doubtful; but the existence of a dispute and the measures of Congress on this
subject, show that the conclusions in the State of Facts, drawn from the
acquiescence of Congress, are not correct; and that the Georgia right of
pre-emption is not recognized by the supreme power of the union. We are not to
believe that Congress are raising this question for the purpose of securing to
the United States a right of pre-emption; but for the better purpose of
substantially guaranting to the Indians, that indemnity for wrongs and that
protection from future encroachments, which they so eminently deserve from us
as a nation. To calculate otherwise would be impeaching the justice of the
union.

3d. THE numbers, characters and situation of the Indian nations, who possess
and cultivate these lands, form a phalanx of arguments against the value of a
pre-emptive right, more formidable than the laws of nature or nations --
arguments wholly unassailable by force or fraud, and far removed beyond the
power of confutation.

4th. THIS pre-emptive claim, unsupported by the laws of nature and nations,
disputed by the United States, unheeded by the Indians, stands solely on the
declaration of the state of Georgia -- on the simple assertion of the only
party interested to make it -- and standing thus alone was never of any value
and probably will never be of any value to the end of time.

PRE-EMPTIVE rights in their best estate are miserable; but this standing on a
grant rescinded and burnt -- on a title no better at best, than the gift of
Pope Alexander -- contemplating lands never to be in market, is miserable in
the extreme: but this vain and illusive right of pre-emption, because like
Pindar's razors, good for market, became an object of purchase. The granting
act gave them a sort of significance -- the parchments with the Governor's
name, the seal of the state and the words fee simple, all sanctioned by the
usual formalities of sovereign legislation, aided by a State of Facts, bore a
very imposing appearance.

PREVIOUS to the granting act several years had elapsed, in which these lands
had not increased in value or demand; but now, by the magic alchymy of
speculation, this shadowy, ambiguous right of preemption was commuted to a fee
simple, and though bought at a fair price in January, had, by the September
following risen in market more than 400 per cent, and how high these productive
acres would have risen is beyond calculation, if the rescinding act had not
restored them to their original standard. By reason of this act the lands have
ceased to be of value and the eyes of the northern purchasers have been opened
to see the miserable foundation of the Georgia fee and pre-emption. This mighty
fabric of speculation was built for tumbling and was destined to crush in its
fall the builders or the owners. Doubtless the Georgians estimate their right
as of some value; the glare of this speculation has dazzled them -- doubtless
the purchasers, who have paid the whole of their money, wish to believe better
things about this Georgia right. They will not be persuaded that fee and
pre-emption can so suddenly sink out of sight. Will the same men be surprised
to hear that even a palace with its magnificent cornices and entabletures has
tumbled suddenly to ruins, after being informed that its real foundation was
nothing more than painted bonnet-paper and that till the time of tumbling, it
had been sustained by weak temporary props?

FROM the premises which have been presented, it is fair to conclude that the
state of Georgia did pretend to sell the fee -- that the state never owned the
fee -- that the fee never vested in the first companies -- that the northern
purchasers have never acquired the fee and therefore that the whole
consideration of the bargains has failed.

FIFTH PROPOSITION. The fee and a right to buy the fee are widely different,
and the Georgia claim to preemption is peculiarly worthless.

A RIGHT to buy a fee is no part of a fee. A right of pre-emption is a mere
contingent right, equally applicable to real and personal estates. It is a kind
of thing, about which a covenant of seisin would be absurd; a thing to which no
ouster can be applied. It may be of some value or of no value, according to the
object of it -- as in the present case.

IF the king of Great Britain had a clear right to charter to the state of
Georgia, an exclusive right to buy the lands in question -- and had actually
done it -- and the lands were clearly within the bounds of that charter -- and
the right of pre-emption was uncontested -- and the Indians were actually
disposed to sell them for less than their value -- and the state of Georgia had
fairly assigned over this right of preemption -- and if there were power enough
to prevent their rescinding the assignment -- and if no principle of law or
policy could annul the assignment of preemptive rights to individuals; then a
conveyance from the assignees would be of some value: That is, of just as much
value as the Indians were willing to sell them, below what they could be sold
for again: Which is just the amount of what the Indians would suffer, by being
confined to one set of purchasers, instead of having all the world as bidders.

BUT what a confluence of contingencies is here? Without every one of which the
right of pre-emption is not worth having; and yet not one of them exists in the
present case. Great Britain had no right to charter the right of purchase --
the boundaries of the state and the right of pre-emption in the premises are
contested -- the Indians have no disposition to sell at any price -- the state
has never fairly assigned the right -- they have rescinded their fraudulent
assignment without a possibility of control, and both law and policy annul the
assignment.

ALL these propositions, except the last, are sustained in these numbers; and
of the last, it is sufficient to observe, that if the law of nature and the
policy of nations can have subjected the Indians to the preemption of a single
state; yet that law and policy must have contemplated states as acting on just
and liberal principles: But how excessive is the oppression -- when a state may
barter this right to individuals, and when these may transfer it through a
great succession of companies, each of which must, in giving an enhanced price
for pre-emption, calculate on purchasing the fee for as much less than the
state could have given for it, as the price which they gave was more than the
states' price to the purchasers! No one can fail to see that every progression
of sales in such a business is an injury to the Indians to the whole amount of
the profits in each sale. The event is that the last purchaser has given so
much, that he can afford very little for the Indian right -- the Indians cannot
afford to sell it at such a reduced price -- a war ensues, and this persecuted
people must be driven nearer the southern ocean or the pole. Such has been too
much the policy of the white people; and so far as the northern alienations of
pre-emption have involved or induced this wrong, so far they have violated the
laws of nature and the policy of nations.

THE author of the State of Facts on this subject says, (page 12) It is
exclaimed, what mischiefs would ensue, if individuals were allowed to purchase
Indian rights! But it is no good objection to the validity of a title to
property, that the proprietor may use it in such manner, as to become
inconvenient to the public.

I AM of those who adopt the exclamation and mean to include in it all which is
above expressed -- founding myself on an incontestible maxim that a law tending
directly to immorality and injustice is void from the beginning. No legislature
could have had power to enact such a law. If a Statute be against common Right
or Reason, the common law shall control it and adjudge it to be void. 8 Rep.
118. 2 inst. 527. Finch 74. A Statute, contrary to natural equity or tending to
immorality and wrong, is void. Jura naturae sunt immutabilia. Hob. 87. 8 Rep.
118.


It is the province of philosophers to explore causes; that of legislators to
calculate consequences. The wrong in this case is precisely coeval with the
law; for it is manifest that even the first grantees could not give the native
proprietors as much for their land as the state itself. Hence if law and policy
had any reason for subjecting the natives to the pre-emption of a state, as for
argument's sake I have admitted, yet on the instant of alienating this to
individuals, law and policy give way to avarice and oppression and the very
principles on which the state claimed the right are abandoned. Hence the
companies deeds are void, as given in violation of first principles.

IN pursuit of wealth men are apt to disregard principles and means; but when
every view of this subject, while it discloses fraud and collusion, exhibits
the nothingness of these Georgia claims, surely the discerning purchaser will
cease to look forward for gain: his sole object will be restitution for the
money paid and indemnity for the wrong suffered.

SIXTH PROPOSITION. Suppose the state of Georgia had owned the fee of the
lands; yet the granting act and the companies deeds are void on principles of
common law.
BY reason of the variety of interests and opinions on this subject many will
differ from me in some of my premises and conclusions respecting the fee and
pre-emption of these lands, I am therefore disposed to try the strength of this
question without the aid of them. Be it that the laws of nature and nations
were made for white people, and that the Indian nations inhabiting and claiming
these lands are to have no protection from the United States. Yet the northern
purchasers have acquired nothing by their deeds. All the money paid, the notes
given and the expense and labor created have been without any consideration;
for the deeds of Governor Matthews to the companies and the granting act
authorizing them are absolutely void on a fair principle of common law. Which
is, that no man or body of men, not being in possession shall sell lands to
another or others not in possession.

THIS law has in several of the states been erected into a statute, for the
purpose of making it known, and of defining the penalty -- it is founded on
substantial reason and calculated to prevent disputes, quarrels and bloodshed.
The original deeds of the companies present to the world a higher violation of
this common law, than any which has been recorded. The deeds purport to be a
conveyance of the fee simple of certain tracts of land, including islands, etc.
describing the very lands, owned, occupied and enjoyed immemorially by the
Indian nations, and lands, whereon the Indians were claiming at the very time
when these deeds were signed, and this within the knowledge of the grantors.
The author of the State of Facts, whose perception of difficulties appears very
accurate, endeavors to obviate this by erecting two sovereign rights on the
same land. 1st. A fee simple in the state of Georgia or as he terms it "a right
in the soil simple and absolute in its nature." 2d. The Indians right of
fishing and hunting, which he says, "is a right in the nation, as long as it
continues to exist as a nation. It is an absolute right, of which it cannot be
deprived, without its own consent in a fair purchase, by a voluntary
abandonment, or by conquest."

This Indian right is unquestionably a sole right of possession, to the
exclusion of all others, and has been so uniformly understood, ever since the
settlement of this country. The author calls this Indian right an usufruct and
says that "by long usage and general principles of law it is no less alienable
than any other contingent or reversionary interest in lands whatsoever." This
is good sliding again: but where is a single instance, in this long usage, of a
state selling the Indian lands in fee simple? Where is one general principle of
law to justify such an usage? How come the words contingent and reversionary to
be applied to lands sold in fee simple? The Indians know nothing about these
nice distinctions, of right absolute in one and right perpetual in another,
that is, a fee simple in Georgia, which comprehends and absorbs all lesser
estates, and at the same time an usufruct in them, which completely absorbs and
annihilates this fee.

THESE paradoxical niceties are exclusively vested in the Georgia companies,
and the usufruct of them belongs to the author of the State of Facts.

BY the concession of this author the Indians own this perpetual right of
usufruct so absolutely that they cannot be deprived of it, without their own
consent in a fair purchase, by a voluntary abandonment or by conquest: Yet
according to him the state of Georgia owns the fee-simple.

WE have now discovered what this fee-simple is. Instead of being like what the
books call fee-simple, the greatest possible estate in lands -- comprehending
all lesser estates, it is the least possible estate and comprehends nothing.
Instead of being, as other fee-simples are, coeval with the creation of this
earth, and always vesting in some one, it dates its existence from the date of
the Georgia deeds, and never vested in any one, till the delivery of them.

THE companies deeds are made in defiance of the common law, at the very point,
where the law marshals all its force: For the natural tendency of them is to
produce, in a most aggravated degree, the very evils, the prevention of which
gave existence to that law.

THE manner in which disputes, quarrels and bloodshed would naturally ensue
from these deeds has been detailed in the last chapter.

HAD the Indians been conquered, and were in a state of rebellion against the
state of Georgia. -- Had the state ever possessed these lands, far otherwise
might be the merits of this question -- but the Indians are on the lands,
claiming, cultivating and acknowledging no superior. Not only this: But by the
very concession of the companies they are rightfully possessing and enjoying
every privilege of a fee except the name; and the selling of the name is of no
use; except the eventual intention of that sale be, to give the purchasers a
color of right to defraud, dispute, quarrel with or murder the injured
possessors.

THE subject analized -- stripped of its covering, presents no other explanation:
For the first companies cannot afford to give the Indians so much for their
right, as the state could have given: Here is the foundation of fraud laid: --
the first grantees can afford still less: The sales will be continued as long
as any gain can be made: The fraud becomes magnified. Now if the Indians cannot
be cheated, disputes and quarrels will be the consequence and murder will (as
it ever has done, with those injured tribes) bring up the rear. It Is enough to
my present purpose, that the state not being in possession, has sold to
companies not in possession, and this in direct violation of an acknowledged
principle of common law. The statutes, which in this case are but a transcript
of the common law declare all conveyances of this description null and void,
which terms may most warrantably be applied to the granting act and the
companies deeds.

SHALL it be said that common law principles are not to regulate and control
legislative acts of sovereign states? I am ready to agree to the position,
provided it may be considered as an agreed point between us -- and it seems
hardly competent that common law principles should be applied to legislative
acts, where there is no common law power to enforce the application: But this
salvo will not help the companies; for they, knowing themselves not to be in
possession, and purchasing of others who had no claim to possession, have, by
their own violation of the same common law, made null and void their own title.
-- They can claim no exemption from common law, unless they should claim that
the sovereignty of the state, (backed by long usage, according to the State of
Facts,) can sanctify a wrong of the most atrocious magnitude. Be it however,
for their sakes, that the state can do this; yet their deeds to the northern
purchasers are null and void, for here both parties are subject to this law.

HE who seeks equity must have done equity. He who seeks law must have done
legally: But in this case they, who are claiming all the aid of the common law
for the recovery of their notes, have, by their own showing, been guilty of
such a gross violation of this common law, that the very men whom they are
pursuing, have, by reason of this very violation, lost all title to the lands
for which the notes were given.

IF ever a trial about the title to this naked visionary fee could be brought
up, the objection here raised, against the validity of the granting act and the
companies deeds, would be conclusive against the northern purchasers; unless
the court trying the question, should deviate from those decisions, which, I am
told, have invariably prevailed on this subject.

I shall now proceed by a new compass to discover the fallacy of the companies
pretensions.

SEVENTH PROPOSITION. The Georgia right of fee or pre-emption is not sustained
by the system of landed tenures in this country.
JUDGE Blackstone in his Com. Vol. II. Page 7, says, So long as (colonizing)
was confined to the stocking and cultivation of desert uninhabited countries,
it kept strictly within the limits of the law of nature: But how far the
seizing on countries already peopled and driving out or massacring the innocent
and defenseless natives, merely because they differed from their invaders in
language, religion, customs, government or color; how far such a conduct was
consonant to nature, reason or christianity, deserved well to be considered by
those, who have rendered their names immortal by thus civilizing mankind.

IT is well known that the first settlers of this country owe no thanks to the
principles accredited by this eminent writer. Whatever might have been their
motives for emigration; yet nature, reason and religion will put in no claim to
serve as a basis to our landed tenures.

IN Trumbull's History of Connecticut may be found claims of title, liveries of
seizin, and modes of ejectment, unknown to the civil or canon law.

IT is said that our forefathers were persecuted for their religion and forced
from their native land into this, then howling wilderness. If history discovers
that their tribulation had worked patience; if their conduct evinced their
abhorrence of persecution -- and if the wilderness ceased to howl at their
approach, we ought to bless the event, -- It is said that the old world was
overstocked, and that the natives of this had more land than they wanted. If
history informs that our ancestors took their brethren of this new world by the
hand and offered to give them, in exchange for the luxuries of this western
hemisphere, the newly imported virtues and science of the east, we ought to
bless the event. If He, whose is the earth, had decreed that our forefathers
should have and enjoy this portion of it -- and in token of this decree had put
them in possession, we ought to cleave to this high evidence of title, and not
to claim beyond it. Pleased with the possession, we seem afraid to look back to
the means, by which it was acquired, as if fearful of some defect in our title;
or at best we rest satisfied with the decision of the laws in our favor,
without examining the reason or authority upon which those laws have been
built. Black. Com. II Vol. page 2.
But this stage of my subject forbids such delicacy -- as we actually live here
and our claim is not contested -- we must seek some origin of it -- and that
being found, we shall be enabled to judge, whether it sustains the claim of
Georgia, to the fee or pre-emption of the lands in question.

THE laws of nature and the subjects of occupancy, dereliction and disuse have
been discussed sufficiently to convince, that on neither of these is our claim
to this country supported. No principle found in books or avowed by man
sustains this claim. No legal trial in this country has ever tried the strength
of our title or decided its operations. From new premises must be new
deductions, and he who endeavors to confound titles sustained by the law of
nature, sanctioned by the books, confirmed by first occupancy and actual
possession -- with titles having no such origin, aims to pervert mankind -- and
turning books and principles from their natural to an unnatural use --
prostitutes them to the base purposes of seduction, imposture and delusion.

"MIGHT OVERCOMES RIGHT" stands as the basis of this new system of landed
tenures, as will appear by the following historical comments on the discovery
of America. The warlike animals on which the Spanish officers were mounted; the
artificial thunders which issued from their hands; the wooden castles, which
had wafted them over the ocean, struck a panic into the natives, from which
they did not recover, until it was too late. Wherever the Spaniards marched,
they spared no age or sex, nothing sacred or profane. The Spaniards went out
with their dogs to hunt after men. The unhappy savages almost naked and
disarmed, were pursued like deer into the thick of the forests, devoured by
mastiffs, killed with gun shot, or surprised and burnt in their habitations.
Guthrie's Discovery of America.
These were the triumphant liveries of seizin in the southern parts of America!!

THE poverty of the inhabitants of Bahama taught Columbus, that this was not
the country, which he was seeking. -- But steering further southward he found a
country, abounding in all the necessaries of life, inhabited by a humane and
hospitable people; and what was of still greater consequence, promising
considerable quantities of gold. This, therefore, he proposed to make the
center of his discoveries.

IT was not benevolence nor science which moved Columbus to discover countries
already discovered; to people regions already populated, or to moralize
nations, more virtuous than his own: But auri sacra fames, The cursed thirst of
gold.
more powerful than Euroclydon, drove this impetuous hero upon these
defenseless natives. Every new discovery of gold formed a new epoch in this
history and added fresh laurels to Guthrie's immortal Columbus.

THIS author exclaims, It is impossible to determine whether the genius of this
great man in first conceiving the idea of these discoveries, or his sagacity in
the execution of the plan he had conceived, most deserve our admiration. My
admiration is more suspended between the base motives of the hero, and the
unfounded panegyric of his biographer. He adds, No one is now imposed on by the
name of Americus Vespusius; all the world knows that Columbus was the first
discoverer. I am one (of all the world) who know no such thing. Because this
transaction is wholly novel, yet is language to lose its usual significance? Is
the term, DISCOVERY, so convertible that it can be applied with increasing
glory to new successions of adventurers?

AT the very time when this weight of glory devolved on Columbus, the immense
regions of this country were populated by millions far exceeding the numbers
now living on it. Myriads of rational, intelligent beings were scattered
throughout every part, enjoying in innocence and simplicity the golden age of
society. According to the above author, The empire of Mexico, at this time,
rich, powerful, inhabited by millions of Indians, had subsisted for ages; its
inhabitants were not rude and barbarous; but every thing announced a polished
and intelligent people. -- Their government, founded on the sure basis of laws,
combined with religion, seemed to bid defiance to time itself. Mexico, the
capital of the empire, situated in the middle of a spacious lake, was the
noblest monument of American industry. It communicated to the continent by
immense causeways, carried through the lake. The city was admired for its
buildings all of stone, its squares and market places, the shops, which
glittered with gold and silver, and the sumptuous palaces of Montezuma, some
erected on columns of jasper, and containing whatever was most rare, curious or
useful. This was the desert uninhabited wild, destined for the discovery of
that immortal brute Fernando Cortez, whose evidence of title was proclaimed by
the groans of Guatimozin, while stretched on burning coals, to compel a
discovery, where his treasures were concealed.

ANOTHER inhospitable wilderness tempted the patriotism of Pizarro. The
Peruvian empire, founded by Mango Capac, had been united, civilized, softened
by the institution of a benevolent religion. "In short," says the above author,
there was no part of America, where agriculture and the arts were so
assiduously cultivated, and where the people were of so mild and ingenuous
manners. He adds, Pizarro had no conception of dealing gently with those, whom
he called barbarians: But who, though less acquainted with the cruel art of
destroying their fellow creatures, were more civilized than himself.

SUCH are the exploits by which Southern America was discovered!! Let the names
of Columbus, Cortez and Pizarro grace the historians' page and swell the poets
numbers: I am perfectly willing that they shall be handed to posterity with
equal and undivided honors.

NORTH AMERICA, abounding less in valuable minerals, became a subject of more
gradual and deliberate discovery. Among the worthies, whose names have acquired
a paper immortality on this subject, the family of the Cabots stands most
conspicuous. In 1494, John Cabot, a Venetian, (born in England) had the honor
of discovering Newfoundland and the island of St. John's; in consequence of
which Henry VII. confered on him another honor just equal to it -- the order of
Knighthood: Whereupon the said John died, and his son Sebastian, using his
father's journals, had the honor of falling in with the continent in the 56th
degree of north latitude -- and thence the long extended honor of exploring the
coast as far as the Floridas. From these discoveries originated the claims of
England to these parts of the northern continent. Trumbull's Hist. of Connect.
Vol. I. page 2.


DURING all this time the Indians had the more substantial honor of living here
-- in numerous tribes -- the unrivalled owners and occupiers of this country.
Their numbers, manners and mode of living may be seen in the above history,
page 28 and onwards.

THE king's patents opened our title; persecution gave occasion to assert it. I
shall only quote one livery of seizin as a sample of the rest. In the year
1637, when quarrels between the ancient inhabitants and the patentees had
prepared for the work of death, the conflict at Mistic decided the fortune of
this infant colony. The intrepid Capt. Mason, finding that the Indians fought
desperately for their wives, their children, their homes and their all, cried
out to his men, We must burn them. He immediately entering a wigwam, took fire
and put it into the mats, with which the wigwams were covered. The fire
instantly kindling spread with such violence, that all the Indian houses were
soon wrapped in one general flame. The enemy were now seized with astonishment
and forced by the flames from their lurking places into open sight and became a
fair mark for the English soldiers. Some climbed the palisadoes and were
instantly brought down by the fire of the English muskets. Others, desperately
sallying forth from their burning cells, were shot or cut in pieces with the
sword. Such terror fell upon them, that they would run back from the English
into the very flames. Great numbers perished in the conflagration.

THE greatness and violence of the fire, the reflection of the light, the
flashing and roaring of the arms, the shrieks and yellings of the men, women
and children in the fort, and the shoutings of the Indians without, just at the
dawn of the morning, exhibited a grand and awful scene. In little more than an
hour this whole work of destruction was finished. Seventy wigwams were burnt
and 5 or 600 Indians perished, either by the sword or in the flames. Thus
parents and children, the sannup and squaw, the old man and the babe, perished
in promiscuous ruin.

THIS eloquent description, taken literally from Doctor Trumbull's history To
the fidelity of this able historian we are indebted, for an unprejudiced
disclosure of the means, by which this country was obtained. The leading
objects of the history are to impress the minds of readers with a respect for
our ancestors, and with a distinct view of the origin, progress and success of
civil and ecclesiastical establishments in this country: but in the midst of
facts, well conducive to these objects and highly honorary to some of our
progenitors, he has not failed to furnish facts as disgraceful to the memory of
the first speculators, whose sole object was gain and whose means were violence
and cruelty.
is presented as a sample of the liveries of seizin throughout North America.
The grandeur of the cruelty made the scene awful indeed!

SUPPOSE that a subject of the Chinese nation should discover that we live
here, occupying more land than we want, and savagely cheating each other with
the surplus, and should report this to the Emperor, and he should patent it
out, and the patentees should come with sufficient force to subdue us and
should actually involve parent and child, the old man and babe in one
promiscuous ruin, and should afterward be disputing about the honor of
discovering this country. What would a survivor of these ruins call them: What
would he think of them? The natives of this country differed no more from us
than we do from the Chinese; they no more deserved to have their buildings
burnt than we deserve the same calamity. Of one blood are created all nations
of men to dwell on the face of the earth: By the same laws of morality and of
nature are they all bound; but manifestly on these laws our title cannot stand.
I have introduced this discussion of the original discovery of this country to
show that in this instance MIGHT HAS OVERCOME RIGHT, and that we must resort to
a system of landed tenures wholly unknown to the books.

THE king of Great Britain patented these lands; not because he had any right
to them; The English books declare the king to be universal occupant and
entitled to all derelict lands: but the same books acknowledge this position to
be a fiction of law. See Bacons abr. term. prerogative. On this fiction of law
was founded the patent to the earl of Warwick, of lands thoroughly populated
and thus derelict principles were substituted in the place of derelict lands,
and thus for two centuries the Indians have been suffering on account of the
profound ignorance of this universal occupant and all his ministers about this
country, combined with an ignorance of the fair operation of their own FICTIONS.


; but because he was more powerful than the inhabitants, about whose coast his
servant Cabot had navigated.

ON the idea of discovery, power or conquest, the charter of New England,
granted in 1620, could not contain much land, as but little was, at that time,
conquered or discovered by the king's subjects. The same is true of that of
Connecticut in 1631. Both are very indefinite as to the kind of right intended
to be conveyed; but both manifestly express the premises as extending from sea
to sea; and by virtue of these and similar charters the different states have
claimed a right of preference to purchase, incroach or conquer within the
limits of them severally assigned.

THE first speculators in this business were the earl of Warwick and others to
the number of 40, commonly called "The great Plymouth Company." These sold
Massachusetts to Sir Henry Roswell and others -- Connecticut to Viscount Say
and Seal and Co. -- and thus the titles went from hand to hand, as the Georgia
speculation has done, neither party in possession, and the natural consequence
was disputes, quarrels and bloodshed.

As the principles of natural and common law are now out of the question, all
was well enough; there was substantial land at bottom; power enough to assert
it; and an unlimited right to exercise this power was implied in the original
charter; in this it differed much from the present speculation. History
discovers, that what money and fair words could not effect, this power effected
-- and in the event we have got the lands, and in them a goodly heritage.

THE divines, moralists and historians of our country, confounded at the
nothingness of these charters, and the cruelty which followed them, have
endeavored to make up a title from a mixture of ingredients.

THE first of which is -- The precedent of Moses in driving out the heathen
from the promised land; and under this head we are told of the barbarity and
savage manners of the natives of this country. As the precedent was of divine
authority, and the case in question was not, they do not well compare.

2d. THAT our ancestors were persecuted and obliged to seek an asylum here.
Much pains have been taken to rescue the characters of our persecuted pious
ancestors from the obloquy cast on the first companies. Be it remembered that
the tenure of lands, and peace of conscience are things wholly distinct, and
that this discussion has nothing to do with ecclesiastical bearings and
distances. If persecution made an asylum necessary: yet an asylum from danger
and a right to buy Indian lands, or to annoy, murder or expel quiet inhabitants
are matters wholly different. If necessity be admitted as a fair argument; yet
as that necessity extends not to the Georgia fee and pre-emption, its
application to the present question is wholly inadmissible.

3d. THAT numerous treaties and purchases were made and Indian deeds obtained.
This is the best evidence of title; but as these deeds express a conveyance of
lands, not of any remnant of right therein they show conclusively, that those,
who made these purchases, did not rely on their charters. As there is no
pretense that these Georgia lands have been bought or that any deed has been
obtained, this evidence of title does not exist in the present case.

4th. WHEN the argument of conquest is used, that not extending to the lands in
question affords no evidence of right.

WHETHER the lands now owned, occupied and enjoyed without molestation, by the
citizens of the United States, are claimed on the ground of necessity,
religion, persecution, treaty, purchase or conquest or whatever pretense of
claim may be made to them: -- Let it be regarded, that they are well holden;
but as none of these pretenses can be made to the lands in question -- the
Georgia claim to fee or pre-emption is not sustained.

BUT the northern states have claimed a right of preemption, let us try the
origin and application of this.

THE doctrine of pre-emptive right has always been understood with us as a mere
right of a colony or state to exclude other colonies or states from purchasing
lands within the limits of their charters, which understanding included in it a
reservation to themselves to purchase whenever the natives were disposed to
sell. In this was not included any idea of a right in fee vesting in a colony
or state, nor of any financial resources resulting from such reservation.

THOUGH this reservation followed the charter lines, it resulted not from the
charter, but from the necessity of the case.

AFTER many years settlement in this country, it was found inexpedient to
suffer individuals to be tampering with the natives for purchases of land; in
consequence of which laws were made to prevent it.

THAT of Connecticut, enacted in 1717 is as follows:

An act concerning purchases of native rights to land.
This assembly observing many difficulties and perplexities arising in this
government, by reason of many purchases of land made of Indian titles, without
the preceding allowance, or subsequent approbation of this Assembly:

Which to remove; IT is hereby enacted and declared by this Assembly, and the
authority thereof, That no title to any lands in this colony can accrue by any
purchase made of Indians, on pretense of their being native proprietors
thereof, without the allowance or approbation of this assembly.

THE same necessity led up a similar arrangement between the colonies, and
though it was an evil and a wrong to the natives; yet of two evils it was the
least, as a competition among the colonies, about purchases, might lead to
quarrels and wars with the natives. At the union of the colonies, this
reservation was not thrown into common stock. By the treaty of peace a line
between the British possessions and the United States was designated, which
extending to the Missisippi, left within our lines about 220 millions acres of
territory, mostly owned and enjoyed immemorially by the natives. In the
confederation of the United States, the reservation of each was not
relinquished. But the reservation thus continued was in no respect fortified.

HOWEVER inventive speculation had in the mean time suggested, that selling
this reservation to companies would obviate the evils contemplated by suffering
individuals to purchase. The idea of filling the public coffers by selling this
indefineable something induced the sale of the Chenessee country, and the lands
south of Lake Erie. By the deeds the purchasers were not invested with the FEE
SIMPLE of the lands, nor with any attribute of real estate; but with a right of
excluding others from purchasing them, and of being purchasers in their own
persons, whenever the policy of the United States and the disposition of the
natives to sell, should coincide to bring them into market.

IN these sales the states did not authorize the purchasers to claim any right
against the natives, on the ground of necessity, religion, persecution, treaty,
purchase or conquest. All this new system of landed tenures had wrought its
perfect work. The states merely withdrew themselves from the chance such as it
was, and in the two first releases received less than a 30th part of what the
lands in fee with a right of possession would have been worth.

IN the mean time the policy of the United States, though elevated above the idea
of taking advantages of the Indians; yet not having power to compel cessions of
this territory, had, by making treaties on the one hand, and on the other
enacting laws, controling the exercise of these reservations, sufficiently
expressed its authority over pre-emptive rights.

THIS policy was expressed by the law on this subject passed March 1st, 1793.

No purchase or grant of lands or of any title or claim thereto, from any
Indians or nation or tribe of Indians within the bounds of the United States,
shall be of any validity in law or equity, unless the same be made by a treaty
or convention entered into pursuant to the constitution.

WHEN cessions of territory have been made to the United States, the utmost
exertions could never draw from the supreme legislature any concession of the
existence of a pre-emptive right, or any guaranty of any part to be reserved.
See resolutions of Congress when Connecticut cession was made.


WHAT confidence could be placed in the wisdom, policy or good faith of a
nation, which should sign treaties with one hand and with the other betray the
tribes, with whom they were made? Or what confidence could be placed in a
nation, which trampling on the laws of nature, and the sacred doctrine of equal
rights, should give sanction to charters, baseless as those of the states, by
aiding to extend their effects beyond the bounds, which even avarice and
cruelty had formerly set to them? But this confidence remains; this policy has
never been relaxed, except when the relaxation was perfectly in unison with the
feelings and interests of the tribes concerned.

As the purchasers of the northern pre-emptions, have in fair market, with full
consent of all parties, bought the fee and possession of the lands, and as no
question has ever been had on the merits of the subject, it is impossible to
draw any legal inference from our quit-claims to the Georgia conveyances.

As the northern states never claimed nor alienated the fee simple -- as they
alienated no right to purchase -- as the congressional power to hold a treaty
alone gave the right to purchase, and as actual purchase northern quit-claims
on this subject amounted to no more than a declaration on the part of the
states that they would never attempt to exercise a claim, which from my
premises, appears to have had no foundation even in the base principles of
their charters, and which exercise had before been controled by the United
States.

THESE states did not pretend to any fraud and collusion practiced on them, and
therefore did not rescind their quit-claims: had they done this, the
consequence might have furnished a precedent in the present case.

As the event has proved, their renunciations of claim have not been
prejudicial to the interest nor opposed to the policy of the union; therefore
the evils, fairly calculable, as the issue of absolute claims on indian land
have not occurred. But in the case of the Georgia sales, no such event can have
presented.

THEREFORE -- Whether we canvass the discovery of this country -- the charters
of the colonies, leading up their new system of landed tenures -- the practice
of the northern states upon this system -- or the policy of the union; every
view of the subject presents a more hideous conception of the daring swindling
practiced on the world by the Georgia granting act, and the companies deeds
purporting to be conveyances of the fee-simple of the Indian lands.

THIS view of our subject, while it excludes forever the idea of a fee-simple,
vesting in the state of Georgia, presents abundant reasons why the northern
people were deluded by this speculation -- and while it discloses a new system
of landed tenures -- excludes all the book principles on landed tenures -- and
all decisions upon those principles from any application to the present case.

As the insertion of the word FEE-SIMPLE in the companies deeds led up the
whole imposture, I present that insertion as a supreme instance of fraud,
collusion and atrocious speculation, engendered between corrupt members of a
legislature and corrupting purchasers, for the express purpose of swindling.

HAD the companies deeds expressed a conveyance of the mere right of
pre-emption, the northern sales could never have been effected. Men, alive,
awake, capable of calculation as the northern people are, would never have
bartered their substantial property for such a miserable shadow.

SHEER FALSEHOOD MARKED THE FRONT OF THIS DETESTABLE TRANSACTION.

Georgia Speculation Unveiled. No. IV.
THE next proposition selected from the first pamphlet, as a subject of
evidence and discussion, is, that the state of Georgia has fairly, legally and
equitably rescinded the granting act.

THE evidence of this rescinding is presented in the following form.

AN ACT Declaring null and void a certain usurped act passed by the last
legislature of this state, at Augusta, on the seventh day of January, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, under the pretended title of "An act
supplementary to an act entitled, an act for appropriating a part of the
unlocated territory of this state, for the payment of the late state troops,
and for other purposes therein mentioned; declaring the right of this state to
the unappropriated territory thereof, for the protection of the frontiers, and
for other purposes:" And for expunging from the face of the public records the
said usurped act, and for declaring the right of this state to all lands laying
within the boundaries therein mentioned.
WHEREAS the free citizens of this state, or in other words the community
thereof, are essentially the source of the sovereignty of the state, and no
individual or body of men can be entitled to, or vested with any authority
which is not expressly derived from that source, and the exercise or assumption
of powers not so derived, become of themselves oppression and usurpation; which
it is the right and duty of the people or their representatives to resist, and
to restore the rights of the community so usurped and infringed.

AND WHEREAS the will or constitution of the good people of this state is the
only existing legal authority derived from the essential source of sovereignty,
and is the only foundation of the legislative power or government thereof, and
so far as that will or constitution expressly warrants, the legislature may go,
but no further; and all constructive powers not necessarily deduced from that
expressed will, are violations of that essential source of sovereignty, and the
rights of the citizens, and are therefore of no binding force or effect on the
state, or the good people thereof, but null and void.

AND WHEREAS the last legislature of this state not confining itself to the
powers with which that body was constitutionally invested, did usurp a power to
pass an act on the seventh day of January, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, entitled "An act supplementary to an act entitled, an act for
appropriating a part of the unlocated territory of this state, for the payment
of the late state troops and for other purposes therein mentioned, declaring
the right of this state to the unappropriated territory thereof, for the
protection of the frontiers, and for other purposes;" by which an enormous
tract of unascertained millions of acres of the vacant territory of this state,
was attempted to be disposed of to a few individuals, in fee-simple, and the
same is not only unfounded as being without express constitutional authority,
but is repugnant to that authority, as well as to the principles and form of
government, the good citizens of this state have chosen for their rule, which
is democratical, or a government founded on equality of rights; and which is
totally opposed to all propriety grants, or monopolies, in favor of a few,
which tend to build up that destructive aristocracy, in the new, which is
tumbling in the old world; and which, if permitted, must end in the
annihilation of democracy and equal rights; those rights and principles of
government which our virtuous forefathers fought for, and established with
their blood.

AND WHEREAS the fourth section of the fourth article of the constitution of
the United States declares, "The United States shall guarantee to every state
in this Union a republican government," which could never have been intended to
a republican aristocracy, and which such extravagant grants tend to establish,
the constitution of the United States expressly acknowledging a republican
democracy, or the foundation of the people: it receiving all its force and
power from their hands as their gift, which is manifest from its context, "We
the people of the United States."

AND WHEREAS as before mentioned the said usurped act is repugnant to the
constitutional authority, in as much as that by the sixteenth section of the
first article of the constitution of this state it is declared, "That the
general assembly shall have power to make all laws and ordinances which they
shall deem necessary and proper for the good of the state, which shall not be
repugnant to this constitution." And the said usurped act is opposed to the
good of the state, and it is self-evident that the legislature which assumed
the power did not deem it for the good of the state:

1st. Because self preservation or the protecting itself is the greatest good
and first duty of every government, and as has been shown, immense monopolies
of land by a few individuals under the sanction of government is opposed to the
principles of democracy, or the fundamental laws the citizens of this state
have chosen for their rule, which so far from being for the good or
self-preservation of the democratical, or equal government, is most manifestly
for its destruction and injury. 2d. Because the expression "good of the state"
embraces the good of the citizens composing the state, and the good of the
citizens consists in the peaceable pursuit of happiness, and the enjoyment of
all rights natural, or acquired, not expressly delegated for the purposes of
government; and a sale of such an enormous tract to a few speculators, which
was and is the common right of all the good citizens of this state, is contrary
to those rights, and therefore to their manifest injury, and of course to the
injury of the state. 3d. Because even supposing constitutional authority to
have been vested in the legislature for the purpose of such disposal, the
legislature was not vested with power to transfer the sovereignty and
jurisdiction of the state over the territory attempted to be disposed of, which
it has done by opening a door for sale to foreign powers, and a relinquishment
of the powers of taxation until the proprietors choose to be represented, which
is in fact dismembering the state, and which transfer and relinquishment cannot
be for the good of the state. 4th. Because there was no necessity or pressing
urgency for the sale of such an immense tract of territory, equal to some
European kingdoms, to carry into execution, and operation, the extinguishment
of the Indian claims to the lands between the sunconee and Ockmulgee,
contemplated by the act entitled "An act for appropriating a part of the
unlocated territory of this state for the payment of the late state troops, and
for other purposes therein mentioned;" the subterfuge on which the said usurped
act of the seventh of January, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five was
founded, when the whole amount of the appropriation for that purpose was but
thirty thousand dollars, and funds to a greater amount were then in the
treasury unappropriated: And because no state or nation is justified in
wantonly dissipating its property or revenues, and a legal alienation of which
can only take place from the most pressing necessity; and the territory
attempted to be disposed of, was the said usurped law valid, was wantonly
dissipated, it being disposed of for the trifling sum of five hundred thousand
dollars, a sum not adequate to the annual quit rents such lands were charged
with previously to the revolution, by the British king; which wanton
dissipation cannot be for the good of the state. 5th. Because exclusive of the
immense loss of revenue to which the state is exposed from the relinquishment
of taxation, the sum of five hundred thousand dollars was accepted as the
consideration money for the sale, and the sum of eight hundred thousand dollars
offered by persons of as large a capital, and as much respectability and
credit, and on terms more advantageous to the state, was refused; which as it
was (should the said usurped act have been considered valid) a clear loss of
three hundred thousand dollars to the revenues of the state, it is evident that
the law authorizing the sale was not deemed by the members of the legislature
for "the good of the state," which must have consisted in obtaining the highest
price and the most advantageous terms. 6th. For the very excellent reasons
given by his excellency the governor in his dissent to the first bill for the
disposal of the said territory, delivered to the house of representatives on
the twenty-ninth of December, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-four, and
which bill was not materially different from the act in question; and which
reasons prove, that his excellency as a negative branch of the legislature,
although he concurred in the law, did not deem it for "the good of the state,"
and which dissent was in the words following: 1st. I doubt whether the proper
time is arrived for disposing of the territory in question. 2d. If it was the
proper time, the sum offered is inadequate to the value of the land. 3d. The
quantity reserved for the citizens is too small, in proportion to the extent of
the purchase. 4th. That greater advantages are secured to the purchasers than
to the citizens. 5th. That so large an extent of territory being disposed of to
companies of individuals will operate as monopolies, which will prevent or
retard settlements, population and agriculture. 6th. (...) should such
disposition be made, at least one (...) the lands should be reserved for the
future disposal of (...) ^tate. 7th. That if public notice was given, that the
land was for sale, the rivalship in purchasers would most probably have
increased the sums offered. 8th. The power given to the executive by the
constitution, the duty I owe the community, and the sacredness of my oath of
office, will, I flatter myself, justify this dissent in the minds of the
members of the legislature, and of my other fellow citizens.

AND WHEREAS the said usurped act passed on the seventh day of January, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, is also repugnant to the before recited
sixteenth section, in as much as it is repugnant to the seventeenth or
subsequent section of the said first article, which declares: "They (the
legislature) shall have power to alter the boundaries of the present counties,
and to lay off new ones, as well out of the counties already laid off, as out
of the other territory belonging to the state. When a new county or counties
shall be laid off out of any present county or counties, such new county or
counties shall have their representation apportioned out of the number of
representatives of the county or counties out of which it or they shall be laid
out, and when any new county shall be laid off in the vacant territory
belonging to the state, such county shall have a number of representatives not
exceeding three, to be regulated and determined by the general assembly:" And
the territory disposed of not laying within the limits of any country already
laid off, and a sale and grant thereof, should the said usurped law be deemed
valid, having been made, it could not be defined the vacant territory belonging
to the state, whereby the constitutional powers vested in the general assembly
by the said seventeenth section would be barred and prevented, and consequently
the settlers on the territory sold, be deprived of the constitutional right of
representation, and is not only thus repugnant to the said fixteenth and
seventeenth fections, but thereby and by the relinquishment of the right of
taxation, until the settlers were represented, which they cannot
constitutionally be, is also repugnant to the whole letter and spirit of the
constitution, it operating as a dereliction of jurisdictional rights, and a
virtual dismemberment of the state.

AND WHEREAS in and by the articles of confederation entered into and finally
ratified on the first day of March, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-one,
by the then thirteen states of America, the territory within the limits of each
of the said states is to each of them respectively confirmed and guaranteed,
first by the second article, to wit, "Each state retains its sovereignty,
freedom, and independence, and every power, jurisdiction and right, which is
not by the confederation expressly delegated to the United States in Congress
assembled." And secondly, by the last clause in the second section of the ninth
article, "No state shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United
States." And in and by the first clause of the fixth article of the federal
constitution of the United States, "All engagements entered into before the
adoption of the said constitution, shall be as valid against the United States
under the said constitution as under the confederation:" and by the twelfth
article of the amendments to the said constitution, ratified and adopted, "The
powers not delegated to the United States by the constitution, nor prohibited
by it to the states; are reserved to the states respectively or to the people."

AND WHEREAS in and by the definitive treaty of peace signed at Paris on the
third of September, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-three, the boundaries
of the United States were established, and the United States fully recognized
and acknowledged by the first article thereof, in the words following: "His
Britannic majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz. New Hampshire,
Maifachusettsbay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and
Georgia, to be free, sovereign and in dependent states, that he treats with
them as such, and for himself, his heirs and successors, relinquishes all
claims to the government, proprietary and territorial rights of the same;" and
by the second article it is declared; "And that all disputes which might arise
in future on the subject of the boundaries of the said United States, may be
prevented, it is hereby agreed that the following are and shall be their
boundaries." And tho^^ boundaries thereby declared, which limit the westwardly
and southwardly parts of this state, are thus desined: "Along the middle of the
Missisippi until it shall intersect the northernmost part of the thirty-first
degree of north latitude; south by a line drawn due east from the termination
of the line last mentioned in the latitude of thirty-one degrees north of the
equator, to the middle of the river Apalachicola or Chatahooche; thence along
the middle thereof to its junction with Flint river: thence straight to the
head of St. Mary's river; and thence along the middle of St. Mary's river to
the Atlantic ocean;" and the king of Great Britain did, by proclamation dated
the seventh day of October, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
sixty-three, annex to the then province of Georgia, all the lands laying
between the said river St. Mary's and the Alatamaha, its former boundary
claimed by South Carolina under her charters; and the state of South Carolina,
in and by a convention held and concluded between the commissioners of the said
states, at Beaufort, under the authority and articles of the confederation, on
the twenty-eighth of April, in the year one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-seven, did confirm to the state of Georgia the southward and west wardly
boundaries described in the said treaty of Paris, by cession and relinquishment
of all right, title and claim which the said state possessed from the original
charter thereof, to the government, sovereignty and jurisdiction in and over
the same, and also the right of pre-emption of the soil from the native
Indians, and all other the estate, property and claim, in or to the said land;
and the boundaries so described, also coincide with the boundaries of this
state as described by the land act of this state now in force, passed at
Savannah, the seventeenth of September, one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-three, (except as to the northern boundary of the state) which by the
said convention is thus established and ratified by the first article thereof:
"The most northern branch or stream of the river Savannah from the sea or mouth
of such stream, to the fork or confluence of the rivers now called Tugaloo or
Keowee, and from thence to the most northern branch or stream of the said river
Tugaloo, till it intersects the north boundary line of South Carolina, if the
said branch or stream of Tugaloo extends so far north, reserving all the
islands in the said rivers Savannah and Tugaloo to Georgia; but if the head
spring or source of any branch or stream of the said river Tugaloo does not
'extend to the north boundary of South Carolina, then a west line to the
Missisippi."

AND WHEREAS until the formation of the confederation there could possibly
belong no territorial rights to the United States, nor after such formation
within the chartered limits of any state, but such as were specially ceded and
relinquished by the respective states; and the people of the state of Georgia
have by no act of theirs, or in any manner or shape whatever, transferred or
aliened or delegated a power to transfer or alien the territory attempted to be
disposed of by said usurped act passed on the seventh of January, one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-five, and the same and every part thereof is hereby
declared to be vested in the state and people thereof, and inalienable, but by
a Convention called by the people for that express purpose, or by some clause
of power expressed by the people delegating such express power to the
legislature in the constitution.

AND WHEREAS divested of all fundamental and constitutional authority which the
said usurped act might be declared by its advocates, and those who claim under
it, to be founded on: fraud has been practiced to obtain it, and the grants
under it. And it is a fundamental principle both of law and equity, that there
cannot be a wrong without a remedy, and the state and the citizens thereof have
suffered a most grievous injury in the barter of their rights by the said
usurped act and grants, and there is no court existing if the dignity of the
state would permit her entering one, for the trial of fraud and collusion of
individuals, or to contest her sovereignty with them, whereby the remedy for so
notorious an injury could be obtained; and it can no where better lay than with
the representatives of the people chosen by them, after due promulgation by the
grand juries of most of the counties of the state, of the means practiced, and
by the remonstrances of the people to the Convention, held on the tenth day of
May, in the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, setting forth the
attrocious speculation, corruption and collusion, by which the said usurped act
and grants were obtained.

AND WHEREAS the said petitions and remonstrances of the good people composing
the state, to the said late convention held at Louisville on the said tenth day
of May, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, produced a resolution of
that body in the following words: " Resolved, That it is the opinion of this
Convention, that from the numbers, respectability, and ground of complaint
stated in the sundry petitions laid before them, that this is a subject of
importance meriting legislative deliberation. Ordered therefore, That such
petitions be preserved by the Secretary and laid before the next Legislature at
their ensuing session." Which resolution invests this Legislature with
conventional powers, quoad hoc, or in common terms, for the purpose of
investigating the same, and which gives additional validity to legislative
authority, were the powers of one Legislature over the acts of another to be
attempted to be questioned.

AND WHEREAS it does appear from sundry affidavits and a variety of proofs
satisfactory to this Legislature, as well as from the presentiments of the grand
juries on oath of a considerable majority of the counties of the state, and by
the afore-recited petitions and remonstrances of the good people thereof to the
Convention, and by numerous petitions to this present Legislature to the same
purport, as also from the self-evident proof of fraud, arising from the
rejection of eight hundred thousand dollars, and the acceptance of five hundred
thousand dollars, as the consideration money for which the said territory was
sold; that fraud and corruption were practiced to obtain the said act and
grants, and that a majority of those members of the Legislature who voted in
favor of the aforesaid act, were engaged in the purchase; and a majority of one
vote only appeared in favor of the said usurped act in the Senate, and on which
majority in that branch the same was passed, and corruption appears against
more than one member of that body; which exclusive of the many deceptions used,
and the inadequacy of price for such an immense and valuable tract of country,
would be sufficient in equity, reason, and law, to invalidate the contract,
even supposing it to be constitutional, which this Legislature declares it is
not.

Be it therefore enacted, That the said usurped act, passed on the 7th day of
January, in the year 1795, entitled, "An act supplementary to an act entitled,
an act for appropriating a part of the unlocated territory of this state, for
the payment of the late state troops, and for other purposes therein mentioned;
declaring the right of this state to the unappropriated territory thereof, for
the protection of the frontiers, and for other purposes," be and the same is
hereby declared null and void, and the grant or grants, right or rights, claim
or claims, issuing, deduced or derived therefrom, or from any clause, letter or
spirit of the same, or any part of the same, is hereby also annulled, rendered
void, and of no effect; and as the same was made without constitutional
authority, and fraudulently obtained, it is hereby declared of no binding force
or effect on this state or the people thereof; but is and are to be considered
both law and grants as they ought to be ipso facto of themselves void, and the
territory therein mentioned is also hereby declared to be the sole property of
the state, subject only to the right of treaty of the United States to enable
the state to purchase under its pre-emption right the Indian title to the same.

And be it further enacted, That within three days after the passing of this
act the different branches of the Legislature shall assemble together: at which
meeting the officers shall attend with the several records, documents and deeds
in the Secretary's, Surveyor-General's and other public offices, and which
records and documents, shall then and there be expunged from the face and
indexes of the books of record of the state, and the enrolled law or usurped
act shall then be publicly burnt, in order that no trace of so
unconstitutional, vile and fraudulent a transaction, other than the infamy
attached to it by this law, shall remain in the public offices thereof; and it
is hereby declared the duty of the county officers of record, where any
conveyance, bond or other deed whatever, shall have been recorded, relating to
the sale of the said territory under the said usurped act, to produce the book
wherein the said deed, bond or conveyance may be so recorded, to the superior
court at the next session of the court after the passing this law, and which
court is hereby directed to cause such clerk or keeper of the public records of
the court to obliterate the same in their presence; and if such clerk or keeper
of records, neglect or refuse so to do, he shall be and is hereby declared
incapable of holding any office of trust or confidence in this state, and the
superior court shall suspend him: And from and after the passing of this act,
if any clerk of a county, notary public, or other officer keeping record, shall
enter any transaction, agreement, conveyance, grant, law or contract relative
to the said purchase under the said usurped act on their books of record,
whereby claim can be derived of authority of record, he or they shall be
rendered incapable of holding any office of trust or profit within this state,
and be liable to a penalty of one thousand dollars, to be recovered in any
court within and under the jurisdiction of this state; one half whereof to be
given for the benefit of the informer, and the other half to be lodged in the
treasury for the use of the commonwealth.

And be it further enacted, That the said usurped law passed on the 7th of
January, in the year 1795, shall not, nor shall any grant or grants issued by
virtue thereof, or any deed or conveyance, agreement or contract, scrip or
paper relative thereto, be received as evidence in any court of law or equity
of this state, so far as to establish a right to the said territory or to any
part thereof: Provided, That nothing herein contained shall be construed to
prevent such deed or conveyance, agreement or contract, between individuals,
scrip issued by the pretended purchasers, or other paper, from being received
as evidence in private actions for the recovery of any moneys given, paid or
exchangea, as the consideration for pretended sales by the original pretended
purchasers or persons claiming and selling by and under them.

And be it further enacted, That his excellency the governor be, and he is
hereby empowered and required to issue warrants on the treasurer after the
expiration of sixty days in favor of such persons as may have bona fide
deposited moneys, bank bills or stock in the funds of the United States or
warrants, in part or in whole payment of pretended shares of the said pretended
purchased territory: Provided, The same shall be now therein and not otherwise:
And provided also, That the risque attending the keeping the sum or sums so
paid in, be deemed and is hereby declared to lay entirely with the persons who
deposited them, and that any charge of guards or other expenses for the safe
keeping thereof, be deducted therefrom; and in case of neglect of application
to his excellency therefore within eight months after the passing this act, the
same shall be and is hereby deemed property derelict, and escheated to and for
the use of this state.

And be it further enacted, That any pretended power afsumed, usurped, or
intended by the said act, or any clause, or letter of the same, or which may or
can be construed to that purpose by the the said usurped act, grant or grants
under it, or from the journals of the house of senate or representatives, to
apply to the government of the United States for the extinguishment of the
Indian claims to the lands within the boundaries in the said usurped act
mentioned, and the holding any treaty by the said general government in
consequence of any application therefore by the company purchasers under the
said usurped act, so far as may affect the rights of this state to the lands
therein described, is and are hereby also declared null and void, and the right
of applying for, and the extinguishment of Indian claims to any lands within
the boundaries of this state, as herein described, being a sovereign right, is
hereby further declared to be vested in the people and government of this
state, to whom the right of pre emption to the same belongs, subject only to
the controling power of the United States to authorize any treaty or treaties
for and to superintend the same.

And be it further enacted, That in order to prevent future frauds on
individuals as far as the nature of the case will admit his excellency the
governor is hereby required, as soon as may be, after the passing of this law,
to promulgate the same throughout the United States.

THOMAS STEVENS, Speaker of the House of Representatives. BENJAMIN TALIAFERRO,
President of the Senate. Concurred, February 13, 1796. JARED IRWIN, Governor.

GEORGIA. Secretary's-Office, 13th Feb. 1797. The foregoing contains a true
copy from the original manuscript copy of record in my office. JOHN MILTON,
Secretary of the state of Georgia.



THIS rescinding act, whether regarded in a legal, equitable or moral point of
view does the highest credit to the legislature which passed it. If it deprived
the northern purchasers of momentary hopes of wealth without labor, it probably
saved thousands from imposition. If it nipt in the bud a number of aspiring
swindlers, it exhibited to the world an act of sovereign justice, which
thoroughly canvassed, will be found to stand on an immovable basis.

SECOND PROPOSITION. This rescinding act is completely fatal to all claims on
the part of the companies and the northern purchasers.
To try the strength and equity of this act, let us first consider what was in
fact conveyed by the granting act and the companies deeds.

NOTHING more can vest or pass by any conveyance, than what the grantor owned
or had a right to convey; therefore the fee-simple, though expressed in the
deeds, did not pass; because the state did not own it. The right of possession,
use or dominion could not pass; because the state had not even a claim to it.
An assignment of any right under the British charters could not pass; for the
lands described had never been altered nor affected since the creation of the
world. No pretense under the old or new system of landed tenures, could reach
these lands. It could not convey a right to buy the land; for this could only
be given by the United States. It could not be a right to conquer the Indians;
for this either in a state or an individual would have been treason against the
union.

THE whole extract and essence of the granting act and the companies deeds was
a simple, unresponsible declaration of the representatives of the sovereign
people of Georgia, that the people after the date thereof would have no claim
upon certain lands within their assumed limits.

THIS declaration, which ought long before to have been made to the United
States was made to the companies for the price of half a million dollars, and
instead of being couched in the narrow compass of a due-bill, was promulgated
to the world with great legislative formality as a bona fide conveyance of the
fee-simple of lands within their territory.

THE progress of this business from its rising to its zenith and thence its
falling to its original nothingness have been sufficiently traced. But the
people of Georgia, indignant at the granting act, have rescinded this
declaration, and such are the real contents of the granting act that this
rescinding is fatal to the companies.

CONSIDERING the rescinding act in this point of view, what is the condition of
the northern purchasers? They claim a right to purchase the lands, merely
because the representatives of the state of Georgia declared that after the 7th
of Jan. 1795, the state would not claim such a right; but afterward in Feb.
1796, the people declared that they would claim such a right, and further
declared that the companies, to whom this first declaration was made, might
take their money again: but for you, who had been defrauded by these companies,
they made no provision, and you have no means to compel the state to withdraw
their claim.

Now suppose the best possible case for the purchasers, viz. that the state of
Georgia owned the fee: yet these men, who are pursuing you for money, have it
completely in their power to receive back the money from the treasury -- to
give up their deeds, and to ratify and confirm the act beyond all controversy:
for the contract was only between the state and the companies -- you are no
parties to it. This can be done now, or at any time hereafter. The rescinding
act has left your claim wholly in the power of your tormentors, and has given
them the temptation of half a million dollars to exercise this power, and their
past conduct has left you no room to doubt their disposition to do it.

SHOWING you this in the case of a fee, you will apprehend on what a slender
thread your title is suspended, provided the granting act should happen to
include any estate less than a fee.

IT IS true you are told by the books, that a fee always vests in some one, and
from thence may infer, that in the case proposed the fee would have been vested
in you, so that no agreement between the state and the companies could be
conclusive: but unfortunately the same law, which gives you this momentary
comfort, tells you that no fee can vest, where neither party is in possession;
provided, that any is in possession claiming and holding all others out, which
was true in the present case. And unfortunately the last clause of this law
applies to every kind of right or claim in real estate, and when you leave real
estate the law leaves you; so that however you might consider your claim, it
would be completely voidable by the act of the parties who made the contract.

THUS, separate from the strength and operation of the rescinding act in
itself, and from all your feelings and reasonings about it, your claim is left
wholly at the mercy of the companies, and this because you have not the actual
fee simple, which they pretended to sell you.

THIS consideration, added to the worthlessness of your claim, presents, in a
strong point of view, the vanity of all reliance on your purchases.

BEYOND this, by destroying the records of the original deeds, and closing the
records against after conveyances, the rescinding act has put it in the power
of any person, intermediately claiming the lands, to break a link in the chain
of title, on which you may rely; this he may do by burning his deed or by
conveying to another and dating his deed anterior to yours. As you have no
record, nor act of possession to evidence your title, and as the proof of such
fraud would doubtless be out of your power, you see how easily your prospects
might be cut off; and this merely by the existence of the rescinding act,
without any reference to its merits.

BUT the actual strength and operation of this act is further discovered, in
its having actually destroyed the marketable quality of the lands. This shows
that the body of mankind, whatever they may think of its equity, really
considers it fatal to your claim; for if they judged the rescinding act to be
of no consequence, your lands would be of as much value as ever.

BUT the strength of this act is further discovered in its having withstood all
the elements combined to defeat it, triumphant over all the passions, which
agitate men disappointed in prospect of wealth, and equally above the fine spun
sophisms of dealers in remnants of law. As the causes of its existence and
object of it formed a combination wholly new, so the act is itself without a
precedent, and standing thus alone, is firmly supported by the voice of the
people, by the inherent sovereignty of the state, and by a train of argument,
well calculated to enforce its equity and validity upon every unprejudiced mind.

THE very effects of the rescinding act, prove that the contents of the
granting were weak; they also prove that the rescinding act possesses stamina
of existence stronger and more durable than its enemies have been willing to
allow it. This act contains in itself forcible reasons why it was made; it does
not descend to all the reasons which might have been offered -- nor to any
formal confutation of the arguments against it; but as these arguments have
been assiduously and in some instances successfully used at the northward, it
may be proper to try the strength of them.

THE first is, This rescinding act is wholly unprecedented and unsupported by
authorities, therefore good for nothing.

I ACCEDE to the premises; but deny the conclusion. -- It is true that the
British king did not rescind his patent to the earl of Warwick. Massachusetts
did not rescind their grant of the Genessee country, nor Connecticut theirs of
the Reserve. But suppose that either or all these sovereign powers had
rescinded their grants, before the lands were obtained by the grantees, what
remedy would the grantees have had? As there is no precedent of the case, there
can be no precedent of a remedy, and those who use this argument, have never
proceeded so far as to suggest even a plausible remedy in the present case. But
it so happens, there is no precedent of the fraud, collusion, atrocious
speculation and corruption, practiced on a sovereign legislature, to render
such an act necessary, and where a new case occurs, its merits must be tried by
the rules of reason and common sense.

THE novelty of the case was created by the fraud of the companies, and it
should not be in their power to draw arguments, from this very novelty, against
the rescinding act. -- The best, which can be said of this argument is, that
the very terms of the premises wholly foreclose any conclusion in favor of or
against the rescinding act.

THE second argument is, that however the rescinding act might have operated,
previous to any sales made by the companies: yet that it can have no effect on
the northern purchasers; because they bought in open market at a fair price,
ignorant of the collusion. I have already suggested the effects which it has
had, and the impracticability of remedy; but in direct answer to the argument,
be it remarked, that if any right existed, it belonged to the sovereign people
of Georgia -- that the collusion of representatives is not the collusion of the
people, and that when those act beyond their delegated powers, their acts are
voidable by the people. But when they, under the influence of bribes, agree to
cheat their constituents and these bribes are given by the grantees, the
contract becomes void on common law principles.

As the king's grants proceed chiefly from his own bounty, and his letters
patent are records of a high nature, they ought to contain the utmost truth and
certainty, and have in all times been construed most favorably for the king
contrary to the grants of common persons; and accordingly in a great variety of
cases we find incertainty, misrecitals, false suggestions, and all such matters
as show that the king was deceived in his grant, held such reasons as have been
sufficient to vitiate the grants. Plow. 333. Co. 44.6 Co. 55.7 Co. 12.8 Co.
56.2 Co 24.8 Co. 145. Hob. 224. Pollexf. 418.


EQUITY will relieve a man against a contract, entered into, when he was in a
state of ebriety, provided he were drawn into such debauch by the management
and contrivance of him, who gained the contract. Powel on contracts, page 29.


IN the first quotations regarding the sovereign people, as standing in the
place of the king, and their representatives as the king's ministers -- the
cases will apply, and the granting act would be void, on common law principles.
On the last quotation, let the fraud be compared to the debauch, and equity
will declare the granting act void. An exception taken under this argument is,
that the property is now in bona fide purchasers, who are not partakers in the
fraud: -- but this exception is never admitted where a grant, deed, or contract
is null and void in itself.

THIS dark work of legislation partook too much of the Ethiopian huc, and the
conduct of the companies too much of the Leopards spots, ever to bring a white
and unspotted title, to the northern purchasers.

IN this case the state has, by a sovereign act, done no more, than what courts
of law or equity would do in similar contracts between individuals.

THE third argument is, If the granting act was null and void in itself, there
was no need of a rescinding act and that if it was not thus null and void, a
rescinding act could not make it so: -- therefore that the validity of the
granting act ought to have been tried by courts.

IF Gunn and Co. had raised a military force, and with colors flying, drums
beating, loaded artillery and all the imposing attitudes of hostile array, had
procured this grant -- and afterward the state of Georgia had, by armed force,
overpowered these invaders -- and the assembly had afterward convened and
rescinded the grant, and outlawed Gunn and Co. would not all the world say they
had done right -- and that burning was good enough for an act thus obtained?
All kings, all nations and sovereign states would do this, and the world would
approve it; but their approbation would be founded on principles broader and
more enlarged than are contemplated in the books.

THE principles of the laws of nature and nations, including the laws of
morality, take root deeper than the roots of society -- the book decisions take
root in a soil less deep than that of society -- the sovereignty of the people
is between them. Society is founded on first principles -- Legislatures declare
the operation of those principles -- Courts apply these declarations to all the
variety of cases, which the weakness and wickedness of man present for their
decision. The sovereignty of the people never alienated to its servants the
judges of courts a right to judge of impositions on that sovereignty.

OF extremes of fraud or force this sovereign people will judge, lesser
violations are left to courts. -- Once adopt as a principle that in such cases,
courts may decide over the heads of legislatures, and you disseize the people
of all sovereignty and erect imperia in imperiis without end.

THE confusion of leaving a question of this kind to courts would be endless.
Without books or principles to form their decisions, and without power to
enforce them, the claimants would be led into immense expense without possible
profit.

HAPPILY the question about the validity of the granting act has been decided
by a power, from which there is no appeal; and the rescinding act has published
this decision in terms, liable to no misconstruction.

THE fourth argument is, That the rescinding act is an ex post facto law.

ALL this doctrine about ex post facto laws, are respects this case, is wholly
irrelevant: for though it be law and reason, that no man shall be punished for
the breach of a law passed after the commission of an act, and though no law of
this description can alter the rights of individuals as respects each other:
yet all this cannot apply to contracts between sovereign and subject; for in
the first case parties exist which can be called into court and compelled to
answer: here there is but one existing party -- the other is beyond the power
of the court. It created the court, and in this creation never imparted to it a
power to control itself in legislative measures.

THE term ex post facto law was derived from the immorality and inexpediency of
such laws: but it wholly loses its name, where it loses its application; that
is, when the after law is both moral and expedient, and when the power making
the law is in every respect uncontrolable.

THIS argument therefore is weak for two important reasons; one, that it cannot
apply to the case: another, that if it might apply in theory, there is no court
or power on earth, mighty enough to make the application in practice.

THE fifth argument is, That a grant is sacred and irreversible; therefore that
the rescinding act cannot destroy the force of the granting act.

IF the Georgia grant is sacred now, it would have been so, if the whole senate
and house of representatives and governor had been bribed and if the land had
been sold for five dollars, instead of half a million; but the fact is, nothing
can make a grant sacred, but the sacred integrity of the contracting parties.
Truth and integrity being absolute requisites in contracts, falsehood and fraud
render them positively void. See Hutchinson on law of nature.
Nothing can make a grant irreversible, but a want of power in both parties to
reverse it. In the present case was no sympton of integrity, and one of the
contracting parties, having abundant power for the purpose, has actually
reversed it. Hence equity and power have been united in proving, to the
confusion of the Georgia companies and disappointment of the northern
purchasers, that the granting act was neither sacred nor inviolable.

SUPPOSE the state had received for this land 800,000 dollars, the highest
price offered, and the assembly had, without any corruption, or collusion,
constitutionally, freely and with the full consent of their constituents,
granted this land and had received full pay for it and had afterward, on any
pretense, rescinded it and kept the money -- all the world would have cried out
shame! But what good would all this do to the suffering purchaser? What lawyer
could point to him any mode of revesting himself with a sole exclusive right to
buy these lands? It Is beyond the power of human invention.

IF in such case the state had owned the fee and possession, and the individual
had asserted and regained his right by force of arms -- all the world might
say, he had done well in opposing might to might, and in redressing an injury:
But now in order to do this he must first violate the laws of nature and
nations by extirpating the right owners; and they must expatriate every
principle of decency and honesty, in attempting to vindicate by force, a claim
founded in fraud and iniquity; for very different from the above case, in point
of equity and morality, has been the conduct of the state of Georgia. By their
rescinding act, while they have asserted the majesty of a sovereign people,
they have exercised all the equity of an individual, by forgiving the wrong and
offering to refund the money.

THE condition of statu quo proposed by this act, though generally recognized
among all nations, as a desideratum between contending parties is not at all to
the humor of these colluders. It severs them forever from the prospect of
immense wealth without labor, invention or honesty, which was the glorious boon
in prospect.

HAD the state confiscated the purchase money, for the treachery practiced
against the sovereign people, more might have been said; but they have
honorably offered it back to those who deposited it. Try them by the law of
nations for this rescinding act and they will be honorably acquitted. Tried by
the laws of nature, the state of Georgia would be approved.

FROM all the maxims, which regulate sovereign states, the claimants fly to
courts of inferior jurisdiction -- courts highly respectable in their
institution -- highly capable of administering justice between man and man; but
wholly inadequate, in delegated power, for a decision of this question; and in
such courts, borrowing the mantles of more honest suitors, they practically
avow their designs of plunder, and not content with having violated the
principles of fair dealing in the first instance, would under the mask of law,
pirate the world of the fair distinctions which subsist between honest and
dishonest applicants for justice.

CONTRACTS between kings and subjects, between sovereign states and
individuals, stand on moral, not on legal principles.

THE high approbation, with which the rescinding act is now received by an
impartial public, establishes its conformity to the laws of morality and of
nature. If the advocates of this argument could have shown that this grant was
fairly and sacredly obtained, the public would have lamented that this
sovereign power had been immorally exercised: but the absolute necessity that
sovereign power should in all governments reside somewhere, has foreclosed all
appeals in the present case.

THE sixth argument is, That the Indian right to part of the lands described in
the granting act has been extinguished -- therefore that the rescinding act
could not at best reach the whole.

To this my remarks on the nullity of sale (neither partly in possession)
furnish a sufficient answer.

THE seventh argument is, That the companies are still possessed of the
original deeds of Governor Matthews -- therefore that the rescinding act, by
destroying the records, cannot have destroyed the title.

BUT deeds are only evidences of title, and like other evidences, they may
speak truth or falsehood -- theirs in conveying the fee violate the truth. --
Deeds may be good or bad -- valid or void, according to the power of the
contracting parties, or the integrity and legality of their contracts. These
deeds were given by a party, unable to contract: they were founded on fraud,
and the subject of them was unconstitutional and illegal. Deeds create no
fee-simple, nor any other quantity of estate in lands. The estate must first
exist: but it did not exist in the present case. Your original deeds from the
Governor can answer no other purpose, than as a standing memorial, that there
was a time, when certain representatives of a free people were guilty of most
abandoned treachery against their constituents, and when there was a class of
men, capable of improving the basest of means for the vilest of ends: -- but
the rescinding act is to remain as an illustrious memorial of the everlasting
abhorrence with which their treachery and your corruption are to be regarded by
this and future generations.

THE foregoing and similar arguments have been proposed by the sellers in every
form in order to give currency to a second edition of delusions, which may be
truly said to be much enlarged by the authors. Every principle of law and
equity has been put on the rack to compel a disclosure of something in favor of
the granting act. The books and their conservators have been put in
requisition. Cases have been nicely fashioned to the fancy of employers, and
the mighty quotient has been that the rescinding act is good for nothing!

AMIDST the preparations for hostility, some of the northern purchasers have
been discomfited -- some settlements have been effected; but even these have
been magnified and multiplied, for the purpose of drawing others to
accommodation. It was not enough, that wretches were employed at the northward
under the mask of purchasers to draw in their neighbors; but pretenses that
these very impostors have settled, have been since improved to draw those very
neigbours to a settlement.

A THOROUGH detail of the frauds practiced in the first, second and last stages
of this business would be voluminous, and in the present case of no other use
than to add a new chapter to the volume of arguments which prove to what a
depth of degradation the predominant lust of wealth is able to sink the
character of man, and to what a boundless field of wickedness, those men are
introduced who leave the path of morals and integrity, and abandon their duty
as men and members of society. The frauds practiced in the northern sales are
within the knowledge and proof of the companies or individuals on whom they
were practiced.


BUT a certain portion of the fraud shall be presented, from the following
affidavits preserved on the journals of the house.

Affidavit First.
GEORGIA, Burke County. January 16, 1796.
RUSSEL JONES, senator from the county of Frankiin, being duly sworn, makes
oath, "That some time in the last summer, Thomas Raburn, Esquire a representative
from the said county in the last legislature, was at his house, when James
Coil, and several others were also present, and talking together on the subject
of the sale of the western territory of this state, the said Coil told Raburn,
that he did not blame him for selling the land, but for his selling his vote so
much lower than what other members did; that he, Raburn, had sold his vote for
six hundred dollars, and that others had got a thousand -- Raburn replied, that
it showed that he was easily satisfied and was not greedy.

Signed, RUSSEL JONES.
Sworn in presence of the committee of the House of Representatives, before me,
THOMAS LEWIS, J. P.

Second.
CLEMENT LANIER, Esquire one of the representatives in the legislature of this
state, who being duly sworn, on the holy Evangelist of Almighty God, deposes
and says, that during the last session of the legislature at Augusta, in the
winter of the year 1794, he being a member of the house of representatives, and
sitting on the same seat with Henry Gindrat, another of the members of that
house, before the speaker took the chair, the said Gindrat recommended to him,
to be in favor of selling of the western lands, for that he, said Gindrat
understood it was worth our notice; for Mr. Thomas Wylly, a senator from
Effingham county, had told the said Gindrat, that he, the said Wylly, could
have eight or ten likely negroes for his part: And the deponent further saves,
that on the same day, in the afternoon, the said Thomas Wylly, came into the
lobby of the house, and beckoned to the deponent, who followed him out, when a
conversation commenced about the Yazoo act; at the same time, a Mr. Dennison,
came by and asked what we were upon -- the said Wylly answered, the land
business; the said Denison, then came up, and Wylly withdrew; the said
Dennison, then told the deponent, that he did not pretend to advise any member
to be in favor of selling the land, but those who were in favor of it, were
handsomely provided for, and that if the deponent thought proper to be in favor
of selling, that he should have part, and that the said Denison said he was a
purchaser of such of the members parts, as had a mind to sell, but understood
that some of the members pretended to ask eight and ten negroes for a share, or
their shares; he said he could not give so much, but the deponent might depend
he would purchase: The deponent further says, that previous to any of the
before recited circumstances, Mr. William Longstreet, one of the members of the
said legislature, frequently called on the deponent, and asked him why he was
not in favor of selling the western lands, who answered he did not think it
right to sell to companies of speculators. The deponent at this time wishing to
make further discovery of the conduct of the members on that sale, and
therefore affected to be inclined to come into the measure, and by that means
kept up a conversation about it occasionally; that on the day the bill received
its first reading, before the house was convened, the said Longstreet spoke to
the deponent, to get his approbation to the sale. The deponent asked him to
show thm what security the members had of the purchasers, when the said
Longstreet presented a certificate, entitling the bearer to two shares of
twenty-five thousand acres each, signed by Nathaniel Pendleton, chairman. The
deponent then told the said Longstreet, that that was not what he had formerly
told him was a member's share; for that the said Longstreet, had before said, a
member's share was seventy-five thousand acres. That the said Longstreet, then
told the deponent, if he would wait a few minutes, or an hour, he would bring
him another certificate from Gunn's company, for the same number of acres. That
the deponent in order to disengage himself from the conversation, then said the
security was not sufficient to entitle him to the land. That the said
Longstreet then told the deponent, if he was not satisfied with the
certificates, he would give him one thousand dollars for it, or for them. The
deponent then presented the certificates to the said Longstreet, and went into
the house, which was the last interview he had on the subject. The deponent
further says, that the shares offered him as aforesaid, were expressly
designed to induce him, the deponent, to vote for the bill for disposing of the
western territory.

Signed, CLEMT. LANIER. Qualified as aforesaid.

Third.
PETER L. VAN ALEN, being duly sworn, says that about the 12th or 13th of
January 1795, he was in company with a Mr. Gindrat, who, the deponent
understood was a member of the legislature, then lately adjourned, that in
consequence of the advice of R. P. Sanders, Esquire another member of the same
legislature, who advised the deponent to purchase some of the western lands,
which the said legislature had sold, and in the purchase of which the deponent
understood the said R. P. Sanders was interested, and from the information of
the said Sanders, they could purchase between them two shares in Gunn's
company, and to the best of the deponents recollection a share in Glascocks
company for a thousand dollars. That the said Gindrat, told the deponent, in a
conversation upon that subject, that he should have his, the said Gindrat's
share, for that sum, provided the money was paid by a certain time. That in
consequence, the deponent went to exchange some governors warrants for money;
and when he returned, Gindrat refused to let him have them; having as the
deponent understood and believed, met with a better market. The deponent
further says, that he believes, and then understood, that a certain quantity
was allotted to each member in the majority, who were not to pay any money
therefore in advance, but were particularly indulged until the whole purchase
money was payable at the treasury, in consequence of their vote and support of
the law for selling the lands. The deponent further says, that R. P. Sanders,
told the deponent, that he had made a contract with Lachlan M'Intosh, Esquire who
was, as the deponent understood, a member of the same general assembly, for all
the shares that the said M'Intosh held in the different companies, for which he
had contracted to give him eight negroes, fifty barrels rice, and a certain sum
of money, which the deponent does not recollect: That this contract was made
before the first bill had been negatived by the governor; but that a
reservation being made in the second bill in favor of the citizens and the
state, would deduct considerably from the quantity of land in each share. He,
the said R. P. Sanders, objected to giving so much. The said M'Intosh, however
urged the completing the contract. The said R. P. Sanders, further told the
deponent, that the contract was broken off by reason of that deduction. The
deponent further says, that he was present in company with Lachlan M'Intosh,
and others, when some one of the company, he thinks Mr. M'Intosh himself, said
that he, the said M'Intosh, held six shares in the Georgia Missisippi company,
which he offered at three hundred dollars premium each, and on the same day the
deponent understood that he did sell them for a premium of two hundred and
fifty dollars each, to one of the grantees of that company.

Signed, PETER L, VAN ALEN. Sworn to as before.

Fourth.
JAMES MERIWETHER, Esquire being first sworn before Thomas Lewis, Esquire in the
presence of the committee of the house of representatives, was asked the
following questions.

Q. 1. Were you not, or are you not now, treasurer to one of the companies
which purchased the territory claimed under the act of the last legislature,
for disposing of the same, passed the 7th January 2795, entitled an act
suppllementary, etc.?

A. I was treasurer to the Georgia Missippi company, and received L. 70 per
annum for that duty; I resigned on coming to this place.

Q. 2. Who were associates in that company?

A. I do not know who they were, the accounts were opened not in the name of
persons, but by the number of certificates; when I received money I receipted
by the number of certificates.

Q. 3. Do or do you not know where the list of the associates is kept?

A. I do not.

Q. 4. Are you or are you not acquainted with the means by which the said act
was obtained?

A. I am not; I am interested as a purchaser in that company.

Q. 5. Do you, or do you not know that some one or more of the members of the
legislature, were holders of shares directly or indirectly in the purchase?

A. I do not.

Q. 6. Did or did not some one more of the members of the legislature, pay in
to you as treasurer, moneys in payment of the purchase, and who and which of
them?

A. I never received any money from any member of the legislature, that I
recollect, but I am pretty certain I did not.

Q. 7. Who was the treasurer previous to yourself?

A. Mr, Amasa Jackson.

Q. 8. Has the Georgia company paid up the whole of the purchase money?

A. They have.

Q. 9. At what time was it paid?

A. About the last of August, he thinks.

Signed, JAs. MERIWETHER. Qualified as before.

Fifth.
The examination of Philip Clayton, Esquire before the committee of the legislature.

Q. 1. Were you intimately acquainted with Roberds Thomas, Esquire deceased, one of
the senate of the state of Georgia, during the last session of the legislature,
at Augusta, and did he live in your house during that session?

A. I was intimately acquainted with Mr. Thomas, he did live in my house during
that session.

Q. 2. Had you, or had you not, conversation with him on the subject of the
sale of the western territory of this state, whilst that subject was in
agitation, or before or after that time?

A. He had before, at, and after the passing the act.

Q. 3. Did he, or did he not tell you, or give you to understand, that he held
a share or shares in some one or more of the companies who purchased the lands;
and did he, or did he not, make known to you that such share or shares, were
given to him by the company or companies without being liable to pay any money
therefore, and that his certificate differed from those given to persons out of
the legislature in that respect?

A. After the passing of the act, he brought a considerable sum of money to my
house, and asked me to take care of it. I believe it was two thousand dollars,
on which I asked him, how he got it, or if he got it for his proportion of the
land, or words to that effect. He said it is nothing to you, take care of it;
and smiled.

Q. 4. Are you, or are you not, intimately acquainted with some one or more of
the grantees of said companies; and have you not heard some one or more of them
say, that the said Roberds Thomas, did receive a gratuitous certificate for a
share or shares in the purchase, and that he would not be content with one in
the usual form?

A. I am acquainted with the grantees of the companies; I never heard it from
any of them.

Q. 5. Have you, or have you not, heard the said Roberds Thomas say, that he
received any sum or sums of money from any of the companies, or any individual
of those companies, either in consideration of his share or shares, or
otherwise, for being in favor of the sale of the land; or have you not heard
any member of either said companies declare, that the said Roberds Thomas did
receive any sum or sums of money for or on account of such shares, or
otherwise, from any of the members of the said companies, for that
consideration?

A. I did not, but had my own opinion.

Q. 6. From every circumstance, which has come to your knowledge, do you, or do
you not know or believe, that the said Roberds Thomas or any of the members of
the last legislature, were absolutely interested in the purchase of the western
lands, or did receive money or other things to induce them or him to vote for
the sale thereof?

A. I do not know, but I suppose they were from general supposition.

Q. 7. Did you, or did you not, understand from the question you put to Roberds
Thomas, when he brought you the money, and the manner in which he answered it,
that he had received the money for his vote in the legislature, or being in
favor of the sale of the land?

A. I did suppose from a knowledge of Mr. Thomas's circumstances, that he could
not have got that sum of money, unless it had been in that way either directly
or indirectly.

Q. 8. Do you, or do you not, know the associates of the respective companies?

A. I do not. -- Mrs. Longstreet executed a renunciation of dower of lands,
belonging to the Georgia company, in favor of Mr. Mather.

Signed PHILIP CLAYTON. Sworn to as before.

Sixth.
JAMES TERRELL, Esquire being duly sworn, says, that Thomas Raburn, Esquire one of
the members of the last legislature, said in his presence, some small time
after the rising of the general assembly, that he, the said Raburn, had
purchased a part of the western land, during that session, and whilst he was a
member of the house of representatives, and that he had sold it again.

Signed, JAMES TERRELL. Attested as before.

Seventh.
JOHN SHEPHERD, Esquire a member of the last legislature, at Augusta, being duly
sworn, says, that just before the bill for the disposal of the western lands,
came before the house at the last session, he had frequent conversations with
William Longstreet, Esquire another member of the legislature, who recommended to
the deponent strongly to be in favor of selling the lands; and if he would, he
should come in for shares to the amount of one hundred thousand acres. The
deponent said he did not think it was right to sell the lands; but the said
Longstreet told him if he would, he might make a fortune for himself and family
forever, or words to that effect: The deponent said it would be injurious to
the community, and it would be displeasing to our constituents to dispose of
their rights. The said Longstreet then said it was no matter, that the deponent
nor himself need not care, provided they could not get the land, whether they
ever came there again, or words to that effect. That the deponent had a
conversation with Philip Clayton, at the State-House, about the 23th of
December 1794, concerning the lands, when said Clayton urged the deponent to go
home. That the same evening, the said Clayton, called the deponent into his
office, and told the deponent, that provided that he would give him, the said
Clayton, an order on the speaker for his warrant, which he said, by his
calculation, was twenty eight pounds, and go home immediately, and return no
more, that he would give the deponent seventy pounds; the deponent answered, he
had business up town, and returned to him no more that night. A few evenings
afterward, the said Clayton told the deponent, that he need not be angry with
him, for that it was at the request of general Gunn, and he would pay the
expense.

Signed JOHN SHEPHERD. Sworn to as before.

Eighth.
DAVID GLENN, being sworn, says, that he went down to Augusta during the last
session of the legislature, while the act for the sale of the western lands was
under the deliberation of the general assembly; that he put up with Mr.
Wilkinson, and Mr. Shepherd, two members of the assemby, at M'Tiers, in
Augusta; that he frequently talked with Mr. Wilkinson on that subject, and
advised him not to agree to sell it, for it would hurt his popularity; that the
said Wilkinson said, it would not, for that he thought it was best. That after
the deponent found the land would be sold, he was desirous to get a part of it,
and applied to Mr. Cox, one of the grantees in one company, to know if he could
get a part; that Mr. Cox told the deponent he could not, for that all the
shares were taken up; that he then applied to the said Reuben Wilkinson, to
know if he could get him a part, who said he could, and did let the deponent
have a share, which was in the name of the said Reuben Wilkinson, and was for
about twenty-seven thousand acres, or thereabout, subject to a deduction. The
deponent further says, that he frequently heard Reuben Wilkinson say, after
the legislature rose, that he should make a great deal of money by that
measure. That during the sitting of the legislature, Mr. Longstreet frequently
urged the deponent to try to prevail on Mr. Shepherd, another member, to go
home; the deponent said he could not influence Mr. Shepherd. The deponent
understood and believed, that the said Longstreet wished to get Mr. Shepherd to
go home, to prevent him voting against the sale of the lands. That he likewise
had a conversation with Mr. Wilkinson, who also asked the deponent if Shepherd
would not go home: The deponent answered he did not know; when Wilkinson
replied, "By God, I wish he would." The deponent further says, that before
the assembly rose, and before the Governor signed the bill, he, the said
Wilkinson, showed the deponent two written certificates, for four shares each,
or for a certain number of acres, the deponent does not precisely recollect
which, said certificate did not mention that any sum was to be paid for them --
They were signed by Nathanial Pendleton, chairman, he believes. That
afterward, the said Wilkinson showed the deponent two printed certificates
from the Tennessee company; one from the Georgia company, for fifty six
thousand acres, signed James Gunn, Matthew M'Allister and George Walker, he
believes; and two printed certificates from the Georgia Missisippi company.
That the said Wilkinson informed the deponent, that the first two written
certificates had been given up, and that he had received the last two printed
ones in lieu thereof.

Signed DAVID GLENN. Sworn to as before.

Ninth.
ROBERT FLOURNOY, Esquire, being duly sworn, says, that the session of the
legislature before the last, he made an acquaintance with Judge Pendleton; that
the said Judge Pendleton then contemplated and made proposals to the
legislature to purchase a part of the vacant territory; that he then offered
the deponent a share, provided that the business succeeded, that not being the
case, the deponent attended at the last session, when that subject came on the
carpet again; that then William Long street called on the deponent one morning
at his lodgings, and informed him, that he the deponent was set down for a
share of seventy-five thousand acres in the Georgia company; that the deponent
was informed that he had been set down by the influence of of general Gunn.
This deponent further says, that the meetings of the Georgia Missisippi
company were held at the deponents quarters; that he was present at some of
their meetings; that during the passage of the act for the disposal of the
western lands, he thinks general Gunn sent for the deponent and asked him if he
was intimate with Henry Mitchell, Esquire a senator from the country of Warren, the
deponent answered he was; general Gunn then requested the deponent to go to him
the said Mitchell, and propose to him, to take a share of seventy-five thousand
acres of lands, on the same terms of the other purchasers, and at the same time
to urge him to vote for selling the lands: The said Gunn mentioned that captain
Rains had a share of fifty-six thousand acres or thereabouts, who was a brother
in law to Mr. Mitchell, but that Mr. Mitchell should have a share exclusive of
that; the deponent did make such a proposal, which Mr. Mitchell refused: The
deponent further says, that the said general Gunn requested him at some time
during that session, and before the bill for selling the lands was passed, to
go to Roberds Thomas, a member of the senate from Hancock county, and know if
he was earnest in the business, for that he was fearful he did not intend to be
uniform, for he was afraid the fellow was frightened, or words of that nature;
that the deponent did call on Mr. Thomas for that purpose, who told him that he
meant to be uniform: The deponent after the rising of the legislature, saw the
said Thomas in the streets of Augusta, when the said Thomas made this
observation, "they blame me for speculation, now I will speculate, Flournoy,
you have been speculating all your life, and I will make more money in two
years than you have made in your whole life," the deponent replied, I believe
you have made more in two months, or less time.

Signed, ROBERT FLOURNOY. Attested as before.
Robert Flournoy, Esquire says that Roberds Thomas, Esquire in a conversation on the
subject before the meeting of the last legislature, told the deponent he should
be in favor of the sale, as he thought it would be an advantage to the state; if
it came forward in a favorable shape: The deponent further says, that general
Gunn likewise told the deponent during the sitting of the legislature, that no
member of the legislature should or could expect to have a share if he did not
vote for the bill. R. F.



Tenth (abridged.)
JAMES SIMMS, Esquire (representative from Columbia county) says, that in frequent
conversation with Roberds Thomas (a senator) he advised said Thomas not to vote
for the sale of the lands; That said Thomas replied, that there was a chance of
making something clever, and that he would take care to make himself secure,
before he gave his vote; That while the bill for the disposal of the western
lands was on the carpet, general Gunn called on the deponent and told him, that
he was fearful the bill would not pass; for that Luke Mann, Esquire (a senator) had
that day voted against the bill. Gunn then said, Simms, I suppose you are a
poor man and you now have an opportunity of making something handsome for
yourself and family. If you will prevail on them to vote for the bill, I will
GIVE you 50,000 acres of land. -- And said Gunn farther told the deponent, that
he would give him the same, if he would get Mr. Woods (a senator) to vote for
it or any other member of the senate. -- The deponent further says, that two
of the senators, John King and Samuel Wright, hearing him express himself
opposed to granting the lands, told the deponent, that he ought not to oppose
it; for that he might make something clever, if he would come into the measure,
or words to that effect.

Eleventh.
BURRELL POPE, Esquire one of the members of the last, and present senate of this
state, being duly sworn, says, that being a member of the senate, at the last
session of the legislature, he lodged at Mr. Herberts, in Augusta, with Mr.
Harrison Musgrove, then a member of the house of representatives, from the same
county; that one evening whilst the bill for disposal of the western territory
was on its passage, the said Musgrove told the deponent he had found out more
than ever he knew before, that he had discovered there were two shares in
Cummings's company, reserved for himself, and for every member that would take
them, but that he did not know he should take them. The deponent further says,
that at another time the said Musgrove said to the deponent, friend Pope, I am
authorized to tell you, that you can have one hundred guineas for your part; to
which the deponent answered, he had no part; that at another time the said
Musgrove further told the deponent, he might get five hundred silver dollars.

Signed, BURRELL POPE. Sworn to as before.

Twelfth.
HENRY G. CALDWELL, Esquire being sworn, says that during the sitting of the last
convention at Louisville, the deponent had a conversation with general Gunn,
when the said Gunn asked the deponent who was to be governor next year, the
deponent said he had heard judge Stith mentioned; the said Gunn shook his head
and said, "it would not do, that Stith had been ungrateful to his poor
relations, for that he had made a great deal of money by the speculation, and
had not been generous to them," the deponent then asked the said general Gunn,
how much judge Stith had made by that business, general Gunn answered, thirteen
thousand dollars; the deponent then asked the said Gunn if the said Stith had a
share in the lands; to which general Gunn gave no direct answer, but said that
he had engaged to give judge Stith thirteen thousand dollars, for his influence
in passing the law, for disposal of the lands, that if the law passed, Stith
was to have the money; that the law had passed, and that in consequence, he had
given him a draft for the money, and he either had received or would receive it.

Signed, HENRY G. CALDWELL. Sworn to as before.

Thirteenth (abridged.)
DAVID B. MITCHEL, (a member of the last and present legislature) deposes that
Thomas Wylly (a senator) told him that he sold a share, which he held in one of
the companies to one Wilson, a merchant in Augusta, for which he got a negro
fellow, named Dulin and that he had some money besides, which was paid him on
account of said share; and said Wylly further told the deponent that he would
make eight or ten negroes by the shares, which he held in the different
companies: -- that the deponent told said Wylly, that he had not made as much
as some others of the senate had when the said Wylly observed -- that he had
engaged too soon -- that he was not so lucky as some of them, who had held off
until the last.

Fourteenth.
HENRY MITCHEL, a senator from the county of Warren, in the last and present
general assembly, being duly sworn, says, that during the sitting of the last
legislature, at Augusta, the deponent was sent for by Mr. Cummings, one of the
Grantees of the Georgia Missisippi company to his house, where in conversation
about the sale of the western territory, the said Mr. Cummings asked the
deponent his opinion as to the propriety of such sale, the deponent answered it
was a subject which would come before him in senate, and consequently he did
not think proper to form his opinion, before it did come forward; that the said
Mr. Cummings further told the deponent, that provided he thought it right to
sell the land, that he should not be precluded from having a share, although a
member, for that the companies had made provision for shares for all the
members, provided they thought fit to take them.

Signed, HENRY MITCHELL. Sworn to as before.

Fifteenth.
JAMES M'NEIL, Esquire a member of the representative branch of the legislature,
and now a member of senate, being duly sworn, says, that in a short space of
time after the adjournment of the last legislature, he was in the town of
Augusta, in company with Andrew Innis, who told him that being one of the
associates contemplated in an act, passed by the aforesaid session, for
disposing of a part of the western territory of this state, that the purchasers
and their associates, were reduced to the necssity of passing a credit in favor
of Roberds Thomas, then senator of Hancock county, as an associate, for the
full amount of eight clear shares of land without his paying one shilling for
the same, whereby they did procure the vote and interest of him the said
Thomas, in passing the aforesaid act; and after the legislature adjourned, the
said Roberds Thomas was alarmed, and did propose to sell or let his eight
shares as aforesaid revert to the Grantees and their associates for a certain
sum, not less than three, nor more than five thousand dollars, which proposal
was acceded to; and that he as one of the associates, was called on for his
proportional part of the aforesaid sum, which he did pay, whereby the claim of
the aforesaid Roberds was extinguished, for and in behalf of the Grantees and
their associates, or words to that effect.

Signed, JAMES M'NEIL. Proved as before.

Sixteenth (abridged.)
JOHN THOMAS deposes, that he does not believe that the companies gave Roberds
Thomas any moneys, and that if he had a large sum of money, he must have got it
by the sale of the lands or shares, which the companies had given him, as he
supposes.

Seventeenth (abridged.)
JAMES LUCAS deposes, that Roberds Thomas, Esquire informed him that the companies
had let him have a share or two in said lands: Also that Reuben, Wilkinson (a
member of the legislature of 1795) informed the deponent that he had a share in
the Tenessee Company.

Eighteenth (abridged.)
CAPT. ROBERT RAINES deposes, that during the session of the last legislature
and previous to the passing of the act, Philip Clayton, Esquire treasurer of the
state, called on the deponent, and informed him, if you could prevail on Mr.
Mitchell, a member of the senate in that legislature, and the brother in law of
this deponent to go home, he the deponent might have five hundred dollars,
pounds or guineas, this deponent does not remember which, and any appointment
from the legislature he would ask, which was in their power to give. The said
Clayton observed at the same time, that as the deponent was the brother of Mr.
Mitchell, he thought he might have influence enough with him to prevail on him
to go home, as the act would be passed whether he went home or not; to which
the deponent made some slight reply. -- And the said Clayton then said, he
hoped the deponent would not think any thing of him, for he was authorized to
say what he had. And this deponent further says, that some time on or about
the first of August last, he was in Augusta, and saw Richard Worsham, a member
of the last legislature there, who had a share in the Georgia company, commonly
called Gunn's company, and was offering the same for sale to Mr. Maher; that
this deponent also saw Reuben Wilkinson, a member of the last legislature, in
Augusta, at the same time, who informed this deponent he had shares in the
purchase of the western lands, and that he wished to sell them.

Signed, ROBERT RAINES. Sworn to as before.

Nineteenth.
ANDREW BAXTER, being duly sworn, makes oath, that some time previous to the
passing of the first bill, for the disposal of the western territory of this
state by the last legislature; the deponent being at Augusta, and conceiving it
a step hurtful to the country, thought it his duty to give his thoughts to the
representation of his county, which was Hancock, and accordingly called on the
senator Roberds Thomas, and reprobated the act, which the said Thomas
vindicated; that the deponent told him that it would be generally thought he
was interested, if he voted in favor of the bill when it was so generally
disapproved of by his constituents, to which the said Thomas replied, that he
did not know that he was interested, but that those who voted in favor of the
bill, were provided for in the articles of the different companies, upon which
the deponent replied, he should consider that as indirect bribery.

Signed, ANDREW BAXTER. Sworn to as before.

Twentieth.
WILLIAM SALLARD, of the county of Hancock, being duly sworn, makes oath, that
on or about the 22d, 23d, or 24, days of January, 1795, he the deponent was at
Augusta, procuring some articles, and disposing of some tobacco, and that
during the said term he was at general Glasscock's, one of the grantees of the
western territory; that a conversation took place between the general and
himself, relative to it and concerning Roberds Thomas* (the senator in the
legislature, which disposed of it) for the said county of Hancock, that the
general asked the deponent what the people of Hancock thought of Thomas and if
they would kill him; the deponent replied he did not know they would kill him
but that he stood a great chance of hugging a sapling, or words to that effect,
for they had an idea Thomas was bribed: The general replied that he did not
know that he was bribed, but that he had a good deal of the land; that he
himself had purchased some of the shares, and had paid himself, with a Mr.
Nightingale, to Thomas, 1700 dollars to the best of the deponent's
recollection, and 400 dollars to John Thomas as he believes, Roberds Thomas's
brother, for the land; that the general further said, the other companies he
expected had also paid the said Roberds Thomas as much money, for lands or
shares, as he had paid; that he yesterday in his way down, met with John
Thomas, the said Roberds Thomas's brother, who acknowledged to the deponent,
that he had received money from general Glascock.

Signed, WILLIAM SALLARD. Proved as before.
From these depositions, it appears that the companies well understood that
indirect bribery was more decent and successful than direct bribery -- that a
settled plan was laid and carried into effect, to interest as many of the
members (as might be) in the companies shares -- that some were to have shares
and to pay for them, relying on the certain advantage of buying at the rate of
500,000 dollars the sum proposed, instead of 800,000 dollars (the sum which
might have been had.) These, however, were to have assurances of certain
profit. Another class were to have shares without paying for them and the
number of shares were to be apportioned to the influence of the members; but
none were to have shares, unless they voted in favor of selling to the
companies. Another class of members were to be sent home on some pretense. All
were to have a fair chance of making something handsome for themselves and
their families. In the midst of this management A FORLORN HOPE appears to
purchase member's rights.

Never was an army better officered, manned or equipped, and as the event has
proved, their measures and maneuvers were successful. Conspicuous in the ranks
were GUNN, GLASSCOCK, LONGSTREET and NIGHTINGALE -- "Unto such was given power,
as scorpions have power and their power was to hurt men;" as the northern
purchasers have severely experienced.



THE measures taken to develope this transaction, were rational and deliberate.
By the month of May, 1795, the minds of the people were expressed by petitions,
to the convention, which produced the following ordinance.

GEORGIA. State-House, Louisville. In Convention, Saturday 16th May, 1795.
On motion by Mr. M'Intosh, seconded by Mr. O'Neal.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Convention, that from the numbers,
respectability and ground of complaint stated in the sundry petitions laid
before them, that this is a subject well meriting legislative deliberation.

Ordered therefore, That such petitions be preserved by the secretary, and laid
before the next legislature at their ensuing session.

A true extract from the jounrnal. THOMAS JOHNSON, Secretary.

In the House of Representatives, Friday the 15th of January, 1796.
These petitions and the doings of the convention were read, whereupon a
committee, consisting of nine respectable members were named, of which Genesis
Jackson, the present governor of that state was chairman. -- The committee
devoted their attention faithfully to the subject and on the 21st of the same
month reported, that they had taken the same under their serious consideration,
and lament that they are compelled to declare, that the fraud, corruption and
collusion by which the said act was obtained, and the unconstitutionality of
the same evinces the utmost depravity in the majority of the late legislature.
It appears to your committee that public good was placed entirely out of view
and private interest alone consulted, that the rights of the present generation
were violated, and the rights of posterity bartered by the said act: That by it
the mounds of equal rights were broken down, and the principles of aristocracy
established in their stead.

The committee whilst they thus with shame and confusion, acknowledge that such
a legislature, entrusted with the rights of their constituents should have
existed in Georgia, cannot however forbear to congratulate the present
legislature and community at large that there are sufficient grounds, as well
with respect to the unconstitutionality of the act, as from the testimony
before the committee of the fraud practiced to obtain it, to pronounce that the
same is a nullity of itself and not binding or obligatory on the people of this
state, and they flatter themselves, that a declaration to that purport, by a
legislative act, will check that rapacious and avaricious spirit of
speculation, which has in this state, overleaped all decent bounds, and which
if it were to continue, would totally annihilate morality and good faith from
among the citizens of the state.

The commit for this purpose beg leave to report, "an act for declaring the
said usurped act void, and for expunging the same from the face of the public
records," and they also herewith report in part, testimony, before them fifteen
affidavits, taken on the subject of the fraud practiced to obtain it.

On Saturday the 30th of January 1796.
The bill now called the rescinding act being prepared, "on the question, shall
the bill pass, the yeas and nays being required are as follows:

Messrs. Abercrombie, Bird, Baily, Butler, Clarke, Cooper, Cobbs, Dixon,
Elholm, Emanuel, Eammis, Few, Franklin, Frazer, Graybill, Good, Gignilliat,
Hammond, Jno. King, Those. King, Jno. Jones, Jas. Jones, J. Jackson, A. Jackson,
Jamieson, Lawson, Lewis, Lanier, Mitchell, R. Moore, Merwether, Mickell, J.
Moore, Piles, Pugh, Rutherford, Rawls, Skinner, Scott, Stacy, Simms, Treutlen,
Terrill, Swain.

Yeas, 44. Messrs. M'Intosh, Randolph, Watkins. Nays, 3.

Resolved, That the said bill do pass under the title aforesaid.

Extract from the minutes, JAS. M. SIMMONS, Clerk.

THE depositions here presented need no other commentary, than the able and
practical one made on them by the rescinding act. I have endeavored to notice
summarily the arguments against this act in one or another part of these
numbers. They have been of every description. Whatever could opiate the
reflections or brighten the prospects of the Georgia sellers has been improved;
but no one has met the rescinding act at the point, where it concentres all its
strength; which is in THE SOVEREIGNTY OF AN INDEPENDENT STATE. This stands
above all the arguments opposed to it, and will continue so to do, till some
one will find a power mighty enough to control it.

THE rescinding act of the United States, in respect to their promise to pay
Spanish milled dollars for continental bills, and the acts of the several
states, which rescinded their plighted faith for the payment of their notes and
bills, were never called in question; although these acts involved property to
the amount of millions, and affected subjects, whose meritorious services and
honest earnings of the bills or notes were never doubted. This rescinding
resulted from the necessity of the case, and became irresistible BY REASON OF
THE VERY SOVEREIGNTY, WHICH PASSED IT. But now, where necessity and equity were
combined with this sovereignty, a rescinding act must become instantly void --
because purchasers of members rights are in danger of suffering. The first
rescinding acts contemplated bills, purporting to be equal to Spanish dollars.
The last operated on deeds purporting to convey fee simples. The bills and the
deeds were equally deceitful: yet the sufferer by the first is left to lament
that he trusted to a power beyond his control; while the purchasers of members
rights are to bid defiance to the power which has already crushed them.

THIS vain gasconading, these nice distinctions result not from reason and
nature; not from precedents and principles; but from judgments perverted by
money and from the miserable items of a fee-table.

NOT being so well versed in the indexes of law books as the opposers of the
rescinding act, I beg leave to close this number with a fable, the due
application of which will render further discussion of the merits of this act
unnecessary.

ONCE on a time, a lion and a fox entered into a treaty of mutual convenants;
but the fox had craftily drawn the lion into articles, wholly foreign from the
object of the treaty, and very inconvenient for the lion to perform. The lion
discovering the treachery determined on redress when a fair opportunity should
present. Soon after, Reynard took the liberty of breaking a very essential
article; upon which the lion, without ceremony, put him to death.

THE foxes assembled and complaining bitterly of cruelty and tyranny,
determined, 1st. That the lion had no right to put Reynard to death. 2d. That
the question about the breach of treaty ought to have been tried by a court of
foxes. And 3d. That as the lion had no right to kill Reynard, and as the
question ought to have been tried, therefore Reynard was not dead. Able
counselors were named to make out the case, and report their opinion. After
much consultation they reported as follows:

1st. SUPPOSE Reynard was now alive -- and suppose a lion was no stronger than
a fox -- then he could not kill a fox; therefore Reynard is still alive. 2d.
SUPPOSE a lion never before killed a fox for breach of treaty; then the lion
had nothing to justify him in doing it; therefore he has not done it, and
therefore Reynard is still alive. 3d. As Reynard had, after making the treaty,
lived for a considerable time -- and as his breath had vested in him; therefore
the lion could not take it away and therefore Reynard is certainly alive. All
which was humbly submitted.
As the burden of the business was Reynard's alive, and as the whole assembly
of foxes wished to believe it, the report was unanimously adopted; and the
counselors were re-appointed to devise and report ways and means for carrying
this judgment into effect.

THIS was an arduous task; but they at length reported that as this lion was
very powerful aad lawless, it would be best to wait for his decease, and
perhaps his successor might be as small and weak as a mouse.

To this it was objected, that as the life of a fox was far short of that of a
lion, the present generation would not have the honor of carrying their
judgment into effect. They therefore appointed a committee to wait on the lion
with a copy of their judgment and to demand his assent to their propositions.
This being delivered, the monarch of the forest replied -- Your reasoning may
be very good; if you will appoint one of your number to enforce it upon me, I
will receive him in the antichamber where your Reynard-alive is deposited; and
further tell your assembly, that when foxes deal with lions they must deal with
good faith.

THAT Reynard was actually dead had been a sore thing at the bottom of all
their measures: but good reasoning had hitherto kept them up. Now this severe
answer returned to the company produced a sadness, which led to the following
humbling resolves:

1st. IN FUTURE NEVER TO BE TOO CUNNING FOR OUR OWN INTEREST. 2d. NEVER TO MAKE
TREATIES WITH LIONS.
Georgia Speculation Unveiled. CONCLUSION. ADDRESSED TO THE NORTHERN PURCHASERS.
IN these numbers I have endeavored to combine, in a narrow compass, a variety
of considerations, calculated to present this subject to you as wholly
different from all others. My aim has been to unite you in a belief that you
have obtained nothing for your money or your notes. Such an union would lead to
a combination of measures for your relief wholly irresistible.

BEFORE I pledge my confidence in such a combination, it may be prudent to
consider the different classes of men who are to unite -- the obstacles to this
union -- and to sum up the real strength of this subject.

THE first class is of those, who placed implicit confidence in all the stories
of the sellers -- who had amused themselves with the delicious idea of immense
wealth -- and had anticipated the splendour of fortune. It is hard for these to
unbelieve -- to renounce their idol -- to part with their phantom -- to reflect
that they have been duped.

OF a second class are a few, who have paid little attention to this subject;
who have a general idea, that states cannot rescind their grants; who have
advanced but little money; who have heard much profane abuse against Jackson
and his party and have been willing to receive it as argument.

OF a third class are some, who partly assisted by the sellers and partly by
their own hopes have made up a sort of system about this business, out of very
mixed ingredients -- and after very liberal abatements of the fraud -- very high
conceptions of the sacred nature of a grant -- some suggestions that the
rescinding act will be rescinded and that if it is not, why it is no great
matter, they believe it will all come out right in the end.

OF a fourth class are a few, who have no opinion of their own; who ask every
man they meet, what he thinks of the Georgia business; who tremble at the
shaking of a leaf; who feel some resentment at the fraud; but dare not utter it
-- lest these lion-like purchasers of members rights should eat them up; but
who are willing to have a stout defense made in their causes, if they can only
keep clear of the bustle.

THE fifth and most numerous class is of those, who feel indignant at the
swindling and fraud practiced in the sales; who feel practically that the
rescinding act is fatal to their claim: who are willing to receive every
rational proposition in favor of a defense in their causes -- and to unite in
measures well adapted for that end.

BUT in the sheeps-cloathing of sufferers are some who are hand and glove with
the sellers, who (though apparent purchasers) never paid a farthing; but who
are receiving commissions and rewards for their services -- and another class
not much better, who partly bought and partly did not buy -- have partly paid
and partly not -- who are in habits of friendship with the insidious sellers,
and who by fawning and sycophancy expect to make fair weather. Such, though
they differ much in character from the harmless animal who licks the hand, just
raised to shed his blood, will meet a similar fate. There is no dependence on
men, who have passed the bounds of morality, truth and honesty. They who depend
on them lean on the staff of a bruised reed that will surely pierce them.

THE first class of obstacles to a union is, the policy of the sellers to
divide and conquer. They have separated companies, and have thus rendered them
less formidable.

THE second is, that, what is every body's business is nobody's. Almost every
one neglects attention to this subject, calculating that his single exertions
will not avail on a question of this magnitude.

THE third is, the artful impositions of the sellers and their confederates.

THEY tell you, that the legislature of 1795, was uniformly respectable; and
that of 1796, was contemptible -- that the people of influence in Georgia
despise the rescinding act -- that Genesis Jackson is the mainspring of motion,
and that whenever he retires, the granting act will be restored. But they
carefully conceal from you the measures taken to get members into the first
legislature, who might be bribed. They do not tell you that the offer of
800,000 dollars was a bona fide offer. They say nothing about the armed force,
which came to the legislature to prevent the passing of the granting act, and
that these were not dispersed, till assurances were given, that if the act
should pass, it should be rescinded. They do not tell you, that after the act
passed, the people were astonished to find the companies composed of some of
the most influential men in the state -- nor do they tell you, that most of
these men denied any knowledge of their names being improved, and indignantly
refused to have any connection with the business: nor do they tell you, that on
this discovery, there was a general burst of indignation from among the people
against the granting act -- that the indignation of the constituents of ROBERDS
THOMAS was not confined to making him hug a sapling, according to the last
deposition; but that they put him to death. They do not tell you, that all the
newspapers, published in the state, expressed unequivocally this indignation.
They say nothing of the doings of the convention in May 1795; nor of the
general preparations of the people of the state for the rescinding of the
grant. They cautiously conceal their own exertions to counteract the spirit of
the people by attempting a re-election of the members in favor of the granting
act -- their conviction, that they could not procure more than five to their
purpose; the fact that they got but three; their coming to the northward and
effecting their sales, while knowing all these things.

YET testimony of these things is now in our possession, and would be
published, were they not reserved to be presented to the public in the trial of
pending causes.

As to the character of the two legislatures, it is unquestionably true, that
the characters of Mr. Watkins and some others in favor of the granting act are
respectable; but no amount of individual character can wash away the stain,
which the rescinding act has indelibly fixed on the legislature of 1795.

As to GOV. JACKSON, that he is a man of genius, resources and patriotism, and
that he resigned an eminent rank in the federal legislature, to interest
himself against the obnoxious act is true, and that he had influence in
effecting it is equally true. But among the other names in favor of this
rescinding act are also others of genius, resoures and patriotism.

IT is beyond a question that the body of the people approve the rescinding
act; else why are all the Yazoo men, as they are termed, peaceably turned out
of office? Why are the legislative, judicial and executive offices of the state
filled with the advocates of the rescinding act? Why has the same legislature
been continued? Are we to be told in one breath that Genesis Jackson has no
influence except among a miserable rabble? And in the next that his influence
over all the departments of government is uncontrolable and wholly
irresistible, and that when he is out of the way, the great men, the rich men,
and the mighty captains will dare to show their heads? These are miserable
cobweb deceits.

FROM the real merits of this subject, men are drawn by interest and credulity
to numerous chimeras -- each of which, after serving its purpose of delusion,
will leave them. They are told that the lands are now worth more than they
cost. Who tells this? The sellers. Why then do not the sellers give practical
proof of this declaration by taking back the lands? They say they are not able;
but the truth is that they would rather pursue you, through all the labyrinths
of law, for a single cent per acre, than take back the lands. They are now
rending together the remnants of their shattered fortunes to pay immense
charges in prosecuting for the recovery of some notes, which, if wholly
undisputed, would not bring 5 s in the pound. They are telling that the
granting act is good. Any man, who really believed this, would take back the
lands; for, the granting act being good, and the lands worth what they declared
them to be, they are worth as much now and be they worth ever so little are
worth more than their notes in suit, by the certain difference of all the cost
and charge of sustaining the suits.

MIND not their words, but look at their actions. When they tell you that
others have settled and paid in full, deny it; for there are ten chances to one
that what you would understand by a settlement has not been made. Some who were
most powerfully under the influence of their delusions have paid in full; that
number is small. Others, fearing the expenses of law, have compromised and paid
5 per cent. Sales to the amount of 70,000 dollars in the Georgia Missisippi Co.
have been vacated and the notes given up, on payment of 5 per cent. by the
purchasers, and other negociations are making to the same purport.
The great body of the purchasers will never pay.

BUT the fourth obstacle is, The books, and the opinions of Lawyers.

My ideas on the application of books to this subject have been already
expressed -- and as to Lawyers opinions, you may have observed, that men, who
have such causes to advocate as those of the Georgia sellers, generally employ
a great number of Lawyers. They wish to monopolize the possession. Hence you
are in the way of hearing a great deal of law and a multitude of opinions,
better calculated (I trust) to alarm than to convince you. Such are the
following. That you must certainly pay the scrip notes and as to negotiable
notes there can be no question about them, all the decisions are that way, and
to this point they will refer you to the following cases, (Dyer 300. Hob. 62.
Sid. 365. Lutw. 238. 2 Mod. 62. Carth. 413. Salk. 622. pl. 1. Comb. 443. Giles
v. Heart. 3 Salk. 353. Ld. Raym. 254. S. C.) I have not been particular to see
whether any of the books or pages quoted have even a specious reference to the
cases in question. That they apply as well as any other books or cases I have
no doubt. The fact is, that the books, as they are called (meaning reports of
cases, between Aplin and Booth, and Steel and Mason, etc.) are not mighty
enough to decide a question depending solely on the law of nature and nations.
The writers of such books never conceived of a pre-emptive right, and never
heard of a sovereign independent state rescinding an act. Any attorney's clerk
may find authorities enough about FEE and GRANT and OUSTER and DISSEISIN and
what the judges of Westminster Hall have said about landed tenures; but what
these have to do with a legislative act of a sovereign state, impowering their
governor, contrary to constitution, to convey the fee-simple right of the
state, to buy land of the right owners, is beyond my conception.

THE real essential difference between this subject in every point of view and
all the subjects in those books, distances all application.

THE introduction of English books into our practice is much like our own
introduction into this country. In that country an enormous national debt, an
expensive army and navy, extravagant schemes of foreign murder and ambition,
and an incalculable civil list, "dragging its slow length along," through the
crooked paths of secret service money, sinecures and all the items of abandoned
expense, rendered it necessary for the government to command and engross the
coin and to set up the idol paper in its stead. This policy rendered it
necessary to protect and support the paper, and this necessity, originating
with bank-bills, government securities and company stocks, at length extended
its jaws to private notes, bills and bonds and the whole became fast bound in
an imperious, unseen and irresistible policy. The king's judges were
constrained to bend the whole practice of law, within these limits, to this
policy. Hence come negotiable notes. Hence the nice subtlety, that fraud and
want of consideration shall not be pleadable against notes. Hence the expedient
of turning men round to the chancery side of courts for manifest justice, or
obliging them to pay their notes and sue for the fraud.

THOUGH our system of landed tenures and our whole policy was widely variant
from that of England; yet the indroduction of all these subtleties was well
enough. It saved us from the trouble of erecting a system of common law on
common reason and our own circumstances -- it loaded our libraries with English
books -- kept us piously in mind of our mother country -- and increased the
glorious uncertainty of the law. While it always furnished one side with
abundance of precedents, it afforded the other a noble occasion of showing that
the precedents did not apply. And thus, however barren of incident a cause
might be; yet our juries, sworn to judge according to the evidence given them
in court and the laws of the state have seldom failed to be amused by the
authorities; and jury-rooms have resounded more with discussions about the
comparative merit of the cases cited from the books, than of the case which
they had solemnly engaged to decide.

ALL this was well enough, and if any of those books declare, that notes
originating out of Missisippi script or negotiable notes for the fee of land
which does not exist, or of pre-emption good for nothing, or for both under a
rescinded grant shall be recovered; or if any case can be found, justifying
such a conclusion, I will freely give up the question. But the impossibility of
any fair application has been sufficiently discussed.

I ONLY add that a note is evidence of indebtedness and like other evidences
may be deceitful. A note may have been signed or not signed by the person whose
name is subscribed to it -- it may have been give under duress; and if it has
been obtained by extreme force or fraud, or if the consideration has wholly and
manifestly failed, in innumerable instances the books will show that negotiable
bonds, bills, etc. have been avoided, both at law and in chancery. If then the
bare existence of a note is not conclusive against the maker or endorser, your
lawyers can form you a defense, combining more strength, than can be found in
the books.

LAWYERS from their habits of thinking, of combining facts and arguments, and
of public discussion, are well able to raise a system upon this unprecedented
subject; but merely as lawyers, understanding the books, they are no more
competent to manage these causes, than a mason is competent to repair the ruins
of the fall or a surgeon to amputate a tree. But if they feel confidence in
their books, let them prove by them the right of their clients to sell the sea
of these lands -- let them storm in front the sovereignty of the state of
Georgia -- and batter down the everlasting rights of the natives to the
premises; -- then shall we have an argument worth a fee.

BUT instead of this we have cases made out of suppositions; such as, suppose
the fee of the lands belonged to the state, and suppose the state honestly sold
it, why then the following cases will apply.

(Comb. 403. Ld. Raym. 154. 2 Salk. 676. pl. 3. Carth. 411. Trygarn v.
Fletcher.) Well suppose they did not own the fee, and suppose there was fraud
in obtaining the granting act, why then the following cases will be relevant.

(Hard. 336. 2 Lev. 194. And. 307. Cro. Eliz. 352. Roll. Abr. 939. Dowse v.
Jeffries.)

WELL, suppose the state has rescinded the grant: the following cases will show
that they had no right to do it;

Noy 5. Show. 321. S. C. cited. Lit. Rep. 190. Everard v. Herne. Cro. Car. 551.
March 95. Therefore the granting act is good, or at all events the question
whether it is good or not must be tried by courts.

(See Carth. 63, 64. 2 Salk. 573. Show. 46. 2 Lil. Reg. 273. 2 Inst. 411. Booth
214.)

THE purchasers must enter upon the land or preemptive right or parchment or
whatever they have got, more or less, and must be ousted and disseised by the
Creek nation, or whatever nation is on it; or they must oust and disseize the
natives -- peaceably, if it can be done, otherwise with a strong hand, or
something must be done.

(See 10 Co. 90. Doct. pl. 72, etc. 10 Co. 91. Keilw. 103. Co. Ent. 652. Doct.
pl. 73.)

OTHER authorities maintain that it must be done, whether it can be or not;
that is, that the purchasers shall not plead, that they could not oust nor be
ousted. To this purpose, see the law, in Powell, on devises. -- "Executors
shall not plead that they have no assets in their hands." This, though not
exactly in point, shows the principle on which the court went.

AGAIN suppose our clients were fraudulent in their sales; yet the suppressio
very vel suggestio falsi (suppression of the truth or suggestion of falsehood)
does not apply. The purchasers ought to have ascertained facts for themselves.
-- To this point, see

(Dyer 365. Co. Ent. 79. Rast. Ent. 254. 6. Co. 10. a. Doct. pl. 128. Doct. pl.
129.)

As to the notes, whether they originated out of fair or swindling contracts;
whether the consideration has failed, through their means or not, and whether
the proof of its failing stand on public records or private testimony; be they
obtained how they may: yet if there is only a signer to them the case is very
clear; but if there is a signer and endorser, the books are full, very full of
authorities in our favor.

(See 2 Roll. Rep. 54. Roll. Rep. 302. Cro. Eliz. 872. 6 Mod. 226. 2 Ld. Raym.
Owen 134. 3 Lev. 330. Hunlock v. Peter. Co. Lit. 102, 361. Doct. pl. 216. And.
237.

I CALCULATE that such arguments will be used, till the money which you have
advanced, shall be expended, and then will be an end of the bubble. The men,
who are spinning such fine arguments, would be ready to assist you without
reward in extinguishing a fire which was consuming your dwellings; but in a
calamity more afflicting to many of you in point of property, their profession
has set them against you, I will do them all the justice to believe that they
heartily wish a more respectable field for the exercise of their talents. No
man is so poor and humble as to be unable to wound and injure his fellow-men.
No elevation in life, profession, talents nor rewards can justify a man for
abetting a wrong. The advocate, who exerts himself to defend a felon from the
punishment of death, acts consistently with the merciful spirit of the penal
code; but he who, in any way, assists a felon to defraud his neighbors --
violates the principles of good faith -- tears the ligaments of social
intercourse, and though he may be treasuring up money against the day of want, is
treasuring up crime against the day of retribution.

THOUGH I should press moral considerations into hard service, were I to address
them to the men who have defrauded you* yet they are fairly applied to that
class of men, on whose exertions they rely for the eventual success of their
unprincipled projections.

BUT opposed to every obstacle, stands the real strength of your cause. In the
first pamphlet having suggested the different considerations, composing this
subject and in this having discussed those, which were most important, I now
proceed to present you the following general conclusions-

1st. BY the Georgia deeds, by your own deeds, by the pamphlets and by the
declarations of the sellers, you had a right to believe that you had bought the
FEE of the lands in question. This was what you bargained for, and what you are
entitled to have; for this only have your moneys been paid and your notes been
given: You are not obliged to accept any substitute: If the fee has failed, the
whole consideration of the bargains has failed: The bargains are wholly void,
and courts of chancery will compel the holders to give up your notes and refund
your money, or courts of law, exercising concurrent powers, will afford you
equal relief.

I HAVE now left the field, where books and the power of courts cannot reach;
but though the books cannot furnish nor confute your premises, they afford
abundant application, as soon as your notes, founded on those premises, are
within the cognizance of courts.

BUT the fee has wholly failed. It is not sustained by the law of nature -- by
the principles of our landed tenures -- by any precedent, nor by the policy of
the United States; but Congress has denied the existence of a fee in a similar
case. The Indians, by the very showing of the State of Facts, own rightfully
every thing about the lands, which constitutes a fee; and the sovereign people
of Georgia do not now pretend that they ever owned the fee: and there is no
person, who undertakes to quote any time, at which this fee vested in Georgia,
or any source from which they could have derived it. Every argument on the
subject of the fee is decidedly in favor of the natives, who possess it.

IT is fair therefore to conclude that you have wholly failed of that which was
the subject of your bargains, and the consideration of your notes; which
conclusion will justify the relief before proposed.

THIS selling of a fee, which did not exist, is a fraud of sufficient magnitude
to exonerate you from payment, and the proof that it was thus sold, and that it
did not exist in the sellers, is within the reach of every one of you. The
sellers adroitly calculated, (as satan did when he proposed the comeliness of
the fruit) that the word fee would be alluring to purchasers, and therefore
inserted it, computing that when that failed, a decent substitute would be
preferred to a breaking up of their bargains; but they relied too much on their
success in the first delusions, and little imagined that the spirit of an
independent people would reduce a majority to the number of three and that the
act would be rescinded with marks of detestation.

THE plausible right of pre-emption was intended as a substitute, and this to
the northern purchasers was not without its comeliness; the argument that the
companies sold in Georgia, and bought of, and sold to each other, takes nothing
from the imputation. This was all done with an eye to the event, which was to
sell again.

2d. THIS PRE-EMPTION, (as it is termed) turns out to be the most delusive of
all shadows; as unlike to a fee and as miserable a substitute as could be
conceived of. After exploring every resource, we at length find, that a right
to purchase lands of the natives is absolutely involved in a right to hold a
treaty with the natives, which right can alone be acquired from the President
of the union -- that the United States are under no express nor implicit
obligation to grant it to a state or to any individual company, in preference
to another -- that they have never granted it, for the purpose of purchase,
except when the Indians were disposed to sell -- that the native possessors of
these lands are never likely to consent to sell; for the principal nation among
them are very averse to parting with their lands.

WE therefore find, that we never had any thing more by our deeds, than a
fractional part of the declaration of the representatives of Georgia, that they
would not apply for this right to hold a treaty -- which state of Georgia was
the least likely of any in the union to obtain such a permission -- and we find
that we could never avail ourselves of this declaration in any other way, than
by application to the president (if a proper time should ever arrive) stating
as a ground of superior merit, that we had bought this declaration. This time
would not probably arrive, till the lapse of many ages, and if any of our
posterity should state to congress that their ancestors had been dupes to a set
of speculators, I trust it would not reflect much honor on us or them.

IT IS true that this permission to hold treaty has been sometimes granted to the
releasees of a state; but if our right of pre-emption, our substitute for a
fee-simple, is reduced to the pitiful chance of being THE MOST MERITORIOUS
BEGGARS FOR A RIGHT TO CHEAT INDIANS, it must be declared a most delusive
substitute, and if any thing more can be made of it, it must be done by men
more capable than I am of discerning its merits.

3d. BUT this negative, worthless declaration of the state of Georgia, which
the breath of a southern slave might have blown into its original nothingness,
has been crushed by a power mighty enough to have annihilated a fee-simple,
combined with an absolute right to deforce the occupants. The rescinding act
presents a system of fraud in the companies, which would been fatal to any
claim of whatever nature or description. Call it a fee and exclude the fraud,
and the contract has been shown to be void on principles of common law; but
introduce the fraud, which is the principal argument in the act itself, and a
new and conclusive defense in your favor is derived from this fraud.

THAT the very men, of whom you purchased were guilty of this fraud, is proved
by a cloud of witnesses. Nearly the whole legislature of 1796, acting without
any bias of private interest in a high responsible capacity, have, by a public
and solemn act, declared their belief in this testimony -- and the sovereign
people, year after year, are bearing public testimony of the integrity of their
legislators in this transaction.

FRAUD cannot be more conclusively proved, and this fraud has been practiced by
the very men, who are pursuing you for payment of your notes. Can a stronger
case be laid before a court?

WHEN these frauds are thoroughly known to our courts, the books and the
authorities will be of as little avail to the counsel, as the rocks and the
mountains will be to their clients in another day.

THE distinction, which I have taken, between that part of this subject, where
the books cannot apply -- and that part, where they may apply, is precisely
this. The subject matter of the granting act and the companies deeds -- the
means of obtaining the act -- the sovereignty of an independent state -- the
relation of such a state to the federal union -- the influence of the policy of
the union on the measures of the separate states -- the rescinding act, with
its power and consequences, are all either unprecedented or unparalled, and
could not have been treated of in the books; and as all these depend on a
system of principles, coeval only with our existence as a nation, it is
impossible that the principles in the books should be able to furnish or combat
the principles on which your cause is sustained.

FRAUD of the first magnitude has been conceived, brought forth, matured and
stands confessed before the court, at the very point of these causes, where the
books can be consistently opened -- and opened at this point, the authorities
both at law and in chancery are conclusively in your favor. At my request they
have been examined and if it was in my province to introduce them, they should
be pr^^^^ted in this place: But in the present situation of the causes pending
and to be commenced, I confine myself to remarking on the law-side of this
question -- that your script notes, your negotiable notes, your securities of
whatever description for these lands, whatever may be the form of your
conveyances stand on the same footing as counterfeit bank bills. There never
yet was a question, whether a counterfeit bill, passing through ever so many
hands, should or should not cease to be counterfeit. Can there be any more
question about negotiable notes for Missisippi script which begun in fraud,
continued by artifice and ended in nothing? Did ever the holder of a
counterfeit bill recover the amount from the bank and turn it round to the
wretch, who first passed it? Will it answer for the holder to say that he
exchanged silver for it? No! The reply of the bank is, we received nothing for
it.

As a bill must be originally good, so must a negotiable note be good, and if
it fail in any of the requisites of a good note, in the first instance, that
failure is not helped by its passing from hand to hand. This remark is true in
a qualified sense -- that is, a note must be legally signed by the maker or
endorser, and this not under any fear of bodily harm. It must be legally the
act and deed of the maker or endorser. These are absolute requisites and the
want of them cannot be supplied by any change of owners.

So a note, which, through fraud or any other cause, might have been avoided,
had the suit been in the name of the party to the fraud, is not made good, by
its having been passed from hand to hand, when that very passing was done for
the express purpose of aiding a recovery -- which is precisely true and
proveable respecting a great number and perhaps all the notes of this
description.

FROM the general knowledge of this fraud which has now obtained and of the
notes which have issued from this corrupt original, the presumption is very
strong, that no man would receive these as he would mercantile notes -- and any
circumstance, showing that in the passing of the note, passed any agreement
(either express or implied) to resund, in case a recovery should be barred on
account of the base origin of the note, the holder, however distant from the
endorser or deceiver, would fail of recovery; and this on the fairest
principles of common law. The means of defense on these and all the other notes
have been presented in the frauds, discoverable in an attempt to sell the fee
-- in the total failure of the substitute and in the necessity of a rescinding
act -- add to these the auxiliary considerations, suggested in these numbers,
add to these your own exertions, and to all, the ingenuity of your counsel --
and courts of law will sustain you.

ON the equity side of this question, I confine myself to presenting you the
following authorities, not as reaching the extent of your case; but as showing
the principles and practice of chancery courts on subjects of fraud, far less
aggravated, than what you have to plead for your relief.

STENT US BAILIS. (See Peer Williams, 2d. Vol. page 218.)
THIS was a bill to be relieved against a contract in writing for the sale of
eleven shares in the Lustring Company, which shares were never transferred, the
books of the Company being shut up, etc.

FOR the defendant, it was objected, 1st. That though this was a hard case on
the now plaintiff; yet that it had been likewise hard on the defendant, who was
not a contriver of the project; but a sufferer by it, having himself bought
stocks at high rates. 2d. That equity ought, in such cases, to stand neuter and
to let the hardship rest where the law had cast it, and at law, now the
defendant had a verdict. 3d. Though the books had been shut for some time, it
was impossible to know but that they might be open again, and that in a little
time, etc. etc.

Master of the Rolls. It is against natural justice that any one should pay for
a bargain, which he cannot have; there ought to be quid pro quo; but in this
case the defendant has sold the plaintiff a bubble or moonshine.

IT is impossible that this bargain should ever be made good to the plaintiff;
for here is proof by the company's own secretary of his having advised with
three eminent counsel, who all agreed that the company cannot justify accepting
any more transfers, and the money cannot be said to be due in conscience,
supposing the plaintiff to be incapable of coming at what he contracted for and
in consideration whereof he was to pay his money.

IF I should buy an house and before such time as, by the articles I am to pay
for the same, the house be burnt down by casualty of fire, I shall not in
equity be bound to pay for the house: and yet the house may be built up again:
but I doubt it will be impossible to set up the company again, as in the other
case the seller may do the house.

IT being four years since the contract; and the books having never been opened
since, it is to be presumed they never will.

CERTAINLY it cannot be imagined that the plaintiff would have been prevailed
upon to covenant for the payment of the money at a precise day, had he
entertained the least apprehension, that the books would never have been opened.

As to the objection that the plaintiff here might have defended himself at law
-- Matters of fraud are cognizable in equity as well as at law. The seller in
this case is the chief actor; he went to market with the bubble and since no
transfer can be made let there be a perpetual injunction and let the defendant,
at the plaintiffs charge, enter satisfaction on the judgment.

ON a rehearing, it was contended for the defendant that he was not the first
projector or inventor (of the bubble,) etc. but no opinion was had -- the cause
being adjusted by the parties.

In the case of BRODERICK US BRODERICK. (P. Will. I. vol. p. 239.)
A Devisee under a will defectively executed, represents the will duly executed
and for a small sum gains a release from the heir.

BY the Court. Either suppressio very or suggestio falsi is a good reason to
set aside any release or conveyance. Now to recite in a deed, as in this case,
that the will was duly executed when it was not, is suggestio falsi and to
conceal from the heir (as in this case) that the will was not duly executed is
suppressio very, so that both circumstances concur; so the court relieved the
heir from the release.

COLT and al' us. WOOLLASTON and ARNOLD. (P. Will. vol. II. p. 155.)
THE plaintiffs brought their bill to be repaid the two several sums of 120 l.
and 120 l. which they had paid to the defendants, as managers and projectors of
a bubble, called the Land Security and Oil Patent.

THE defendant Woollaston had (it seems) invented a project for extracting oil
out of English radishes, and got a patent for the sole exercise of this
invention; and having bought an estate for 31,800 l. called Sutton Marsh in
Lincolnshire, formerly the estate of lady Cornbury, which was then in mortgage
for 28,000 l.

IN June 1720, this Woollaston made public this project and assigned his oil
patent to the defendant Arnold, in trust for all the contributors toward the
project, which he divided into five thousand shares, valuing every share at 20
l. in order to raise 100,000 l.

AND as an encouragement and security for all the contributors, Woollaston
conveyed his purchase of Sutton Marsh to the defendant Arnold and his heirs, in
trust, in the first place, to pay off the two mortgages, being 28,000 l. and
afterward to pay to himself (the said Woollaston) 57,000 l. in all 85,000 l.
and as to the surplus which the estate would raise, it was to be for the
benefit of the contributors; the project or bubble was to be called the Land
Seurity and Oil Patent, and was represented by the defendants to be a most
advantageous project without any hazard, there being landed security given for
the benefit of the contributors.

The plaintiffs paid unto the defendant Arnold the several sums of 120 l. and
120 l. for six shares a-piece, for which Arnold gave them receipts, and the
projectors sold about 1000 tickets amounting to 20,000 l.

IN August 1720 the project failed, no oil having ever been made, or radishes
sowed on the premises.

WHEREUPON the contributors, with some resentment, called upon the projectors
for their money, which occasioned the projectors to advertise, that in six
months time, they would return the money with interest; but afterward this was
refused.

INSISTED for the defendants, that the plaintiff being acquainted with this
security as to the lands, they ought to resort thither; that there could be no
imposition in this case, because the parties had notice; and the extracting oil
out of radishes having had the sanction of a patent, could not be thought a
cheat; and as to the advertisements, it was pretended they were gained by
threatenings; and that the parties admitting they were aggrieved, had their
remedy at law.

Master of the Rolls: This is an imposition, to propose the surplus of the
value of an estate which cost but 31,800 l. after 85,000 charged upon it, which
is much more than double the value) as a security to the contributors who laid
out their money upon this project; it is giving them moonshine instead of any
thing real, and the proof is very slight, whereas it ought to have been
extremely strong; it is hard to believe, that any person would consent to be so
imposed upon And what makes it worse is, that this great sum of 57,000 l. is
reserved to the defendant the projector himself.

THE gaining the patent can be no sanction to the cheat, because the patent
does not secure the patentee, if it is not a new invention, but others may use
the same, or if it be not the first patent, the patentee is not secure from an
action; and patents of new inventions, as well as grants of other things, may
be obtained by surprise and false suggestions.

IF this were a fraud against any private or single person, a court of equity
would relieve; a fortiori, when it is a fraud against great numbers, against
multitudes, where the mischief is more extensive, and many families thereby
ruined.

IT is no objection, that the parties have their remedy at law, and may bring
an action for moneys had and received for the plaintiffs own use; for in cases
of fraud, the court of equity has a concurrent jurisdiction with the common
law, matter of fraud being the great subject of relief here.

ACCORDINGLY cases of this nature have frequently met with relief in this
court, as in Aaron Hill's case, which was a patent for extracting oil out of
beech, which was also divided into shares, (as this is) and a security proposed
and agreed to be made of lands, which came out to be terra incognita betwixt
the degrees of latitude 50 and 57; and in the principal case, the land, after
the 85,000 l. paid, seems to be worth as little as Aaron Hill's.

AND as to the pretense of gaining the advertisements by force, the
contributors were angry, and had reason to be so, and one of the contributors
(though it does not appear to have been either of the plaintiffs) threatened to
cut the defendants throats; but this all ended in an arrest of one of the
defendants, which was a lawful proceeding, and after all these threatenings
were over, the last advertisement was given out by the defendants on the 19th
of September 1720.

FURTHER it is just that the defendant Arnold, as well as the defendant
Woollaston, should be charged; for as Woollaston was the first projector and
procurer of the patent, and purchaser of the land, so Arnold was his trustee,
accepted the conveyance, was the treasurer, received the money, and gave the
receipts, was partner in the fraud, and plainly particeps criminis.

THEREFORE decree both the defendants to pay back to the plaintiffs their
principal, interest and costs.

Note; the same decree was made in the case of Spackman versus Woolldston,
which was the next cause in the paper, of the same nature, against the same
defendants, and on the same project.

IN this view of our subject will you still be amused by the sellers telling
you, that you can take possession of the lands, Congress or no Congress? --
That you can drive off the Indians, Georgia willing or not willing? And pray
could you not have been guilty of treason and violence, without purchasing? As
well might robbers comfort their victims, by telling them, that they can earn
as much more, or can indemnify themselves by robbing the next man they meet.

WILL you still be amused by being told, that perhaps Georgia may release these
lands to the United States and then you may get a title, or that perhaps they
will again have a legislature abandoned enough to restore the granting act?
Shall every new position in which this floating bubble can be presented charm
you with new colors and brighten your hopes? Alas! all these attempts to amuse
you are but like the opiates administered to wounded men which lull while they
operate; but when they lose their effect, leave the patient awake to all the
horror of his pains.

YOUR lands are irretrievably gone, you have no substitute for them. Your money
has been paid to men who will probably be soon unable to refund, and if your
notes should be recovered, the loss to the amount of your whole purchases would
be a total loss. To prevent such recovery your exertions alone are necessary.
Let me request all, who have been purchasers and sufferers by this Georgia
business, to combine these exertions.

BY your success, millions of dollars now pledged on this speculation, will be
restored to the channels of industry -- languishing credit and confidence will
revive, and the records of our courts will bear standing testimony, of your
triumph -- over A SYSTEM OF FRAUD AND SWINDLING, MORE COMPLICATED IN ITS
MACHINERY AND VARIED IN ITS OPERATIONS, THAN ANY WHICH HAS DISGRACED THE
CHARACTER OF MAN IN THIS OR ANY OTHER AGE.


