

A NARRATIVE OF THE EXTRAORDINARY ADVENTURES, AND Sufferings by Shipwreck and
Imprisonment, OF DONALD CAMPBELL, ESQUIRE. OF BARBRECK: WITH THE SINGULAR HUMORS
OF HIS TARTAR GUIDE, Hassan Artaz; COMPRISING The Occurrences of Four Years and
Five Days, IN AN OVERLAND JOURNEY TO INDIA.

IN A SERIES OF LETTERS TO HIS SON.

"What is this world? Thy school. O misery!
"Our only lesson is, to learn to suffer;
"And he who knows not that, was born for nothing."
YOUNG. SECOND AMERICAN EDITION

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR EVERT DUYCKINCK and CO. NO. 110. PEARL-STREET. 1798.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE events related in the following pages, naturally became a frequent subject
of conversation with my children and my friends. They felt so much satisfaction
at the accounts which I gave them, that they repeatedly urged me to commit the
whole to paper; and their affectionate partiality induced them to suppose, that
the narrative would be, not only agreeable to them, but interesting to the
public. In complying with their solicitations, I am far from being confident
that the success of my efforts will justify their hopes: I trust, however, that
too much will not be expected, in regard to literary composition, from a person
whose life has been principally devoted to the duties of a soldier and the
service of his country -- and that a scrupulous adherence to truth will
compensate for many blemishes in style and arrangement.

CONTENTS.
PART I.
LETTER I. Page 13. Introductory. LETTER II. Page 16. Ridiculous Effects of
Ignorance, exemplified in a whimsical Story of two Dublin Aldermen. LETTER III.
Page 21. Author's Motives for going to India. Melancholy Presentiments. Caution
against Superstition. Journey to Margate. Pa^ket. Consoled by meeting General
LOCKH^ on board. Lands at Ostend. LETTER IV. Page 24. ^^^rt Account of the
Netherlands. Conduct of the Belgians. Ostend described. Wonderful Effects of
LIBERTY on the Human Mind, exemplified in the Defense of Ostend against the
Spaniards. LETTER V. Page 29. Caution against using Houses of Entertainment on
the Continent kept by Englishmen. Description of the Barqu^s. Arrives at
Bruges. Gross Act of despotism in the Emperor. Imprisonment of LA FAYETTE.
LETTER VI. Page 34. Description of Bruges. Reflections on the Rise and Decay of
Empires. Chief Grandeur of the Cities of Christendom, consisted in Buildings,
the Works of Monkish Imposture and Sensuality. Superstition a powerful Engine.
LETTER VII. Page 39. Opulence of the Bishop of Bruges. Cathedral. Church of
Notre Dame. Vestments of THOMAS A BECKET. Extraordinary Picture. Monastery of
the Dunes. The Mortification of that Order. A curious Relic. LETTER VIII. Page
45. Passage to Ghent. Cheapness of Traveling. Description of Ghent. Cathedral.
Monastery of St. Pierre. CHARITY of the Clergy. LETTER IX. Page 51. Description
of two brazen Images, erected in Commemoration of an extraordinary Act of
Filial Virtue. Journey from Ghent through Alost to Brussels LETTER X. Page 55.
al Review of Austrian Flanders. LETTER XI. Page 6^. Short description of
Brussels. Royal Library. Arsenal. Armor of Montezuma. The Enormities committed
under the Pretext of Christianity, by far greater than those committed by the
French in the Frenzy of emancipation. LETTER XII. Page 66. Brussels continued.
Churches, Chapels, Toys, Images and Pictures. A Host, or Wafer, which was
stabbed by a Jew, and bled profusely. Inns excellent and cheap. LETTER XIII.
Page 71. General Remarks on the people of the Netherlands. Account of the
Emperor JOSEPH the Second. Anecdote of that Monarch His Inauguration at
Brussels. Burning of the Townhouse. Contrasted conduct of the Belgians to
JOSEPH on his Arrival, and after his Departure. The detestable Effects of
Aristocracy. LETTER XIV. Page 79. Liege Constitution of the German Empire.
Tolerant Disposition of JOSEPH the Second, occasions a Visit from His Holiness
the Pope, who returns to Rome in disappointment. Situation of the present
Emperor. Reflections on the Conduct of Russia and Prussia to Poland. LETTER XV.
Page 86. Luxury of the Bishop of Liege. Reflections on the Inconsistency of the
Professions and Practice of Churchmen, particularly the Nolo Episcopari, which
Bishops swear at their Insta^ement. Advantages of the study of the Law in all
Countries. Liege, the Paradise of Priests. Sir JOHN MANDEVILL'S Tomb. LETTER
XVI. Page 91. Aix-la-Chapelle. A bit of Earth in a Golden Casket. Consecration
of the Cathedral, by an Emperor, a Pope, and three hundred and sixty-five
Bishops. Their valuable Presents to that Church. LETTER XVII. Page 96. Juliers.
Reflections on Religious Persecution. Cologne. Church of St. Ursula. Bones of
eleven thousand Virgin Martyrs. Church of St. Gerion. Nine hundred Heads of
Moorish Cavaliers. Reflections on the Establishment of Clergy, and the
Superiority of that of Scotland. LETTER XVIII. Page 101. Cologne continued.
Strange Ambition of Families to be thought Descendants of the Romans. Story of
Lord ANSON and a Greek Pilot. Bonne. Bridge of Caesar. Coblentz. Mentz.
Frankfort. LETTER XIX. Page 106. Frankfort described. Golden Bull. Augsburgh.
Manufactory of Watch-Chains, etc. Happy State of Society arising from the
tolerant Disposition of the Inhabitants. LETTER XX. Page 111. Augsburgh
continued. Adventure in the Convent of Carmelites. A good Friar. LETTER XXI.
Page 116. Tyrol Country, Story of Genii leading the Emperor MAXIMILION astray.
Innspruck. LETTER XXII. Page 121. Tyrolese. Innspruck Riches of the Franciscan
Church there. One Mass in it sufficient to deliver a Soul from Purgatory. Hall.
Curiosities at the Royal Palace of Ombras. Brisen. Valley of Bolsano. Trent.
LETTER XXIII. Page 126. Description of the Bishopric of Trent, Obvious
Difference between Germany and Italy. Contrast between the Characters of the
Germans and Italians Council of Trent. Tower for drowning adulterers. Bassano.
Venice. LETTER XXIV. Page 131. General Description of Venice, and Reflections
on the Venetians. LETTER XXV. Page 137. Concubinage more systematically
countenanced in Venice than London. Trieste. Lo^s of servant and Interpreter,
Sail for Alexandria. Zante. LETTER XXVI. Page 143. Adventure at the Island of
Zante. Alexandria. The Plague, and an Incursion of the Arabs. Pompey's Pillar.
Cle^patra's Obelisk, etc. Island of Cyprus, Latichea. Aleppo.
PART II.
LETTER XXVII. Page 156. Description of Aleppo. LETTER XXVIII. Page 162. Short
Account of the Turkish Constitution and Government. LETTER XXIX. Page 168.
Account of Turkish Constitution and Government continued. Moral Character of
the Turks. LETTER XXX. Page 174. Prejudices of Christian Writers, and their
Misrepresentations of the Turkish Morals and Religion. Vindication of the
latter LETTER XXXI. Page 182. Vindication of the Turks continued. Description
of a Caravan Account of Ceremonies used by Pilgrims at Mec^a. LETTER XXXII.
Page 194. Aleppo continued. Frequent Broils in the Streets. LETTER XXXIII. Page
200. Aleppo continued. Coffee-Houses. Story-tellers. LETTER XXXIV. Page 206.
Aleppo continued. Puppet-shews. Rargahuze, or Punch, his Freedom of Speech and
Satire. LETTER XXXV. Page 213. Disagreeable Adventure, which occasions a sudden
Departure from Aleppo. LETTER XXXVI. Page 220. A plan of Traveling settled.
Tartar Guide. Departure from Aleppo. LETTER XXXVII. Page 227. Description of
Tartar Guide. His conduct. Arrival at Diarbeker. Pad^n Aram of Moses. Scripture
Ground. Reflections. Description of the City of Diarbeker. Whimsical Incident
occasioned by Laughing. Oddity of the Tartar. LETTER XXXVIII. Page 233. Strange
Traits in the Tartar's Character. Buys Women, ties them up in Sacks, and
carries them 50 miles. Reflections on the Slave Trade. Apostrophe to the
Champion of the oppressed Africans. LETTER XXXIX. Page 239. Extravagant Conduct
of the Tartar, which he afterward explains satisfactorily Extraordinary
Incident and Address of the Tartar, in the Case of Santons. LETTER XL. Page
245. Explanation of the Affair by the Santons. Bigotry. Reflections. LETTER
XLI. Page 252. Arrives at Mosal. Description thereof. A Story-teller. A
Puppet-sh^w. The Tartar forced to yield to Laughter, which he so much
condemned. Set out for Bagdad. Cal^nder^ -- their artful Practices.
PART III.
LETTER XLII. Page 258. Arrives at Bagdad Whimsical Conduct of the Guide.
Character of the Turks. Short Account of Bagdad. Effects of Opinion. Ruins of
Babylon. Leaves Bagdad. Attacked by R^obbers on the Tigris. LETTER XLIII. Page
265. Arrives at Bassora. Account of that City. Leaves, it, and arrives at
Busheer. More Disappointment. Bombay. Goa. Gloomy Presentiments on leaving Goa.
A storm. LETTER XLIV. Page 271. Shipwreck. LETTER XLV. Page 278. The same.
LETTER, Page 283. Made Prisoner by some of HYDER ALLI'S Troops. Humanity of a
Lascar, Hardships. Meets a friend. Mr HALL. LETTER XLVII. Page 288. Mr. HALL'S
Misery aggravated by the Loss of a Miniature which hung at his Bosom. Sent
under a guard up the Country. LETTER XLVIII. Page 293. Arrives at Hydernagur,
the capital of the Province of Bidanore. Brought before the Jemadar. Committed
to Prison. LETTER XLIX. Page 299. History of HYAT SAHIB. Called upon to enter
into the Service of HY^ER, and offered a Command. Peremtorily refuses. Another
Prisoner, a Native. Court of Justice. Tortures and Exactions. Mr. HALL
declining fast. LETTER L. Page 307. Mr. HALL'S affecting Story. LETTER, LI.
Page 313. Pressed to enter into the Service of HYDER ALLI. Refusal. Threatened
to be hanged. Actually suspended, but let down again. Still persists in a
Refusal, and determined to undergo any Death rather than enter. Projects a Plan
to excite a Revolt, and escape. LETTER LII. Page 319. Projects to escape
defeated Laid in Irons. Intolerable Hardships. Death of Mr. HALL. LETTER LIII.
Page 324. Melancholy Situation. Cruelty. Released from Prison. Account of
HYDER, and the East India Politics in general. LETTER LIVE. Page 329. East India
Politics continued. LETTER LV. Page 333. Account of HYDER, and Indian Politics
continued. General MATHEWS'S Descent on the Malabar coast. Mounts the Ghauts.
Approaches toward Hydernagur. Author's Delight at getting into the open Air.
Delivered by an unexpected Encounter from his Guards. LETTER LVI. Page 340.
Returns to the Fort, and proposes to the Jemadar to give it up to the English.
Proceeds to the English Camp. LETTER LVII Page 345. Meeting with General
MATHEWS. Returns to the Fort with a Cowl Delivers it to the Jemadar. Leads
General MATHEWS into the Fort, and brings him into the Presence of the Jemadar.
English Flag Hoisted. Vindication of General MATHEWS from the Charge of
Peculation. LETTER LVIII. Page 351. Sets off for Bengal. Cundapore. Unable to
proceed Letter from General MATHEWS. Proceeds in an open Boat for Anjengo
Stopped by Sickness at Mangalore. Tellicherry. Anjengo. Travancore. Dancing
Girls. Palamcotah. Madura Revolt of ISIF CAWN. LETTER LIX. Page 357.
Trichinopoly. Tanjore. Burning of Gentoo Women with the Bodies of their
Husbands. Negapatnam. LETTER LX. Page 369, Leaves Negapatnam. Taken by a French
Frigate, Horrible Reflections. SUFFREIN. Character of TIPPOO SAHIB. Escape.
Arrives at Madras. LETTER LXI. Page 378. Passage to Bengal. Negotiation for
HYAT SAHIB. Mr. HASTINGS. Sir JOHN MACPHERSON. Hears from MACAULEY, Sir JOHN'S
Secretary, of ^e Servant I lost at Trieste. Jagranaut Pagoda. Vizag p^nam.
LETTER LXII. Page 383. Masulipatam. Arrives at Madras ^ermines to proceed on
HYAT'S Business to Bombay. Reaches Palamcotah. Takes sick. Recovering, crawls
to Anjengo, and thence to Bombay. Resolves to return again to Madras. LETTER
LXIII. Page 397. Adventures with a young Lady. Surat. China. Bath. Conclusion.
A JOURNEY TO INDIA, etc.
LETTER I.
MY DEAR FREDERICK,
THE tenderness of a fond father's heart admonishes me, that I should but
poorly requi^e the affectionate solicitude you have so often expressed, to
become acquainted with the particulars of my journey over land to India, if I
any longer withheld from you an account of that singular and eventful period
of my life. I confess to you, my dear boy, that often when I have endeavored
to amuse you with the leading incidents and extraordinary vicissitudes of
fortune which chequered the whole of that series of adventures, and observed
the eager attention with which, young though you were, you listened to the
recital, the tender sensibility you disclosed at some passages, and the earnest
desire you expressed that "I should the whole relate," I have felt an almost
irresistible impulse to indulge you with an accurate and faithful narrative,
and have more than once sat down at my bureau for the purpose: but sober and
deliberate reflection suggested that it was too soon, and that, by complying
with your desire at such a very early period of your life, I should but render
the great end I proposed by it abortive, frustrate the instruction which I
meant to convey, and impress the mere incident on your memory, while the moral
deducible from it must necessarily evaporate, and leave no trace, or rather
excite no idea, in a mind not sufficiently matured for the conception of
abstract principles, or prepared by practice for the deduction of moral
inferences.

I am aware that there are many people, who, contemplating only the number of
your days, would consider my undertaking this arduous task, and offering it to
your reflection, even now, premature: but this is a subject on which I have so
long and so deliberately dwelt, which I have discussed with so much care, and
examined with such impartiality, that I think I may be acquitted of vanity,
though I say I am competent to form a judgment on it. The result of that
judgment is, that I am determined to indulge you without further delay; and I
trust that you will not, on your part, render it an empty indulgence, but, on
the contrary, by turning every circumstance to its best use, by converting
every feeling which these pages may excite in your heart into matter of serious
reflection, and by making every event (as it happens to deserve) an example to
promote either emulation on the one hand, or circumspection and caution on the
other, justify me in that opinion of you on which I found this determination.

I remember, that when, at an early age, I entered upon that stage of classical
education at which you are now, at an earlier age, arrived -- I mean the Aeneid
-- I was not only captivated with the beautiful story of the Hero, in the
second Book, but drew certain inferences from parts of it, which I shall never
forget, and which afterward served to give a direction to the growth of my
sentiments on occasions of a similar nature: above all, the filial piety of
Aeneas made a deep impression on my mind, and, by imperceptibly exciting
emulation in my bosom, augmented considerably the natural warmth of my
affection and respect for my father. It is under the recollection of this
sensation, and a firm persuasion that your heart is fully as susceptible of
every tender impression, and your understanding as fit for the reception of
useful history, as mine was then, that I overlook your extreme youth, and write
to you as though you were an adult. If there be a thing on earth of which I can
boast a perfect knowledge, it is my FREDERICK'S heart: it has been the object
of my uninterrupted study almost since it was first capable of manifesting a
sensation; and, if I am not very much mistaken in it indeed, the lively
interest he feels in the occurrences of his father's life, is the result, not
of idle curiosity, but unbounded filial affection. Such an amiable motive shall
not be disappointed in its end; and while I discharge the duty of a parent in
gratifying it, I shall be encouraged and sustained under my labors by the
sanguine expectation, that he will derive from my exertions the most solid
advantages in his future progress through life. As those advantages are
expected also to extend to my dear boy JOHN, whose tender years disqualify him
from making the same immediate reflections on the various subjects as they
occur, my FREDERICK will perceive that it becomes his duty, not only as a good
son, but as an affectionate brother, to assist and enforce them upon his mind,
to explain to him the difficulties, and furnish him with his reasonings and
inferences on them, so as that they may make, as nearly as possible, equal
impressions on the heart and understanding of both. "Felix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum:" And though few have the felicity to be warned by other men's
misfortunes or faults, because they seldom make deep impressions on their
feelings, I am convinced that my sufferings and errors, as they will interest
my FREDERICK'S heart, and gratify his curiosity, cannot fail to enlarge his
understanding, and improve his conduct.

I am my dear FREDERICK, etc. D. C.

LETTER II.
HAVING, in compliance with your reiterated solicitations, determined to give
you a narrative of my journey to the East Indies, and the singular turns of
fortune which befell me there, I think it necessary, on reflection, to prepare
you still further for the reception of it, by proposing certain terms to be
fulfilled on your part; and as, in my last, I told you that I expected you,
and, with your assistance, your brother, to turn my r^tion to a more useful
account than the gratification of mere idle curiosity, by letting the moral
deducible from my errors and misfortunes strike deep and take root in your mind
-- so there are other things, which, though not so extremely important, are too
weighty to be neglected; to which I desire to direct your attention.

I believe you must have already perceived, that the well-being of yourself and
your brother is my nest -- I might, perhaps, without trespassing much upon
truth, say, my only object in life; that, to the care of your education, and
the cultivation of your m^nd, I exclusively devote my time and my thoughts; and
that, to insure your future happiness, I would sacrifice every thing I have a
right to dispose of, and risk even life itself. The time, I trust, is not far
distant, when your brother will be as well qualified to understand this as you
are now -- when both will feel alike the important duty it enforces on you --
and when your only emulation will be, who shall produce the most luxuriant
harvest to reward the labors I have taken -- to reward yourselves.

In order, therefore, on my part, to give every thing I do a tendency to the
great object of my wishes, and induce you, on yours, to contribute your share
to it, I shall give you, as I proceed in my narrative, a topographical
description of the various Countries through which I shall have occasion to
conduct you, and, as concisely as may be, an account of their manners, policy,
and municipal institutions, so far as I have been able to collect them; which I
hope will serve to awaken in you a thirst for those indispensible parts of
polite education, Geography and History. I expect that you will carefully
attend to those sciences, and that you will not suffer yourself, as you read my
Letters, to be carried ^ay by the rapid stream of idle curiosity from incident
to incident, without time or disposition for reflection: you must take
excursions, as you go along, from my Letters to your Geographical Grammar and
your Maps -- and, when necessary, call in the aid of your Tutor, in order to
compare my observations with those of others on the same places, and by those
means to acquire as determinate an idea as possible of their local situation,
laws, and comparative advantages, whether of Nature or Art. You will thus
enable yourself hereafter to consider how society is influenced, and why some
communities are better directed than others.

Here I must observe to you, that as geography is a science to which rational
conversation, as supported by gentlemen of breeding and education, most
frequently refers, the least ignorance of it is continually liable to
detection, and, when detected, subjects a man to the most mortifying ridicule
and contempt.

The ingenious GEORGE ALEXANDER STEEVENS has, in his celebrated Lecture upon
Heads, given a most ludicrous instance of this species of ignorance, in the
character of a citizen, who, censuring the incapacity of ministers, proposes to
carry on the war on a new plan of his own. The plan is, to put the troops in
cork jackets -- send them, thus equipped, to sea -- and land them in the
Mediterranean; When his companion asks him where that place lies, he calls him
fool, and informs him that the Mediterranean is the capital of Constantinople.
Thus, my dear son, has this satirist ridiculed ignorance in pretenders to
education; and thus will every one be ridiculous who betrays a deficiency in
this very indispensable ingredient in forming the character of a gentleman. But
a story which I heard from a person of strict veracity, will serve more
strongly to show you the shame attendant on ignorance of those things which,
from (...) rank, we are supposed to know; and as the fear of shame never fails
to operate powerfully on a generous mind, I am sure it will serve to alarm you
into industry, and application to your studies.

During the late American war, about that period when the KING of FRANCE was,
so fatally for himself, though perhaps in the end it may prove fortunate for
the interests of mankind, manifesting an intention to interfere and join the
Americans, a worthy alderman in Dublin, reading the newspaper, observed a
paragraph, intimating, that in consequence of British cruisers having stopped
some French vessels at sea, and searched them, France had taken umbrage! The
sagacious alderman, more patriotic than learned, took the alarm, and proceeded,
wi^h the paper in his hand, directly to a brother of the board, and, with
unfeigned sorrow, deplored the loss his country had sustained, in having a
place of such consequence as UMBRAGE ravished from it! -- desiring, of all
things, to be informed in what part of the wo^d Umbrage lay. To this the other,
after a torrent of invective against ministers, and condolence with his
affl^cted friend, answered that he was utterly unable to tell him, but that he
had often heard it mentioned, and of course conceived it to a place of great
importance; at the same time proposing that they should go to a neighboring
bookseller, who, as he dealt in books, must necessarily know every thing, in
order to have this gordian knot untied. They accordingly went; and having
propounded the question, "what part of the globe Umbrage lay in?" the
bookseller took a Gazetteer, and, having searched it diligently, declared that
he could not find it, and said he was almost sure there was no such place in
existence. To this the two aldermen, with a contemptuous sneer, answered by
triumphantly reading the paragraph out of the newspaper. The bookseller, who
was a shrewd fellow, and, like most of his countrymen, delighted in a jest,
gravely replied, that the Gazetteer being an old edition, he could not answer
for it, but that he supposed Umbrage lay somewhere on the coast of America.
With this the wise mag^strates returned home, partly satisfied: but what words
can express their chagrin when they found their error -- that the unlucky
bookseller had spread the story over the city -- that the newspapers were
filled with satirical squibs upon it -- nay, that a caracature print of
themselves leading the city-watch to the retaking of Umbrage, was stuck up in
every shop -- and finally, that they could scarcely (albeit aldermen) walk the
streets, without having the populace sneer at them about the taking of Umbrage!

Thus, my child, will every one be more or less ridiculous who appears
obviously ignorant of those things which, from the rank he holds in life, he
should be expected to know, or to the knowledge of which vanity or petulence
may tempt him to pretend.

I am sure I need not say more to you on this subject; for I think you love me
too well to disappoint me in the first wish of my heart, and I believe you have
too much manly pride to suffer so degrading a defect as indolence to expose you
hereafter to animadversion or contempt. Remember, that as nothing in this life,
however trivial or worthless, is to be procured without labor -- so, above all
others, the weighty and invaluable treasures of erudition are only to be
acquired by exertions vigorously made and unremittingly continued.

Quid munus reipublicae majus aut melius a^ferre possumus quam si juventutem
been erudiamus. -- Thus says the matchless TULLY. If, then, the education of
youth interests so very deeply a state, can it less powerfully interest him who
stands in the twofold connection of a citizen and parent? It is the lively
anxiety of my mind, on this point, that obliges me to procrastinate the
commencement of my narrative to another letter, and induces me to entreat that
you will, in the mean time, give this the consideration it deserves, and
prepare your mind to follow its instructions.

LETTER III.
A VARIETY of unpropicious circumstances gave rise to my journey to the East
Indies, while domestic calamity marked my departure, and, at the very outset,
gave me a foretaste of those miseries which fate had reserved to let fall upon
me in the sequel. The channels from which I drew the means of supporting my
family in that style which their rank and connections obliged them to maintain,
were clogged by a coincidence of events as unlucky as unexpected: the war in
India had interrupted the regular remittance of my property from thence: a
severe shock which unbounded generosity and beneficence had given to the
affairs of my father, rendered him incapable of maintaining his usual
punctuality in the payment of the income he had assigned me; and, to crown the
whole, I had been deprived, by death, of two lovely children (your brother and
sister), whom I loved not less than I have since loved you and your brother.

It was under the pressure of those accumulated affl^ctions, aggravated by the
goading thought of leaving my family for such a length of time as must
necessarily elapse before I could again see them, that I set out for India in
the month of May, in the year 1781, with a heart overwhelmed with woe, and too
surely predictive of misfortunes.

From the gloomy cave of depression in which my mind was sunk, I looked
forward, to seek, in the future, a gleam of comfort -- but in vain: not a ray
appeared -- Melancholy had thrown her sombre shadow on the whole. Even present
affl^ction yielded up a share of my heart to an unaccountable dismal
presentiment of future ill; and the disasters and disappointments I had passed,
were lost and forgotten in ominous forebodings and instinctive presages of
those that were to come.

Of all the weaknesses to which the human mind is subject, superstition is that
against which I would have you guard with the utmost vigilance. It is the most
incurable canker of the mind. Under its unrelenting dominion, happiness
withers, the understanding becomes obscured, and every principle of joy is
blasted. For this reason I wish to account for those presages, by referring
them to their true physical causes, in order thereby to prevent your young mind
from receiving, from what I have written, any injurious impression, or
superstitious idea of presentiment, as it is fashionably denominated.

If the mind of man be examined, it will be found naturally prone to the
contemplation of the future -- its flights from hope to hope, or fear to fear,
leading it insensibly from objects present and in possession, to those remote
and in expectation -- from positive good to suppositious better, or from actual
melancholy to imaginary misfortune. In these cases, the mind never fails to see
the prospect in colors derived from the medium through which it is viewed and
exaggerated by the magnifying power of fancy. Thus my mind, laboring under all
the uneasiness I have described, saw every thing through the gloomy medium of
melancholy, and, looking forward, foreboded nothing but misfortune: accident
afterward fulfilled those forebodings; but accident, nay, the most trifling
change of circumstances, might possibly have so totally changed the face of my
subsequent progress, that good fortune, instead of misadventure, might have
been my lot, and so all my forebodings been as illusory and fallible as all
such phantoms of the imagination really are. Thus I argue now -- and I am sure
I argue truly; but if reason be not timely called in, and made, as it were, an
habitual inmate, it avails but little against the overbearing force of
superstition, who, when she once gets possession of the mind, holds her seat
with unrelenting tenacity, and, calling in a whole host of horrors, with
despair at their head, to her aid, entrenches herself behind their formidable
powers, and bids defiance to the assaults of reason.

Thus it fared with me -- Under the dominion of a gloomy presentiment, I left
London; and my journey down to Margate, where I was to take shipping, was, as
SHAKSPEARE emphatically says, a phantasm, or a hideous dream -- and my little
state of man suffered, as it were, the nature of an insurrection: -- the chaos
within me forbade even the approach of discriminate reflection; and I found
myself on board the packet, bound to Ostend, without having a single trace left
upon my mind, of the intermediate stages and incidents that happened since I
had left London.

It has been observed -- and I wish you always to carry it in memory, as one of
the best consolations under affl^ction -- that human sufferings, like all other
things, find their vital principle exhausted, and then extiction accelerated,
by overgrowth; and that, at the moment when man thinks himself most miserable,
a benignant Providence is preparing relief, in some form or other, for him. So
if, in some sort, happened with me; for I was fortunate enough to find in the
packet a fellow-passenger, whose valuable conversation and agreeable manners
beguiled me insensibly of the gloomy contemplation in which I was absorbed, and
afforded my tortured mind a temporary suspension of pain. This gentleman was
General LOCKHART: he was going to Brussels, to pay his court to the Emperor
JOSEPH the Second, who was then shortly expected in the Low Countries, in order
to go through the ceremonies of his inauguration. As Brussels lay in my way, I
was flattered with the hopes of having for a companion a gentleman at once so
pleasing in his manners and respect^ble in his character, and was much
comforted when I found him as much disposed as myself to an agreement to travel
the whole of the way thither together. Thus, though far, very far from a state
of ease, I was, when landing at Ostend, at least less miserable than at my
coming on board the packet.

As this letter is already spun to a length too great to admit of any material
part of the description I am now to give you of Ostend, and the country to
which it belongs, I think it better to postpone it to my next, which I mean to
devote entirely to that subject, and thereby avoid the confusion that arises
from mixing two subjects in the same letter, or breaking off the thread of one
in order to make way for the other.

Adieu, my dear boy! -- Forget not your brother JOHN. That you may both be good
and happy, is all the wish now left to, etc.

LETTER IV.
THAT country to which I am now to call your attention -- I mean, the
Netherlands -- is marked by a greater number of political changes, and harassed
by a more continued train of military operations, than perhaps any country in
the records of modern history. It may truly be called the Cockpit Royal of
Europe, on which tyrants, as ambition, avarice, pride, caprice, or malignity,
prompted them, pitted thousands, and hundreds of thousands, of their
fellow creatures, to cut each other's throats about some point, frivolous as
regarding themselves, unimportant to mankind, and only tending to gratify a
diabolical lust for dominion; Yet, under all these disadvantages, (such are the
natural qualities of this country), it has, till lately, been in a tolerably
flourishing state; and would, under a good government and proper protection,
equal any part of Europe for richness.

Flanders, Brabant, and the country now called the United Netherlands, were in
general known by the name of Netherlands, Low Countries, or Pais-bas, from
their situat^on, as it is supposed, in respect of Germany. Anciently, they
formed a part of Belgic Gaul, of which you may remember to have read an account
in the Commentaries of JULIUS CAESAR, who describes the inhabitants as the most
valiant of all the G^llic Nations -- Horum omnium Belgae funt fortiss^mi. They
afterward were subject to petty princes, and made part of the German Empire;
and, in the sixteenth century, became subject to CHARLES the Fifth of the House
of Austria: but, being oppressed beyond endurance by his son, PHILIP the Second
of Spain, (that blind and furious bigot), they openly revolted -- slew to arms
to assert their freedom; and, after a struggle as glorious in effect as
virtuous in principle -- after performing prodigies of valor, and exhibiting
examples of fortitude, to which none but men fighting in the godlike cause of
LIBERTY are competent -- led on by the wisdom and valor of the PRINCE of
ORANGE, and assisted by the SOVEREIGN of GREAT BRITAIN -- they at length so far
succeeded, that those now called the United Netherlands, entered into a solemn
league, and forced the gloomy tyrant to acknowledge their independence. But
that part to which I am now particularly to allude, continued annexed to the
House of Austria. In 1787, they revolted, and made a temporary struggle to
disengage themselves from the dominion of the EMPEROR; but, owing to some
cabals among themselves, and the temperate conduct of that prince, they again
returned to their allegiance, and were rewarded with a general amnesty. In
1792, they were overrun by the French army under General DUMOURIER -- opened
their arms to those republicans, and were rewarded for it by oppression,
tyranny, and injustice. The French, however, were driven back out of the
country; and, wonderful to relate, they again received their old master, the
EMPEROR, with strong demonstrations of joy, and manifested their loyalty and
attachment to him by every expression that abject hypocrisy could suggest.

"O! how unlike their Belgic sires of old!" Here, could I stop with strict
justice, I would -- But, behold! the French again came; again they opened their
gates to receive them; and again they were, with tenfold fury and rapacity,
pillaged, oppressed and insulted; and at the very time I am writing this, the
guillotine is doing its office -- enforcing the payment of the most exorbitant
and enormous contributions, and compelling, it is said, one hundred thousand of
the ill-fated inhabitants to take the field, as soldiers of the republic.

Human opinion is so chequered and uncertain, that two very honest men may in
certain cases act in direct contradiction and hostility to each other, with the
very best intentions -- He, therefore, must have but a cold heart, and a
contracted understanding, who cannot forgive the man that acts in such cases
erroneously, when he acts from the exact dictates of his opinion, and upon the
principle which he has conscientiously adopted: but when a whole people are
seen whisking about with every gust of fortune, and making a new principle for
every new point of convenience, we must despise them even when they happen to
act right, and can scarcely afford them so much as pity in their calamities.
The Austtrian Netherlands are now in that state; and, without presuming to say
in which of their tergiversations they were right, I will venture to pronounce
that they deserve punishment, and I believe they are in hands very likely to
give them their due.

To return -- Ostend is a seaport of Austrian Flanders, and is situated in the
Liberty of Bruges. It was, at one time, the strongest town in Flanders: but a
double ditch and ramparts, which constituted its strength, are now destroyed;
and in the place where the former stood, docks, or rather basins, extremely
capacious and commodious, are formed, for the reception of shipping. The ground
about the town is very low and marshy, and cut into a number of fine canals --
into some of which, ships of the largest size may enter -- and in one of which,
vessels of great burden may ride, even close to Bruges. The harbor here is so
fortunately circumstanced, that it was once thought, by engineers, entirely
secure from a blockade; and its pristine strength can in no way be so well
described, as by a relation of the defense it made in the four first years of
the seventeenth century -- though, near the close of the sixteenth, it was no
better than an insignificant fishing town. It held out against the Spaniards
for three years, two months, and sixteen days. Eighty thousand men lost their
lives before it, while fifty thousand were killed or died within. It at last
surrendered, but on good terms; and not for want of men or provisions, but for
want of ground to stand on, which the enemy took from them, at an amazing loss,
step by step, till they had not room left for men to defend it. Three hundred
thousand cannon-balls, of thirty pounds weight each, were fired against it; and
the besieged often filled up the breaches made in their ramparts with heaps of
dead bodies.

Such, my dear boy, are the miracles that men, animated with the all-subduing
spirit of Liberty, can perform -- Liberty! that immediate jewel of the soul --
that first moving principle of all the animal creation -- which, with equal
power, influences the bird to beat the cage with its wings, and the lion to
tear the bars of his imprisonment -- the infant to spring from the tender
confinement of its nurse, and the lean and shrivelled pantaloon to crawl
abroad, and fly the warmth and repose of his wholesome chamber -- Liberty!
which, for centuries enthralled by artifice and fraud, or lulled into a slumber
by the witching spirit of priestcraft, now rises l^ke a giant refreshed with
wine -- in its great efforts for emancipation, destroys and overturns systems
-- but, when finding no resistance, and matured by time, will, I sincerely
hope, sink appeased into a generous calm, and become the blessing, the guardian
and protect^r of mankind!

It is your good fortune, my dear children, to be born at a time when Liberty
seems to be well understood in your own country, and is universally the
prevalent passion of men. It is almost needless, therefore, for me to exhort
you to make it the groundwork of your political morality: but let me remind you
to guard, above all, against the despotism of certain tyrants, to whom many of
the greatest advocates for liberty are strangely apt to submit -- I mean, your
passions. Of all other tyrants, they are the most subtle, the most bewitching,
the most overbearing, and, what is worse, the most cruel. Beneath the dominion
of other despots, tranquillity may alleviate the weight of your chains, and
soften oppression; but when once you become the slave of your passions, your
peace is for ever fled, and you live and die in unabating misery.

LETTER V.
THE pride of the English is remarked all over the globe, even to a proverb!
But pride is a word of such dubious meaning, so undefined in its sense, and
strained to such various imports, that you shall hear it violently execrated by
one, and warmly applauded by another -- this denouncing it as a sin of the
first magnitude, and that maintaining it to be the most vigilant guardian of
human virtue. Those differences in opinion arise not from any defect in the
intellects of either, but from each viewing the subject in that one point in
which it first strikes his eye, or best suits his taste, his feeling, or his
prejudices. I have no doubt, however, but a full consideration of the subject
would show, that pride, as it is called, is only good or bad as the object from
which it arises is mean or magnificent, culpable or meritorious. That noble
pride which stimulates to extraordinary acts of generosity and magnanimity,
such as, in many instances, has distinguished, above all others, the nobility
of Spain, exacts the homage and admiration of mankind: But I fear very much
that our English pride is of another growth, and smells too rankly of that
over-strained commercial spirit which makes the basis of the present grandeur
of Great Britain, but which, in my humble judgment, raises only to debase her
-- by slow, subtle degrees, poisons the national principle, enslaves the once
bold spirit of the people, detracts from their real solid felicity, and, by
confounding the idea of national wealth with that of national prosperity, leads
it in rapid strides to its downfall. In short, we are approaching, I fear, with
daily accelerated steps, to the disposition and sordid habits of the Dutch, of
whom Doctor GOLDSMITH so very pertinently and truly speaks, when he says, "Even
Liberty itself is bartered here!"

Without leading your mind through a maze of disquisition on this subject,
which might fatigue with abstruseness and prolixity, I will bring you back to
the point from which the matter started, and content myself with remarking,
that the pride of the English, speaking of it as a part of the national
character, is the meanest of all pride. The inflation of bloated, overgrown
wealth, an overweening affection for money, an idolatrous worship of gain,
have absolutely confounded the general intellect, and warped the judgment of
the many to that excess, that, in estimating men or things, they always refer
to "what is he worth?" or, "what will it fetch?" This sordid habit of thinking
was finely hit off by a keen fellow, the native of a neighboring kingdom, who,
for many years, carried on business in London, and failed: -- Sitting one day
in a coffee-house in the city, where some wealthy citizens were discussing a
subject not entirely unconnected with cash concerns, one of them observing him
rather attentive to their conversation, turned to him, and said, "What is your
opinion, Sir, of the matter?" -- "'s blood, Sir!" returned he, peevishly, "what
opinion can a man have in this country, who has not a guinea in his pocket?"

Under the influence of all the various caprices inspired by this unhappy
purse-pride, I am sorry to say our countrymen do, when they go abroad, so play
the fool, that they are universally flattered and despised, pillaged and
laughed at, by all persons with whom they have any dealing. In France, Mi Lor
Anglois is, or at least was, to have six times as great a profusion of every
thing as any other person, and pay three hundred per cent. more for it; and the
worst of it was, that a Mi Lor was found so conducive to their interest, that
they would not, if they could help it, suffer any Englishman to go without a
title -- nay, would sometimes, with kindly compulsion, force him to accept of
it, whether he would or not: but if an Englishman be, above all others, the
object of imposition in foreign countries, certainly none pillage him so
unmercifully as his own countrymen who are settled there. In all the places
through which I have traveled, I have had occasion to remark (and the remark
has been amply verified by every gentleman I have ever conversed with on the
subject), and the most extravagant houses of entertainment are those kept by
Englishmen. At Ostend, as well as other places, it was so; therefore, as
economy, when it does not trespass upon the bounds of genteel liberality, is
the best security for happiness and respect, I advise you, whenever you shall
have occasion to visit the Continent, in the first place to avoid all
appearance of the purse-proud ostentation of John Bull; and, in the next place,
to avoid all English houses of entertainment.

It is a singular circumstance, and belongs, I should suppose, peculiarly to
Ostend, that the charity-children of the town are permitted to come on board
the vessels arrived, to beg of the passengers, one day in the week.

Before I bid adieu to Ostend, I must remark one heavy disadvantage under which
it labors -- the want of fresh water; all they use being brought from Bruges.
In going from Ostend to Bruges, a traveller has it in his choice to go by land,
or water -- If by land, he gets a good voiture for about ten shillings of our
money; the road is about fourteen or fifteen miles -- If by water (the mode
which I adopted, as by far the cheapest and pleasantest), he travels in a
vessel pretty much resembling our Lord Mayor's barge, sometimes called a
track^chuyt, but often la barque, or bark: it is, in truth, fitted up in a
style of great neatness, if not elegance; stored with a large stock of
provisions and refreshments of all kinds, and of superior quality, for the
accommodation of the passengers; and has, particularly, a very handsome private
room between decks, for the company to retire to, in order to drink tea,
coffee, etc. etc. or play at cards. In this comfortable, I might say,
delightful vehicle, as perfectly at ease as lying on a couch in the best room
in London, are passengers drawn by two horses, at the rate of about four miles
an hour, for about ten pence, the same length of way that it would cost ten
shillings to be jumbled in a voiture over a rough paved road.

The country between Ostend and Bruges is very level, and of course destitute
of those charms to a mind of taste, which abound in countries tossed by the
hand of Nature into hill, dale, mountain, and valley: the whole face of it,
however, is, or at least then was, in so high a state of cultivation, and so
deeply enriched by the hands of art and industry, aided by the natural
fertility of the soil, that its appearance, though far from striking or
delightful, was by no means unpleasant; and on approaching the town of Bruges,
we passed between two rows of trees, beautiful, shady, and of lofty size --
forming, with the surrounding objects, a scene, which, if not romantic, was at
least picturesque.

In passing through countries groaning beneath the despotic scourge of
unlimited monarchy, where subsidies are raised, and taxes laid on ad libitum --
where guilty distrust and suspicion, with the eyes of a lynx and the fangs of a
harpy, stand sentinels at every gate, to scrutinize the harmless passenger,
awake him to the clanks of his fetters, and awe him into compliance, a
freeborn Briton feels a cold horror creep through his whole frame: his soul
recoils at the gloomy ferocious and insolently strict examination, with which a
sentinel, at the entry of a town, stops, investigates, demands a passport; and,
in short, puts him, pro tempore, in a state of durance, with all its hideous
formalities and appendages, its gates, its bars, its armed ruffians, its formal
professions of laws, and its utter violation of reason and of justice. Entering
the town of Bruges, we were stopped by a sentinel, who, with all the saucy,
swaggering air of authority, of a slave in office, demanded to know, whether we
had any contraband goods? whether we were in any miliry capacity? whence we
came? and whither we were going? with a variety of other interrogatories, to my
mind equally impertinent and detestable, but which seemed to make no greater
impression on the good Flemings themse^ves, than demanding the toll at a
turnpike-gate would make on an English waggoner.

Talking over this subject, since that time, with a gentleman who is well
acquainted with all those places, he informed me, that in the war between the
Emperor and the States General, some French officers, traveling through
Flanders to join Count MAILLEBOIS, were stopped at the gate of Bruges, and, by
order of the Emperor, sent to his army, turned into the ranks, and obliged to
do duty as common soldiers. -- Here, my dear FREDERICK, was an act, not only
despotic in itself, but aggravated by circumstances of collateral profligacy,
of such enormous magnitude, as bids defiance to all power of amplification, and
leave eloquence hopeless of describing it with greater force than it derives
from a simple narration of the fact: on the one hand, the inroad upon the just
personal rights of the individual; on the other, the rights of a nation
violated. Some men in England, judging from their own constitutional security,
may disbelieve the fact: but let them consider, that the Marquis de la FAYETTE,
an alien, taken upon neutral ground, is now, even now, held in illegal, unjust
thraldom and persecution -- let them, I say, remember this, and let their
incredulity cease.

Bless your stars, my dear boy, that you were born in a country where such
outrages as these can never be perpetrated by any, and will never be approved
of but by a few.

LETTER VI.
IN my last, I carried you past a ferocious, impertinent sentinel, into the
town of Bruges; and now, having got you there, I must endeavor, from the loose
materials I have been able to collect, to give you a short description of it.

I had heard much of Bruges, its grandeur, and its opulence; you will guess my
surprise then, when, on entering it, I found nothing but an old-fashioned,
ill-built, irregular town; the streets, in general, narrow and dirty, and most
of the houses strongly expressive of poverty and squalid wretchedness: yet this
was anciently a most flourishing cry. Did the difference be^ween the town at
this time, and its state as it is represented of old, consist only in its
external appearance, we might readily account for that, in the great
improvements made by the moderns in the art of house-building; but its present
inferiority goes deeper, and is the re^ult of departed commerce -- commerce,
that fluctuating will-with-a-wisp, that leads states in hot pursuit after it,
to entrap them ultimately into mires and precipices, and which, when caught,
stays till it extinguishes the spirit of freedom in a nation, refines its
people into feeble slaves, and there leaves them to poverty and contempt.

Perhaps there is no subject that affords an ampler field for a speculative
mind to expatiate upon, than the various, and, I may say, incongruous
revolutions which have chequered the progress of human society from the first
records of history down to the present time. It is indeed a speculation which
not only tends to improve the understanding, by calling in experience to
correct the illusions of theory, but is highly instructive in a moral point of
view, by pointing out the instability of the very best strictures of human
wisdom, and teaching us how little reliance is to be placed upon human
casualties, or earthly contingencies. Look to Greece, once the fountainhead of
arts, eloquence, and learning, and the mother of freedom -- her poets, her
legislators, her soldiers, and her patriots, even to this day considered the
brightest examples of earthly glory! -- see her now sunk in slavery, ignorance,
sloth, and imbecility, below any petty nation of Europe. Look to Rome -- in her
turn, the queen of arms and arts, the land of liberty, the nurse of heroes --
the stage on which inflexible patriots, accomplished philo^ophers, and a free
people, acted for centuries a drama that elevated man almost above his nature!
-- see her now reduced to the last stage of contemptibility -- even below it,
to ridicule and laughter -- swayed by the most contemptible imposture, and sunk
into the most despicable enslavement, both of person and opinion -- the offices
of her glorious senate performed by a kind of heteroclite being, an
hermaphroditical imposture, who, deducing his right from the very dregs and
offscourings of superstition and fanaticism, and aided by a set of disciples
worthy of such a master, rules the people, not with the terrors of the Tarpeian
rock, nor yet with that which to a Roman bosom was more terrible, banishment --
but with the horrors of eternal damnation! -- see her valiant, vigorous
soldiery converted into a band of feeble fiddlers and music-masters, and the
clangor of her arms into shrill concerts of squeaking castratoes; those places
where her CICERO poured forth eloquence divine, and pointed out the paths that
led to true morality -- where her BRUTUS and her CATO marshalled the forces of
freedom, and raised the arm of justice against tyrants, overrun by a knavish
host of ignorant, beggarly, bald-pa^d friars, vomiting, to a crowd of gaping
bigots, torrents of fanatical bombast, of miracles never performed, of gods
made of wood or copper, and of saints, that, like themselves, lives by
imposture and deception! -- see her triumphs and military trophies changed into
processions of priest singing psalms round wafe^ and wooden crucif^xes; and the
code of Philosophy and religion, which operated so effectually upon the morals
of her people that there was none among them sound so desperate or so base as
to break an oath, exchanged for the Roman Catholic branch of the Christian
Faith -- for dispensations for incest, indulgences for murder, fines for
fornication, and an exclusive patent for adultery in their priesthood. Then
look to England! -- see her, who once stooped beneath the yoke of Rome, whose
chief, CARACTACUS, was carried there in chains to grace his conqueror's
triumphs, while herself was made the meanest of the Roman provinces, now
holding the balance of the world, the unrivalled mistress of arms, arts,
commerce -- every thing.

It was in this irresistible mutation of things, that Bruges sunk from the high
state of a most flourishing city, where there are still (unless the French have
destroyed them) to be seen the remains of seventeen palaces, anciently the
residences of consuls of different nations, each of which had distinct houses,
magnificently built and furnished, with warehouses for their merchandises: and
such was the power and wealth of the citizens in those days, that it is an
indubitable fact, they kept their sovereign, the Archduke MAXIMILIAN, prisoner,
affronted his servants, and abused his officers; nor would they release him
until he took an oath to preserve inviolate the laws of the state. Even so late
as the time I was there, Bruges had some trade -- indeed as good a foreign
trade as most cities in Flanders. The people seemed cheerful and happy, and the
markets were tolerably supplied.

Several fine canals run in a variety of directions from Bruges: by one of
them, boats can go, in the course of a summer's day, to Ostend, Neuport,
Furnes, and Du^kisk; and vessels of four hundred tuns can float in the ba^on of
this town. Another canal leads to Ghent, another to Damme, and another to
Sluys. The water of those canals is stagnant, without the least motion; yet
they can, in half an hour, be all emptied, and fresh water brought in, by means
of their well-contrived sluices. This water, however, is never used for
drinking, or even for culinary purposes; a better sort being conveyed through
the town by pipes from the two rivers Lys and Scheldt, as in London; for which,
as there, every house pays a certain tax.

Although the trade of this city has, like that of all the Low Countries, been
gradually declining, and daily sucked into the vortices of British and Dutch
commerce, there were, till the French entered it, many rich merchants there,
who met every day at noon in the great marketplace, to communicate and
transact business, which was chiefly done in the Flemish language, hardly any
one in it speaking French; a circumstance that by this time, is much altered --
for they have been already made, if not to speak French, at least to sing
Ca-ira, and dance to the tune of it too, to some purpose.

The once-famed grandeur of this city consisted chiefly, like that of all grand
places in the dark periods of Popery, of the gloomy piles, the ostentatious
frippery, and unwieldy masses of wealth, accumulated by a long series of
monkish imposture -- of Gothic structures, of enormous size and sable aspect,
filled with dreary cells, calculated to strike the souls of the ignorant and
enthusiastic with holy horror, to inspire awe of the places, and veneration for
the persons who dared to inhabit them, and, by enfeebling the reason with the
mixed operations of horror, wonder, and reverence, to fit the credulous for the
reception of every imposition, however gross in conception, or bungled in
execution. Those are the things which constituted the greatness and splendour of
the cities of ancient Christendom; to those has the sturdiest human vigor and
intellect been forced to bend the knees: they were built to endure the outrages
of time; and will stand, I am sure, long, long after their power shall have
been annihilated.

What a powerful engine has superstition been, in the cunning management of
priests! How lamentable it is to think, that not only all who believed, but all
who had good sense enough not to believe should, for so many centuries, have
been kept in prostrate submission to the will and dominion of an old man in
Rome! -- My blushes for the folly and supineness of mankind, however, are lost
in a warm glow of transport at the present irradiation of the human mind; and
though I can scarcely think with patience of that glorious, godlike being,
HENRY the Second of England, being obliged by the Pope to lash himself naked at
the tomb of that saucy, wicked priest, THOMAS A BECKET, I felicitate myself
with the refl^ct^on, that the Pope is now the most contemptible sovereign in
Europe, and that the Papal authority, which was once the terror and the scourge
of the earth, is now not only not recognized, but seldom thought of, and, when
thought of, only serves to excite laughter or disgust.

LETTER VII.
THE town of Bruges, although the streets be, as I have already described them,
so mean, narrow, dirty, and irregular in general, contains, nevertheless, some
few streets that are tolerable, and a few squares also that are far from
contemptible. -- I should think it, nevertheless, not worth another letter of
description, were it not that the churches, and church-curiosities, demand our
attention; for you will observe, that in all rich Popish countries, every
church is a holy toy-shop, or rather a museum, where pictures, statues, gold
cups, silver candlesticks, diamond crucifixes, and gods, of various sorts and
dimensions, are hoarded up, in honor of the Supreme Being. This city having
been for centuries the sea of a bishop, who is suffragan to the archbishop of
Mecklin, and at the same time hereditary chancellor of Flanders, it is not to
be wondered at, if ecclesiastical industry should have amassed some of those
little trinkets which constitute the chief or only value of their church. The
mitre of this place conveys to the head that wears it a diocese containing six
cities, from the names of which you will be able to form some small judgment of
the opulence of one poor son of abstinence and mortification. -- Those cities
are, in the first place, Bruges itself, then Ostend, Sluys, Damme, Middleburgh
in Flanders, and Oudenberch -- not to mention one hundred and thirty-three
boroughs and villages; and if you could compute the number of inferior clergy
with which the streets and highways are filled, you would be thunderstruck.
There, and in all those Popish countries, they may be seen, with grotesque
habits and bald pates, buzzing up and down like bees, in swarms, (a precious
hive!) -- and, with the most vehement protestations of voluntary poverty in
their mouths, and eyes uplifted to Heaven, scrambling for the good things of
the earth with the eagerness of a pack of hounds, and the rapacity of a whole
roll of lawyers! With loaded thighs (I might say, loaded arms too, for they
have large pockets even in their sleeves, for the concealment of movables),
they return to the great hive, where, contrary to the law of bees, the drone
lives in idle state, and he plunders them: contrary, too, to the habits of
those useful insects, they banish the queen be, and suffer no female to
approach their cells, but keep them in contiguous hives, where, under cover of
the night, they visit them, and fulfill in private that which they deny in
public -- the great command of Providence.

The first building in nominal rank, though by no means the first in value, is
the great cathedral, which has at least bulk, antiquity, and gloominess enough
to recommend it to the faithful. It is by no means unfurnished within, though
not in so remarkable a manner as to induce me to fill a letter with it. In a
word, it is an old Popish cathedral, and cannot be supposed wanting in wealth:
at the time I write, it has been standing no less a time than nine hundred and
twenty-nine years, having been built in the year 865.

The next that occurs to me, as worthy of notice, is the church of Notre Dame,
or that dedicated to our Lady the Virgin MARY. This is really a beautiful
structure of the kind -- indeed magnificent. Its steeple is beyond conception
stupendous, being so very high as to be seen at sea off Ostend, although it is
not elevated in the smallest degree by any rise in the ground; for, so very
flat is the whole intermediate country, that I believe it would puzzle a
skilful leveller to find two feet elevation from high-water-mark at Ostend up
to this city. The contents of this church are correspondent to its external
appearance -- being enriched and beautified with a vast variety of sacerdotal
trinkets, and fine tombs and monuments. As to the former, the vestments of that
same THOMAS A BECKET whom I mentioned in my last, make a part of the
curiosities deposited in this church: this furious and inflexible impostor was
archbishop of Canterbury; and his struggles to enslave both the king and people
of England, and make them tributary to the Pope, have canonized him, and
obtained the very honorable depot I mention for his vestments. To do justice,
however, to the spirit and sagacity of the holy fathers who have so long taken
the pains to preserve them, it must be commemorated, that they are, or at least
were set with diamonds, and other precious stones! Probably, among the many
priests who have, in so many centuries, had the custody of those divine relics,
some one, more sagacious than the rest, might conceive, that, to lie in a
church, and be seen by the all-believing eyes of the faithful, a little
colored glass was just as good as any precious stone, and wisely have
converted the originals to some better purpose. If so, it will be some
consolation to Holy Mother Church to reflect, that she has bilked the
Sans-culottes, who certainly have got possession of Saint THOMAS A BECKET'S
sacerdotal petticoats; and, if they have been sound enough to stand the
cutting, have, by this time, converted them into comfortable campaigning
breeches. O monstrous! wicked! abominable! -- that the Royal MARY, sister to
the great Emperor CHARLES the Fifth, should, so long ago as the Reformation,
have bought at an immense price, and deposited in the treasury of the church of
our Lady the blessed Virgin MARY, the vestments of a saint, only to make
breeches, in the year 1794, for a French soldier! The time has been, when the
bare suggestion of such sacrilege would have turned the brain of half the
people of Christendom: but those things are now better managed.

Of the tombs in this church, I shall only mention two, as distinguished from
the rest by their costliness, magnificence, and antiquity. They are made of
copper, well gilt. One of them is the tomb of MARY, heiress to the Ducal House
of Burgundy; and the other, that of CHARLES (commonly called the Hardy), Duke
of Burgundy, her father.

In Bruges there were four great abbeys, and an amazing number of convents and
nunneries. The buildings, I presume, yet stand; but there is little doubt that
their contents, of every kind, have been, before this, put in requisition, and
each part of them, of course, applied to its natural use.

The church once belonging to the Jesuits, is built in a noble style of
architecture: and that of the Dominicans has not only its external merits, but
its internal value; for, besides the usual superabundance of rich chalices,
etc. it possesses some very great curiosities --

As, first, a very curious, highly wrought pulpit -- beautiful in itself, but
remarkable for the top being supported by wood, cut out, in the most natural,
deceptive manner, in the form of ropes, and which beguile the spectator the
more into a belief of its reality, because it answers the purposes of ropes.

Secondly, a picture -- and so extraordinary a picture! Before I describe it, I
must apprise you that your faith must be almost as great as that of a Spanish
Christian to believe me -- to believe that the human intellect ever sunk so low
as, in the first instance, to conceive, and, in the next, to harbor and
admire, such a piece. But I mistake -- it has i^s merit; it is a curiosity --
the demon of satire himself could not wish for a greater.

This picture, then, is the representation of a marriage! -- but of whom? why,
truly, of JESUS CHRIST with Saint CATHARINE of Sienna. Observe the congruity --
Saint CATHARINE of Sienna lived many centuries after the translation of JESUS
CHRIST to Heaven, where he is to sit, you know, till he comes to judge the
quick and the dead! -- But who marries them? In truth, Saint DOMINIC, the
patron of this church! The Virgin MARY joins their hands -- that is not amiss
-- But, to crown the whole, King DAVID himself, who died so long before CHRIST
was born, plays the harp at the wedding!

My dear FREDERICK, I shall take it as no small instance of your dutiful
opinion of me to believe, that such a picture existed, and made part of the
holy paraphernalia of a temple consecrated to the worship of the D^vinity: but
I assure you it is a fact; and as I have never given you reason to suspect my
veracity. I expect you to believe me in this instance, improbable though it
seems: for such a farrago of absurdities, such a jumble of incongruities,
impossibilities, bulls, and anachronisms, never yet were compressed, by the
human imagination, into the same narrow compass.

I protract this letter beyond my usual length, on purpose to conclude my
account of Bruges, and get once more upon the road.

The monastery of the Carthusians, another order of friars, is of amazing size,
covering an extent of ground not much less than a mile in circumference. The
Carmelites, another order, have a church here, in which there is raised a
beautiful monument, to the memory of HENRY JERMYN, Lord Dover, a peer of
England -- But the monastery called the Dunes, a sect of the order of Saint
BERNARD, is by far the noblest in the whole city; tho cloisters and gardens are
capacious and handsome; the apartment of the abbot is magnificent and stately,
and those of the monks themselves unusually neat. Those poor mortified
penitents, secluded from the pomps, the vanities, and enjoyments of life, and
their thoughts no doubt resting alone on hereafter, keep, nevertheless, a
sumptuous table, spread with every luxury of the season -- have their
country-seats, where they go a hunting, or to refresh themselves, and actually
keep their own coaches.

Among the nunneries there are two English: one of Augustinian nuns, who are
all ladies of qualify, and who entertain strangers at the grate with
sweetmeats and wine; the other, called the Pelicans, is of a very strict
order, and wear a coarse dress.

To conclude -- In the chapel of Saint BASIL is said to be kept, in perfect
preservation, the blood which JOSEPH of Arimathea wiped off with a sponge from
the dead body of CHRIST. Finis coronat opus.

I fancy you have, by this time, had as much of miracles as you can well
digest: I therefore leave you to reflect upon them and improve.

LETTER VIII.
AS I was going to the barque, at Bruges, to take my departure for Ghent, the
next town in my route, I was surprised to see a number of officious, busy, poor
fellows, crowding round my effects, and seizing them -- some my trunk, some my
portmanteau. etc. I believe two or three to each: but my astonishment partly
subsided when I was told that they were porters, who plied on the canal, and
about the city, for subsistence, and only came to have the honor of carraying
my baggage down to the vessel. Noting their eagerness, I could not help
smiling. I know there are those, and I have heard of such, who would bluster at
them: but my mirth at the bustling importance which the poor fellows affected,
soon sunk into serious concern; I said within myself, "Alas, how hard must be
your lot indeed!" and my imagination was in an instant back again in London,
where a porter often makes you pay for a job, not in money only, but in
patience also, and where the surliness of independence scowls upon his brow as
he does your work. Every one of my men demanded a remuneration for his labor:
one man could have easily done the work of five -- but I resolved not to send
them away discontented: he is but a sordid churl that would; and I paid them to
their full satisfaction. Here, my dear FREDERICK, let me offer you (since it
occurs) my parental advice on this point -- from the practice of which you will
gain more solid felicity than you can possibly be aware of now: never weigh
scrupulously the value of the work of the poor; rather exceed than fall short
of rewarding it: it is a very, very small thing, that will put them in good
humor with you and with themselves, and relax the hard furrows of labor into
the soft smile of gratitude -- a smile which, to a heart of sensibility such as
yours, will, of itself, ten-thousand-fold repay you, even though the frequent
practice of it should abridge you of a few of those things called pleasures, or
detract a little from the weight of your purse.

Being again seated in my barque, I set off for Ghent, a city lying at a
distance of twenty-four miles from Bruges. I must here remark to you, that the
company one meets in those vessels is not always of the first rank; it is
generally of a mixed, motley kind: but to a man who carries along with him,
through his travels, a love for his fellow creatures, and a desire to see men,
and their customs and manners, it is both pleasant and eligible -- at least I
thought it so, and enjoyed it. There were those amongst us who spoke rather
loftily on that subject: I said nothing; but it brought to my mind a reflection
I have often had occasion to concur in, viz. that a fastidious usurpation of
dignity (happily denominated stateliness) is the never-failing mark of an
upstart or a blockhead. The man of true dignity, self-erect and strong, needs
not have recourse, for support, to the comparative wretchedness of his
fellow creature, or plume himself upon spurious superiority. You will
understand me, however! When I say, "the man of true dignity," I am far, very
far, from meaning a lord, a squire, a banker, or a general officer -- I mean a
man of intrinsic worth -- homo emunctae naris -- one who, in every station into
which chance may throw him, feels firm in the consciousness of right -- who can
see and cherish merit, though enveloped and concealed behind a shabby suit of
clothes -- and who scorns the b^own-up fool of fortune, that without sense or
sentiment, without virtue, wisdom, or courage, presumes to call himself great,
merely because he possesses a few acres of earth which he had neither the
industry nor merit to earn, or because his great-great-great-grandfather
purchased a title by perfidy to his country, the plunder of his
fellow-citizens, or the slaughter of mankind.

Although the face of that part of the country through which we are now
passing, like that of the preceding stage from Ostend to Bruges, wants
diversity, it has its charms, and would be particularly delightful in the eye
of an English farmer; for it is covered with the thickest verdure on each side
of the canal, and the banks are decorated all along by rows of stately trees,
while the fields in the back ground are cultivated to the highest degree of
perfection, and bear the aspect of producing the most abundant harvest.

You will be able to form a judgment of the trifling expense of traveling in
this country, from my expenses in this stage of twenty-four miles. I had an
excellent dinner for about fifteen pence of our money; my passage cost me but
sixteen more, amounting in all to two shillings and seven pence: compare that
with traveling in England, where one cannot rise up from an indifferent
dinner, in an inn, under five shillings at the least, and you must be
astonished at the disproportion.

Ghent is the capital of Flanders, and is to be reckoned among the largest
cities of Europe, as it covers a space of ground of not less than seven miles
in circumference; but there is not above one half of that occupied with
buildings, the greater part being thrown into fields, gardens, orchards, and
pleasure-grounds. Situated on four navigable rivers, and intersected into no
fewer than twenty-six islands by a number of canals, which afford an easy,
cheap, and expeditious carriage for weighty merchandise, it may be considered,
in point of local advantages for commerce, superior to most cities in Europe;
while those islands are again united by about a hundred bridges, some great and
some small, which contrbute much to the beauty of the city.

To a man accustomed to mould his thoughts by what he sees in Great Britain,
the strong fort^fications that surround almost all towns on the Continent
convey the most disagreeable sensations -- ^eminding him of the first misery of
mankind, War! -- denoting, alas! too truly, the disposition of man to violate
the rights of his fellow creatures, and manifesting the tyrannous abuse of
power. On me, though trained and accustomed to military habits, this "dreadful
note of preparation" had an unpleasing effect; for, though born, bred, and
habituated to the life of a soldier, I find the feelings of the citizen and the
man claim a paramount right to my heart.

Ghent was once extremely well fortified, and calculated, by nature as well as
by art, to repel encroachment. It had a very strong castle, walls, and ditches;
and now, though not otherwise strong, the country may, by shutting up the
sluices, be, for above a mile round, laid in a very short time under water. It
was formerly so populous and powerful, that it declared war more than once
against its sovereign, and raised amazing armies. In the year 1587, it suffered
dreadfully from all the ravages of famine, under which a number not less than
three thousand of its inhabitants perished in one week.

This town is distinguished by the nativity of two celebrated characters: one
was the famous JOHN of Gaunt, son of King EDWARD the third of E^gland; the
other, the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth, who was born there in the year 1500.

It was in this city that the Confederation of the States, well known under the
title of the Pacification of Ghent, which united the Provinces in the most
lasting union of interest and laws, was held: this union was chiefly owing to
the vigorous, unremitted efforts of WILLIAM the First, Prince of Orange, to
whose valor and virtue may be attributed the independence of the United States.

In this city there were computed to be fifty companies of tradesmen, among
whom were manufactured a variety of very curious and rich cloths, stuffs, and
silks: it is certain, that the woollen manufacture flourished here before it
had made the smallest progress in England, whose wool they then bought. There
was also a good branch of linen manufacture here, and a pretty brisk corn
trade, for which it was locally well calculated. You will observe, once for
all, that in speaking of this country, I generally use the past tense; for, at
present, they are utterly undone.

Ghent was the sea of a bishop, who, like the bishop of Bruges, was suffragan
to the archbishop of Mechlin. Thus, in most Christian countries, are the
intellects, the consciences, and the cash too, of the people, shut up and hid
from the light, by priest within dean, and dean within bishop -- like a ring in
the hand of a conjurer, box within box -- till at last they are enveloped in
the great receptacle of all deception, the capacious pocket of the archbishop.
Let not sceptered tyrants, their legions, their scaffolds, and their swords,
bear all the infamy of the slavery of mankind! Opinion, opinion, under the
management of fraud and imposture, is the engine that forges their fetters!! --
JANSENIUS, from whom the Jansenists took their name, was the first bishop of
this place; and the late bishop, I think, may be reckoned the last.

The municipal government of this city is correct, and well calculated to
secure internal peace and order. The chief magistrate is the high bailiff;
subordinate to whom are burgomasters, echivins, and counselors.

Ghent is not deficient in stately edifices; and, true to their system, the
holy fathers of the church have their share, which, in old Popish countries, is
at least nineteen twentieths. In the middle of the town is a high tower, called
Belfort tower: from whence there is a delightful prospect over the whole city
and its environs. Monasteries and churches, there, are without number; besides
hospitals and marketplaces: that called Friday's market, is the largest of
all, and is adorned with a statue of CHARLES the Fifth, in his imperial robes.
The stad-house is a magnificent structure -- So is the cathedral, under which
the reverend fathers have built a subterraneous church. What deeds are those
which shun the light! Why those holy patriarchs have such a desire for burying
themselves, and working like moles under ground, they themselves best know, and
I think it is not difficult for others to conjecture.

This cathedral, however, is well worth attention, on account of some capital
pictures it contains. The marble of the church is remarkably fine, and the
altar-piece splendid beyond all possible description; and, indeed, in all the
others, there are paintings, eminent for their own excellence, and for the
celebrity of the masters who painted them.

In the monastery of St. PIERRE, there is a grand library, filled with books in
all languages; but it is chiefly remarkable for the superlative beauty of its
ceiling, one half of which was painted by RUBENS.

Thus you may perceive, my dear FREDERICK, the charity of the clergy! -- how,
in pure pity for the sins of mankind, and in paternal care of their souls, they
exact from the laity some atonement for their crimes, and constrain them at
least to repent -- and, with unparalleled magnanimity, take upon themselves the
vices, the gluttony, the avarice, and the sensuality, of which they are so
careful to purge their fellow creatures.

LETTER IX.
HAVING given you a general outline of the city of Ghent, I shall now proceed
to give you an account of one of the most excellent, and certainly the most
interesting, of all the curiosities in that place. It is indeed of a sort so
immediately correspondent to the most exalted sensations of humanity, and so
perfectly in unison with the most exquisitely sensible chords of the feeling
heart, that I resolved to rescue it from the common lumber of the place, and
give it to you in a fresh letter, when the ideas excited by my former might
have faded away, and left your mind more clear for the reception of such
refined impressions.

On one of the many bridges in Ghent stand two huge brazen images of a father
and son, who obtained this distinguished mark of the admiration of their
fellow-citizens by the following incidents:

Both the father and the son were, for some offense against the state,
condemned to die. Some favorable circumstances appearing on the side of the
son, he was granted a remission of his share of the sentence, upon certain
provisions -- in short, he was offered a pardon, on the most cruel and
barbarous condition that ever entered into the mind of even monkish barbarity,
namely, that he would become the executioner of his father! He at first
resolutely refused to preserve his life by means so fatal and detestable: This
is not to be wondered at; for I hope, for the honor of our nature, that there
are but few, very few sorts, who would not have spurned, with abhorrence, life
sustained on conditions so horrid, so unnatural. The son, though long
inflexible, was at length overcome by the tears and entreaties of a fond
father, who represented to him, at all events, his (the father's) life was
forfeited, and that it would be the greatest possible consolation to him, at
his last moments, to think, that in his death he was the instrument of his
son's preservation. The youth consented to adopt the horrible means of
recovering his life and liberty: he lifted the axe; but, as it was about to
fall, his arm sunk nerveless, and the axe dropped from his hand! Had he as many
lives as hairs, he would have yielded them all, one after the other, rather
than again even conceive, much less perpetrate, such an act. Life, liberty,
every thing, vanished before the dearer interests of filial affection: he fell
upon his father's neck, and, embracing him, triumphantly exclaimed, "My father,
my father! we will die together!" and then called for another executioner to
fulfill the sentence of the law.

Hard must be their hearts indeed, bereft of every sentiment of virtue, every
sensation of humanity, who could stand insensible spectators of such a scene --
A sudden peal of involuntary applauses, mixed with groans and sighs, rent the
air. The execution was suspended; and on a simple representation of the
transaction, both were pardoned: high rewards and honors were conferred on the
son; and finally, those two admirable brazen images were raised, to commemorate
a transaction so honorable to human nature, and transmit it for the
instruction and emulation of posterity. The statue represents the son in the
very act of letting fall the axe.

Lay this to your mind, my dear FREDERICK: talk over it to your brother;
indulge all the charming sympathetic sensations it communicates; never let a
mistaken shame, or a false idea (which some endeavor to impress) that it is
unmanly to melt at the tale of woe, and sympathize with our fellow creatures,
stop the current of your sensibility -- no! Be assured, that, on the contrary,
it is the true criterion of manhood and valor to feel; and that the more
sympathetic and sensible the heart is, the more nearly it is allied to the
Divinity.

I AM now on the point of conducting you out of Austrian Flanders -- One town
only, and that comparatively a small one, lying between Us and Brabant: the
name of this town is Alost, or, as the Flemings spell it, Aelst.

From Ghent to Brussels (the next great stage in my way), I found, to my
regret, that there was no conveyance by water: I therefore was obliged to go in
a voiture, and stopped at Alost, as an intermediate stage; and mathematically
intermediate it is -- for it lies at equal distance from Ghent and Brussels,
being exactly fifteen miles from each.

This is a small, but exceeding neat town, situated on the river Dender; and
being a remarkably great thoroughfare accommodations of every kind are
tolerably good in it. It would be idle to suppose, that Catholic zeal had left
so many souls unprotected and undisciplined, where there were so many bodies
capable of drudgery to pay for it. In truth, there has been as ample provision
made for the town of Alost in the way of sacerdotal business, as for any other
town in the Netherlands -- regard being had to its bulk; for there were several
convents of friars, and of course several of nuns: besides, there was a
Jesuit's college of some note. How they all fare by this time, it is difficult
for me to determine.

The church of Saint MARTIN could boast of some excellent pictures,
particularly a most capital piece, "La Peste," by RUBENS.

In a convent inhabited by a set of monks, denomined Gulielmite, I saw the tomb
of THIERRY MARTIN, who first brought the art of printing from Germany to that
place. His name and fame are transmitted to us by an epitaph upon his tomb,
written by his friend, the ingenious Erasmus.

This tomb of THIERRY MARTIN stands a monument, not only of his merit, but of
the short-sigh^edness and folly even of monks. Alas, silly men! they little
knew, that when they granted THIERRY MARTIN the honors of the convent, they
were harboring, in their hallowed ground, one of their greatest enemies, and
commemorating the man who was contributing to the overthrow of their sacred
order: for the art of printing, wherever it reached, illuminated the human
mind, and first kindled up that light, before which priestcraft, and all its
pious impostures, like evil specter, have vanished. To the art of printing is
human society indebted for many of the advantages which it possesses beyond the
brute or savage tribes -- for the perfection of arts, the extension of science,
the general enlargement of the mind, and, above all, for the emancipation of
person and property from the shackles of despotism, and of the human intellect
from the fetters of blindness and ignorance with which sacerdotal fraud had
chained it for centuries to the earth.

The territory of this city is of pretty large extent, and is called a county,
having, in ancient times, had counts of its own; and the whole of it is
extremely fruitful in pasture, corn, hops, flax, and most other productions of
those climes.

I made but a very short stay at Alost, when I proceeded on to Brussels; and,
having thus brought you through that part of the Netherlands called Austrian
Flanders, I think I ought to give you a general account of the country at
large, as I have hitherto confined myself merely to the cities and towns of it;
but as this letter is already of a length that will not allow of any great
addition, I shall postpone my intended description to my next.

LETTER X.
WERE mankind to be guided by moderation, reason, and justice -- were there no
lust for territory in particular states -- no ambition or desire in kings for
an undue enlargement of their power -- no unjustifiable infractions attempted
by one state or potentate upon the peace and possession of another -- no arms
to carry desolation and plunder through the world, nor churchmen more mild, but
not more moderate, to drain them with their subtle deceptions -- were the
husbandman, the fisherman, the manufacturer, and the labourer, permitted to
make, by their industry, the best use of the soil on which chance or nature had
planted them, and to lift the fruits of their labor to their own lips -- no
people were more happy than the inhabitants of Austrian Flanders.

This country is bounded, to the north, by the Scheldt; to the north-west, by
the Northern Sea: to the south, and south-west, by Artois, one of the finest
Provinces of France; and to the east, by Brabant. Its greatest length is
seventy-five miles; and its greatest breadth, fifty-five. The air is good; but
it is said to be better in proportion as it recedes from the sea. The winters
are sometimes long and severe, and the summers sometimes wet and sultry; yet,
in general, the climate is agreeable. The soil is in most parts fertile, and in
some to a degree equal to that of any part of Europe. It is chiefly famous for
its pasturage; in consequence of which, great numbers of black cattle, horses
and sheep, are bred in it, and immense quantities of butter and cheese made. It
is, besides, abundantly productive of all sorts of culinary vegetables -- fruit
in great quantities -- corn and flax, which last is not only raised in great
plenty, but is celebrated for the fineness and strength of its staple. It is
true, that in some parts they have not corn sufficient for the inhabitants; but
this is well recompensed by other productions, with the redundance of which
they purchase the superfluous grain of their neighbors -- for, where the
inhabitants do follow tillage, the produce is unequalled, and the superfluity
must of course be great.

The superior fecundity of the sheep of this country is very remarkable, and
difficult, perhaps, to be accounted for -- a ewe here bringing forth constantly
three lambs at a birth, sometimes four, sometimes five, and some have been
known to produce as many as six and seven -- no small instance of the
prodigality of nature in providing for this spot.

At some distance from the seacoast, the face of the country is decorated with
a profusion of wood, fitted either for timber or for fuel; and toward the
coast, where nature has been rather niggard of that blessing, the inhabitants
substitute, in its stead, for fuel, a kind of turf, which they find at the
depth of four or five feet from the surface of the earth, and which makes a
fire, not only cheerful, pleasant, and hot, but remarkably wholesome, being
free from the destructive sulphurious and bituminous vapor attendant upon coal.

Perhaps no part of the world is better supplied than this province with all
sorts of fish, as well those of sea as fresh water: fowl and venison were
extremely plenty and reasonable; and a great deal of excellent beer was brewed
in it. It is washed by several rivers, four of which are noble streams, namely,
the Scheldt, the Lys, the Scarpe, and the Dender; and there are several canals,
the chief of which is that between Bruges and Ghent.

Thus in whatever way it be considered, nature seems to have made ample
provision for the happiness of the people: how far they are so, you shall hear
when I come to give a general view of the Netherlands -- that which is
applicable to Austrian Flanders being equally so to all the other parts of the
Netherlands, excepting those under the dominion of the Republic of the United
States.

The States of this country, according to the constitution it once possessed,
consisted of clergy, the nobility, and the commoners. The clergy were the
bishops and abbots: the nobility was composed of certain families holding
hereditary offices or ^aronies, to which that privilege was annexed; and the
commoners were made up of the burgomasters, pensioners and deputies of the
cities and districts. But the only religion professed or tolerated in this
country, was the Roman Catholic.

Of the people of Austrian Flanders a celebrated Author gives the following
account, which I transcribe for your use, the rather as my stay there was too
short to enable me to make any material observations on them, or their manners.
--

"With respect to the persons and characters of the inhabitants," says he,
"they are, generally speaking, lusty, fat, and clumsy -- very industrious, both
in cultivating their lands, and in their trades and manufactures -- lovers of
liberty, and enemies to slavery -- and not defective in good sense or judgment,
though they have not so lively an imagination as some other nations. Their
women are fair, handsome enough, and honest by their natural constitution, as
well as from a principle of virtue: as they cannot pretend to wit and repartee,
they do not make themselves ridiculous by the nauseous affectation of them.
Both sexes are great lovers of public diversions; and every city, town, and
village, have their kermisses, or fairs, in which all sorts of shows are
exhibited."

Many arts which now enrich other nations, and the importance of which has
excited contests and struggles of the most serious kind in the political world,
were invented or improved in that country. Weaving, in general, though not
invented, was greatly improved; and the art of forming figures of all sorts in
linen was first invented there. To the Flemings we are also indebted for the
arts of curing herrings, dyeing cloths and stuffs, and oil-colours. But those
arts, and the manufactures, have gradually slid away from them, and left but a
small share behind, when compared with their former flourishing state; they
have flown to a land of liberty and security, where hostile feet never tread,
where slavery corrupts not, where war devoureth not, no^ Priests no^ Despots
break in and steal. Nevertheless, silk, cotton and woollen stuffs, brocades,
camblets, tapestry, linen, and lace, are still manufactured here to some small
extent.

This province had counts of its own, from the ninth century up to the year
1369, when it was made over, by marriage, (l^ke a farm of cattle) to the dukes
of Burgundy; and afterward, again, was by them made over, in like way of
marriage, to the House of Austria. In 1667 France seized the southern part; and
the States General obtained the northern, partly by the treaty of Munster, and
partly by the Barrier treaty of 1715.

To reckon upon the natural endowments of this country, one would suppose that
it should be a terrestrial paradise: yet such is the wickedness of man, and the
outrageous spirit of power, that it is almost the last country in Europe in
which I would have property, and fix a permanent residence. Just now, while I
am writing, I have before me an account, that the French, to whom they have
opened their gates, have plundered them to the last atom of their moveable
poss^ssions; and that the property of the unfortunate people is now in wagons,
on its way to Paris.

Once more, my boy, I say, bless your GOD, that planted you in a country
cheered by the voice of freedom, defended by British valor, and, what is of
more consequence, surrounded by the Ocean.

LETTER XI.
HAVING conducted you through that part of the Netherlands called Austrian
Flanders, w^ are now to direct our attention to that called Austrian Brabant,
of which part, as well as of the Netherlands in general, Brussels, where I
arrived the same day I left Ghent, is the capital, giving its name to a quarter
or territory that surrounds it.

In all parts of the Netherlands through which I traveled, I could not help
admiring the uniform decorations of the roads, rivers, and canals, with rows of
lofty trees, which form a most agreeable shade from the summer's burning sun,
and yet do not obstruct any great extent of prospect, the country is so
extremely flat. And one thing I remarked, and which certainty seems at first
view, extraordinary, is, that in the great extent of country through which we
have hitherto passed, from Ostend to Brussels, being sixty-eight miles, I
scarce saw one nobleman or gentleman's seat -- nothing above the house of a
husbandman, a curate, or some person of small fortune: and yet the country is
extremely rich; and I saw many spots, as I went along, charming beyond
description, and such as would tempt, I should think, a man of taste and
opulence to settle in them. This must appear unaccountable to those who do not
recollect, that in a country subject like this to the ravaging incursions of
contending armies, fortified ^owns are considered as the most pleasing, because
the most secure retreats of opulence.

As I approached the city of Brussels, I was struck with a mixed sensation of
surprise and delight at the appearance it made -- none that I had ever seen
being comparable to it, and not one in Europe, by the account of travelers,
being in that respect superior to it, Naples and Genoa only excepted: like
them, however, it, when entered, falls far short of the expectation raised by
its external appearance, being all composed of hills and hollows, which not
only fatigue, but render the appearance of the streets, though well built,
contemptible and mean.

Brussels stands on the beautiful little river Senne, on the brow of a hill.
The city is about seven miles in circumference, has seven gates, with extensive
suburbs, and is encompassed with a double wall made of brick, and ditches; but
its size is too great for strength, as a face of defense of such extent could
not possibly hold out a long siege -- a great and insuperable defect in such a
country as I have described.

Great as is the extent of ground on which this city stands, it is nevertheless
very well built, and extremely populous. It is ornamented with no fewer than
seven squares, all of them remarkably fine, particularly the great square or
market place, which is reckoned to be perhaps the finest in Europe. Around it
are the halls of the different trades, the fronts of which are adorned, in a
superb manner, with emblematical sculpture, with gilding, and a variety of
Latin inscriptions. One quarter of this square is entirely occupied by the
town-houses, a noble pile of building, in which there were apartments where the
States of B^aba^t me^, ^inely adorned with tapestry in gift frames, and some
admirable original paintings. At the time I was there, the whole city was in
motion, preparing for the Inauguration of the EMPEROR, who was then impatiently
expected, and whose approach made such a bustle, and promised such a spectacle,
as made me regret the necessity I lay under of proceeding on my journey. The
townhouse was put into the highest order, and subsequently fell a sacrifice to
the great and important event for which it was prepared.

The steeple of this building is of a most stupendous height -- three hundred
and sixty-four feet; and on the top of it is erected a statue of Saint MICHAEL
killing the Dragon, of the enormous height of seventeen feet: this colossal
statue is so constructed as to serve for a weathercock; and being made of
copper, well gilt, is at once conspicuous, magnificent, and ornamental.

The public buildings of Brussels, particularly the palaces and courts of the
several princes, counts, and other persons of distinction, (and, you may be
sure, the churches and cloisters too), are spacious, expensive, and
magnificent. Behind the imperial palace, which stood in the highest part of the
city, but was burnt down many years ago, is a park, well stocked with deer, and
planted with trees, like St. James's-park at London, for the inhabitants to
walk in. At the farther end of it is a fine pleasure-house, built by the
Emperor CHARLES the fifth, after his abdication.

The palace is a magnificent structure: the rooms of it are finished in a style
far superior to those of any palace in England, and enriched with many fine
paintings: that of the family of HECTOR, in the council chamber, lays claim to
the first rank of eminence. Of the other buildings (the grandeur of which
entitle them to the names of palaces), those of the Prince de la Tour and
Taxis, and the British Earl of Aylesbury, are distingushed by great beauty and
magnificence. Indeed, in all the palaces, there are collections of original
paintings, by the most eminent masters, both Italian and Flemish.

The royal library of Brussels claims particular attention, for the magnitude
and liberality of its establishment, containing a grand collection of the most
excellent books in all languages, and being open all the year on Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Saturdays, to public access.

The ar^enal of Brussels is extremely well worth going to see, on account of
the very curious antique arms it contains -- of which it is, at this distance
of time, impossible for me to give you any account worth attention. The armor
of the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth, together with the furniture of his horse, and
state sword, are shown: I could see nothing either novel or interesting in them
-- a strong mark I presume, of my want of taste; but I confess my organs are
not so refined as to feel any extraordinary emotions at the sight of a heap of
i^ert matter, mearly because it once enveloped the carcass of a tyrant: neither
were they so very coarse or dull as not to undergo very pointed sensations at
the sight of the armor of MONTEZUMA, the injured Emperor of Mexico, the victim
of avarice and rapine, under their usual mask, religion. Why MONTEZUMA'S armor
should make a part of the trophies of a Popish state, and be triumphantly
exhibited, is hard to account for in human folly: why that should be exhibited
which is a stain of the deepest-damned black, in their black code of faith, is
astonishing, unless we allow the truth of the old saying, "Quos DEUS vult
perdere, prius dementat;" and that, after having violated every principle of
virtue, morality, and human feeling -- after having surpassed in cruelty all
that we know of the worst monsters of the earth, or of the deep, the fell
hyena, or the ravening shark -- after having successfully emulated the worst
efforts of the most malignant spirits that are said to hold counsel for the
ruin of mankind in hell -- they were desirous to transmit the spoils of their
ravages to posterity, to tell them what glorious things have been achieved in
days of yore, for the love of CHRIST -- to demonstrate what benefits are to be
derived from a religion which has, for so many hundred years, given sanction to
every enormity that strikes the soul of man with horror, and thereby to make
converts to their principles. Monsters! fools! Away with your idle cants, ye
hypocrites, who would brand the cruelties of the present days, the massacres of
the Jacobins, with the crime of infidelity, and attribute those much lamented
defections from humanity to a falling off from the Christian faith. Look to
Mexico! -- see a monster, a high priest of your religion, collecting, by fair
promises and sweet pursuasion, a people round him; and, when a plain was
filled, commanding his bloodhounds, armed with sword and crucifix, to fall
upon and murder them -- because one poor creature, who knew not what a book
meant, had accidentally dropped a bible from his hands! -- see him not sparing
age or sex, but butchering all, for the love of CHRIST! -- When have the
deluded and enfrenzied mob of France perpetrated, in the full torrent of
popular frenzy, such atrocities as this cruel priest committed in cold blood?
when have they hunted down their follow creatures, massacred children, and
given their yet panting members to their dogs for food, as pious Christians,
headed by a pious priest, have done in Mexico? Never! never! -- Learn wisdom,
then, ye hypocrites! and if you cannot convince your enemies by reason, or
conquer them by force, and if their predatory and wicked progress is not to be
stopped, do not sanctify their enormities, or palliate their crimes, in the eye
of reason, by a comparison with those of a deeper dye: remember, that "not to
be the worst stands in some rank of praise," and that the Jacobin cruelties of
Paris, horrible though they were, were pity and tender mercy, compared with the
Christian butchery in Mexico, in Europe, in Asia, in every place where Popery
ever set its bloody hoof.

You are not, from what I say, to infer that I entertain any illiberal
animosity to Popery, as many men, and more women, do, merely because its
articles of faith differ from those in which I was bred; I trust my heart and
understanding are above such very degrading prejudices: but I abhor every thing
that militates against human happiness -- every thing that crushes the
operations of intellect -- every thing that stops the current of opinion, and
prevents its course from enlarging and meliorating our condition: I abhor the
impertinent and hypocritical intrusion of all churchmen upon national or
domestic concerns; the more, when that intrusion is mischievous; and more
still, when it assumes the mask of piety -- for that is at once a fraud upon
man and an abuse of GOD. All those causes of abhorrence attach, more or less,
to all sects of the Christian religion, the Quakers only excepted -- but to
Popery rather more than to any of the others; for it is observed, that while
the very first principles of Christianity, as originally laid down in theory,
are peace and good will toward men, warfare, persecution, and bloodshed, have
practically marked its footsteps wherever it has trod, and its very essence
been perverted by its own ministers, who, entrusted with the key of the temple,
steal the vestments from the alter, to cover the deformed, crookrd back of
vice. But the rays of dawning reason now break with fuller light upon mankind;
and it hastens to meridian resplendence, before which those phantoms raised by
pious jugglers will vanish, and, "like the baseless fabric of a vision, leave
not a wreck behind."

LETTER XII.
IN the arsenal of Brussels was another curiosity, which I overlooked in my
last -- a model of a cannon, constructed so as to throw seven balls at once. It
is some consolation to philanthropy to reflect, that of all the abominable
engines and instruments which the inventive faculties of man have discovered to
increase the cruelty and carnage of war, not one has been of late times
adopted. This model lies here, therefore, only as a memorial of the diabolical
genius of the inventor.

The opera-house of Brussels, accounted the noblest and largest in Europe, is
built after the Italian manner, with rows of lodges or closets, in most of
which are chimneys. One of those, which belonged to a prince, whose title I now
forget, was hung with looking-glasses, in which, while he sat by the fire, took
refreshments, or reclined on his couch, he could see the whole representation,
without being exposed to the view of either the actors or the audience.

The markets of Brussels are very remarkable. The dukes of St. Pierre paid no
less than forty thousand florins, or upwards of three thousand pounds Sterling,
for four pictures of them, painted by RUBENS and SYNDER -- LEWIS the Fourteenth
of France offered an immense sum of money for them; but they found their way at
last into the collection of the British Earl of Orford. The value of them is
said, by connoisseurs, to be beyond computation.

Brussels is extremely well supplied with water: for, besides the river, it has
twenty public fountains, adorned with statues, at the corners of the most
public streets; and the lower part of the city is cut into canals, which
communicate with the great one, extending from Brussels to the Scheldt, fifteen
miles: by means of this canal, which was finished in 1561, and cost the city
eight hundred thousand florins, a person may sail from Brussels to the North
Sea; and barques do actually go twice a day to Antwerp, and back again.

This city is full of churches, of which the most remarkable is that of Saint
MICHAEL and Saint GUDULA, commonly called the cathedral. It is a superb, old
Gothic structure, and, from its celebrated situation, a most beautiful ornament
to the city. It is not only grand in its external appearance, but finely
adorned within. The pillars which support the roof are lofty and elegant: and
against each is a statue of ten feet in height. There are no less than sixteen
chapels in it; and each chapel is enriched with abundance of splendid
ornaments, altar finery, candle-sticks, crucifixes, etc. and with some
excellent pictures too: a picture of JESUS CHRIST presenting the keys of
Paradise to Saint PETER, which is reckoned among the chef-d'oeuvres of RUBENS,
hangs in one of those chapels. There are some monuments, also, of very great
merit, in the choir of this church. But that which I think by far the greatest
and most admirable curiosity (I mean of human workmanship) in the church, is a
pulpit -- one of the richest and most exquisitely wrought pieces I have ever
seen: at the bottom are seen ADAM and EVE as large as life, represented as at
the moment when the angel drove them out of Paradise: in both of their faces
are deeply and expressively marked the traits of a mind agonised with anguish
and remorse: behind EVE is a figure of Death, which follows them; and on the
top of the pulpit are seen the figures of JESUS CHRIST and the Virgin MARY
crushing the head of the Serpent. The strong expressions in the faces of all
those figures, and the exquisite turn of the workmanship. is the more
remarkable, as it is all cut out of oak wood.

Of supernatural curiosities, one of the chapels in this cathedral contains
some, that, for miracle, yield to none in the long catalogue of monkish
devices. Three hosts or wafers are daily worshipped by the people; which hosts
or wafers, the priests firmly assert, and the people as firmly believe, were,
so long ago as the year 1369, stabbed by a Jew, and bled profusely. They are
exposed on every festival, in a chalice richly set with diamonds; and on the
first Sunday after every thirteenth of July, there is a yearly procession in
memory of this stabbing and bleeding, when the hosts are carried in great state
round the city, embellished with all manner of precious stones, and attended by
all the clergy, secular and regular, the magistrates, the courts of justice,
and even by the governor of the province: the chapel where they are kept is of
marble, and the altar of solid silver.

Great GOD! what an opprobium to the human understanding, that, at the time
when the mind of man is sufficiently enlightened to avoid the weakness of
shameful credulity, a whole people should stoop to such extravagant imposition!
what a shame to justice and honesty, that those who are trusted to guard the
rights of a people, and who certainly are too well informed to yield their
belief to such trash, should yet join in, and give the weight of their
authority to so gross, so wicked a deception on a community! The magistrates,
the courts of justice, and the governor -- they walk, too, in company with the
bald-pated impostors -- Good GOD! can more be said? volumes of comment could
not elucidate or render it more conspicuously absurd than the bare recital of
the fact itself.

It is impossible for me to recount to you the number of nunneries, of various
orders, in which unfortunate women were cloistered up, some from bigotry, and
others by force, in this city. There were, however, two of them English -- one
of Dominican ladies, founded by Cardinal HOWARD, in the reign of CHARLES the
Second, of which a lady of the noble House of Norfolk was always abbess: the
other is of Benedictine nuns; the Beguinage of the latter is like a little
town, surrounded with a wall and ditch, and divided into pretty little streets,
where every Beguine has her apartment; the number of them amounts in general to
seven or eight hundred, sometimes more.

If population be the true strength of a nation, this part, of Popery is very
impolitic. The succession of women in this one convent since the reign of
CHARLES the Second, must amount to many thousands. Had those been married, and,
on an average, had only two children each, with the children, grandchildren,
and great-grandchildren, down to the present day, in all the ramifications of
descent, there is no doubt but their number would equal that of the whole
people of some extensive provinces. What, then, must be the loss to the
population of the earth, arising from the celibacy of so many millions of males
and females as have been consigned to sterility in the catholic countries, ever
since that extraordinary doctrine came first into fashion? It is out of the
reach of calculation: not but, now and then, they may have children -- indeed
they certainly have but those are generally disposed of in a way not to bring
shame on the frail Sisterhood, or their Confessors.

In wading through such a torrent of offensive ideas as the innumerable
absurdities and deceptions of Popish countries continually raise in the mind,
it is a pleasing circumstance to be relieved by the contemplation of some
really useful, humane institution; and such a one presents itself now to my
recollection: At Brussels, and, I am told, at all great towns of the
Netherlands, there is a public office for lending money at a very moderate
interest upon pledge^: it is called the Mount of Piety; and was established
nearly 108 years ago by the Archduke, ALBERT, and ISABELLA, his wife. By this
institution, the poor are saved from the fleecings and frauds of pawn-brokers:
and to render it still more perfect in accommodation, there are private
passages for entrance: so that those who would wish to conceal their
necessities, are exempted from the mortification of being seen publicly going
in, or coming out.

You have read, I presume, that in the days of Heathenism, the Deities of that
curious Mythology were supposed to rejoice in the number Three. The Popish Code
has fixed upon Seven as the lucky number. Thus they have seven sacraments,
seven deadly sins, etc. etc. Brussels has improved upon that; and, taking the
hint from their blessed liturgy, has seven grand streets; seven
parish-churches; seven Patrician families, out of which the Magistrates are or
were elected; seven large squares; seven midwives, licensed and sworn by the
Senate; and seven gates, leading to seven places of recreations and exercise,
one to a place proper for fowling, a second to a place for fishing, a third to
one far hunting, a fourth to pleasant fields, a fifth to pastime grounds, a
sixth to springs and vineyards, and a seventh to gardens. Besides all which
sevens, they boast of having once had the great good fortune of entertaining,
at one time, seven crowned heads, with seven thousand horse belonging to their
retinue. If there were any spell in the number Seven, the people of Brussels
surely must have been secure from all mischief; but the Sans-Culottes have
broken the charm, dispersed the necromancers, and lowered poor number Seven to
its mere arithmetical value.

The inns, or eating houses, in this city, were equal to any in the world: a
stranger might dine there better and cheaper than in any place perhaps, on
earth. The wines, also, were excellent and cheap; and coach-hire beyond
expectation reasonable -- And here I recollect to remark to you, that, all the
way from ^^^end to Brussels, one is obliged to (...), dine, etc. in
bed-chambers; a circumstance which is extremely ^^^cord^nt ^o the feelings of
those who have been (...) to Bri^^sh inns* although the bed-chambers are* to
^ay the (...) large and commodious. At the very ^^lls of (...) begins the
famous wood of So^^e, from which the inhabitants were allowed to cut wood for
fuel: as fast as the trees were cut down, fresh ones were planted in their
stead; by which means the wood was preserved, and it afforded a continual
supply to the poor.

Brussels is so very remarkable a place, that I have taken more than my usual
scope of description of it. Just as I had finished it, I read a paragraph in
the public papers. stating that it is likely to be annexed to the territories
of the French Republic.

LETTER XIII.
HITHERTO, as I have proceeded on my travels, I have been purposely very
particular in my descriptions of the towns through which I passed on my way to
India, in order to give your mind a disposition to inquiry, and point out to
you an overflowing source of improvement and delight. Having so far shown you
how amply you will be rewarded, even in amusement, by the trouble of searching
into books, for the accurate topographical descriptions of towns, cities,
buildings, etc. etc. I think I may spare myself that labor for the future, and
confine myself to those points that more immediately apply to the enlargement
of the mind -- I mean, the government, laws, manners, and character of the
people of each country; and only use the former as subservient to the latter
purpose, at least until I come to those places where, the ground being but
little trodden by British feet, more precise description may become necessary.

But, before I leave the Netherlands, I must make a few remarks upon the
country and people, which it would be unpardonable in me to omit, after having
been already so minutely particular in things of inferior merit to the scope of
my plan.

Although personal appearance be, in the eye of Moral Philosophy, a very
inferior consideration, and mind the proper study of man; yet in describing a
people, I cannot think it altogether unnecessary to include their personal
appearance, as it will be found that there exists a greater analogy between the
person and the mind of men than is generally perceived. Thus the lively
hilarity, the restless activity, the levity and fantastic character of the
French, are strongly pourtrayed in the national person. In like manner, the
lofty, fat, clumsy and m^^shapen person of the people of the Netherlands, is
strongly ^^lustrative of the temper and habit of their mind. int^^^^cts and
spirits: industrious and h^^vy; (...) of understanding, but not defective in
judgment; slow in work -- but, persevering in effort, and ^^^^ing in the
process, they are generally successful in the end: in war, cold and backward at
o^^ensive operations, but inflexible and terrible in resistance; like the boar
of the forest, the^ seek not the combat with any, but will not go out of their
way to decline it with the most powerful: their appetites and desires coole^^
(...) other nations, but less subject to change or capri^^: never violently in
love, but rationally attached to their wives; and both men and women faithful
to their conjugal vow, as well from natural temperament, as from a principle of
virtue.

Thus constituted by nature, the effects of their industry are wonderful in
every thing, but chiefly in their canals and sluices, which serve not only for
the support of their commerce, and the facility of intercourse, but for their
defense against enemies: this was in other times; but, alas! the former of
these uses, commerce, has so entirely absorbed all their intellect, and
possessed their very souls, that they seem almost entirely negligent of the
latter; and from being, of all people, the most wise and vigilant in
determining and ascertaining their rights, the most zealous asserters and
defenders of their independence, the most ardent friends to liberty, and the
most determined enemies to slavery, they are become a sort of strange,
inconsistent, hotch-potch politicians, whom ingenuity itself would find a
difficulty in describing. They retain so much of their ancient and noble
vigilance as serves to make them suspicious -- so much of their independence as
disposes them to change -- so much of their jealousy as stimulates them to
resistance -- but not one particle of their former wisdom, to instruct them
where they should attach themselves, where resist, or where resolve to act --
nor of their courage to carry any resolution they might form into effect.

In the year 1781, the Emperor JOSEPH the Second came to Brussels, in order to
indulge his paternal feelings as a monarch with the contemplation and view of
his subjects, and also to be inaugurated; and perhaps upon no occasion that has
ever occurred in the most volatile nation, was there greater joy more
universally expressed. For some time before his arrival, the whole country was
in motion, and, even with them, domestic industry stopped its usual persevering
pace, suspended in the eager, anxious expectation of his arrival. Every thing
in the birth, education, natural disposition and person of the young Emperor,
united to impress his subjects with the most exalted opinion of his goodness,
and to inspire all ranks of people with the most fortunate presages of a wise
and beneficent government. Nor did he disappoint them: his conduct, when among
them, is handed over to remembrance, by a variety of acts of benevolence and
condescension, which showed that the grandeur of the monarch had not made him
forget the nature of the man, and that his heart was better fitted for the
mild, domestic enjoyments of a subject, than the stern and unbending hardihood
fit for a King: for I am perfectly of opinion with the celebrated JUNIUS, that
there are virtues in a private man which are vices in a King; and that the
monarch of a country, in order to preserve respect, should avoid familiarity,
and keep his person sacred from too general observation. SHAKSPEARE has put
into the mouth of his HENRY the Fourth, a beautiful expression on this subject,
well worth the attention of Kings -- "Had I so lavish of my presence been,
So common hackney'd in the eyes of men.
Opinion, that did help me to the Crown,
Had still kept loyal to possession,
And left me in reputeless banishment,
A fellow of no mark, nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir,
But, like a comet, I was wondered at:
That men would tell their children, This he be."


Of the number I have heard, I will mention one anecdote only, and one
remarkably expression of JOSEPH'S, which will serve to show in its true light
what his disposition was; and when you consider them as the act and sentiment
of a young man nursed in the lap of despotism and pride, you cannot but
consider them as mavelous.

In his journey to the low countries, he visited Wurtzaurg; and, in his
perambulating alone and incog, stopped at a little public-house, where the
people were busily employed in entertaining themselves: he went in, and
inquired why they were so merry -- "Sir," said one of the country people, "we
are celebrating a marriage." "May I be permitted to join the company?" said the
disguised Emperor. The host obtained that permission for him. When he entered
the room, the married couple were presented to him, and he received them with
great gaiety, sat down, drank their health, and, having informed himself of
their situation, took leave of the company: but what was their astonishment,
when, on lifting up a bottle of wine, they found a draft for six hundred
florins, signed JOSEPH, and payable for the use of the married couple.

At Luxembourg, when the people called aloud on Heaven to shower down blessings
on him for his affability, he made use of this remarkable expression, while his
feelings moistened his eyes: "I wish I could make you as happy in my care, as I
am in your affection!"

The affability of monarchs has often been magnified by the foolish, and often
blamed by the wise: But, if all the instances of eondescension practiced by
kings were like that I have recited of JOSEPH; if they arose from a sound,
unquestionable spirit of philanthropy, not from gaping curiosity, broad folly,
or a peurile inquisitive habit; and if, instead of conceiving those they visit
paid for their intrusion with the honor of having conversed with majesty, and
leaving them churlishly, they would generously pay them with hard cash, as the
good Emperor JOSEPH did; then, indeed, their affability might defy the
exaggeration of fools, and must certainly command the applause of the wise.

On the 13th of July, the ceremony of inauguration took place at Brussels.
Nothing could equal the splendor of the place but the general joy of the
people: the crowds were beyond all conception immense, and every thing was
carried on with regularity till evening, when, in playing off some fireworks,
that noble building the townhouse took fire, and was burnt: six unfortunate
persons lost their lives, and twenty were dangerously hurted: those who
perished were absolutely roasted, and their cries were beyond description
piercing. To such a temper as JOSEPH'S, you will readily conclude that this
must be a most afflicting circumstance -- it was so; and he left Brussels under
the pre^^^re of very different feelings from those with which he entered it,
and was followed by the prayers and blessings of all the people.

But now we are to view the reverse of the medal. The sound of their prayers
for his welfare, and praises of his goodness, had hardly died away upon their
lips, ere their minds turned to revolt and rebellion. I will not say that they
were not right in one or other, or which of those two extremes: certainly they
could not be right in both; much less can their subsequent conduct be
justified, or accounted for, in any principle of human nature, but that of the
most abject meanness, dastardly feebleness, and gross folly. They returned to
their allegiance, and besought forgiveness: that forgiveness was granted. How
they have behaved since, I have already informed you, (see Letter IV.); and I
have now to add, that, pillaged by the French, and likely to be left
unprotected, they have again held their necks out, soliciting the protection
and the yoke of Austria, and have actually offered to raise 100,000 men for the
Emperor, if he will again drive the French out of their territories -- An
excellent word that IF!

How a people, once formed for manly pith and love of freedom, could bend so
low, is unaccountable. It is a question hard to be determined, whether an
obstinate adherence even to a bad cause, is not more respectable, than a
fickle, alternate dereliction, and adoption of right and wrong, as it suits the
caprice or convenience of the moment? Of two things so very contemptible, I
think the former the least odious and least unmanly.

At the same time, my observations on the country led me to conceive, that
under the name of freedom, they groaned under the yoke of tyranny; for, though
the country was, as I have described it, charming, its fecundity unsurpassed,
its face decorated with the best gifts of Providence -- I mean, smiling fields
and bleating plains -- though Ceres profusely repaid the labors of the
husbandman, though every field had the appearance of a garden, and though, upon
inquiry, I found that land which would bring in England five pounds an acre,
rented at eight, nine, and ten shillings of our money at most -- yet, in spite
of all this, the farmers were rather poor in general -- not even one of them to
be found rich and substantial, like the middle rank of that class of men in
England. They wanted the great stimulus to industry -- security of their
property: they were liable to be turned out by their landlords at pleasure, and
be plundered when it should please some monarch to make war.

The first of these, however, you will observe, is not the oppression of the
Emperor: it is a tyranny of that worst of all constituent parts of a state, an
aristocracy -- a vile aristocracy! -- that universal, that every-day despotism,
under which all places groan, more or less -- which is exercised in all the
various gradations of life that chequer society, from the great man who, under
the name of minister, domineers over the peer, to the country fox-hunting
savage, who puts a poor wretch in jail to pine for years, (his family, the
while, supported by the parish charity). only for doing that which makes the
enjoyment of his own life, killing a partridge or a hare! -- that aristocratic
tyranny which is seen scowling on the brows of a swaggering fellow in power,
adopted by his secretary with increase, by him handed down to an upstart set of
fellows in office, dependent on his smile, and by them displayed in all the
nauseous, despicable forms which awkwardness and ignorance lifted above their
stations, never fail to assume -- the cold reserve, the affected stare, the
liftless nod, the feigned deafness, blindness, absence, and other fashionable
perfections, which serve as vents for upstart arrogance, and indemnify the
sycophant for the vile homage and submission which he has before paid some
wretch, mean and arrogant as himself! -- I tell you, my dear FREDERICK, it is
this aristocratic usurpation of power, where power exists not, nor is necessary
-- this insulting assumption of superiority, this hidden petty oppression which
rears its head in every manor, nay, almost every town and village in the
kingdom, that put the nations out of tune, mars the harmony of social
arrangement, and renders power in the aggregate obnoxious. Why, our very women
have their saucy, aristocratic, supercilious front, their haughty stare, their
contemptuous titter; and barter the winning softness of the sex, the dimples
where the loves should dwell, for the haughty to^s of the head, the ill-natured
sneer, and the insulting Hector's frown -- And thus the spirit of aristocracy,
like a poisonous weed, grows and expands from one to the other with baleful
luxuriance, gradually overspreading the whole face of humanity, stopping the
wholesome current of the social atmosphere, and choking up the less rank but
more useful plants -- Thus it goes round in shameful traffic; and, as the poet
says, "The wh -- re she kicks her cully,
Court-waiters are kicked at call;
We are all kicked, yet bully
While interest kicks the ball."


I am persuaded, that if the grievances of the most despotic states were
fairily estimated, and assigned to their real authors, the princes of such
states would be found responsible for a very small share indeed, when compared
with the aristocracy: and by aristocracy, I mean not merely lords, but all men
who convert the wealth which Providence has bestowed upon them to the purposes
of tyranny, exactions, imposition and oppression -- under which four heads we
will again find, not only imprisonment for begging alms, imprisonment for
shooting a partridge, but often seduction, adultery, and persecution for
resisting or resorting to law for punishment of that seduction or adultery. Of
all those things, the proofs, I fear, in all nations, are abundant: I am sure
they are so in the best governed state in Europe -- I mean, England -- "Qui
capit, ille facit."

I have thrown up a fool's cap: how many are there who wi^^ privately put it on!

LETTER XIV.
AS the time of my departure from Brussels pproached, I found the bitter
sensations with which I left London, in some measure, returning. My fortunate
encounter with General LOCKHART had afforded me a temporary respite; but^ now I
was once more to face an unknown country alone, without the chance of again
meeting a friend to solace my mind, or mitigate my woe, on this side of India.

Having seen as much of Brussels as my time and occasions would at all allow,
and, in truth, having rather trespassed on my plan, for the reasons just
mentioned, I determined to push forward as fast as it was possible, and took
post for Liege, where I arrived, after passing through a beautiful, fertile,
well-cultivated country, to the charms of which the renewed agony of my
feelings redered me almost insensible.

As we have now almost the whole length of Germany before us to travel through,
it will be proper, before I proceed further, to give you a general idea of the
constitution of this vest empire -- over all which, while one great monarch
nominally presides, there are spread a number of petty potentates, who really
rule after as distinct forms of government as almost any two governments,
however remote in Europe.

Considering the nature of government abstractedly, one would suppose that it
arose from the general will of the society governed, and was formed for their
use and benefit alone: but if we view the different systems scattered over the
civilized part of the earth, we shall find that they originated from force and
fraud; and that, in their first formation, when bodily prowess, not
intellectual power, bore sway -- when he that could carry the strongest armor,
and strike the heaviest blows, was sure to govern -- when mere animal strength
and ferocity disinherited reason of her rights, and robbed her of that
ascendency to which the invention of gunpowder, aided by the art of printing,
has since in some sort restored her -- the basis upon which governments were
raised was, one man, not the whole society; the point then was, how this or
that strong ruffian could collect most slaves about him, not how this or that
society should choose the best head: if he has strength to carry havoc through
the ranks of their enemies, and then to overawe themselves, he was sure of
dominion over the people, and left it to his son; but if it so happened that he
did not also bequeath to him bodily prowess to preserve it, the next strong
ruffian seized the reins, flung him from his seat and kept it till he, or some
one of his heirs, was again served so in his turn by some other usurper. Hence
arose the cabals and intrigues of courts, the spirit of party, and intestine
commotion; till at length the people, for their own security, and to avoid the
horrors of civil war, made choice (from dismal necessity) of some one family to
rule them. As society advanced, and opulence held forth temptation, some
greater ruffian, followed by a horde of needy, famished barbarians, made
incursions on those rulers; and being irresistible, as well from numbers firmly
connected, as from the powerful impulse of necessity, under whose banners they
generally robbed and ravaged, was submitted to on terms, and became Lord
Paramount of a number of petty sovereigns, who did homage to him, and fleeced
the miserable subjects, to keep him in humor; and thus, in a series of time,
the power of both took root, and remained immovable, unless when torn up by
some violent tempest that convused the state, and shook it to its foundations.

Reading this account, you will very naturally exclaim, "Good GOD! how absurd!
how irrational!" Yet so it is; and from this source, muddy though it be, is
modern honor, and modern greatness, and modern high blood, derived: from this
foul and turbid fountain have most of the governments of the world issued; from
those strong men of yore have most of our modern governors descended: and as it
generally happens (so equally has Providence distributed the gifts of nature)
that the strength of the intellectual part is in the inverse ratio of the
animal, perhaps that is the reason why monarchs are formed, in general, of
greater bodily vigor than mental endowments, and better fitted for the field
than the cabinet -- and for this reason are obliged to take from the puisne
ranks of their subjects some assistant, so far removed from the great standard
of antique dignity, as to possess understanding enough to govern.

Upon a retrospective view of the History of Europe, it will be found, that for
a long time after the birth of CHRIST, Germany was divided among such petty
rulers as I have described, who each held his little state in sovereignty, and
was called Princeps in Latin, or, in plain English, Prince. After the downfall
of the Western Empire, a nation called Franks, from that part called Franconia,
overran a great part of Gaul and Germany, and in the fifth century took
possession of that part of Gaul which lay north of the river Loire. In the year
800, CHARLEMAGNE, the son of PEPIN, their king, formed an immense empire in the
west, comprehending a great part of Germany, France, Italy, and a part of
Spain. About eighty years afterward, the petty princes of Germany shook off
the French Carlovinian race, and elected an emperor of their own from the House
of Bavaria.

At last HENRY the Fourth, having displeased that grand arbiter the Pope, was
put under the ban, and in consequence deposed by the states; on which occasion
his Holiness had the address to make that great dignity elective, he having
uncontroled power over the electors; since which it has continued so, with some
modifications, and under certain regulations, formed by CHARLES the Fourth, at
the diet of Nuremberg. The election, however, has been always so managed, that
it has never departed from the regular line of succession but when there was an
actual want of heirs.

In a country over which the Pope had such influence, it might reasonably be
supposed that intolerance is carried to a great length; but it is not so, as a
review of each particular state shows. The estalished religion, in general, is
Popery. JOSEPH the Second, that good and wise monarh, displayed a greater
spirit of toleration than any other Catholic prince since HENRY the Fourth of
France. He was not murdered by a friar for it, it is true -- those days of
pious barbarity are past; but he was visited on the occasion by his Holiness,
who, after a variety of remonstrances against the relaxation he gave to
religious severity in his own dominions, finding him unmoved by papers,
resolved to attack him in person; but, whether it was that the pontifical
amulet lost its charm when out of the air of Rome, or that his Holiness was not
properly anointed before (like Hecate in Macbeth) he took his flight, or that
he forgot some of those relics which were expected to operate on JOSEPH'S
mind, so it was, that the good emperor continued inflexibly attached to his
former resolve; and, after kissing his Holiness' toe, and a thousand other
pretty politenesses, sent him back to Rome again with his finger in his mouth;
and a story to relate. that would, at one time, have set all Europe in a flame,
and sent the good monarch, like HENRY the Second of England, to lash himself
naked over the rotten remains of some vagabond fraudulent priest.

In the election of emperor, the laws of the empire have laid down no
qualification but that which ought to be the fine qua non of all princes,
namely, that he be justus, bonus, et utilis -- Neither have they made any
limitation in regard to religion, nation, state, or age; nevertheless, the
majority of electors being Papists, a Roman Catholic prince is always chosen.

The rank of the emperor is very great: he is looked upon by all crowned heads
as the first European potentate; and* as such, precedence is always given him
and his ambassadors: he is the supreme head of the German empire; but his power
in the administration thereof is very limited indeed. In ancient times. the
emperor had considerable domains and incomes; but warfare and prodigality have
dissipated the greatest part of them, and they have been successively alienated
or mortgaged, so that his revenues were very inconsiderable lately, and now,
since the French war, are almost as nothing.

The present emperor FRANCIS found the empire, when he was elected, incumbent
with difficulties of the most enormous magnitude -- a war on which the
existence of every monarchy in Europe seemed to depend, an exhausted treasury,
and a disposition to revolt in a part of his dominions, the Netherlands. At
this present time, his situation is, beyond that of every other prince,
lamentable: -- almost all his resources gone, and an insolent, formidable,
triumphant enemy, proceeding and carrying conquest by rapid strides through his
country. He called upon his people to support him. The states of the
Netherlands, instead of assisting him to stop the progress of the enemy,
invited and opened their gates to them, put them in their bosom, and were
stung. Of the other states, some refuse their aid, while some have recourse to
feeble expedients; and, to evade the weight, temporise, procrastinate, and
shuffle, till at length will come the French army, and force them to do for
their enemy ten times more than (if done timely, and with a good grace) might
save the empire and themselves. The KING of PRUSSIA, one of those states, on
being called upon, says he is busily employed in securing the plunder of
Poland, and cannot come -- while the tiger is glutting in the blood of the
harmless flocks, the huntsmen are coming upon him, to cut him off. As an
Englishman, zealous for the welfare of my country, I wish the KING of PRUSSIA
may not, by his attention to Poland, sacrifice all Germany to the French. As an
honest man, I cannot help entertaining a wish, that the scandalous and
outrageous wrongs done to Poland, and this treachery to the allies whom he
himself brought into the present difficulties, may be expiated by any calamity,
however great, that does not extend to the interest or wellbeing of Europe.

It is a maxim in courts of equity, that a man coming to demand redress, should
come with clean hands, and, seeking equity, should do equity. This maxim has
unfortunately never yet extended to decisions between states: power is their
right, and force decides -- Yet, in a contest like the present, the very
foundation of which is hostility to kings, and which is carried on in the
twofold way of arms, in the open field, and private negotiation for
insurrection; when, for the interest of the cause they espouse, as well as
their own personal safety, kings should assume at once their best form to
appreciate themselves, and discredit their enemies in the eyes of mankind -- in
such a state of things, I say, for the KING of PRUSSIA and the EMPRESS of
RUSSIA to take the part they have done with regard to Poland, is so
extravagant, that we can only account for it in the will of the ALMIGHTY
predisposing them for some extraordinary cri^^s. No one would expect them to
depart from their accustomed crooked path of policy, if safety did not loudly
call upon them to proceed in the direct road. It is monstrous to see beings
endowed with common sense, expending themselves in an unjust struggle for
aggrandizement, while the sword of extinction is suspended by a hair over their
heads.

But to return -- in this state is the young emperor at this moment, deserted
by his people in the Low Countries, unaided by his Continental ally, and
supported only by Great Britain. What the issue may be, GOD alone can tell: but
every one possessing a heart of feeling, or a single sentiment of honor or
justice, must wish that young prince a fortunate delivery from the difficulties
which the impolicy and wickedness of others have led him into, and which the
treachery of some of them make more formidable, if not utterly insuperable.

LETTER XV.
THE various districts or territories into which Germany is divided, go under a
variety of designations, not known among us as independent titles to power --
principalities, seigniories, counties, electorates, margravates, and bishoprics
lay and spiritual. Of the lay bishoprics, Osnaburg, the prince bishop of which
is our DUKE of YORK, makes one: and Liege, where we are now arrived is the
territory of a bishop lay and spiritual, or spiritual and temporal, one of the
fairest kind of that class -- for he possesses temporalities, and enjoys them;
whereas their lordships merely spiritual, enjoy and have the ingratitude and
impudence to renounce them: but no matter for that; the bishop of Liege
possesses a bishopric, fruitful in corn, wine, wood, and pasture, with air
extremely pleasant and temperate; and while the latter gives his terrestrial
clay health and appetite, the former afford him the means of preserving the
one, and indulging the other, with true spiritual comfort, and high
ecclesiastical voluptuousness. In cases of repletion, too, the mineral waters
of the bishopric, particularly the well-known one of Spa, offer their aid; and
some of the best beer in the world, which is brewed in these territories
diversifies his spiritual Lordship's cup, and, with its pungent bitter, sends
back his palate to his wine with renovated relish.

It is astonishing how inconsistent with themselves, and how discordant in
their constituent principles, some very wise institutions are. Thus episcopacy,
and all other branches, posts or ranks, high or low, commissioned or
non-commissioned, of the church, publicly and systematically profess poverty,
abstinence, and an utter indifference to temporal concerns, while their livings
are enormous, and, themselves overfed. Nay, so cautiously has ecclesiastical
law provided for that, even in our liberal establishments, that a bishop, at
his instalment, positively declares, in the face of GOD, at the holy altar,
that he is averse to being a bishop -- nolo episcopari -- Under such
conditions, what must not the charity, the condescension, the mortifying
submission of a divine be, to stoop to a bishopric, and suffer such a heavy
load to be heaped upon his back -- against his will! Assuredly, the imposing a
bishopric upon him must be a great act of violence on his inclinations: for I
cannot think it possible that a Christian divine would, in the first place,
commit the crime of simony by seeking preferment, and gaining it by
prostitution; much less can I believe that he would be guilty, at the holy
altar, of a solemn act of perjury, by swearing nolo episcopari, if he was not
actually, and bona fide, averse to a bishopric.

The bishop of Liege, however, may be fairly acquitted on the score of his
temporal half, for the share of transgressions committed by his spiritual half.
And unquestionably, as a Christian divine, he must groan in spiritual
humiliation, when he reflects that his title is emblazoned with the gorgeous
vanities of prince of Liege, duke of Bouillon, marquis of Franchemont, count of
Looz, etc. Such a set of proud worldly titles are of themselves sufficient
(putting the wine and beer, and repletion, out of the question) to annihilate
the spiritual merits of the bishop, and expunge the grace of GOD from his name
here, if not from himself hereafter.

Of all kinds of slavery, that nation groans beneath the worst, which has the
name, without the essence, of a free constitution; and Germany abounds with
such. By the constitution of this bishopric, the government consists of three
states, the first is the chapter of Liege; the second, the nobility; and the
third, the deputies of the towns and capital. These, however, are very seldom
called together, except to raise taxes, or on some such extraordinary
emergency: but there is a committee of the states who meet three times a-week,
and in time of war daily; they are always about the prince bishop, to make
remonstrances, and demand the redress of grievances -- from whence we may
reasonably infer, that the people are well protected, or at least well
governed; the continual intercourse between the committee and bishops, no
doubt, tending to promote a very happy influence in favor of the people!

In forming this constitution, special care has been taken to give the first
state a great preponderance. The chapter is to consist of sixty persons, who
must either prove their nobility for four generations, both by father and
mother, or have been doctors or licentiates of divinity for seven years, or of
law for five years, in some famous university, before they can be admitted.

How is it that the profession of the law should bear such potent sway in
almost all countries -- that even in Liege, a Catholic country and
ecclesiastical government, five years study of the law should be deemed an
equal qualification of seven of divinity? In England, and its dependencies, the
ascendancy of the law is still greater; and even in America, that profession is
the first step to state honors. The truth is, that the science of the law,
which, however despicable in practice, is the noblest of human sciences,
quickens and invigorates the understanding more than all the other kinds of
learning put together; while the study of divinity (I do not mean real divinity
or morality, but that whimsical jumble of miracles and incongruities, of
fulsome cant and senseless rhapsody, called so by churchmen) contracts the
understanding, and bends it into a kind of crooked cunning. Formerly, the
clergy were the dispensers of the laws, and they alone studied it -- Happy
times! happy people! When the united powers of both lawyers and priests were
lodged in the same person, it is no wonder that they were able to enslave the
persons, when they had got possession of the understanding, of the people --
that we at this day see so many stupendous monuments remaining of their pride
and power, and that the bloated load of episcopacy still has its votaries and
supporters.

The bishopric of Liege is very populous and extensive, containing many large
towns, many baronies and seigniories, seventeen abbeys for men, who must be all
gentlemen, and eleven for ladies, exclusive of swarms of inferior note. In this
distribution of the abbeys, male and female, I do not think that sufficient
regard has been had to equality of numbers: I really think the fathers have
been ill used. The ladies, though, I dare say, are well enough contented with
the arrangement.

Although, as I have already apprized you, I do not mean to enter into a minute
description of towns, so very easily found in many volumes of geography and
history, there occasionally occur certain curiosities in some of those towns,
which it would be unpardonable in me to pass over, as they may not perhaps be
found in such books of those sciences as fall in your way.

Liege, the capital of the bishopric, is unquestionably a beautiful city, of
immense size: its opulence, its pleasantness, its plenty, and salubrity, may be
calculated from the name it has long been expressly called by way of eminence
-- the Paradise of Priests. -- Indeed, it must needs be a holy and happy city;
for it is chiefly occupied with convents, churches, and other religious
foundations.

The Paradise of Priests! -- Excellent! Why, if the genius of sensuality
himself were to torture his invention for centuries, to strike out an
appellation for the grand emporium of luxury, voluptuousness, and sensual
enjoyment, he could not have hit on one so singularly appropriate as the
Paradise of Priests.

In a grand cathedral here, are five great silver chests full of relics,
besides several silver statues of saints; and a Saint GEORGE on horseback, of
massy gold; and in Saint WILLIAM'S Convent, without the city, is the tomb of
the famous English traveller, Sir JOHN MANDEVILLE, from whom all lying
travelers have been since proverbially called Mandevilles -- an appellation
which, I promise you, I will hazard the imputation of dullness rather than
incur. I suppose it was for his truly priestlike powers in the mavelous that
he was honored with a birth among their reverences. They have thought it
necessary, however, to entreat, by an inscription in bad French, all persons
who see it, to pray for his soul. In truth, poor Sir JOHN'S mavelous stories
were as harmless as ever were invented, and entertaining to boot. If so much
could be said for their reverences, they might venture to rest their future
safety on their own innocence and GOD'S mercy: but I fear their miracles cut
deeper, and will be found to go to a much more important and serious account.

In the bishopric of Liege, twenty miles from the capital, stands the famous
town of Spa. so renowned for its excellent waters, that it has become a vulgar
name for almost all mineral waters whatsoever. Those are said to open
obstructions, concoct crudities, dry up excessive moisture, and strengthen the
nerves and bowels; and such is their reputation, that prodigious quantities of
them are carried into foreign countries.

Fortunate coincidence, to have such a choice and easy panacea for intemperance
attached to the Paradise of Priests!

LETTER XVI.
AIX-LA-CHAPELLE -- The imperial city of Aix-la-Chapelle, by the Germans called
Achen, lies at the distance of twenty-six miles, nearly east, of Liege. As it
was a moderate stage, the weather fine, and the face of the country around
beautiful, I found my journey extremely pleasant, and entered that famous city
in as good a disposition to be pleased with it, as circumstances and
reflections so melancholy as mine (which, in spite of every effort, would
intrude themselves) may be supposed to allow. It is certainly a very fine city,
and well deserves the reputation it has in all parts of the world.

Perhaps no city in Germany has a fairer claim to antiquity than
Aix-la-Chapelle; for it was famous, even, in the time of the ancient Romans*
for its waters, and was by them called Aquasgranum, or Urbs Aqu^nsus. It was
destroyed by the H^^^s, who, like the French now, destroyed and tr^mpled under
foot every vestige of refinement, wherever they carried their conquests; and it
lay in ruins till it was rebuilt by CHARLEMAGNE, who made it the seat of his
empire on this side of the Alps. By him it was ordained, the kings of the
Romans should be crowned there: and it has been famous, since that time, for
councils and treaties, particularly that famous one between France and Spain in
1663, and another lately between France and Great Britain.

Although there are many Protestants, both Lutherans and Calvinists, in this
city, they are obliliged to go to church two miles off, at a place called
Vaels, in the duchy of Limburg; so that Popery prevails with some portion of
its intolerance. Here, as in all other places subject to its power, it has
raised the Gothic gloomy pile, accumulated enormous masses of wealth, and
hoarded up treasures, under the gulling pretexts of religious paraphernalia: a
golden casket, set with precious stones of inestimable value, is hoarded up,
not for the actual value of the moveable, but as the only fit receptacle for a
relic it contains -- a curious one, too, even of its kind -- a bit of earth!
-- A bit of earth? yes! a bit of earth, common earth! -- only with this
fortunate circumstance in addition, that a drop of the blood of Saint STEPHEN
fell, or is said to have fallen, upon it, as he was stoned to death! think of
that, master FREDERICK! Why, when those things occur to me, I feel myself
agitated by a whimsical tumult of sensations, serious and ludicrous, sorrowful
and merry, that it is impossible to describe -- something like that state in
which the spirits flutter when a person whimpers between a laugh and cry. But,
to carry the matter farther, when we recollect that some of the wisest and
brightest of mankind, some of the bravest warriors, sternest philosophers, and
ablest statesmen, that ever existed, have been the dupes of those shallow
artificers, and actually have knelt in devout homage to these bits of earth,
bone, sticks, and stone, etc. we must allow that it answers a great and noble
end, by pointing out to us the infirmity of our nature, and showing us, to use
the words of one of our brightest luminaries, "what shadows we are, and what
shadows we pursue!"

We have already had, and are likely yet to have such a clumsy load of
cathedrals to attend to, that I should not mention that of Aix-la-Chapelle (a
large, gloomy, dreary, old-fashioned, Gothic pile), were i^ not that it carries
along with it some matters worthy of notice. What think you, then, of an
emperor, a pope, and three hundred and sixty-five bishops, in one company? Oh!
precious assemblage! But where, I hear you ask -- where, in the name of GOD,
collect the bishops? a pope and emperor are easily had! My dear FREDERICK,
three hundred and sixty-five bishops might easily be picked up in Christendom,
and leave more behind, too, than would serve any useful purpose to the world.
-- Yes, the Emperor CHARLEMAGNE, and three hundred and sixty-five bishops, were
present at the consecration of this cathedral by Pope LEO the Third. That
emperor lies now in great state under the altar of the choir: Pope LEO rots in
Rome; and for the bishops, they are gone, perhaps, as Hamlet says, "to stop a
beer barrel." --

"The imperial CAESAR, dead, and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole, to keep the wind away*"
From such a splendid and opulent attendance at the consecration, one would
naturally expect that this cathedral would have been, at the very outlet,
enriched with costly and valuable trappings: but no -- one image of that of
Liege would purchase the whole. It should be recollected, however, that they
were all, excepting the emperor, Churchmen -- a class, whose charity, generally
speaking, has, like a ring, neither end nor beginning; or at least ends and
begins in itself, where nobody can see it; or, according to the old proverb,
begins at home.

To compensate, however, for those worldly, worthless vanities, gold, silver,
and jewels, his Holiness, and their three hundred and sixty-five Graces,
presented the cathedral with some exquisite pieces of relic, of more
inestimable value, by their account, than the mines of Potosi or Golconda: the
first, an old covering -- it would be folly for me to say, whether gown,
petticoat, or shift -- but they, that is to say, the priests, say, and the
faithful believe them, that it was the shift worn by the Virgin MARY at the
birth of CHRIST -- how their Holinesses came by it, is hard to conjecture: --
in the next place, a piece of coarse cloth, which, they also say, and are
believed when they say, was girt about CHRIST on the cross: thirdly, a piece of
cord, with which they say he was bound: -- fourthly, some of the blood of Saint
STEPHEN, now eighteen hundred years old; -- and, fifthly, a picture of the
Virgin and Child, embossed on a j^sper, by Saint LUKE. With all due deference
to their Reverences' knowledge, I should think a dozen statues in gold of the
apostles would be rather a more valuable gift, and more ornamental, than these
rags and cords, which I dare say did not cost altogether six pence. We talk
here of our blue ribbons, our red ribbons, and our stars as great donations;
but I think the presents of the Pope and three hundred and sixty-five bishops
to the cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle, beat them out of the field, whether we
consider the magnificence of the gift, or the generosity of the givers.

But that which, above all things, renders Aix-la-Chapelle worthy of notice, is
the salubrity of its waters, which bring from England, and all other European
nations, a vast concourse of valetudinarians, who contribute at once to the
gaiety and opulence of the city and adjacent country. Some of those waters are
used for drinking, and others for bathing, resembling very much, in their
quality, the virtues of those of Bath in Somersetshire, but that some of them
are still hotter and stronger: they are unpleasant to the taste till use
reconciles the palate to them, and most of them have a very offensive smell;
but they are often powerful in effect, and give relief in a great variety of
maladies; and they are rendered still more palatable by the commodious neatness
of the baths, the excellence of the accommodations, and the great plenty of
provisions, which are at once good and reasonable in this city.

I staid to short a time at Aix-la-Chapelle, that I could not, without the aid
of some of the miracles wrought by the saints of the Romish church, or Sir JOHN
MANDEVILLE, acquire a sufficient knowledge of the people, to attempt a
description of them, or their manners -- but it and Spa are so well known, that
you cannot have much trouble in finding a description of them already written.

As far as my observations enabled me to judge, there was nothing in the German
character that had the power either to create interest, or excite great
attention. -- They are rather to be approved than admired; and, wanting those
prominent features that so whimsically chequer other nations with the extremes
of bad and good, majestic and ridiculous, afford little subject to the
traveller for the indulgence of sentimental reflection, or to the philosopher
for the exercise of moral speculation.

LETTER XVII.
BIDDING adieu to the famous city of Aix-la-Chapelle, which, very
untraveller-like, I passed without drinking of its waters. I pushed on, and
soon arrived at the city of Juliers, the capital of a duchy of that name,
sixteen miles from Aix. The country itself is wonderfully fruitful, teeming
with abundance of all sorts of corn, wood, pasture, woad, coal, and cattle;
above all, a most excellent breed of horses, of which great numbers are
exported.

As to the city, though a capital, there was nothing in it that I thought worth
attention -- that of neatness is its greatest praise. It is not, like Liege,
overloaded with enormous church edifices; but, what is much better, the people
are opulent, the poor well supplied, and all happy. In all likelihood, this is
owing to the inhabitants being a mixture of Protestant and Roman Catholic; for,
by a treaty between the Elector Palatine and the Emperor of Brandenburg,
respecting the succession of the territories of the Duke of Cleves, both the
Lutherans and Calvinists of this duchy, and of Berg, are to enjoy the public
exercise of their religion, and all other religious rites.

If experience would allow us to wonder at any thing in the management of the
rulers of nations, it must surely be matter of astonishment, that in an article
of such consequence as eternity, and which must be directed by private
sentiments alone, such violence should systematically be offered to opinion,
and that mankind should be dragooned, as they have been for so many weary
centuries, into the profession of particular modes of faith. Combating opinion
by force is so absurd, that I am sure those who attempted it, never could
flatter themselves with the sl^ghtest hopes of success. It is therefore clear,
that it was in motives very different from real wishes for the eternal welfare
of man's soul, that religious persecution originated. Political finesse and
state stratagem are the parents of persecution: and until every constitution is
clean purged of religious prejudices, it must continue to be clogged with
obstructions, and involved in confusion. If it be objected that certain
religious sects are hostile to certain states, it may be answered, that they
are so because the state is hostile to them. Cease to persecute, and they will
cease to be hostile -- Sublata causa tollitur effectus. It is folly, broad
folly, to suppose that there are in any particular religion, seeds of hostility
to government, any more than in any particular name, complexion, stature, or
color of the hair. Put, for experiment, all the men in the kingdom, of above
five feet ten inches high, under tests and disqualifications, (and it would be
full as rational as any other tests) -- and, my life for it, they would become
hostile* and very justly, too; for there is no principle, human or divine, that
enforces our attachment to that government which refuses us protection, much
less to that which brands us with disqualifications, and stigmatizes us with
unmerited marks of inferiority.

The states of this duchy, and that of Berg, consist of the nobility and the
deputies of the four chief towns of each; and they lay claim to great
privileges in their diets -- but they are subject to the Elector Palatine, to
whom they annually grant a certain sum for the ordinary charges of the
government, besides another which bears the name of a free gift.

"Some authors say that this town was founded by JULIUS; others deny it; the
dispute has run high, and is impossible to be determined: fortunately, however,
for mankind, it does not signify a straw who built it; nor could the decision
of the question answer any one end that I know, of instruction, profit, or
entertainment. Parva leves capiunt animos. Those who rack their brains, or
rather their heads, for brains they can have none, with such finical
impertinent inquiries, should be punished with mortification and
disappointment, for the misuse of their time. But what else can they do? You
say, Why, yes; they might sit idle, and refrain from wasting paper with such
execrable stuff; and that would be better. By the bye, if there were two good
friends in every library in Europe, licensed to purge it, like the Barber and
Curate in Don Quixotte, of all its useless and mischievous stuff, many, many
shelves that now groan under heavy weights would stand empty.

Traveling over a very even road, and a country extremely flat, (for from
Aix-la-Chapelle I met with but one hill), I arrived at Cologne, the capital,
not only of the archbishopric of that name, but of the Circle of the Lower
Rhine. My spirits, which were not in the very best tone, were not at all raised
on entering the city, by the ringing of church-bells, of all tones and sizes,
in every quarter. Being a stranger, I thought it had been a rejoicing day; but,
on inquiry, found that it was the constant practice. Never, in my life, had I
heard such an infernal clatter: never before had I seen any thing so gloomy and
melancholy -- the streets black -- dismal bells tolling -- bald-pated friars,
in myriads, trailing their long black forms through the streets, moulding their
faces into every shape that art had enabled them to assume, in order to excite
commiseration, and begging alms with a melancholy song calculated for the
purpose, somewhat like that of our blind beggars in London, and productive of
the same disagreeable effect upon the spirits. In short, I was not an hour in
Cologne, when those circumstances, conspiring with the insuperable melancholy
of my mind, made me wish myself out of it.

Nevertheless, Cologne is a fine city; and if it be any satisfaction to you to
spin those fine imaginary ligaments that, in the brain of the book-worm,
connect the ancient and modern world, I will inform you, that it was anciently
called Colonia Agrippina, because AGRIPPINA, the mother of NERO, was born
there, and honored it with a Roman colony, because it was her birthplace. The
mind, forced back to that period, and contemplating the mischiefs of that
monster NERO, cannot help wishing that Cologne had been burnt the nigth of her
birth, and Miss AGRIPPINA buried in the ruins, ere she had lived to give birth
to that scourge of the world.

Although the established religion here be the Roman Catholic, extraordinary as
it may appear, they are very jealous of power; and though the elector, by his
officers, administers justice in all criminal causes, they will not permit him,
in person, to reside above three days at a time in the city, nor to bring a
great train with him when he visits it; for this reason he commonly resides at
Bonne.

Cologne has a very considerable trade, particularly in Rhenish wine; and its
gin is reckoned the best in the world, and bears a higher price than any other
in all the nations of Europe.

Like all great Roman Catholic cities, it has a profusion of churches, crosses,
miracles, saints, and church trinkets; and I really think it has more steeples
and bells than any two cities in Germany. As Liege was called the Paradise of
Priests, this ought to be called the Golgotha of Skulls and Skull-caps. In the
church of Saint URSULA, they show, or pretend at least to show, the bones of
eleven thousand virgin martyrs. The skulls of some of those imaginary virgins
are in silver cases, and others in skull-caps, of cloth, of gold, and velvet.
And in the church of Saint GERION, are no less than nine hundred heads of
Moorish cavaliers, of the army of the Emperor CONSTANTINE, (previous to that
saint's conversion to Christianity), who they say was beheaded for refusing to
sacrifice to idols: by the bye, the Popish divines burn, instead of beheading,
for not sacrificing to idols -- Every one of those heads, however, has a cap of
scarlet, adorned with pearls. The whole forms a spectacle no doubt equally
agreeable and edifying. It struck me, however, as an extremely ludicious sight,
malg^^ the solemnity of so many death's he^ds: and when their story was
recounted, I could not help internally chuckling, and saying (rather punningly,
to be (...)). "Ah! what blockheads ye must have been, to suffer yourselves to
be separated from your snug warm bodies, rather than drop down and worship an
idol, in which so many good Christian divines have shown you an example!" This,
you will conclude, I said to myself: an avowal of my sentiments in that place
might have given my head a title to a scarlet cap and pearls; and as I had some
further use for it, I did not think it expedient to leave it behind me in the
church of Saint GERION -- so, very prudently, kept my mind to myself.

Coming out of the church, a multitude of beggars, all in canonicals, or
student's habits, surrounded, beseeching me for alms -- one, pour l'amour de
DIEU; another, pour l'amour de la Saint Vierge; a third, pour le salut de no^e
Redempteur; a fourth, pour l'amour de Saint GERION; and so on!

When I had gone as far as I wished in donations, another attacked me: though I
told him my charity-bank was exhausted, he persevered, and was uncommonly
solicitous -- till at length, having exhausted the whole catalogue of saints
that are to be found in the calendar, he raised his voice from the miserable
whine of petition, and exclaimed with great energy, "Par les neuf cent tetes
des Cavaliers Maures qui sont santifies au Ciel, je vous conjure de me fair
l'aumone!" This was too formidable an appeal to be slighted; and so, in homage
to the skulls and red caps, I put my hand in my pocket, and stopped his
clamours.

Those miserable modes of peculation are the most pardonable of any produced by
the church: we have no right to regret a trifle sacrificed at the shrine of
compassion, even when that compassion is mistaken; but our reason revolts at
imposition, when it calls coercion to its aid, and assumes the name of right.

Without any national predilection, which you know I am above, I think our
church affairs in Scotland are arranged upon a better system than any other
that I know of: hence their clergy are in general examples worthy of imitation,
for learning, piety, and moral conduct.

LETTER XVIII.
LABORED investigations to establish connections between the history of the
ancient and business of the modern world, and virulent disputes about trifles
of antiquity, such as in what year this place was built, or that great man was
born, when and where JULIUS CAESAR landed in England, whether he passed this
road or that, what route HANNIBAL took over the Alps. and such like, are so
essentially uninteresting, useless, and unimportant, so unprofitable, and, one
would think, so painful too* that it is wonderful how so many men of great
learning have been unwise enough to employ their lives in the research.

It does not follow, however, that when information that tends to recall to our
minds the great men of antiquity is presented to us, we should reject it. A man
of classical taste and education feels a delight in those little memorials of
what gave him pleasure in his youth. I know a gentleman, who, being at Seville;
in Spain, traveled to Cordova, for no other purpose but to see the town where
LUCAN and SENECA were born: and I dare say, that if you were at Cologne, you
would be much pleased to see the townhouse, a great Gothic building, which,
contains a variety of ancient inscriptions; the first to commemorate the
kindness of JULIUS CAESAR to the Ubii, who inhabited this place, and of whom
you have found mention made by him in his Commentaries, and also his building
two wooden bridges over the Rhine: a second commemorates AUGUSTUS sending a
colony here. There is also a cross-bow of whalebone, twelve feet long, eight
broad, and four inches thick, which they who speak of it conjecture to have
belonged to the Emperor MAXIMIN. There are also some Roman inscriptions in the
arsenal, the import of which I now forget.

It is very extraordinary, but certainly a fact, that there are, about Cologne,
families yet existing, who indulge the senseless ambition of pretending to be
descended from the ancient Romans, and who actually produce their genealogies,
carried down from the first time this city was made a colony of the Roman
empire. Of all kinds of vanity, this is perhaps the most extravagant; for, if
antiquity merely be the object, all are equally high, since all must have
originated from the same stock; and if it be the pride of belonging to a
particular family who were distinguished for valor or virtue, a claim which
often only serves to prove the degeneracy of the claimant, it could not apply
in the case of a whole people: but this is among the frailties of humanity; and
we are often so dazzled with the splendor of terrestrial glory, that we
endeavor to be allied to it even by the most remote and ridiculous
connections. I heard of a man, whose pride and boast, when drunk, was, that
Dean SWIFT had once thrown his mother's oysters (she was an oyster-wench) about
the street, and then gave her half a crown as an atonement for the injury. On
the strength of this affinity did he call the Dean nothing but Cousin Jonathan,
though the Dean was dead before he was born!

But of all the stories I have ever heard as illustrative of this strange
ambition, that which the late Lord ANSON has left us is the most striking. When
that great man was traveling in the East* he hired a vessel to visit the
island of Tenedos* his pilot, a modern Greek, pointing to a bay as they sailed
along, exclaimed in great triumph, "There, ^ay, there it was that our fleet
lay." -- "What fleet?" interrogated ANSON -- "Why, our Grecian fleet, at the
siege of Troy," returned the pilot.

While those doughty descendants of the ancient Romans indulge the cheerless
idea of their great and illustrious line of ancient ancestry, the prince who
rules them felicitates himself with the more substantial dignities and
emoluments of his modern offices. As elector and archbishop of Cologne, he has
dominion over a large, fruitful, and opulent country: he is the most powerful
of the ecclesiastical electors: he has many suffragan princes, lay and
spiritual, under him: and he is archchancellor of the Holy Roman Empire. The
revenues of his archbishopric amount annually to one hundred and thirty
thousand pounds Sterling; and as elector, he is poss^ssed of several other
great benefices. I presume, because he is a prince, that he is a man of sense;
and, I will venture to say, that, as such, he would not barter those good
things for the power to demonstrate that LUCRETIA was his aunt, BRUTUS his
grandfather, and the great JULIUS CAESAR himself his cousin-german.

CHRIST chose his disciples out of fishermen. The Chapter of Cologne is,
perhaps, on the contrary, the very most aristocratic body existing, being
composed of forty canons, who are princes or counts of the empire -- Of those,
twenty-five choose the archbishop, and many advance one of their own body to
that great and wealthy dignity, if they please.

From Cologne I proceeded to the town of Bonne, which is said to take its name
from the pleasantness of its situation. Here the elector resides, and has a
very fine palace. The country around is extremely fruitful and pleasant, and is
blessed with most of the good things which render the rich magnificent and
happy, and remind the poor of their inferiority and wretchedness --
particularly wine, which is here remarkably excellent. It contains churches,
priests, convents, cloisters, etc.; but I need not mention them -- what place
could exist without them?

I should not forget to tell you, that, at this place, JULIUS CAESAR built one
of his bridges across the Rhine -- works which would have handed down to
posterity the name of a common man, for the magnitude of the structure and
ingenuity of the contrivance, but are lost in the crowd of astonishing talents
which distinguished that brightest of morals. The greatest biographer of
antiquity says of him, that he was as great a general as HANNIBAL, as great an
orator as CICERO, and as great a politician as AUGUSTUS; but it might be added,
that he was among the first poets of his day -- that he was of the first
mechanical genius, and the finest gentleman, in Rome.

Nature seems to have formed, in CAESAR, a compendious union of all human
talents, as if to demonstrate how unavailing they were when opposed to strict
rigid honesty and virtue in the character of BRUTUS.

To go from Bonne to Frankfort, there are two ways -- one over the mountains of
Wetterania, the other up the river Rhine. I made no hesitation to adopt the
latter, and was rewarded for my choice with the view of as sine a country,
inhabited by as fine a race of people, as I had ever seen. Valleys filled with
herds, plains enamelled with cornfieldsd, and the hills covered with vineyards,
regaled the eye, and conveyed to the mind all the felicitating ideas of plenty,
natural opulence, and true prosperity. My anxiety, however, to get forward, and
disengage myself from a species of solitude in a country where, though
traveling is cheap, accommodations of most kinds in the public houses are bad,
induced me to push on, without taking the time necessary for making accurate
observations on the country as I passed; so that, gliding, as it were,
imperceptibly, through a number of towns, of which I recollect nothing
distinctly but the names of Coblentz and Mentz, I arrived at the great, free,
and imperial city of Frankfort on the Maine.

Here I shall stop, for a short time, my relation, in order to give you time
for just reflection and examination of what I have already written: and as, in
the latter part of it, I have skimmed very lightly over the country, I desire
that you will supply the deficiency of my information by close research in
books; inform yourself of the great outlines of the Germanic Constitution; look
back to its origin, its progress, and its establishment; thence proceed to the
district parts, or inferior states, of which it is composed; ponder them all
well; and from those draw your own inferences, and let me hear what they are
with freedom: should they be wrong, I will endeavor to set them right; but
should they be right, they will afford me the most lively satisfaction; for
they will serve to correct one of the greatest errors under which youth labors
-- an overweening, sanguine imagination, that things in this life are, or at
least can be modelled into perfection; whereas experience, and a just
observation of the history of mankind, will show, that on this ball things will
never be as they ought, but must remain as they are -- imperfect.

LETTER XIX.
THE country about Frankfort is delightful, rich and fruitful, and watered by
the beautiful river Maine, which divides the city into two parts, that on the
north being called Frankfort, and that on the south, Saxenhausen, from the
Saxons, who are supposed to have been the founders of it. The city itself is
large, populous, and rich, and distinguished for being the place where the
emperor and king of the Romans is elected -- though, by the appointment of
CHARLEMAGNE, Cologne has a superior claim to that honor. The magistrates, and
great part of the inhabitants, are Lutherans or Calvinists; notwithstanding
which, most of the churches are in the hands of the Roman Catholics -- a
laudable instance of the true tolerant spirit of a wise and virtuous
institution, and a heavy reflection upon, as well as a noble example to the
Popish Powers of Europe.

The territory belonging to Frankfort is of very considerable extent; and the
trade carried on through it, by means of the rivers Rhine and Maine, of very
great importance, not only to the country itself, but to other commercial
nations, and particularly to Great Britain, whose manufactures are sent to
Frankfort, and thence circulated through the Continent. in amazing quantities.

The fairs of Frankfort are talked of all over Europe -- of such importance are
they in the world of commerce. They are held, one at Easter, and another in
September, and continue for three weeks, during which time the resort of people
there from all quarters is astonishing. Every thing is done by the government
to render them as attractive to merchants as possible; and taxes or duties are
extremely low -- a bale of the value of ten or twenty thousand crowns paying
duty only about ten or eleven pence of our money. All commodities from all
parts of the world are sold there, and circulated through the empire; but,
particularly, books are sold in prodigious quantities. After the fairs are
over, the shops of the foreign merchants are shut up, and their names written
over their doors.

To give an idea of the great importance these fairs are to commerce, I need
only mention, that in the present war, the impediments thrown by the French in
the way of the transit of goods up the Rhine, and the shutting up that fair,
gave a most alarming paralysis to the manufacturing establishments of England,
and a shock to public credit in consequence, that would, but for the timely
interference of Parliament, have, in all probability, been fatal to the
national credit.

Frankfort is in many respects a pleasant place: the merchants are extremely
convivial and sociable, and form clubs, where they meet to drink tea and
coffee, and play at cards. There is a playhouse also, a great number of
coffee-houses, and other houses of entertainment in abundance. The country
around is covered with woods and vineyards, and the circumjacent villages are
very pleasant, and well supplied with houses of entertainment, to which the
inhabitants of the city resort in the Summer season: and the inns in Frankfort
are excellent.

A singular custom prevails here, which I think worth mentioning: Taverns are
denoted by pinetrees planted before the doors of them; and the different prices
of the wines in their cellars are marked in ciphers on the door-posts.

In the town here is presented the original Golden Bull, or Pope's Authority,
which contains the rules and orders to be observed at the election of the
Emperors. The Golden Bull is never shown to strangers but in the presence of
two of the council and the ^ecretary -- It is a little manuscript in q^^ to,
consisting of forty-two leaves of parchment, with a gold seal of three inches
diameter, of the value of twenty ducats, hung to it by a cord of yellow silk.
It is said to be written in Latin and Gothic characters, without diphthongs;
and kept in a black box together with two written translations of it into the
German language.

It is said of Frankfort, that the Roman Catholics possess the churches, the
Lutherans the dignities, and the Calvinists the riches. It is therefore one of
the few places in Christendom where the churches and the riches do not go into
the same hands.

From Frankfort to Augsburgh, I passed through a number of towns, all of them
so very inconsiderable as not to merit any particular description. The way lies
from the Palatinate though the Circle of Suabia. In the extreme end of the
Palatinate, and immediately before entering the Duchy of Wirtemberg, the
country is covered with fir-trees, and money is so scarce in it, that a loaf of
wheaten bread, weighing eight pounds, costs but two pence.

This city of Augsburgh is the capital of a bishopric of that name in the
Circle of Suabia, and is worthy of the attention of the classical traveller for
its antiquity. About twelve years before the birth of CHRIST, AUGUSTUS CAESAR
subdued all this country, and, on the place where Augsburgh now stands, formed
a colony, gave the town the name of Augusta Vindelicorum, and put it under the
government of DRUSUS the brother of TIBERIUS, afterward emperor of Rome. The
inhabitants of this place were the Vindelici, a branch of the Illyrians. But,
ancient though it be, it has little more of antiquity to entitle it to notice
than the bare name; for it has been pillaged so often, particularly by that
monster ATTILA, that there are scarcely any remains of its antiquity to be
found.

Augsburgh, is now, however a handsome city -- the public buildings in general
magnificent, and adorned with fountains, water engines of a curious
construction, and statues.

The most rich and splendid part of the town belongs to a family of the name of
FUGGERS (originaly descended from a weaver), who enriched themselves by
commerce, and one of whom rendered not only himself, but the whole family,
conspicuous, by entertaining the emperor CHARLES the Fifth in a superb manner,
and supplying him with money, and then throwing his bond into the fire; in
return for which, the emperor, made him a count of the empire.

This city is remarkable for goldsmiths' ware; and its mechanics are equal to
any in the world, for works in gold, ivory, clocks, and time-pieces; and they
engrave better than any people in Germany, which brings them considerable
profits. But what they are, above all other people, eminent for, is the
manufacturing steel-chains so prodigiously fine, that when one of them, of a
span in length, has been put about the neck of a flea, it lifts up the whole of
it as it leaps; and yet those are sold for less than a shilling of our money a
piece.

Controversy, and difference in rel^gious opinions* which has almost, ever
since the commencement of Christianity, disgraced the human understanding, and
defaced society, imposes upon the liberal, well-thinking traveller, the office
of satirist but too often. Augsburgh, however, is a splendid exception, and
holds up a most glorious spectacle of manly sense, generous sentiment, justice,
and I will say policy too, vanquishing that shark-jawed enemy of mankind,
bigotry. The magistracy of Augsburgh is composed of about an equal number of
Protestants and Roman Catholics -- their senate consisting of twenty-three
Roman Catholics and twenty-two Lutherans, and their common Council of a hundred
and fifty of each: The executive power is lodged in the senate -- the
legislative authority in both bodies. But, what is hardly to be found any
where, they all, as well as the people, agree together in the most perfect
harmony, notwithstanding the difference of religion; and at all tables but the
communion table, they associate together, dip in the same dish, and drink of
the same cup, as if they had never heard of the odious distinction of Papist
and Protestant, but as being bound to each other by the great and irrefragable
bond of humanity: fellow creatures, affected by the same feelings, impelled by
the same passions, laboring under the same necessities, and heirs to the same
sufferings, their means of assuaging the one, gratifying or resisting another,
and supplying the third, are the same, though chequered and varied a little in
the mode -- the road alone different, the ends alike. Is it not cruel, then --
is it not intolerable, that the calamities inseparable from humanity should be
aggravated with artificial stings, and the nakedness of human nature exposed,
and rendered more offensive, by factitious calamities of human contrivance?
Cursed were those who first fomented those disputes, and cast those apples of
discord through the world: blind were they who first were seduced from the
paths of peace by them; and more cursed, and more blind, must they be, who, in
this time of intellect and illumination, continue on the one hand, to keep up a
system so wicked and so detestable, or, on the other, to submit to error at
once so foolish and so fatal.

LETTER XX.
FOR the reasons mentioned in my last, Augsburgh is a most agreeable place to
live in. Touched with the sensations natural to a man who loved to see his
fellow creatures happy, my heart expanded to a system of peace and harmony,
comprehending the whole globe: my mind expatiated involuntarily on the
blessings and advantages derived from such a system; and, taking flight from
the bounds of practicability, to which our feeble nature is pinned on this
earth, into the regions or fancy, had reared a fabric of Utopian mold, which, I
verily believe, exceeded in extravagance the works of all the Utopian
architects that ever constructed castles in the air.

Hurried on by this delightful vision, my person paid an involuntary obedience
to my mind; and the quickness of my pace increasing with the impetuosity of my
thoughts, I found myself, before I was aware of it, within the chapel-door of
the convent of the Carmelites. Observing my error, I suddenly turned about, in
order to depart, when a friar, a goodly person of a man, elderly, and of a
benign aspect, called me, and, advancing toward me, asked, in terms of
politeness, and in the French language, why I was retreating so abruptly -- I
was confused: but truth is the enemy before whom confusion ever flies; and I
told him the whole of my mistake, and the thoughts from which they arose.

The good father, waving further discourse on the subject, but with a smile
which I thought carried a mixture of benevolence for myself, and contempt for
my ideas, brought me through the church, and showed me all the curiosities of
the place, and particularly pointed out to me, as a great curiosity, a sun-dial
made in the form of a Madonna, the head enriched with rays and stars, and in
the hand a scepter which marked the hours.

Quitting the chapel, and going toward the refectory, the friar stood, and,
looking at me with a smile of gaiety, said, "I have yet something to show you,
which, while lady Madonna marks the time, will help us to pass it; and, as it
will make its way with more force and subtlety to your senses than those I have
yet shown you, will be likely to be longer retained in remembrance."

He spoke a few words in German, which of course I did not understand, to a
vision bearing the shape of a human creature, who, I understood, (...)
lay-brother; and, turning down a long alley, brought me to his cell, where we
were soon followed by the aforesaid lay-brother, with a large earthen jug of
liquor, two glasses, and a plate with some delicately white biscuit.

"You must know," said the friar, "that the convent of Carmelites at Augsburgh
has for ages been famed for beer unequalled in any part of the world; and I
have brought you here to have your opinion -- for, being an Englishman, you
must be a judge, the Britons being famed for luxury, and a perfect knowledge of
the scavoir vivre." He poured out, and drank to me: it looked liker the
clearest Champaigne than beer -- I never tasted any thing to equal it; and he
seemed highly gratified by my expressions of praise, which I lavished upon it,
as well from politeness, as regard to truth.

After we had drank a glass each, "I have been reflecting," said the friar, "on
the singular flight of fancy that directed your steps into this convent -- Your
mind was diseased, my son! and a propitious superintending Power has guided
your steps to a physician, if you will but have the goodness to take the
medicine he offers."

I stared with visible marks of astonishment.

"You are surprised," continued he; "but you shall hear! When first you
disclosed to me those sickly flights of your mind, I could on the instant have
answered them: but you are young -- you are an Englishman -- two characters
impatient of reproof: the dogmas of a priest, I thought therefore, would be
sufficiently difficult to be digested of themselves, without any additional
distaste caught from the chilling austerity of a chapel!"

I looked unintentionally at the earthen jug, and smiled.

"It is very true," said he, catching my very inmost thoughts from the
expression of my countenance -- "it is very true! good doctrine may, at certain
times, and with certain persons, be more effectually enforced under the
cheering influence of the social board, than by the authoritative declamation
and formal sanctity of the pulpit; nor am I, though a Carmelite, one of those
who pretend to think, that a thing in itself good, can be made bad by decent
hilarity, and the animation produced by a moderate and wise use of the goods of
this earth."

I was astonished --

"You fell into a reverie," continued he, "produced by a contemplation of the
happiness of a society existing without any difference, and where no human
breath should be wasted on a sigh, no ear tortured with a groan, no tears to
trickle, no griefs or calamities to wring the heart."

"Yes, father!" said I, catching the idea with my former enthusiasm; "that
would be my wish -- that my greatest, first desire."

"Then see thou," interrupted he, "the extent of thy wish, suppose you could
realize it, which, thank GOD! you cannot."

"What! thank GOD that I cannot? are these your thoughts?"

"Yes, my son; and ere Madonna marks the progress of ten minutes with her
scepter, they will be yours too."

"Impossible!"

"Hear me, my son! -- Is not death a horrible precipice to the view of human
creatures?"

"Assuredly," said I -- "the most horrible: human laws declare that, by
resorting to it for punishment, as the ultimatum of all terrible inflictions."

"When, then," said he, "covered as we are with misery, to leave this world is
so insupportable to the human reflection, what must it be if we had nothing but
joy and felicity to taste of in this life? Mark me, child!" said he, with an
animated zeal that gave an expression to his countenance beyond any thing I had
ever seen: "the miseries, the calamities, the heart-rendings, and the tears,
which are so intimately interwoven by the great artist in our natures as not to
be separated in a single instance, are in the first place our security of a
future state, and in the next place serve to slope the way before us, and, by
gradual operation, fit our minds for viewing, with some sort of fortitude, that
hideous chasm that lies between us and that state -- death. View those
miseries, then, as special acts of mercy and commiseration of a beneficent
Creator, who, with every calamity, melts away a link of that earthly chain that
fetters our wishes to this dismal world. Accept his blessings and his goods,
when he sends them, with gratitude and enjoyment: receive his afflictions, too,
with as joyous acceptance, and as hearty gratitude. Thus, and not otherwise,
you will realize all your Utopian flights of desire, by turning every thing to
matter of comfort, and living contented with dispensations which you cannot
alter, and, if you could, would most certainly alter for the worse."

I sat absorbed in reflection -- The friar, after some pause proceeded --

"Errors arising from virtuous dispositions and the love of our fellow
creatures, take their complexion from their parent motives, and are virtuous.
Your wishes, therefore, my son! though erroneous, merit reward, and, I trust
will receive it from that Being who sees the recesses of the heart; and if the
truths I have told you have not failed to make their way to your understanding,
let your adventure of today impress this undeniable maxim on your mind -- so
limited is man, so imperfect in his nature, that the extent of his virtue
borders on vice, and the extent of his wisdom on error."

I thought he was inspired; and, just as he got to the last period, every organ
of mine was opened to take in his words.

"'It Is well, my son!" said he -- "I perceive you like my doctrine: then"
changing his manner of speaking, his expressive countenance the whole time
almost anticipating his whole words, "take some more of it," said he gaily,
pouring out a fresh glass. I pleaded the fear of inebriety -- "Fear not," said
he; "the beer of this convent never hurts the intellect."

Our conversation continued till near dinnertime; for I was so delighted, I
scarcely knew how to snatch myself away: such a happy melange of piety and
pleasantry, grave wisdom and humor, I had never met. At length, the
convent-bell tolling. I rose: he took me by the hand, and, in a tone of the
most complacent admonition, said, "Remember, my child! as long as you live,
remember the convent of the Carmelites; and in the innumerable evils that
certainly await you if you are to live long, the words you have heard from old
Friar AUGUSTINE will afford you comfort."

"Father!" returned I, "be assured I carry away from you a token that will
never suffer me to forget the hospitality* the advice, or the politeness of the
good father AUGUSTINE. Poor as I am in natural means, I can make no other
return than my good wishes, nor leave any impression behind me: but as my
esteem for you, and perhaps my vanity* make me wish not to be forgotten, accept
this, (a ^eal ^ing, with a device in hair, which I happened to have on my
finger); and whenever you look at it, let it remind you of one of those, I dare
say innumerable, instances, in which you have contributed to the happiness and
improvement of your fellow creatures."

The good old man was affected, took the ring, and attended me to the convent
gate, pronouncing many blessings, and charging me to make Augsburgh my way back
again to England if possible, and take one glass more of the convent ale.

LETTER XXI.
LEAVING Augsburgh, I traveled through Bavaria a long way before I reached the
Tyrol Country, of the natural beauty of which I had heard much. and which I
therefore entered with great expectations of that sublime gratification the
beauties of nature never fail to afford me. I was not disappointed; indeed, my
warmest expectations were exceeded.

The first thing that strikes a traveller from Bavaria, on entering it, is the
fort of Cherink, built between two inaccessible rocks which separate Tyrol from
the bishopric of Freisingen. So amply has nature provided for the security of
this country against the incursion of an enemy, that there is not a pass which
leads to it that is not through some narrow defile between mountains almost
inaccessible; and on the rocks and brows of those passes, the emperor has
constructed forts and citadels, so advantageously placed, that they command all
the valleys and avenues beneath.

After a variety of windings and turnings through mountains of stupendous
height and awful aspect, I began to descend, and entered the most delightful
valley I had ever beheld -- deep, long, and above a mile in breadth --
surrounded with enormous piles of mountains, and diversified with the alternate
beauties of nature and cultivation, so as to form an union rarely to be met
with, and delight at once the eye of the farmer, and the fancy of him that has
a true taste for rural wildness. From the heights in descending, the whole
appeared in all its glory; the beautiful river Inn gliding along through it
longitudinally, its banks studded with the most romantic little villages, while
a number of inferior streams were seen winding in different courses, and
hastening to pour their tribute into its bosom.

Here I felt my heart overwhelmed with sensations of transport, which all the
works of art could never inspire: here nature rushed irresistibly upon my
senses, and, making them captive, exacted their acknowledgement of her
supremacy: here vanity, ambition, lust of fame and power, and all the
tinselled, gaudy frippery to which habit and worldly custom enslave the mind,
retired, to make way for sentiments of harmony, purity, simplicity, and truth:
here Providence seemed to speak in language most persuasive, "Come silly man,
leave the wild tumult, the endless struggle, the glittering follies, the false
and spurious pleasures which artifice creates, to seduce you from the true --
dwell here, and in the lap of natute study me:" Here, oh! here, exclaimed I, in
a transport which bereft me, for the time, of every other consideration, here
will I dwell for ever. The charm was too finely spun, to withstand the hard
tugs of fact; and all its precious delusions vanished before a host of gloomy
truths -- deranged affairs -- family far off, with the distance daily
increasing -- the hazards and the hardships of a long untried journey -- and
the East Indies, with all its horrors, in the rear. I hung my head in sorrow;
and, offering up a prayer to protect my family, strengthen myself, and bring us
once more together in some spot heavenly as that I passed through, was
proceeding on in a state of dejection proportionate to my previous transports,
when I was rouled by my postillion, who, pointing to a very high, steep rock,
desired me to take notice of it. I did so; but seeing nothing very remarkable
in its appearance, asked him what he meant by directing my attention to it --
He answered me in the following manner, which, from the singularity of the
narrative, and his strange mode of telling it, I think it would injure to take
out of his own words: I will, therefore, endeavor, as well as I can, to give
you a literal translation of it; and, indeed, the impression it made on my
memory was such, that, I apprehend, I shall not materially differ from his
words:

"You must know, Sir, (for every one in the world knows it), that all these
mountains around us, are the abodes of good and evil spirits, or genii -- the
latter of whom are continually doing every malicious thing they can devise, to
injure the people of the country, -- such as leading them astray -- smothering
them in the snow -- killing the cattle by throwing them down precipices -- nay,
when they can do no worse, drying up the milk in the udders of the goats --
and, sometimes, putting between young men and their sweet-hearts, and stopping
their marriage. Ten thousand curses light upon them! I should have been married
two years ago, and had two children today, but for their schemes. In short,
Sir, if it were not for the others -- the good ones -- who are always employed
(and the blessed Virgin knows they have enough on their hands) in preventing
the mischiefs of those devils, the whole place would be destroyed, and the
country left without a living thing* man or goat!"

Here I could not, for the life of me, retain my gravity any longer, but burst,
in spite of me, into an immoderate fit of laughter, which so disconcerted and
offended him, that he sullenly refused to proceed with the story and farther,
but continued marking his forehead (his hat off) with a thousand crosses,
uttering pious ejaculations. looking at me with a mixture of terror, distrust,
and admiration and every now and then glancing his eye ask^nce toward the
hills, as if fearful of a descent from the evil spirits.

My curiosity was awakened by the very extraordinary commencement of his
narrative; and I determined, if possible, to hear it out: so, assuring him that
I meant nothing either of slight or wickness by my laughter -- that I had too
serious ideas of such things to treat them with levity -- and* what was more
convincing logic with him, promising to reward him for it -- he proceeded with
his story as follows:

"Well, Sir, you say you were not sporting with those spirits -- and fortunate
it is for you: at all events, Saint JOHN of GOD be our guide, and bring us safe
to Innspruck. Just so the great MAXIMILIAN was wont to laugh at them; and you
shall hear how he was punished for it -- and that was the story I was about to
tell you. The Emperor MAXIMILIAN, that glory of the world, (he is now in the
lap of the blessed Virgin in Paradise), once on a time, before he was emperor,
that is to say, when he was archduke, was always laughing at the country
people's fears of those spirits -- and an old father of the church forewarned
him to beware, lest he should ^^ffer for his rashness: so one day he went out
hunting, and at the foot of that mountain a most beautiful chamois started
before him; he shot at it, and missed it -- (the first shot he had missed for
many years, which you know was warning enough to him) -- however, he followed,
shooting at and missing it, the animal standing every now and then till he came
up within shot of it: thus he continued till near night, when the goat
disappeared of a sudden, and he found himself buried, as it were in the bowels
of the mountain: he endeavored to find his way out, but in vain; every step he
took led him more astray, and he was for two days wandering about, CHRIST save
us! in the frightful hollows of those mountains, living all the time on wild
berries: on the second night be bethought himself of his want of faith, and of
the saying of old Father JEROME: and he fell on his knees, and wept and prayed
all night; and the Virgin heard his prayers, he being a good man, and, above
all, an emperor -- GOD bless you and me! we should have perished -- In the
morning a beautiful young man, dressed in a peasant's habit, came up to him,
gave him victuals and wine, and desired him to follow him, which he did, you
may be sure, joyfully -- but, Oh blessed Virgin! think what his surp^^^e must
have been, when, getting again into the plain out of the mountain, the young
man di^^ppeared and vanished all of a sudden, just at the foot of that steep
rock which I showed you, and which ever since goes by the name of the emperor's
rock -- You see what a dangerous place it is, and what dangerous spirits they
must be that would not spare even the holy Roman emperor. In my mind, the best
way is to say nothing against those things, as some faithless people do, and to
worship the Virgin and keep a good conscience, and then one will have the less
to fear."

By the time he had ended his narrative, we were in sight of Innspruck, when I
annoyed and terrified him afresh, by laughing immoderately at the end of his
story -- but atoned in some measure for it, by giving him half a florin.

On inquiring at Innspruck, I found that MAXIMILIAN had actually lost his way
in the mountain, and had been conducted out of it by a peasant, who left him
suddenly; the rest was an exaggerated ^r^ditionary tale, arising from the
superstitious fears of the country people.

LETTER XXII.
IN all nations under Heaven, and at all times since the creation there have
been men formed to make a noise in the world -- to increase or impede, to
direct or disturb, the calm, sober progress of social life -- and, in the
eagerness and violence of their efforts to reach the goal of superiority,
overturn or thrust out of their ordinary path the rest of mankind, till either
they provoke against them a general conspiracy of their fellow creatures, or,
till reaching the point of their pursuit, they become elevated objects of
homage and admiration. Such men are generally composed of great materials for
mischief: -- having strong natural talents and violent ungovernable spirits;
according to the direction these get, they are harmless or mi^chievous -- but,
like morbid matter in the animal system, if not let loose by some channel or
other, they never fail to disturb the whole economy of the body they belong to,
and produce fatal consequences to it and to themselves: Colonial possessions
have therefore, in some views, been of use (as America formerly to England) to
draw off those dangerous spirits, who, though they are in times of peace better
at a distance, in times of war are found to be the toughest sinews of a nation.

The country of Tyrol, such as I have described it, formed bv nature for the
residence of the Sylvan deities, rich in the products of the earth, the people
contented and happy, and the whole the region of peace; manufactures, the first
root of low vices, and commerce, the great instigator of war, have scarcely
been able to set their feet there: hence it happens, that there is no channel
through which those exuberant spirits I have alluded to can take their course,
or expand their force. Home, therefore, is no place for those of the Tyrolese,
who are cursed or blessed (call it which you please) with those very
combustible qualities; and they are obliged to roam abroad in search of
opportunities of distinguishing themselves, giving vent to their spirits, and
manifesting their talents. They are found, therefore, scattered all over the
Continent: and as it rarely happens that opportunities occur in life of
signalising such talents in a dignified line, rather than be idle they do what
they can, and apply to chicanery as a wide and appropriate field for their
genius and vigor to work on -- the emigrant Tyrolese are, therefore, by most
nations of the continent, reckoned among the most expert and accomplished
sharpers in the world -- the people, however, who remain at home, are of a
different character -- they are, generally speaking, tall, robust, and
vigorous; the women strong, and very fair; and both sexes exhibit a very
pleasing mixture of German phlegm and Italian sprightliness; or, to speak more
properly, they are a mean between those two extremes.

Innspruck, though a small city, is handsome and agreeable, standing in a very
beautiful valley, surrounded with mountains, which, while their lower parts are
well cultivated, are capped on the tops with perennial snow. The castle
formerly the residence of the Austrian princes is stately and magnificent,
adorned within with fine paintings, and decorated without by natural and
artificial fountains, statues, pleasant gardens, groves, walks, and covered
galleries, leading to five different churches.

A-propas -- Let me not forget the churches! In a chapel of the Franciscan
church, there is an image of the Virgin MARY as big as the life, of solid
silver, with many, other images of faints of the same metal. If some of those
silver deities were transferred to Paris, I fear their divinity would not save
them from the hands of the sacrilegious Convention. One thing, however, is well
worth the attention of travelers, particularly those who wish to wipe away the
sins of a deceased friend, and get them a direct passport to happiness -- This
Franciscan church is held to be one of the most sacred and venerable in the
world, on account of the indulgences granted to it by several popes; so that
one single mass said in it, is declared to be sufficient to deliver a soul from
the pains of purgatory. When we consider the great and important extent of
their power in that respect, we cannot wonder if they had all the saints in the
calendar, and the Virgin MARY to boot, in solid silver, even of the size of the
Colossus at Rhodes.

Hall, the second city in Tyrol, lies one league from Innspruck: it is famous
for its salt-works, and for a mint and silver mines, in which seven thousand
men, women, and children are constantly employed.

At a royal palace and castle called Ombras, lying at equal distance from
Innspruck and Hall, there is an arsenal, famous for a prodigious collection of
curiosities, such as medals, precious stones, suits of armor, and statues of
several princes on horseback, in their old rich fighting accoutrements; besides
great variety of military spoils and trophies taken by the House of Austria; in
particular, a statue of FRANCIS the First and his horse, just as they were
taken at the battle of Pavia, and two others of Turkish bashaws, with the
costly habits and appointments with which they were taken, embellished with
gold, silver, and precious stones. But, above all their curiosities, the most
extraordinary is an oak enclosing the body of a deer: this last, however
unaccountable, is fact; and equals, I think, any of the wonders in the
metamorphoses of OVID.

Leaving Innspruck, I proceeded on my journey, and soon entered into the
mountains, which are there of a terrible height -- I was the best part of a day
ascending them: as I got near the top, I was shown, by my driver, the spot
where FERDINAND, king of Hungary, and the Emperor CHARLES the F^fth, met, when
he returned from Africa, in the year 1520. It is marked with an inscription to
that effect, and has grown into a little village, which, from that
circumstance, bears the name of the S^lutation.

Although this mountain, called Bremenberg (or Burning-hill), is covered with
snow for nine months in the year, it is inhabited to the very top, and produces
corn and hay in abundance; at the highest part there is a post house, a tavern,
and a chapel, where the traveller is accommodated with fresh horses,
provisions, and, if he chooses, a mouthful of prayers -- I availed myself of
the two first; but the latter being not altogether in my way, I declined it,
for which I could perceive that I was, by every mouth and eye in the place,
consigned to perdition as a heretic.

Just at this spot there is a spring of water which falls upon a rock, and
divides into two currents, which, at a very small distance, assume the
appearance, and, in fact, the magnitude too, of very large rivers. The mountain
is sometimes difficult to pass, sometimes absolutely impracticable -- I was
fortunate, however, in this respect; for I got over it without any very
extraordinary delay, and on my way was regaled with the most delicious venison
that I have ever tasted in my life; it was said to be the flesh of a kind of
goat.

Although it is but thirty-five miles from Innspruck to Brisen, it was late
when I reached the latter; and as it contained nothing worth either the trouble
or delay attending the search of it, I set out the next morning, and,
traveling with high mountains on one side, and a river all along upon the
other, arrived at a town called Bolsano, in the bishopric of Trent. The country
all along was thickly inhabited, and the mountains perfectly cultivated and
manured even to their highest tops. On entering the valley of Bolsano, I found
the air becoming obviously sweet, delightful, and temperate; the vineyards, and
all the trees and shrubs, olives, mulberries, willows, and roses, etc. of all
the most lively green, and every thing marking the most luxuriant vegetation.

Bolsano is a small, but extremely neat and pleasant town -- but nothing I saw
about it pleased me so much as their vineyards, which are planted in long
terraces along the sides of the hills, and are formed into the most beautiful
arbours, one ^ow above another.

From Bolsano to Trent, is fifty-one miles, a good day's journey: almost the
whole of it lies through the valley of Bolsano, a most fruitful and pleasant --
indeed, delightful road, which made the day's journey appear to me much shorter
than it really was.

Perhaps no part of the habitable globe is, within the same comparatively small
compass of earth, so wonderfully diversified by the hand of nature in all her
extremes, as that through which I have just carried you. There, under almost
the same glance of the eye, were to be seen the stupendous, the rugged, the
savage, and the inaccessible -- the mild, the fruitful, and the cultivated.
Here, the mountain capped with perpetual snow, gradually falling in blended
gradations of shade, far beyond the reach of the artist's pencil, into the
green luxuriant valley; and there, the vineyard, the olivary, and the rich
corn-field, bursting at once from rugged rocks and inaccessible fastnesses: the
chu^lish aspect of the tyrant winter for ever prowling on the mountain's head
above -- perpetual spring smiling with all her fascinating charms in the plains
below. Such scenes as these would baffle all efforts of the poet's pen or
painter's pencil: to be conceived, they must be seen. I shall therefore close
my account of them with a strong recommendation to you, that whenever you
travel for improvement, you go through the Country of Tyrol, and there learn
the great and mavelous working of nature.

LETTER XXIII.
PERHAPS the learned unwise men of the world, who spend their lives poring
after impossibilities, have never met with a more copious subject of
puzzle-pated enjoyment than the derivation of the names of places. In all
disputed cases on this subject, the utmost within human reach is conjecture;
but the joke of it is, that, fortunately for mankind, the certainty of it would
not be of a single button advantage to them, even if it could be acquired by
their search. Doctor GOLDSMITH, in his Citizen of the World, has thrown this
matter into high ridicule; and I recommend it to your perusal, lest this shadow
of literature should one day wheedle you from more respectable pursuits. Trent
has afforded vast exercise to book-worm conjectures in this way; for, while
some pronounce it to be derived from Tridentum, and for this purpose will have
it that NEPTUNE was worshipped there, though so far from the sea-others claim
the discovery of its derivation from Tribus Torrentibus, or three streams which
run there. Now, as to the first, exclusive of forcing NEPTUNE all the way from
the Gulf of Venice to their temples, I cannot find any such similarity in the
sound of Trent and Trident to warrant the inference; and as to the Tribus
Torrentibus, they might as well say that a primmer or hornbook was found there,
and that thence it was derived from the alphabet, since the same analogy
subsisted between them, namely, that the letters T, R, E, N, T are to be found
in both. But, in the name of God, what signifies what it was called after? Its
name is Trent; and if it had been Putney, or John of Groat's house, the town
would be neither the better nor the worse, nor the treasures of literature
suffer any defalcation from the difference.

The bishopric of Trent is about sixty miles long, and forty broad -- fertile,
and abundant in wine, oil, fruit, and pasture -- and pleasant, the beautiful
river Adige meandering through the whole of it from north to south. The
inhabitants are bigoted Roman Catholics -- you will the less wonder, then, that
the bishop should have so extensive a principality, and an annual revenue of
forty thousand crowns.

As I receded from Germany, and advanced toward Italy, I found the air, the
persons, and the manners of the people, to display a very great difference, and
to resemble those of the Italians more than those of the Germans. Though Popish
bigotry be pretty strong in many parts of Germany, it no where there assumes
the gloomy, detestable aspect that it does in Italy.

And now, since I have happened to mention the characters of these two people,
I may as well, once for all, more particularly as we are got to the verge of
both, give you them in full; in both which I am warranted in saying, that all
who know the two will agree with me.

Perhaps contrast was never more perfectly exemplified than in a comparison
between the Germans and Italians; and that contrast strikes more forcibly and
suddenly in passing from one country in the other, than it would in so short a
space between any two people existing. The Italians, jealous, revengeful,
treacherous, dissembling, servile, vicious, sanguinary, idle, and sensual. The
Germans, on the contrary, open, good-natured, free from malice and subtlety,
laborious, sincere, honest, and hospitable -- and, with those valuable
qualities, properly complaisant. So happy is the character of this people, that
to be German hearted has long been a phrase signifying an honest man who hated
dissimulation: and their hospitality was even in the days of JULIUS CAESAR,
remarkable; for we learn from him, that their houses were open to all men --
that they thought it injustice to affront a traveller, and made it an article
of their religion to protect those who came under their roof. D^d not
intemperance in eating and drinking detract from their virtues, no people on
earth would bear comparison with them for intrinsic worth, and particularly for
integrity in dealing.

The city of Trent, though not very large in circumference, is populous. The
high mountains which surround it, subject it to all the inconveniences of heat
and cold -- rendering the air excessively hot in summer, and extremely cold in
winter; besides which, they expose the town to dreadful inundations -- the
torrents that descend from the mountains being sometimes so impetuous as to
roll large pieces of rock with them into it, and having several times laid the
whole place waste.

There are in Trent many stately palaces, churches, and religious houses. The
only one, however, that I will particularize, is that of Saint MARY MAJOR,
noted for a prodigious large organ, which can be made to counterfeit all sorts
of musical instruments, together with the singing of birds, the cries of
several beasts, and the sounds of drums and trumpets, so exactly, that it is
difficult to distinguish between the imitation and the reality. To what an end
such an instrument should be set up in a place of worship, I am at a loss to
divine, unless it be to add to the rich, useless lumber that fills all those of
Popish countries.

But that which distinguishes this church still further, is, that it is the
place where the famous Council of Trent was held, concerning the Reformation,
at which four thousand persons of a public character, laymen and ecclesiastics,
assisted. This Council sat eighteen years before it did any thing; but at last
the Pope contrived to get the ascendant; and, after debating and deliberating
so long, not only the Protestants, but even the German and French nations,
refused to receive its decrees. Certain of the clergy, finding the ascendancy
that the negotiation of the Pope was getting in this council, said that the
Holy Ghost had been sent here from Rome in a cloakbag!

Trent once boasted a curiosity -- which indeed still remains, though out of
use -- that, I think, would be found serviceable in most towns in Christendom,
and elsewhere too, and particularly at Bath, and such places. It was a tower on
the river Adige, into which the stream was conducted, for the purpose of
drowning such of the clergy as were convicted of having been too familiar with
their neighbors wives and daughters!

The people of Trent speak promiscously, and indifferently, both the German and
Italian languages; but whether well or not, I was not adept enough to discover.

My next stage was Bassano, a town in the territory of Vincenza in Italy,
situated at the end of a very long n^rrow valley. It is watered by the river
Bren^a, which washes that very rich, fertile, serene, healthy, and plentiful
district of Italy, so celebrated for its admirable wines, as well as for its
fine pasture-grounds, rich cornfieldsd, and prodigious abundance of game,
cattle, and mulberry-trees; from all which it is called the Garden and Shambles
of Venice.

The next day I arrived at an early hour at Venice, the description of which I
shall not injure by commencing it with the mutilated fragment of a letter, and
shall therefore postpone it to my next.

THUS, my dear FREDERICK, have I, in order to preserve the unity and order of
my progress, brought you through Germany with a precise regularity, that, if I
was not wishing for your improvement, might be dispensed with -- yet have left
much, very much indeed, untouched, in the confidence that you will yourself
have the industry to find it out.

I confess, my dear boy, that I have often, as I wrote, detected myself in
excursions from the road into moral reflection -- but I could not stop: your
improvement was my object in undertaking the business; and I could not refrain
from endeavoring to inculcate such lessons as the progress of the work
suggested, and as impressed my mind with a conviction of their truth and
utility.

You must have observed, that there are two topics on which I dwell very much
-- one, LIBERTY -- the other, an abhorence of bigotry and superstition. But,
before I proceed further, I must call to your remembrance what I have often
said, that by liberty I do not mean that which some people now give that name
to -- nor do I mean religion when I speak of bigotry; for true liberty is still
more incompatible with anarchy than with despotism, and superstition is the
greatest enemy of religion. Let the first object of your heart and soul be true
morality -- the next, rational liberty: but remember, that the one is not to be
found independent of religion, nor the other over to be enjoyed but under the
restraining hands of wholesome laws and good government -- such (...) England
now boasts.

In the^e times, when human opinion is actually polled on the two extremes of
political judgment, I know, that to speak rationally, is to incur the censure
of both, or to be, as POPE somewhere says, "by tories called a whig, by whigs a
tory:" but I care not -- I speak my opinion with the fair face of independence;
nor would scruple to tell the KING of PRUSSIA my hatred of despotism, or the
Convention of France my abhorrence of anarchy -- between both of which the true
and genuine point of liberty lies; and England, thank God! draws the line.

LETTER XXIV.
AS I approached Venice, I was much delighted with its appearance. Its stately
steeples and noble buildings seemed as if just emerging from the sea, and
floating on the surface of it; and it required no great stretch of fancy to
imagine, that it undulated with the agitated waves of its parent the Adriatic.
On all the surrounding coasts, nature and art seemed to have vied with each
other in pouring the greatest profusion of their gifts, while thousands of
masts, scattered like forests over the surrounding bays, denoted that Venice,
not content with her own, shared in the wealth and luxuries of other climes.

It is indeed difficult to conceive a more extraordinary and pleasing
appearance than this city makes at a distance, whether you approach it from the
sea or from the continent. Built not like towns in Holland, where immense moles
and walls push the sea forward, and encroach on his dominion, it stands on
piles erected in the sea; and the foundations of the houses almost touching the
water, gives it the appearance of floating on its surface. The steeples are
seen at sea at the distance of thirty miles; and the prospect becomes more
beautiful the nearer it is approached -- presenting in many views the
appearance of floating islands.

To erect a city thus upon the water, while so many thousands of acres stand
unoccupied, at first sight seems extraordinary -- but all those great and
strange deviations from the ordinary path presented by nature, have their
source in necessity; and it is not till long after the necessity has been first
lamented, and afterward obviated, that experience comes into aid, and
demostrates, that, from her, security and utility have often arisen. Thus it is
with Venice, who, fortified by her local situation (the effort of necessity),
sits secure, and bids defiance to the world.

The place where Venice now stands, is supposed to have been formerly a marshy
ground, on which the Adriatic Sea had gradually encroached, leaving the more
elevated parts of it above water, and thereby forming a vast number of little
islands, hence called Lagunes: on those the fishermen of the neighboring
shores built their huts; and when Italy was invaded by the Goths under AIARIC,
and afterward by that barbarous race the Huns, under ATTILA, both of whom
spread ruin and desolation wherever they came, vast numbers of people from the
circumjacent shores of the Adriatic, particularly from Padua and Aquileia, sled
hither, and brought along with them immense wealth. Here they laid the first
foundations on seventy-two distinct little islands, and certainly with huts, of
a city which afterward stood almost foremost in the naval and commercial
world: as those islands were built upon, and became over-people, they gradually
pushed forward their piles, and built upon them aga^n, till the whole became
one vast city, extending to many more of those islands beyond the original
seventy-two.

As it was indebted in a great measure, for its rise and importance to the
commerce of the East, which then was carried on by way of the Red Sea and
Alexandria, when the passage by the Cape of Good Hope was discovered, that
trade declined and Venice declined gradually along with it.

It is amazing, what an extent of territory and accumulation of power the
Venetians once poss^ssed. Besides their present possessions, which comprehend
the territories of Padua and Verona, the Vincentine, the Brescians, the
Bergamales, the C^ema^co, the Polefin of Rovig^, Marca Trevig^ana, the Patria
del Friuli, and Ist^ia, they had under their dominion the islands of Rhodes,
Scio, Samos, My^lene, Andros, Candia, the Morea, and the cities of Gallipo^i
and Thessalonica: besides which, they, in conjunction with France, took
Constantinople, and remained for sometime masters of that part of the Empire;
and disputed the dominion of Sclavonia, Croatia, Morlachia and Dalmatia, with
the Kings of Hungary, and contended with the Genocie (...) the empire of the
sea: but of a great part of these, I and their other conquests, they have since
been stripped, almost entirely, by the Turks.

As to the government of Venice, I shall not enter into any particulars of its
history -- It is called a republic, and was once a democracy. The name remains,
while that which gave it is gone. It is, certainly, now a downright aristocracy
-- the privilege of sitting in the great Council being confined to the
nobility; and the doge, under the name of head, being no more than a gaudy
slave, loaded with fetters: yet, such is the idle fondness of man for
superficial pomp, that this office is sought-after with avidity; for though his
power be small, his state is very splendid. Hence it is said, that the doge of
Venice is a king in his robes, a senator in council, a prisoner in the city,
and a private man out of it; and what is more extraordinary, is, that though he
may be deposed, he cannot resign -- nor even decline the office, if he be once
chosen, without exposing himself to banishment, and his effects to confiscation.

The established religion of this state is the Roman Catholic; but the
Venetians are not b^gots, and reject the supremacy of the Pope. Jews,
Armenians, Greeks, and Protestants, are allowed the exercise of their religion
there; and, provided they do not intermeddle with state affairs, of which they
are extremely jealous, even their priests, monks, and nuns, may take almost any
liberties they please -- a privilege that you may be assured is not neglected
by any of them.

As few places have excited greater admiration and attention than Venice, so
none have been more copiously described by travelers, every one of whom may,
when he returns to his native country, give a very accurate account of the
public buildings, curiosities, paintings. etc. by only translating the book
given to him by his va^^^ de place, or cicerone, on his arrival the^^ -- It is
certain, Venice abounds with all those, particularly paintings; but I had not
the time minutely to investigate; nor should I have the inclination, if I did,
to describe such things: they are open to you in many well written volumes,
which I recommend to your peru^ual. Such things, however, as strike me for
their novelty, or difference from those in other places, I will, as well as I
can recollect them, give you an idea of.

To their local situation they own their security -- separate I from terra
firma by a body of water of five miles in breadth, too deep to be forded, and
too shallow for vessels of force to pa^s: and on the other sides, by scattered
shallows, the channels between which are marked out by st^kes, which, on the
appearance of an enemy, they can take away; they bid defiance to hostile army
or navy, and have not been reduced to the necessity to erecting walls or
fortifications for their defense.

The first peculiarity that strikes me, as arising immediately from their
living, I may say, in the sea, is the total exclusion of all sort of carriages;
for those streets that are on firm ground are extremely narrow and crooked; and
on most of the canals, so far from having a quay on either side to walk on, the
water comes up to the doors of the houses; so that walking is but little known,
for they get into a boat off their threshold, and their first step out of it
again is, ten to one, on the threshold of another. This circumstance, though in
some respects it has its uses, is, in others, extremely disagreeable, as well
as injurious; for, though those who have occasion to labor have a sufficiency
of exercise, those whose condition exempts them from labor, and who,
therefore, in all other countries, resort to artificial labor (exercise) for
the promotion of health, are here entirely cut off from all such means of it as
we practice, having neither hunting, shooting, riding, bowling, etc. etc. nor
can they have them, unless they go to the Continent for them. The chief
amusements of the Venetians are reserved for the carnival time, which commences
about a week after Christmas, and which, therefore, I could not see; but, from
the concurrent testimony of all travelers and the people themselves, as well
as from the evidence of my own observation on the manners of the people, I am
well warranted in saying, are festivals of debauchery, not, and licentiousness.
This is a subject on which I am, nevertheless, disposed to believe, that more
has been said than truth will bear ou^ -- yet, a bare statement of the truth,
would, I fear, ^ear hard enough upon the moral character, or at least the
piety, of the Venetians.

That masquerades are the very worst schools of vice, the private anecdotes of
the beau monde even in England might suffice to demonstrate -- That courtez^ns
are found lost to all sense of modesty and common decency, the streets of
London afford nightly proof: -- Therefore, that masquerading (which is the
amusement of the Venetians) should cloak many crimes, and that their courtezans
should be shameless and their women lewd, is no such wonder, seeing, as we do,
those things in this Northern clime; but we may, without any illiberality,
suppose, that, from physical causes of the most obvious kind, they are carried
to a greater extent there than here: though one of the most enlightened and
amiable of all travelers says it would be hard to be proved, yet, with
deference to him, I think it may be rationally supposed.

There is an active principle in the mind of man which will not ^ofter it to
rest; it must have some materials to work upon. Men, enlightened by science,
have within themselves a fund, and can never want food for contemplation; but
the many, in those hours when a suspension of labor or worldly business drives
them to expedients for the employment of their time are but too prone to leave
the mind to the guidance of the senses, and to cogitate on vice till they w^sh
to practice it. Hence that homely but true saying, "Idleness is the root of all
evil." In England we have a variety of expedients which the Venetians want,
whose minds being besides naturally more vivid, are more prompt to give a loose
to the warm illusions of sensual fancy. Thus prepared, they meet the carnival,
when every thing conspires to give circulation to indulgence; and when those
operations of the mind which with us have so many channels to discharge
themselves, with them, like a vast stream suddenly confined to one narrow
channel, burst forth with an irresistible torrent, and carry away before them
every bond that religion or morality has laid down as restraints on the
exhuberance of human passion. The customs and habits of the place and time
contribute to it; for, while the severe restrictions of the female sex for the
rest of the year sharpen both inclination and invention on the one hand -- on
the other, the unbounded license, the universal change of habits, customs and
laws -- the total suspension of all distinction, care, or business which take
place at that time, aided by perpetual masquerade -- and those most convenient
of all receptacles, the gondolas, with those most expert and forward of all
pandars, the gondoliers -- afford ample scope to their wishes, and form
altogether a mass of circumstances in favor of vicious indulgence, not to be
found in any other part of Christendom; to resist which, they must be more
virtuous than any other people -- a point never yet laid to their charge by the
best-natured and most extenuating of all those who have written upon that
subject.

LETTER XXV.
PROFLIGATE though the people of London are, I will not allow that it is so
vicious a city as Venice. That there are in it, and indeed in all capitals,
individuals who have reached the highest acme of shameless debauchery and
depravity, it would be foolish to deny: but that concubinage is practiced in
the same-open way, so generally, or so systematically as at Venice, no one will
venture to assert. I trust the day of depravity and indelicacy is far removed
from us, that will exhibit a British mother arranging a plan of accommodation
for her son, and bargaining for a young virgin to commit to his embraces -- as
they do in Venice -- not as wife, but as concubine. On that one custom of the
Venetian ladies I rest my position; and have no hesitation to avow, that all
the private Concubinage of London amounts not to such a flagrant consumm^tion
of moral turpitude and shameless indelicacy as that practice to which I allude.

The Venetian men are well-featured and well-shaped -- the women, well-shaped,
beautiful, and, it is said, witty: but I had that within which robbed every
object of its charms; and I might say with HAMLET, that "man delighted not me,
nor woman either." -- In short, not all the beauties and novelty of the place,
not all the pleasures that sta^e the traveller in the face, and solicit his
enjoyment, not all the exquisite looks of the ladies, could rouse my mind from
its melancholy, or fix my attention -- I grew weary of Venice before I had been
many hours in it, and determined to grasp at the very first opportunity that
offered for my departure.

I had arranged, in my own mind, a plan to proceed to Latichea, a considerable
seaport town in Syria, and thence to Aleppo, whence, as it was a great Eastern
mart, I entertained hopes that I should find a speedy, or at least a certain
conveyance, by a caravan, across the deserts, to Basso^ah, and little doubted
but that I should find a vessel at some of the Venetian ports, either bound, or
belonging to a seaport of such commercial consequence, upon which I could
procure a passage -- But in this I was disappointed; for, on the fullest
inquiry that I could make, I found that there was only one ship ready to sail,
and no probability of any other for a considerable time after -- I did every
thing I could to avail myself of this conveyance, but was disappointed, owing
to a young lady being passenger, who was daughter to the owner of the vessel --
and the old gentleman did not approve of an English officer being of the party
with his daughter. I used ever^ argument without success, urging the resident,
Mr STRANGE, who had behaved very politely to me during my short residence at
Venice, to interest himself about it: I likewise entreated Mrs. STRANGE, an
affable, pleasant woman, to exert her endeavors, and made her laugh, by
proposing to her to give me a certificate of my behavior, and to pledge
herself to the old gentleman that the happiness or honor of his family would
not be disturbed by me during the passage.

Hearing, however, that a ship lay at Trieste, which was to sail thence for
Alexandria in Egypt, I determined to embrace that opportunity, and, instead of
my former intended route, go to Grand Cairo, thence to Saez, and so down the
Red Sea, by way of Mecca, to Moca, and thence to Aden, which company's vessels,
or India country traders are always to be found going to one or other of the
British settlements.

I accordingly set out for Trieste, with all the impatience of a sanguine mind,
anxious to change place, eager to push forward, and full of the new route I had
laid down -- the charms of which, particularly of seeing Grand Cairo, the Land
of Egypt, and the Pyramids, were painted by my imagination in all the glowing
exaggerated colors of romance. The captain of the vessel was then at Venice,
and I accompanied him to Trieste, which is about sixty miles from Venice.

Soon after our arrival at Trieste, I had the mortification to find, that the
vessel was by no means likely to keep pace with the ardour of my mind, and
that, owing to some unforeseen event, her departure was to be delayed; so,
after a few of those effusions which may be supposed on such an occasion to
escape a man of no very cool temper hanging on the tenter-hooks of expectation,
I found it necessary to sit down, and patiently wait the revolution of time and
event, which nothing could either impede or accelerate.

It has often been remarked, and is held as a point of faith by
Predestinarians, that some men are doomed by fate to disappointment -- and
that, when they are so, no wisdom can obviate, no vigilance provide against,
nor no resolution resist, her decrees; but, that, in spite of all the efforts
of reason and industry, a series of sinister events shall pursue them through
life, and meet them at every turn they attempt to take. Such has been my lot
for the greatest part of my life -- but I have neither faith enough in
predestination, nor self-love enough so far to blind me to my own faults, as to
suppose that lady Fate had any thing at all to do with it. No, no; it was often
owing to a temper, warm, impatient, and uncontroled, which, in almost all cares
of momentary embarrassment, chased reason from her office, usurped her place,
and decided as chance directed. Let every man examine the grounds of all his
serious disappointments in life with candor, and he will find physical causes
to which to assign them, without resorting to supernatural. For my part, when I
hear a man say that he has been all his life pursued by ill-fortune, I directly
conclude, that either he has been a blunderer, or those he dealt with, brutes.
In the ordinary operation of earthly contingencies, mischances will happen; but
an uniform life o^ mischance can only arise from mismanagement, or a very
extraordinary chain of human injustice. --

These reflections arose from the following incident:

I had procured a servant to attend me on my journey, who, from my short
observation of him, promised to contribute very considerably to my comfort, my
convenience, and, indeed, to my security, as he was apparently honest, sincere,
active, and clever in his duty, and master of several languages, and
particularly of the lingua Franca, a mixture of languages, peculiarly useful in
traveling through the East. Finding that I was likely to be delayed at
Trieste, and conceiving that in this interim letters from England, for which I
most ardently longed, might have arrived at Venice for me, I imprudently and
impetuously sent him to Venice, for the purpose of taking them up, and carrying
them to me. But guess what must have been my feelings when I found, almost
immediately after his departure, that the vessel was preparing to sail, and
that I must either lose my passage or my servant: anx^ous though I was to get
forward, and grievous though my former delay had been to me, I hesitated which
to do; but prudence, for once, prevailed over inclination; and I determined, at
all events, to depart, under all the embarrassment attending the want of a
servant and linguist, and all the poignant feelings of having been accessory to
the disappointment, and perhaps the injury of a poor fellow, whom I really
conceived to be a person of merit. In our passage to Alexandria we touched at
Zante, an island on the coast of Greece, belonging to Venice; it was anciently
called Zacy^s -- is about fifty miles in circumference, and contains fifty
thousand inhabitants. Never before had I tasted any thing equal to the
delicious flavor of the fruits of this (...) -- the grapes exquisite, and the
me^n and pe^^hes of prodigious bigness and unequ^d (...) island is abundantly
fruitful in wine, currants, o^, figs, and corn, but is very subject to
earthquakes. Near the seaport which we entered is as great a curiosity in
nature as is any where, I believe, to be found. Two spring wells of clear fresh
water throw up large pieces of real pitch in such quantities, that, it is said,
the people collect, one year with another, one hundred barrels of it, which
they use in paying their shipping and boats.

In the first stages of melancholy, consolation is rejected by the mind as
premature. The heart, intent, as it were, upon supping full of woe, disclaims
all advances of comfort, and feeds on grief alone. Hence the truly skilful in
the human heart consider premature consolation as an aggravation of woe, and
comfort only with condolence, well knowing that the tide of grief must take its
course, and that, until it be first full, no hopes can be had of its retiring.
The full force of this I began now to feel. The disquietude of domestic
embarrassment -- the bitterness of separation from all I loved -- the solitary
sadness of my situation, wandering through unknown countries -- myself unknown
and unfriended -- aggravated at length by the loss of my servant, who was a
sort of prop to my spirits -- and my being cast into a ship among a people
whose language I little understood, without any soul or one circumstance to
mitigate my sorrow, or console me under it; all these, I say, had wound up my
feelings to the highest pitch of fortune -- More miserable I could not be when
the island of Zante received me, and, for the first time for a sad series of
days, raised me with the transporting sound of an English voice.

I have promised my FREDERICK, to give you a candid relation, in hopes that you
will improve by it: but if I thought, that, on the contrary, any thing I said
should tend to raise in your mind a sentiment injurious to your principles, o^
reflective on your father's conduct, but to be an example and admonitory guide
to your own, I should condemn my candor and curse the hour that I wrote --
but, I trust to your good sense and disposition, with my care to direct them;
and shall, but not without hesi^ation, proceed. But, as I have already spun out
this letter to such an extent, I will defer my further relation to another.

LETTER XXVI.
AT the time I set out upon my journey over land to India, I was (though
married, and the father of children) very young, naturally of a sanguine
constitution: my attachment to the fair ^ex was ^o ways diminished by a
military education: and a warmth of temper, an ardent sensibility of mind, and
a frank unsuspicious disposition, left me but too often to regret the facility
with which I yielded to the charms of women. But the regret for each error was
wilfully smothered in vain determinations of amendment -- and the promised
amendment again broken in upon by some new error. Thus it was, till riper years
and circumstances of weight strengthened my reason, and gave it in some greater
degree that dominion it should have over my actions.

Circumstanced as I have in my last letter described myself to be, and
constituted by nature and education as I have mentioned above, I landed in the
charming ^sland of Zante, where nature herself seems to have conspired against
chastity -- making the very air breathe nothing but transport and delight.
There I met a young lady, a native of England -- extremely pretty, highly
accomplished, and captivating in the extreme: she had been at Venice for her
education -- was a complete mistress of music, and expressed an intention of
following it professionally on her arrival at England, whither was going
passenger in a vessel bound there from Zante. To have accidentally met with a
native of England, even of my own sex, in such a distant corner of the world,
under such circumstances as mine, just escaped from the horrid life I had for
some time led, must have filled me with joy: allowance, therefore, may be made
for my feelings on meeting this young lady, and for my thinking of some
expedient to prevent our separation. She labored, perhaps, under the pressure
of feelings as disagreable as my own, and expressed her satisf^ction at meeting
with a countryman so very unexpectedly. Reserve was soon thrown off on both
sides: we entered into a conversation interesting and confidental, which
increased my anxiety to keep her with m^, and in order to persuade her to
accompany me, I pointed out in the strongest colors possi^e, the great
advantages she might derive from her accomplishments in India, where her
musical talents alone, exclusive of her various captivating qualities, would be
an inexhaustible mine of wealth. In short, I so very eagerly enforced my
proposal to accompany me, and time was so very short, that she consented, and
in two hours we had arranged every thing for our departure together -- and here
with shame and horror I confess (nor shall ever cease to regret it), that this
ecclai^ecissement communicated the first ^ay of substantial pleasure to my
heart that it felt since I left London.

Thus far, our project sailed before the wind: wayward imagination (...) it out
in the most alluring drapery that fancy could fabricate, and prevented us from
seeing the impract^cability of it, as it stood in the nakedness of truth; and
when it came to be carried into execution, a thousand difficulties occurred,
that the wi^ness of passion, and the warmth of our feelings, had before
concealed from our view. In the first place, it was necessary for her to obtain
the consent of a lady to whose care and protection she was committed: in the
next place, accommodations were to be procured for her in the same ship with me
-- a circumstance of most arduous difficulty; besides which, a variety of other
impediments -- insuperable indeed -- concurred to frustrate our views, and put
an end to our project. If my pleasure at meeting her was great, my anguish at
parting with her was inexpressible. I had once more to face the world alone;
and, on the second day of my sojourning at Zante, emba^ked with a heavy heart,
and ^et sail for Alex^n^. The last disappointments we undergo, seem alw^ys the
heaviest; and this at Zante I thought at that time to be the greatest of my
life. But -- oh! short-sighted man! bubble of every delusive shadow! I never
reflected, as I have since done, what serious mischiefs, what endless misery,
what loss of time, means, and reputation, I may by that providential
disappointment have escaped -- for these are the almost never-failing
consequences of such affairs. It too often happens, that the siren who deludes
a man into her snares, is the very person who inflicts the deadly wound into
his heart. Avoid, my dear FREDERICK! avoid all such, as you would avoid plague,
pestilence, or ruin -- steel your heart by timely reflection against their
advances. In all your transactions with women, like a good general in warfare,
secure for your heart a retreat; for it will be too late to find that they are
unworthy when your heart is ensnared -- and when you find them worthy of your
affection, it will be time enough to give a loose to the sensibility of your
heart. A virtuous woman is beyond all calculation to be valued, when she is
found; but, alas! in finding her, you may pass through so many fires ordeal,
and run such danger, that it is almost a doubt, whether a wise man (if he can
fetter his passions) had not better dispense with the blessing, than run the
hazard of searching for it.

On my arrival at Alexandria, I found, to my fresh mortification, that the
plague was raging all over Egypt -- and as, if this was not of itself
sufficient to block up my intended route, an irruption of the Arabs, who in
formidable bodies infested all the roads, put a period to all my hopes of
seeing Grand Cairo, and viewing the curiosities of that country, which all who,
like us, have the Bible put early into their hands, are taught to venerate as
soon as they are taught to read. Here I thought to have viewed the pyramids,
whose antiquity, origin, or intended use, have baffled the learned and
ingenious inquiries of so many ages -- of beholding Mount Sinai, the stone of
Moses, the tract of the Israelites, all of which are said to be clearly pointed
out, and geography by that means brought into the support of Sacred History.
These, and many things, I did wish to see -- they are worth it: but I have had
since reason to believe, that my ill luck was not so great as I then thought
it; for the search is dangerous, and made prodigiously expensive by the
ex^ctions of the Mahomedan magistrates. It is as well, therefore, to travel
over this country in books, which afford us good information, and more of it,
at an easier rate than you could purchase it in the country.

Alexandria was built by ALEXANDER the Great, soon after the overthrow of Tire,
about 333 years before CHRIST, and is situated on the Mediterranean, twelve
miles west of that mouth of the Nile, anciently called Canopicum. A very
extraordinary circumstance is related as a proof of the suddenness of
ALEXANDER'S resolution to build it: After he had directed the number of public
strictures, and fixed the places where they were to stand, there were no
instruments at hand proper for marking out the walls, according to the custom
of those times: upon this, a workman advised the King to collect what meal was
among the soldiers, and sift it in lines upon the ground, in order to mark out
the circuit of the walls: the advice was followed, and the king's soothsayer
interpreted it to be a presage of the future prosperity and abundance of the
city. This prophecy was certainly afterward verified; for it soon became the
emporium of commerce, of arts, and of sciences.

By the description of STRABO and other ancients, it appears that this city was
built upon a plan well worthy the vast mind of its founder; and the fragments
of its ornaments afterward made part of the grandest embellishments of Rome
and Constantinople. In the museum of the royal palace, which occupied a fourth
part of the city, the body of ALEXANDER was deposited in a golden coffin -- but
the detestable SELDUCUS CIBYOFACTES violated the monument, took away the golden
coffin, and substituted a glass one in its place.

This city like most others of antiquity, has been the scene of terrible
massacres. About two hundred years after its foundation, it was totally
depopulated by PTOLEMY PHYSCON -- the very few who escaped stronger, flying
into other countries. Desirous, however, not to reign over empty houses, he
seduced inhabitants from the neighboring countries; and again, for some slight
offense, determined on a general massacre of the young men; and accordingly,
when they were one day assembled in the Gymnasium, or place of public exercise,
he ordered it to be set on fire, so that all perished, either in the flames, or
by the swords of his mercenaries, whom he had placed at all the avenues.
Afterward, in the year of CHRIST 215, the Emperor CARACAILA, having been
lampooned by some of the inhabitants, ordered a gene^al massacre by his
numerous troops, who were dispersed over the city. The inhuman orders being
given, all were murdered, without distinction of age or sex; so that, in one
night's time, the whole city floated in blood, and every house was filled with
carcases: the monster himself, retiring to the temple of Serapis, was all the
time imploring the protection of the Deity -- a proof that practical devotion
and the most atrocious inhumanity may meet in the same bosom. As if this had
not been sufficient vengeance, he stripped the city of all its ancient
privileges -- ordered all strangers who lived there to depart -- and, that the
few who remained might not have the satisfaction of seeing one another, he cut
off all communication of one street with another, by walls built for the
purpose, and guarded with troops.

Notwithstanding these massacres, Alexandria again recovered its former
splendor -- and was again (...) by AMROU, the infamous Saracen -- and all the
^^^repid youth of the city perished with arms in (...) hands. The magnificence
of the city may (...) from the account written by AMROU (...) C^liph: "I have
taken," said he, "the C^ty of (...) West; it is of an immense extent; I cannot
describe to you how many wonders it conta^* there are 4000 p^ce, 4000 baths,"
etc. etc.

The great advantages of the East India trade, which was then carried on by the
Red Sea, preserved Alexandria through several resolutions; but having fallen
under the dominion of the Turks, and the passage round the Cape of Good Hope
being discovered, a fatal blow was given to its commerce, and it has since
fallen to decay. It is, however, even now, worth the attention of the classical
traveller. Entering the harbor, we passed by the Island of Pharos, were
PTOLEMY built the enormous tower which was once the wonder of the world; and,
when riding within the port, nothing could be more gratifying than to see from
thence that mixture of ancient and modern monuments that presented themselves
to the view, on which ever side the eye could be turned.

Of myriads of antiquities which this place affords for the inspection of the
curious, I shall mention only two -- One, the column of POMPEY, on viewing of
which, the remembrance of that great and good man's most unmerited and cruel
fate extracted a sigh from the bottom of my heart: this pillar engages the
attention of all travelers; it is composed of red granite; the capital is
Corinthian, with palm leaves, and not indented; the shaft and the upper member
of the base are of one piece, ninety feet long; and nine in diameter; the base,
a square of fifteen feet on each side; the whole column is one hundred and
fourteen feet high, perfectly well polished, and only a little shivered on the
eastern side. Nothing can equal the majesty of this monument: seen from a
distance it over-tops the town, and serves as a signal for vessels; approaching
it nearer, it produces an astonishment mixed with awe: one would never be tired
of admiring the beauty of the capital, the length of the shaft, nor the
extraordinary simplicity of the pedestal. Some years ago, a party of English
seamen contrived, by flying a kite, to draw a line over the pillar, and by that
means made a kind of a shroud, by which they got up, and on the very top of it
drank a bowl of punch, to the utter astonishment of a multitude who came to see
them; they broke off one of the volutes of the column, but amply compensated
for this mischief by a discovery they made, as, without their evidence, the
world would not have known, at this hour, that there was originally a statue on
this column, one foot and ancle of which, of enormous size, are still
remaining. -- The other is the obelisk of CLEOPATRA, of immense size, and of
one single piece of granite marble. Here I observed, too, a thick wall, with
towers mouldering under extreme age, which con^ained, in its face, fragments of
architecture of the most exquisite workmanship, such as broken columns,
friezes, etc.; those were the antique ruins of some fallen pieces of antiquity,
at the time that this ant^que wall was built: what then must be the length of
time since they had first undergone the hands of the workman? These
circumstances tend to demonstrate, that, far back beyond the reach of our
calculation, the arts flourished: and when one thinks of the miraculous masses
of work done in former ages -- the magnitude of the pieces of which those works
were composed, such as whole columns and obelisks of a single block of marble
-- the Colossus of Rhodes, made of brass, one foot of which was placed on one
side of the harbor, and another on the other side, so that ships passed
between its legs -- we cannot help yielding up the palm to the ancients for
stupendous magnificence, however we may surpass them for the useful, the
elegant, and the good.

At Alexandria I remained about twelve days, till, wearied of the confined
state I lived in on account of the plague, I resolved to devise some m^a^s, if
possible, to get away, and at length hired a b^at to carry me to the island of
Cyprus, from whence I concluded, that I should find no sort of difficulty in
procuring a conveyance to Latichea, and so proceed by my first intended route.
I accordingly arrived at Cyprus in perfect safety, where, to my great sorrow
and astonishment, I found that an epidemical fever, equal in its effects to a
plague, prevailed: however, there was no alternative; I must run the risque,
and I dismissed the boat that carried me from Alexandria.

Although the etymologies of the names of places are of very little importance,
and most frequently uncertain, I think it probable that the learned are r^ght,
who assert the name of this is derived from Cyprus, or Cypress -- with which
shurbs the island abounds. It had, in ancient times, a number of other names --
one of which was Paphia, whence Venus* who was worshipped in it, was called the
Paphian Goddess. It lies thirty miles west of Syria, whither I was bound,
stretching from the south-west to the north-east, one hundred and fifty miles
in length, and seventy in breadth in the widest part of it.

This island holds a very high rank in classic lore -- It gave birth to some
great philosophers and considerable poets -- The Apostle BARNABAS was a native
of it, and, assisted by ST. PAUL, first introduced Christianity among them.
Famagusta, a town on the eastern part of the island, opposite to the shore of
Syria, is the ancient Salamis, built by TEUCER the son of TELAMON, and brother
of AJAX.

Symisso, on the south-east, the best port in Cyprus, is the Amathus mentioned
by VIRGIL, in his Aeneid, and by OVID in his Metamorphoses. And Baffo. on the
Western coast, is the Paphos of antiquity, famous for the Temple of Venus.

As the branches of an empire most remote from the great seat of government are
always more despotically governed than those near the source of redress, Cyprus
has been continually ruled with a rod of iron since it came into the hands of
the Turks. While it was under the dominion of Christians, it was well peopled,
having no less than eight hundred or a thousand villages in it, besides several
handsome cities; but the Turks have spread ruin and desolation over the
country, and it is now so thinly inhabited that more than half the lands lie
uncultivated.

The air of this island is now for the most part unwholesome, owing to the
damps arising from the many fens and marshes with which the country abounds --
while, there being but few springs or rivers in the island, the want of a
plentiful fall of rain, at proper periods, distresses the inhabitants very much
in another way; and by means of the uncultivated state of the country, they are
greatly infested with poisonous reptiles of various kinds.

The most remarkable mountain in Cyprus is called Olympus -- a name common to
several other mountains in Greece, particularly to that in Thessaly, so famous
in the poetry of the ancients. That in Cyprus is about fifty miles in
circumference: great part of it is covered with woods; and at the foot of it
are fine vineyards, which produce admirable wine, not only in a sufficiency for
their own consumption, but some also for exportation. And although the greater
part of the island lies uncultivated, as I have before observed, it produces a
sufficient quantity of corn, unless in seasons when their harvest fails, in
which case the people are easily supplied from the continent. They have,
besides, cattle enough for their own consumption. Many parts of the country
abound in wild fowl, and several sorts of game, and they have plenty of fish
upon the sea coasts.

The trade of Cyprus is not inconsiderable, and carried on chiefly by Jews and
Armenians: the commodities in which they deal are wine, oil, cotton, wool,
salt, silk, and turpentine -- besides, it produces several sorts of earth, fit
for the use of painters, particularly red, black, and yellow.

Its most wonderful production, however, is the famous stone (Asbestos)
inextinguishable, or (Amiantos) impollutus, so called from its extraordinary
property of resisting fire. It is related that the ancients m^de out of this
stone a kind of thread that would r^^^rn unconsumed in the most intense fire.
It is even said, that some experiments have been made in modern days, which
have sufficiently proved that the thing is not a fiction. In such extraordinary
questions as this, though I do not positively contradict, I always suspend my
belief, till something stronger than mere assertion is offered to convince me.

There is one dreadful mischief to which this island is subject. In the hot
season, locusts come from the Continent, in swarms so vast and so thick as to
darken the sky like clouds. Those would certainly devour all the fruits of the
earth, if they were not driven to sea by a north wind that usually blows at the
time of their coming. When that wind happens to fail, which fortunately is
seldom, the consequence is a total demolition of the fruits of the country.

The whole island, as well as particular towns, was entirely consecrated to the
goddess VENUS, who thence was called VENUS CYPRIA, or DEA CYPRIA, and is
represented by the poets as taking a preculiar pleasure in visiting it; and
this unquestionably arose from the loose habits and lascivious temperament of
the women there, who certainly are, at this time, not remarkable for chastity.

I must confess, however, that I felt great pleasure in entering Cyprus; it
was, as I have already stated, classic ground, and dedicated to the Queen of
Love. But a traveller who visits it with shapes of amusement, will be much
disappointed; for in no one particular did it seem to me to resemble that
Cyprus famed in the Heathen Story and Mythology. Of the Cyprian queen's favors
the ladies seemed to boast no one mask, save the most nauseous, disgusting
lewdness; and the natural fertility of the soil is half lost beneath the
oppressive yoke of the servants of the Turkish government. Thus, in the
extraordinary revolutions that human affairs are incessantly undergoing, that
island which for its superior beauties was supposed to be the residence of
love, which gave birth to the philosophers ZENO, APPOLLONIUS, anD XENOPHON, is
now a miserable, half-cultivated spot, peopled with a mixture of wretched
Turks, Jews, Greeks, and Christians -- groaning under the tyranny of a
barbarous despotic abuse of delegated power -- infested with locusts which
devour the fruits of the earth -- and disgraced by a race of ignominious women,
who esteem it to be an act of religion to prostitute themselves to all
strangers.

Our RICHARD the First made a conquest of this island on his way to the Holy
Land, and conferred the royalty of it on GUY LUSIGNAN, king of Jerusalem. The
Venetians possessed themselves of it in the year 1480 -- but, in the sixteenth
century, the Turks dispossessed them, and have ever since kept it under the
yoke -- I should have remarked that then wine is excellent.

Continuing my route, I hired another boat, after only forty-eight hours stay
at Cyprus, and proceeded for Latichea, which, as I have somewhere before
mentioned, is a considerable seaport town of Syria, built on a promontory of
land, which, running into the sea, occasions its being continually refreshed
with breezes. Fortune, who had hitherto been not very liberal in her
dispensations, now favored me; for, just as I arrived at Latichea, a caravan
was preparing. The consul of the Turkish Company at Cyprus received me with
great politeness and hospitality -- gave me a letter to the resident at
Latichea; and by his instruction and assisstance, after a very short stay, I
set out on my way to Aleppo with the caravan.

As I shall hereafter have occasion more particularly to describe the nature or
those caravans, I shall, for the present, tell you, that this was composed of
no other beasts of burden than mules and asses, of which there were not less
than three or four hundred in number.

Mounted on a mule, I traveled along, well pleased with the fertile appearance
of the country, and delighted with the serenity of the air -- We were, as well
as I can now recollect, near ten days on the road; during which time we
traveled only in the morning early, and in the heat of the day reposed under
the shade of trees.

I was informed, that if, instead of going to Latichea, I had gone to
Scandaroon (otherwise Alexandretta), I should, in the road from thence to
Aleppo, have traveled through a country, in which the most singular and
extravagant customs prevail that exist in any country emerged from barbarism --
Several of those I heard; but one in particular was, that the men prostituted
their wives and daughters to all comers -- and that this originated from a
principle of religion, though there was every reason to believe, that, like
many of their religious institutions, it was made at last subservient to the
gratification of avarice.

On my way to Aleppo, I was met by a Mr. --, an English gentleman, who had
heard of my coming, and who, in the most kind and hospitable manner, insisted
upon my living at his house instead of the British consul's, where I should
otherwise have resided during my stay there; and his manner of asking me was so
engaging, interesting, and impressive, that I found it impossible to refuse him.

As the great public caravan had departed from Aleppo before my arrival, and
the expense of fo^ming a private one on my account was too great, as I was
traveling on my own account, and had no dispatches to authorize or enforce my
departure, or bear me out in the expense; I was constrained to remain at Aleppo
till some eligible mode of traveling occurred, or another public caravan was
formed. This delay gave me an opportunity of seeing and informing myself of the
city and surrounding country; the result of which, I shall, in as short a
manner as possible, relate to you in a future letter. It also gave occasion to
one of those unhappy incidents wihch I have often had occasion to lament, no^
from any consciousness of direct criminality, but for the scope it gave to
misrepresentation, and the injury which that misrepresentation did me in the
opinion of some of my friends.

(End of Part First.)
A JOURNEY TO INDIA, etc. PART II.
LETTER XXVII.
MY DEAR FREDERICK,
SO long as the route of my journey lay through European regions, little
presented itself respecting human nature of such very great novelty as to
excite admiration or awaken curiosity. In all the various nations through which
we have passed, a certain parity of sentiment, arising from the ore great
substratum, Christianity, gave the same general coloring to all the scenes,
however they might differ from each other in their various shadings. Whatever
dissimilitude the influence of accident, climate, or local circumstance, may,
in the revolutions of ages, have introduced into their manners, customs
municipal laws, and exterior forms of worship -- the great code of religion and
moral sentiment remains nearly the same with all: and right and wrong, good and
evil, being defined by the same principles of reason, and ascertained by the
same boundaries, bring the r^le of conduct of each to so close an approx^mation
with that of the orders, that, when compared with those we are now to attend
to, they may really be considered as one and the same people.

In the empire now before us, were we to leave our judgment to the guidance of
general opinion of Christian nations, we should have, on the contrary, to
contemplate man under a variety of forms and modifications, so entirely
different from those to which habit has familiarised our minds, as at first to
impress us with an idea of a total disruption from our nature, and induce us,
as it has already the generality of our people, to divorce them from a
participation of all those sympathetic feelings which serve to enforce the
discharge of mutual good offices among men. Deducing all their principles, not
only of moral conduct, but municipal government, from a religion radically
different from, and essentially adverse to, ours; deluded by that system into a
variety of opinions which liberality itself must think absurd; unaided by that
enlightened philosophy which learning, and learned men, acting under the
influence of comparative freedom, and assisted by the art of printing, have
diffused through the mass of Europeans; and living under a climate the most
unfavourable to intellectual or bodily exertion, they exhibit a spectacle which
the philosophic and liberal mind must view with disapprobation, regret, and
pity -- the illiberal fierce Christian with unequalified detestation and
disgust: while, on their part, bigoted to their own principles and opinions,
they look on us with abhorrence, and indulge as conscientious a contempt of,
and antipathy to Christians, which I apprehend no lapse of time, without a
great change of circumstance, will be able to eradicate. Should Mahomedanism
and Christianity ever happen to merge in Deism (but not otherwise), the
inhabitants of Syria and Europe will agree to consider each other even as
fellow creatures. In Spain and Portugal, Jew, Turk, and indeed Protestant, are
without distinction called hogs. In Turkey, Jews and Christians are
discriminately called dogs; each thinking the other completely excluded from
the pale of humanity, and well worthy the dagger of any TRUE BELIEVER who would
have the piety to apply it.

You will allow, my dear FREDERICK, that it must have been rather an important
contemplation to your father, to have perhaps two thousands miles to travel
through the immense and almost trackless wilds of a country inhabited by such
people, without the consolation of any others to accompany him in his journey;
for, unless a public dispatch was to overtake me, there was little probability
of my having a single European partner of my fatigue and perils.

However, as the period was not yet arrived at which I was to go forward, or
even determine my mode of traveling, I endeavored to soothe my mind as much
as I could into content, and to take advantage of my stay at Aleppo, to acquire
all the knowledge possible of the place, that is to say, of that city in
particular, and of the Turkish government and manners in general.

A distant view of Aleppo fills the mind with expectations of great splendor
and magnificence. The mosques, the towers, the large ranges of houses with flat
roofs, rising above each other, according to the sloping hills on which they
stand, the whole variegated with beautiful rows of trees, form altogether a
scene magnificent, gay, and delightful: but, on entering the town, all those
expected beauties vanish, and leave nothing in the streets to meet the eye, but
a dismal succession of high stone walls, gloomy as the recesses of a convent or
state prison, and unenlivened by windows, embellished, as with us, by the human
face divine. The streets themselves, not wider than some of the meanest alleys
in London, overcast by the height of the prison-houses on either side, are
rendered still more formidably gloomy by the solitude and silence that pervade
them; while here and there a lattice toward the top, barely visible, strikes
the soul with the gloomy idea of thraldom, coercion, and imprisonment.

This detestable mode of building, which owes its origin to jealousy, and the
scandalous restraints every man is empowered by the laws and religion of the
place to impose upon the women consigned either by sale or birth to his
tyranny, extends not to the inside of the houses, many of which are magnificent
and handsome, and all admirably suited to the exigencies of the climate, and
the domestic customs and manner of living of the inhabitants.

The city is adorned, it is true, here and there, with mosques and appendant
towers, called Minarets, from which cryers call the faithful to prayers; and in
some of the streets there are arches built at certain distances from each
other, so as to carry the eye directly through them, and form a vista of
considerable grandeur: but all these are far from sufficient to counterbalance
the general aspect or gloominess and solitude which reigns over the whole, and
renders it so peculiarly disgusting, particularly at first sight, to an
Englishman who has enjoyed the gaiety and contemplated the freedom of a city in
Great Britain.

The mosques (Mahomedan temples) are extremely numerous in this city; indeed
almost as much so as churches and convents in the Popish countries of
Christendom. There is nothing in their external appearance to attract the
notice of the traveller, or indulge the eye of the architect; they are almost
all of one form -- an oblong quadrangle: and as to the inside, I never had an
opportunity of seeing one; none but Mussulmen being permitted to enter them, at
least at Aleppo.

The next buildings of a public kind to the mosques that deserve to be
particularly mentioned, are the caravanseras -- buildings which, whether we
consider the spirit of beneficence and charity that first suggested them, their
national importance, or their extensive utility, may rank, though not in
splendor of appearance, at least in true value, with any to be found in the
world.

Caravanseras were originally intended for, and are now pretty generally
applied to, the accommodation of strangers and travelers, though, like every
other good institution, sometimes perverted to the purposes of private
emolument or public job: they are built at proper distances through the roads
of the Turkish dominions, and afford the indigent or weary traveller an asylum
from the inclemency of the weather; are in general very large, and built of the
most solid and durable materials; have commonly one story above the ground
floor, the lower of which is arched, and serves for warehouses to stow goods,
for lodgings and for stables, while the upper is used merely for lodgings;
besides which, they are always accommodated with a fountain, and have cooks
shops and other conveniences to supply the wants of the lodgers. In Aleppo the
C^avanseras are almost exclusively occupied by merchants, to whom they are,
like other houses, rented.

The suburbs of Aleppo, and the surrounding country, are very handsome,
pleasant, and, to a person coming out of the gloomy city, in some respects
interesting. Some tossed about into hill and valley lie under the hands of the
husbandman; others are covered with handsome villas; and others again said out
in gardens, whither the people of Aleppo occasionally resort for amusement.

The roofs of all the houses are flat, and formed of a composition which
resists the weather effectually. On those most of the people sleep in the very
hot weather: they are separated from each other by walls; but the Franks, who
live contiguous to one another, and who, from their disagreeable circumstances
with regard to the Turks, are under the necessity of keeping up a friendly and
harmonious intercourse together, have doors of communication, which are
attended with these fortunate and pleasing advantages, that they can make a
large circuit without descending into the streets, and can visit each other
during the plaque, without running the risk of catching the infection by going
among the natives below.

There is a castle in the city which I had nearly forgotten to mention -- The
natives conceive it to be a place of great strength. It could not, however,
withstand the shock of a few pieces of ordnance for a day. It is esteemed a
favor to be permitted to see it; and there is nothing to recompense one for
the trouble of obtaining permission, unless it be the prospect of the
surrounding country, which from the battlements is extensive and beautiful.

Near this castle stands the seraglio, a large old building, where the bashaw
of Aleppo resides: the whole of it seemed to me to be kept in very bad repair,
considering the importance of the place. It is surrounded by a strong wall of
great height: besides which, its contiguity to the castle is very convenient;
as, in case of popular tumults, or intestine commotions, the bashaw finds an
asylum in the latter, which commands and overawes the city, and is never
without a numerous garrison under the command of an Aga.

Such is the summary account I have been able to collect of Aleppo, the capital
of Syria; which, mean though it is when compared with the capitals of European
countries, is certainly the third city for splendor, magnificence, and
importance, in the vast extent of the Ottoman Empire -- Constantinople and
Grand Cairo only excelling it in those points, and no other bearing any sort of
competition with it.

LETTER XXVIII.
HOWEVER faction may agitate or abuse irritate the minds of men against the
executive branch of their government, the people of every nation under Heaven
are disposed to think their own constitutional system the best; and the artful
intertexture of religion with governments confirms them in that opinion, and
often consigns the understanding to unalterable, error and illiberal prejudice.
It would be wonderful, then, if the Turkish constitution, founded on the Koran,
was not looked upon with abhorence by the bulk of the Christian world; and more
wonderful still, if the outrageous zealots of the Christian church, who for so
many centuries engrossed all the learning of Europe to themselves, should not
have handed down with exaggerated misrepresentation every circumstance
belonging to the great enemies of their faith. But that, at this day of
intellectual illumination, mankind should be enveloped in such error and
darkness, with regard to the government of so large a portion of the globe as
Turkey, is extraordinary; and only to be accounted for by a reference, in the
first place, to those religious prejudices which we suck in from our nurse, and
which habit, incessant document, and every part of our education, tend to
confirm in our mind; and in the next, to that indisposition the human mind
feels to part with its old prejudices, and the general indolence and incapacity
of men to acquire knowledge by the arduous and fatiguing paths of study.

The Turkish government is gros^ly misrepresented. Were our opinions to be
directed by the general belief of Europeans, we should suppose that the life
and property of every being in that vast empire were irremediably at the mercy
of the Grand Seignior -- and that, without laws to protect, or any intermediate
power whatever to shield them, they were entirely subject to the capricious
will of an inexorable tyrant, who, stimulated by cruelty, sharpened by avarice,
and unrestrained by any law human or divine, did every thing to oppress his
subjects, and carry destruction among mankind. I firmly believe, that, from the
combination of ideas arising from those prejudices, there are few Christians
who think or hear of the grand Turk, that do not, by an involuntary act of the
mind, instantly think of blood and murder, strangling with bow-strings, and
slicing off heads with cimeters.

As there is no part of your education more near my heart than the eradicating
illiberal prejudices from your mind, and fortifying you against their assaults;
I find it impossible to refrain from giving you my opinion of the Turkish
government, which I have been at some pains to collect, as well from oral
information as from the best authors; and which, though very far from what a
generous and universally philanthropic disposition would wish them to have, is
very different from that which is generally attributed to them, and
unquestionably far more limited in its powers than the governments of several
Christian countries I could mention.

The constitution of that country is laid down expressly in the Koran. The
emperor of Turkey (commonly called the Grand Seignior) is a descendant of
Mahomet, who pretended he had the Koran from Heaven: and he is as much bound by
the inst^tutes of that book as any subject in his realm -- as liable to
deposition as they to punishment for breach of them, and indeed has been more
than once deposed, and the next in succession raised to the throne. Thus far,
it is obvious, his power is limited and under control. But that is not all --
It is equally certain that the Turkish government is partly republican; for,
though the people at large have no share in the legislation, and are excluded
by the Koran from it (which Koran has established and precisely ascertained
their rights, privileges, and personal security), yet there is an intermediate
power which, when roused to exertion, is stronger than the Emperor's, and
stands as a bulwark between the extremes of despotism and them. This body is
the ULAMA, composed of all the members of the Church and the law, superior to
any nobility, jealous of their rights and privileges, and partly taken from the
people, not by election, but by profession and talents. -- In this body are
comprised the Moulahs, the hereditary and perpetual guardians of the religion
and laws of the empire: they derive their authority as much as the Emperor from
the Koran, and, when necessary, act with all the firmness resulting from a
conviction of that authority; which they often demonstrate by opposing his
measures, not only with impunity, but success. Their persons are sacred; and
they can, by means of the unbounded respect in which they are held, rouse the
people to arms, and proceed to depose. But, what is much more, the Emperor
cannot be deposed without their concurrence.

If, by this provision of the constitution, the power of the monarch is
limited, and the personal security of the subject ascertained, on the one hand;
the energy of the empire in its external operations is, on the other, very
frequently and fatally palsied by it. Declarations of war have been
procrastinated, till an injurious and irrecoverable act of hostility has been
sustained; and peace often protracted, when peace would have been advantageous.
The Ulama being a numerous body, it has been found always difficult, often
impossible, to unite so many different opinions; and nothing being to be done
without their concurrence, the executive power finds it often impossible to
take a decisive step in a crisis of advantageous opportunity. But as this code
of laws and government is received as a divine revelation, binding both prince
and people, and supposed to be sealed in Heaven, the breach of it would be
sufficient to confign even the monarch to deposition and death.

As to the military force, which in the hands of all Despots has been made the
instrument of the people's slavery, that of the Turk could avail him nothing;
and, whenever it does interfere, acts only to his overthrow. The very reverence
they have for his person arising from obedience to their religion, they are, a
fortiori, governed by it, not him. He holds no communication with them; and the
standing force of the Janissaries is, compared with the mass of the people,
only a handful. Some wild accounts, indeed, have stated it at 300,000; but the
best informed fix it below 60,000 of which a great part consists of false
musters and abuses -- great multitudes being enrolled to obtain certain
privileges annexed to the office of Janissary. The fact is, that the chief
force of the empire is a militia composed of the people; who, with respect to
obedience and subordination, are so loose that they leave their duty whenever
they please, without receiving any punishment. How far the people of Turkey are
protected from the encroachments of power, will appear from the recital of a
fact related by one of the best and most liberal of our historians on that
subject, and which is of too great notoriety to be doubted.

In the year 1755, the Port, as it is called, or Palace of the Grand Vizir at
Constantinople, was burnt down: in laying the plan for rebuilding it on the
former site, the leading consideration was, how to contrive matters so as to
render it secure from accidents of a like nature in future; and it was
determined that the only certain means to do so was, to leave a space of clear
ground all round it, for which purpose the contiguous houses should be
purchased from the proprietors, and demolished. All the owners of the houses
agreed to the sale, except one old woman, who pertinaciously refused: she said
she was born, and had lived all her life, in that spot, and would not quit it
for any one. Now, in England, for the convenience of a private canal, the
Parliament would force her to sell. But what did they say in Turkey? When all
the people cried out, "Why does not the Sultan use his authority, and take the
house, and pay her the value?" No! answered the magistrates and the Ulama, it
is impossible! it cannot be done! it is her property. While the power of the
monarch is thus limited, and the rights of the people thus ascertained by the
Koran, and in things manifest and open to view rigidly adhered to, justice
between man and man is rarely administered; for, though the laws themselves are
good, the corrupt administration of them disarms their effect, and distorts
them from their purpose. The venality of the judges is beyond conception
flagitious and barefaced; and their connivances at false witnesses so
scandalously habitual, that testimony is become an article of commerce, and can
be procured with a facility and at a price that at once stamps an approbrium on
the country, and furnishes matter of wonder to the considerate mind, how, if
judges are flagitious and shameless enough to be guilty of it, the people can
bear such a pern^cious system so long. Hence flow all the censures on the laws
and government of that country -- hence most of the impediments under which its
commerce and agriculture languish; while the actual written laws of the realm
are, if duly administered, sufficiently adequate to the security of property,
the regulation of commerce, the repression of vice, and the punishment and
prevension of crimes.

In endeavoring to guard your mind against an illiberal, vulgar prejudice, I
have stated to you what the Turkish constitution is, and what the laws; but you
must not carry what I have said to an overstrained or forced interpretation. I
would not have you infer that the people are well governed; I only say, that
their constitution contains within it the means of better government than is
supposed. I would not have you infer that property is always secure; I barely
say there are laws written to secure it. This too I wish to impress on you,
that the common people are more free, and that property and life are better
secured, in Turkey, than in some European countries. I will mention Spain for
one. Like the country we are now contemplating, fear keeps them, as disunited
individuals, under passive obedience in ordinary cases; but, unlike the
Spaniards, when notoriously aggrieved: when their property or religious code is
forcibly violated: when the prince would riot in blood, and persist in an
unsuccessful war: the Turks appeal to the law; they find a chief; the soldiery
join their standard, and depose or destroy him, not on the furious pretext of
popular hatred, but upon the legitimate ground of the Koran, as an infidel, and
a violator of the laws of GOD and Mahomet -- They always, however, place his
regular successor on the throne. Yet, notwithstanding the general venality
which pollutes the fountains of justice, and notwithstanding the great abuse of
power to which I have alluded, their internal policy is, in many respects,
excellent, and may be compared with advantage to that of any nation in Europe.
Highway-robberry, house-breaking, or pilfering, are little known and rarely
practiced among them; and at all times the roads are as secure as the houses.
Ample provisions too are made against those petty secret frauds which many who
carry a fair face in England, and would bring an action for damages against one
that should call them rogues, practice every day. Bakers are the most frequent
victims of justice, and are not unfrequently seen hanging at their own doors.
They are mulcted and bastinadoed for the first and second offense, and on the
third, a staple is driven up into their door-case, and they are hanged from it.
Notwithstanding which, men are constantly found hardy enough to pursue the same
course of practice; and this is more extraordinary, as the police is so
strictly attended to, that the bashaw or vizir himself goes about in disguise,
in order to discover frauds and detect the connivances of the inferior officers
of justice. But what will our great ladies, who consume their nights, destroy
their constitution, and squander their husband's property in gambling; who
afterward, to repair their shattered finances, have recourse to the infamous
expedient of keeping gaming-houses, and endeavor to recover by degrading means
what they have lost by fo^ly, to the disgrace of themselves and family, and the
shame of their sex and rank -- What will they say when I tell them, that gaming
is held among the Turks to be as infamous as theft, and a gamester looked upon
with more detestation than a highway robber? The Turkish ambassador and his
train will, on their return to their country, have to tell a curious tale of
this much-famed island, in that and other respects.

LETTER XXIX.
PREJUDICE, that canker of the human heart, has injured mankind by impeding
personal intercourse, and thereby clogging the channel of intellectual
improvement: it forbids that interchange of sentiment -- that reciprocal
communication of opinion -- that generous circulation of intellectual wealth,
which, while it enriches another, advances itself -- it dissevers the bond of
social union, and makes man sit down the gloomy, selfish possessor of his own
miserable mite, with too much hatred to give, and too much pride to receive,
those benefits, which Providence, by leaving our nature so unaccommodated, has
pointed out as necessary to pass between man and man: under its influence we
spurn from us the good, if we dislike the hand that offers it, and will rather
plunge into the mire than be guided by the light of any one whose opinion is at
variance with our own.

Thus it is between the Turks and us -- the little of their affairs which the
prejudice of the Mahomedans have allowed themselves to communicate, or suffered
others to glean among them, has been in general so misused, distorted, and
misrepresented by the prejudices of the Christians, that it is not going beyond
the truth to say, there exist not a people in the civilized world whose real
history and genuine state are so little known as those of the Turks: and the
worst of it is, that not one misrepresentation, not one single mistake has
fallen on the generous, charitable side; but all, all without exception tend to
represent the Turk in the most degraded and detestable point of view. As the
purity of the Christian does not allow him to be guilty of a wilful,
uncharitable misrepresentation, we should attribute it to unavoidable error,
were it not that, till some late authors whose liberality does them honor,
they all walked in the very same track, and could hardly have been so uniformly
erroneous from design. We must therefore attribute it to religious zeal and
mistaken piety; in which, in this instance alone, they seem to be reputable
competitors with the Turks. The moroseness, the animosity, and the supercilious
self-possession of the bigot, each holds in common with the other.

One striking feature in the constitution of Turkey is, that neither blood nor
splendid birth are of themselves sufficient to recommend a man to great
offices. Merit and abilities alone are the pinions which can lift ambition to
its height. The cottager may be exalted to the highest office in the empire; at
least there is no absolute impediment in his way; and I believe it has often
happened. Compare this with France under its late monarchy, where no merit
could raise a man from the Canaille: this, I say, is one of the criterions of a
free constitution, and Turkey is so far democratic.

The very first principle ingrafted in the minds of the Mahomedan children, is
a high contempt of all religions but their own; and from the minute babes are
capable of distinguishing, they are taught to call Christians by the name of
Ghiaour, or Infidel: this grows up in their manhood so strong in them, that
they will follow a Christian through the streets, and even justl^ against him
with contempt, crying, Ghiaour! Ghiaour! or, Infidel! Infidel! -- Men of
dignity and rank, indeed, will treat Christians with courtesy; but as soon as
they are gone out of hearing, will call them dog! This is monstrous! But let us
recollect how a Turk would be treated in Spain or Portugal, and we shall see
that inhuman bigotry may be found in a greater degree among Christians than
even Mahomedans. In Spain or Portugal they would treat them thus: -- the common
people would call them hogs; they would justle them also in contempt; and what
is more, they would stab them (it has often happened) por amor de Dios; and as
to the people of rank, they would very conscientiously consign them to the
Inquisition, where the pious fathers of the church would very piously consign
them to the flames, and coolly go to the altar, and pray to GOD to damn them
hereafter to all eternity. So far the balance, I think, is in favor of the
Turks. Need I go further? -- I will. --

The Mahomedans are divided into two sects, as the Christians are into many.
Those are the sect of Ali, and the sect of Omar. Now, I have never heard among
them of one sect burning the other deliberately: but the Roman Catholics, even
now, burn Protestants by juridical sentence -- burn their fellow Christians to
death for differing from them in a mere speculative point of doctrine. Which
then are the better men? I am sure it is unnecessary to say; though bad are the
best.

The Turks are allowed, by those who know them best, to have some excellent
qualities; and I think, that in the prodigality of our censure, which, though
stow acquainted with them, we are forward to belittle, it would be but fair to
give them credit for many of those good qualities, which even among ourselves
it requires the greatest intimacy and the warmest mutual confidence and esteem
to disclose or discover in each other. That they have many vices is certain.
What people are they that have not? Gaming they detest; wine they use not, or
at least use only a little, and that by stealth; and as to the plurality of
women, it can in them be scarcely deemed a vice, since their religion allows
it. One vice, and one only, of a dark dye is laid to their charge; and that has
been trumpeted forth with the grievous and horrid addition, that though
contradictory to nature, it was allowed by their religion. This I have reason
to believe is one of the many fabrications and artifices of Christian zealots,
to render Mahomedanism more odious: for I have been informed from the most
competent and respectable authority, and am therefore persuaded, that the
detestable crime to which I allude, is forbidden both by the Koran and their
municipal laws; that it is openly condemned by all, as with us; and that*
though candor must allow there are many who practice it (by the bye there are
too many in England w^o are supposed to do the same), there are none hardy or
shameless enough not to endeavor to conceali^t; and, in short, that it is
apparently as much reprobated there as any where; which, at all events, rescues
the laws and religion of the country from that stigma.

Perhaps there is no part of the world where the flame of parental affection
burns with more ardent and unextinguishable strength, or is more faithfully
returned by reciprocal tenderness and filial obedience, than Turkey. Educated
in the most unaffected deference and pious submission to their parents will;
trained both by precept and example to the greatest veneration for the aged,
and separated almost from their infancy from the women, they acquire a modesty
to their superiors, and a bashfulness and respectful deportment to the weaker
sex, which never cease to influence them through life. A Turk meeting a woman
in the street, turns his head from her, as if looking at her were criminal: and
there is nothing they detest so much, or will more sedulously shun, than an
impudent, audacious woman. To get the better of a Turk therefore, there is
nothing further necessary, than to let slip a virago at him, and he instantly
retreats.

Since the arrival of the Turkish ambassador in London, I have had frequent
occassion to observe, that the people of his train have been already, by the
good example of our British belles and beaux, pretty much eased of their
national modesty, and can look at the women with as broad and intrepid a stare,
as the greatest puppy in the metropolis.

Their habitual tenderness and deference for the fair sex, while it speaks much
for their manly gallantry* must be allowed by candor to be carried to an
excess extravagant and irrational. It is the greatest disgrace to the character
of a Turk to lift his hand to a woman: this is, doubtless, right, with some
limitations; but they carry it so far as to allow no provocation, be it what it
may, sufficient to justify using force or strokes to a woman; the utmost they
can do is, to scold and walk off. The consequence of this is, that the women
often run into the most violent excesses. There have been instances where they
have been guilty of the most furious outrages; where they have violated the
laws in a collected body, and broke open public stores of corn laid up by the
government: the magistrates attended, the Janissaries were called, and came
running to quell the riot -- but, behold they were women who committed it: they
knew no way of resisting them, unless by force; and force they could not use:
so the ladies were permitted quietly to do their work in defiance of
magistrates, law, right, and reason.

Among the variety of errors and moral absurdities falsely ascribed to the
Mahomedan religion, the exclusion of women from Paradise holds a very
conspicuous place, as a charge equally false and absurd; on the contrary, the
women have their fasts, their ablutions, and the other religious rites deemed
by Mahomedans necessary to salvation. Notwithstanding, it has been the practice
of travelers to have recourse to invention, where the customs of the country
precluded positive information; and to give their accounts rather from the
suggestions of their own prejudiced imagination, than from any fair inferences
or conclusions drawn from the facts that came under their observation.

LETTER XXX.
THE subject I touched upon in my last three letters, and on which this, and
probably some succeeding ones, will turn, is attended with circumstances of
great delicacy, and may possibly bear the aspect of at least a dubious import,
as touching the great point of religion. I will therefore, before I proceed
further, explain to you (lest it should require explanation) the whole scope of
my meaning.

My object throughout the whole of what I have said respecting the Turks, is to
war with prejudice, not to draw comparisons: -- to show that where the
Mahomedans are vicious or enslaved, it is not the fault of their religion or
their laws: -- to convince you, the Turks are not the only people in the world,
who, under all the external forms of sanctity and religion, are capable of the
most detestable (...), and sometimes, utterly be^eft of all pretentions to
charity -- and that, while they have been held up as a perpetual subject of
reproach and accusation, they were con^ting only just the same crimes that
con^^cience might have resorted on their accusers. If allowance can be at all
made for historical m^srepresentation, we may perhaps be disposed to (...) that
of the ignorant Catholic mission^ of the early ages, as en^t^ed to some ex^use,
or (...). The intemperate z^al of ^se times (...) ^e the fall exercise of the
rational f^es; but in this age of illumination and liberality, he that
falsifies from polemical malice should meet little quarter and less belief. And
it must be grievous to all men of virtue and religion to reflect, that
churchmen, disciples of the Christan church, which should be the fountain of
purity and truth, have been foremost in the list of falsifiers.

The difficulty of obtaining information of any kind in Turkey, is very great;
of their religion chiefly they are extremely tenacious; and as to their women,
it is allowed by the best informed men, who have lived there for many years, in
departments of life that gave them the best means of obtaining information
Europeans can have, that, at best, but a very imperfect knowledge can be had of
them. Yet travelers who probably never migrated farther than "from the green
bed to the brown," have given us dissuse accounts of their religion; and
adventurers who never were beyond the purlieus of Drury, have scaled Seraglio
walls, and carried off the favorites of Sultans.

The truth is, my dear FREDERICK, the Turks, like all other people, have their
share of vices, but are by no means countenanced in them by their religion; and
from what I have been able to collect, as well from my own inquiries and
observations, as from reading the best historians, I am persuaded that they
have not, in the whole scope of Mahomedanism, one doctrine so subversive of
virtue, or so encouraging to the indulgence of vice, as many that are to be
found in that curious code, Popery.

The malice of our intemperate zealots against Mahomedanism has been of course
extended to its founder with more than common exaggeration and additions. They
have represented Mahomet to be a man of mean origin, possessing a mind
unenlightened by science or literature, and an understanding and faculties
naturally gross. All those suggestions are undoubtedly false; -- he sprung from
the most noble of all the Arabian tribes -- the Cor^ishites: at his time,
poverty, so far from being a reproach among them, was a mark of every thing
that was great and dignified, if supported with magnanimity and fortitude; and
the two first caliphs lived as poor as Mahomet himself, although they had
immense revenues, commanded vast armies, and were lords of great provinces. As
to his understanding I can only say, that perhaps he was the very last man in
the world whose intellectual powers should be called in question. His genius
was unbounded, his spirit enterprising, his powers of address were unequalled,
he was allowed to be the greatest orator of his time; and yet, with all these
qualifications, his understanding was slighted. It is a logical truth, that
when people prove too much, they prove nothing at all: our Christian zealots,
in this instance, have overshot the mark, and thereby rendered all their other
information at least doubtful. Perhaps the consummation of all policy was
Mahomet's pretending to be an idiot, in order to make his great and wonderful
effusions appear to be the immediate inspiration of Heaven -- He called himself
THE IDIOT PROPHET. Mohammed.


The whole of Mahomedanism may be reduced simply to this one article of faith
-- "There is but one GOD, and MAHOMET is the prophet;" but upon this they have
superinduced, from time to time, such a variety of absurdities as would require
volumes to describe: however, in strict candor let us reflect, and ask our own
hearts the question, whether sprinkling with holy water, or worshipping a bit
of white wafer as GOD, can be exceeded, or are less absurd than the periodical
ablutions of the Turks, or their going on a pilgrimage to Mecca?

With regard to the women, I have said before that the best information we can
obtain is very imporfect; all I have been able to collect, you shall have. They
are formed in a style of the most exquisite symmetry, par^icularly about the
chest and bosom; they have delicate skins, regular features, black hair and
eyes, and are, above all other beings, cleanly and neat in their persons,
bathing twice a day regularly, besides on other occasions, and not sufferng
even the smallest hair to remain upon their bodies. They are kept in the most
rigorous confinement, and only persons of ill fame paint. Women of character
are there chaste -- nor is their chastity to be attributed to restraint merely,
for, from their infancy they are trained to discretion and self-subjection, and
the modesty natural to the sex is cherished from its first dawnings. When they
grow up, they are not, like our women here, subjected to the contagion of
infamous gallantry; neither are the men trained to, nor do they pride
themselves, like some among us, on the arts of seduction. In fact, that
practice makes no part of the accomplishments of their fine gentlemen; nay, it
is held by them to be infamous. There are no such characters to be found in
Turkey as your box-lobby loungers -- none of your upstart cubs like those who
doudle the best part of the day through Pall Mall, St. James's-street and
Bond-street; who, without birth, wealth, education, or parts, fancy themselves
fine fellows, and powder their noses in ladies' head-dresses, whispering them
in order to get the reputation of gallantry; who strut like Bantam cocks, and
assume a fierce air to conceal their conscious want of spirit; and dressed in a
suit of regimentals bought by papa, at mama's request, to exhibit sweet Master
Jacky to advantage in the Park -- though never to be soiled with gunpowder, or
personated with a ball in the nasty field of battle!!! -- my dear FREDERICK, I
have often told you that you shall make choice of your own profession. If you
should choose any of the learned professions, you may fail in it without
dishonor; for many of the ablest men have failed before: but, mark me! avoid
the military as you would ruin, unless you have the requisites; let not the
glitter of a scarlet coat, or the empty name of a soldier, tempt you to be like
one of those miserable animals I have described. There may be charasters more
wicked -- I know none so utterly contemptible.

All extremes are bad; but the exceedings of virtue even where they run into
error, are still preferable to vice. However ludricous it may appear, we cannot
absolutely despise or condemn the prudery of the Turkish women, though it runs
into such extravagance, that, when feeding their poultry, they keep carefully
vieled if there happens to be a cock among them, so fastidiously averse are
they to the odious male creature seeing their pretty faces.

When the circumstances under which the Turkish women stand are considered, it
must appear amazing, that chastity, from principle, is universal among them, as
it is confessed to be: the nature of man urges him to desire, with greatest
ardour, that which is most forbidden; and women who are much confined, may well
be supposed to have their passions inflamed by the exaggerated workings of the
imagination. Infidelity, however, to the marriage bed, is much less frequent
among the men there, than among the women here; and the tide or fashion, which
in this country gives such a rapid and irresistible circulation to vice and
adultery, runs there in an opposite direction; and contrary to our customs, no
man is so unfashionable in Turkey as he that has interrupttd the domestic peace
of a family by seduction.

Among the many virtues which may with strict justice be ascribed to the Turks,
hospitality holds a conspicuous place. It is not confined to common civility,
it extends to personal protection. Many deem it absolutely their duty to risk
their lives in defense of their guests; nor will any motive, however cogent, be
allowed to justify the violation of it. Nay, to such a system is it carried up,
that an engagement with a stranger is accepted as an excuse for not obeying the
summons of a great man, when no other apology, not even that of indisposition,
would be admitted.

While the Turks abhor and despise all other religions but their own, their
government is by no means intolerant in spiritual concerns. The exercise of all
religions is free, and at Constantinople (we are told) Monks dress in their
habits, and are allowed at funeral processions to elevate the cross, which is
more than the English tyranny allowed the Roman Catholics of Ireland to do,
till very lately: a Turk, however, convicted of apostasy, could not by any
means escape death. Meantime it must be observed, that if they keep up a decent
semblance of the forms of their religion, no intrusive inquiry is made unto
their real faith: and though it is one of the injunctions of Mahomet to
endeavor to convert unbelievers, and they sometimes in obedience to that
command solicit the conversion of Christians and others; they never sail to
consider any renegado, or person who becomes a convert, with contempt, if not
dislike.

I will conclude this letter with an extract from that most valuable and
accurate work, Russel's History of Aleppo, which will give you a better,
because a true, notion of Turkish morals, than you are likely to receive from
general opinion. "Upon the whole," says he, "whether it be ascribed to the
influence of their political constitution, or to the absence of various
temptations, which in Europe often lead to the violation of better laws; there
are perhaps few great cities where many of the private and domestic virtues are
in general more prevalent than at Aleppo."

LETTER XXXI.
THE use of periodical stated times of devotion is universally admitted, and
the necessity of adopting them makes a part of the Christian code. The
Mahomedan religion, however, exceeds it far in the rigid attention to, and
frequency of, devotion. There are no less than five stated times of prayer in
every twenty-four hours, fixed as indispensable, at none of which a true
believer fails; and the fervency of their praying exceeds even the frequency. I
have heard it ass^rted, that if the house was to take fire while they are at
their devotion, they would not break off; and so rigidly intent do they
conceive it their duty to be during the time of prayer, that if in the midst of
it they were interrupted by a fit of sneering or coughing, they consider all
already done as gone for nothing, and always begin them again. And to tell a
truth of them, if the Christian curse them, they are pretty even with them in
return, never failing to pray for discord, enmity, and dissension among their
enemies, as well as health and prosperity to themselves; and to the efficacy of
those prayers they fondly attribute all the wars and dissensions which
incessantly harass Christendom. A bell tolls as a public notice of prayer; and
when a true Mahomedan hears it, let him be where he will, whether at home or
abroad, in the highway or in the market, be the place dirty or clean, wet or
dry, he immeditely falls down and worships.

As subsidiary to prayer they have their ablutions, in which they are full as
scrupulously punctual as in their prayers. One is preparatory to prayer,
another after cohabitation with women, a third before e^^ing, and another again
incidental. Those they never neglect to perform, unless some insuperable
obstacle lies in the way. Charity, that most glorious doctrine of any religion,
is enjoined by the Koran under the most heavy denunciation of heavenly
vengeance, in case of neglect; and by it they are charged to regard no bounds
in liberality to the poor. Many Mussulmen in their zeal to discharge this duty
have given a fourth, many a third, and some one half of their property. Nay,
the instances are not unfrequent of men giving away their all, and living
afterward themselves upon alms. To do strict justice it most be said, that
poverty is no where so respectfully attended to, honored, or reverenced, as
among the Mahomedans; who have a saying among them, "that the fear of want is a
mark of the judgment of GOD."

Abstinence is considered as a virtue among them, and very strictly enjoined as
a religious duty. The great fast appointed by the Koran continues for the month
of Ramedan, during which time they neither eat, drink, nor converse with their
wives, from sunrise till the stars appear, or the lamps are hung out at the
mosques. Any man who breaks it is punished with death; but the worst of it is,
that they will not allow even travelers, the sick o^ the wounded, to plead a
right to exemption: some of the Turks, however, and all the Christians, have
hit upon expedients to pass the month without much mortification; that is,
sleeping in bed all day, and sitting up and carousing all night, to evade the
restraint.

The last and greatest ordinance of their religion is the pilgrimage to Mecca,
which when once accomplished is supposed to be a direst passport to Heaven; and
there are few of them who do not at one time o^ other of their lives take that
painful and hazardous journey. As this is a very interesting journey, however,
to travel in the closet, as it includes the description of a caravan, and
serves to show to what extremeties enthusiasm can influence men, I will give
you a description of it as handed to me by a very accurate and ingenious
person, on whose precise veracity I can rely; first making some remarks upon
the preceding part of this letter.

You will observe from what I have already said, that, excepting the mere
points of religious faith, the moral ordinances of Mahomedanism comprehend most
of those parts of the Christian religion, on the practice of which the
reputation of piety is founded; and that for strict obedience to those
ordinances the Mahomedans are more remarkable than we are. Adultery is not
frequent among them; wine is seldom or never used; theft is little known; so is
murder. Then in the practical parts of devotion, there are in the first place
prayers; secondly, abstinence or fasting; thirdly, charity. Those are all
Christian doctrines, more zealously observed by them than by us. Their
ablutions are at least no injury to the cause of morality or piety; but rather,
being done as a religious exercise, serve to keep up the series of intercourse
which should subsist between the creature and his Creator: besides, I cannot
help thinking with our inimitable poet Thomson, that -- from the body's purity,
the mind
Receives a secret sympathetic aid. SEASONS -- Summer.
And as to the pilgrimage to Mecca, however irrational it may appear to us, it
is at least recommended by sincerity and zeal, and is doubtless in the eye of
an all-seeing Providence meritorious. HE, we are to suppose, will judge, not by
the value of the act, but the purity of the motive; and will accept it as the
offering of a frail, blind mortal, bending in obedience to that which he
conceives to be the will of Heaven. Besides, for the life of me I cannot see
why a pilgrimage to Mecca is at all more culpable than a pilgrimage to
Jerusalem; not to mention the thousand other holy places to which well-meaning
Christians go, for their soul's sake, at imminent hazard of their lives, and
certain mortification and hardship to their bodies.

Banish then, my FREDERICK! banish from your heart all illiberal and
uncharitable prejudices, if any have yet found their way to it. Revere and
cling to your religion as the best and most conducive to eternal and temporal
happiness; and the more good because it enjoins us to be charitable even to the
Jews as well as to the Gentiles: but never think that you advance the cause of
that religion, or do service to your GOD, by waging war against your
fellow creatures for opinions they can no more help entertaining than you can
help having yours, or by denouncing against them that eternal sentence which
rests with the Almighty alone to judge of or to pronounce.

To a benevolent mind the animosities of mankind present a most afflicting
picture* and the frivolous pretexts upon which those animosities are grounded
render it only the more horrible. One would think that the substantial traffic
of life, and the struggle of mankind for the superfluities of it, of themselves
afforded ample materials for scuffle, without resorting to the shadows of
speculation for contention. Yet experience has shown us that opinion is a much
more copious source of animosity and warfare; and that for one man who has been
cursed, murdered, or destroyed by his fellow creatures in a contest for
property, there are a thousand who have fallen sacrifices to the vengeance of
hostile opinion.

Were it possible that I could obtain from the bounty of Heaven a grant of the
first wish of my heart, that wish should be to see all mankind in harmony and
mutual good will, ranging without distinction under the one great name of man
and brother. As those who foment the disunion between them are the most
pernicious monsters of society, so he who endeavors to bring them one step
nearer to a general accommodation of sentiment, who strives to inculcate the
principles of mutual toleration, and encourage the growth of reciprocal
affection between men as fellow beings, may be justly ranked among the best
friends of mankind, and the most faithful servants of Him who gave being to all.

Among the gross misrepresentations of which I complain, and which for the sake
of mankind I lament, is that general falsehood, the infidelity of the Turkish
women. The respectable author whom I have before taken the freedom of quoting,
I mean Dr. Russel, declares that in twenty years residence at Aleppo, he did
not remember a public instance of adultery; and that in the private walks of
scandal those he heard of were among the lowest class, and did not in number
exceed a dozen. "In respect to the Franks (continues he) the undertaking is
attended not only with such risk to the individual, but may in its consequences
so seriously involve the whole settlement, that it is either never attempted,
or is concealed with a secrecy unexampled in other matters. I have reason to
believe that European travelers have sometimes had a Greek courtesan imposed
on them for a sultana; and after having been heartily frightened, have been
induced to pay smartly, in order to preserve a secret which the day after was
known to half the sisterhood in town." He remarks, however, that at
Constantinople the state of gallantry is different.

On the subject of the Turkish moral character, I have endeavored to be as
concise as justice would allow me to be; and yet I find that I have gone to
some length. I cannot however dismiss it without giving you a trait to which
the most obstinate polemical prejudice, and the most inveterate hatred, must in
spite of them pay the tribute of applause. Their treatment to their slaves is
beyond all example among us humane, tender, and generous, and such as may well
bring a blush into the faces of Christian dealers in human flesh. When young
slaves, male or female, are bought by a Turk, they seem to be introduced into
the family rather in the condition of an adopted child; they receive the same
education, perform nearly the same offices, and are bound to no greater marks
of respect than their master's own children -- and in fact feel none of the
galling circumstances of a state of servility; the very worst treatment they
ever receive is to be put on a footing with the menial domestics, or ordered to
the same duty as a valet or a page. It often happens, on the other hand, that
they are married into the family, and very frequently are promoted to high
offices in the state. If they adopt the religion of their masters, it is always
spontaneously; and even to slaves taken in war, no compulsion is used to make
them change their faith.

The following is the best description I am able to give you of an Eastern
caravan. It exactly coincides with my own observations, and with the various
accounts I have had from others. I owe it, as well as the account of the
proceedings of the pilgrims at Mecca, to the kind offices of a friend, who took
the pains to procure them for me.

DESCRIPTION OF A CARAVAN. Enclosed in the preceding Letter.
A CARAVAN, which is so often mentioned in the history and description of the
East, and in all the tales and stories of those countries, is an assemblage of
travelers, partly pilgrims, partly merchants, who collect together in order to
consolidate a sufficient force to protect them, in traveling through the
hideous wilds and burning deserts over which they are constrained to pass for
commercial and other purposes; those wilds being infested with Arabs, who make
a profession of pillage, and rob in most formidable bodies, some almost as
large as small armies. As the collection of such a number requires time, and
the embodying of them is a serious concern, it is concerted with great care and
preparation, and is never attempted without the permission of the prince in
whose dominions it is to be formed, and of those also through whose dominions
it is to pass, expressed in writing. The exact number of men and carriages,
mules, horses, and other beasts of burden, are specified in the license; and
the merchants to whom the caravan belongs, regulate and direct every thing
appertaining to its government and police during the journey, and appoint the
various officers necessary for conducting it.

Each caravan has four principal officers: the first, the caravanbachi, or head
of the caravan; the second, the captain of the march; the third, the captain of
the stop or rest; and the fourth, the captain of the distribution. The first
has the uncontrolable authority and command over all the others, and gives,
them his orders: the second is absolute during the march; but his authority
immediately ceases on the stopping or encamping of the caravan, when the third
assumes his share of the authority, and exerts it during the time of its
remaining at rest: and the fourth orders the disposition of every part of the
caravan, in case of an attack or battle. This last officer has also during the
march the inspection and direction of the distribution of provisions, which is
conducted under his management by several inferior officers, who are obliged to
give security to the master of the caravan; each of them having the care of a
certain number of men, elephants, dromedaries, camels, etc. etc. which they
undertake to conduct and furnish with provisions at their own risque, according
to an agreement stipulated between them.

A fifth officer of the caravan is the play master or treasurer, who has under
him a great many clerks and interpreters, appointed to keep accurate journals
of all the material incidents that occur upon the journey. And it is by these
journals, signed by the superior officers, that the owners of the caravan judge
whether they have been well or ill served or conducted.

Another kind of officers are the mathematicians, without whom no caravan will
presume to set out. There are commonly three of them attached to a caravan of
large size; and they perform the offices both of quarter masters and
aides-de-camp, leading the troops when the caravan is attacked, and assigning
the quarters where the caravan is appointed to encamp.

There are no less than five distinct sorts of caravans; first, the heavy
caravans, which are composed of elephants, dromedaries, camels and horses;
secondly, the light caravans, which have but few elephants; thirdly, the common
caravans, where there are none of those animals; fourthly the horse caravans,
where there are neither dromedaries nor camels; and lastly, sea caravans,
consisting of vessels; from whence you will observe that the word caravan is
not confined to the land, but extends to the water also.

The proportion observed in the heavy caravan is as follows: When there are
five hundred elephants, they add a thousand dromedaries and two thousand horses
at the least: and then the escort is composed of four thousand men on
horseback. Two men are required for leading one elephant, five for three
dromedaries, and seven for eleven camels. This multitude of servants, together
with the officers and passengers, whose number is uncertain, serve to support
the escort in case of a fight, and render the caravan more formidable and
secure. The passengers are not absolutely obliged to fight; but according to
the laws and usages of the caravans, if they refuse to do so, they are not
entitled to any provisions whatever from the caravan, even though they should
agree to pay an extravagant price for them.

Every elephant is mounted by what they call a nick: that is to say, a young
lad of nine or ten years old, brought up to the business, who drives the
elephant, and pricks it with a pointed iron to animate it in the fight: the
same lad also loads the firearms of the two soldiers who mount the elephant,
with him.

The day of the caravan setting out being once fixed, is never altered or
postponed* so that no disappointment can possibly ensue to any one.

One would suppose that so enormous and powerful a body, so well armed, might
be (...) of moving forward without fear of being robbed: but as most of the
Arabian princes have no other means to subsist but by their robberies, they
keep spies in all parts, who give them notice when the caravans set out, which
they way lay; and sometimes attack with superior force, overpower them, plunder
them of all their treasure, and make slaves of the whole convoy -- foreigners
excepted, to whom they generally show more mercy. If they are repulsed, they
generally come to some agreement; the conditions of which are pretty well
observed, especially if the assailants are native Arabians. The carrying on of
robberies with such armies may appear astonishing; but when the temptation is
considered, and when it is known that one caravan only is sometimes enough to
enrich those princes, much of our surprise vanishes.

They are obliged to use great precautions to prevent the caravan from
introducing that dreadful distemper, the plague, into the places through which
they pass, or from being themselves infected with it. When therefore they
arrive near a town, the inhabitants of the town and the people of the caravan
hold a solemn conference concerning the state of their health, and very
sincerely communicate to each other the state of the case, heartily informing
each other whether there be danger on either side. -- When there is reason to
suspect any contagious distemper, they amicably agree that no communication
whatever shall take place between them; and if the caravan stands in need of
provisions, they are conveyed to them with the utmost caution over the walls of
the town.

The fatigues, hardships, and hazards, attending those caravans, are so great,
that they certainly would never be undertaken, if the amazing profits did not
in some measure counterbalance them. -- The merchant who travels in them must
be content with such provisions as he can get, must part with all his
delicacies, and give up all hope of ease; he must submit to the frightful
confusion of languages and nations; the fatigues of long marches over sands,
and under a climate almost sufficiently hot to reduce him to a cinder: he must
submit cheerfully to exorbitant duties fraudulently levied, and audacious
robberies and subtle tricks practiced by the herd of vagabonds who follow the
caravans -- for preventing which, the merchants have a variety of well
contrived locks, that can only be opened by those who know the knack of them.

But in some tracks of caravans there are dangers, and horrible ones against
which no human foresight or power can provide, and beneath which whole caravans
sink, and are never after heard of.

The Egyptian caravans are particularly subject to hazards in the horrid tracks
they are necessarily obliged to take through sandy deserts, where, for
boundless extents, nature has denied one single circumstance of favor; where a
blade of grass never grew, nor a drop of water ever ran; where the scorching
fire of the sun has banished the kindly influence of the other elements; where,
for several days journey, no object meets the eye to guide the pa^ched
traveller in his way; and where the casual track of one caravan is closed by
the moving sands, before another can come to take advantage of it. In those
vast plains of burning sands, if the guide should happen to lose his way, the
provision of water, so necessary to carry them to the place where they are to
find more, must infallibly fail them; in such a case the mules and horses die
with fatigue and thirst; and even the camels, notwithstanding their
extraordinary power to subsist without water, soon perish in the same manner,
together with the people of the caravan, wandering in those frightful deserts.

But more dreadful still, and still more inevitable, is the danger when a south
wind happens to rise in those sandy deserts. The least mischief it occasions
is, to dry up the leathern bags which contain the provision of water for the
journey. This wind, to which the Arabs give the epithet of poisoned, often
stifles in a moment those who have the misfortune to meet it; to prevent which,
they are obliged to throw themselves immediately on the ground, putting their
faces close to the burning sands which surround them on all sides, and covering
their mouths with some linen cloth, lest by breathing they should swallow
instantaneous death, which this wind carries with it wherever it extends. --
Besides which, whole caravans are often buried under moving hills of burning
sand, raised by the agitation of the winds.

All those horrors and dangers are so exquisitely described by our charming
bard THOMSON, that I cannot refrain transcribing the passage, as bringing them
more immediately home to the understanding and the heart, than volumes of
common description could do. -- Breathed hot
From all the boundless furnace of the sky,
And the wide glittering waste of burning sand,
A suffocating wind the pilgrim smites
With instant death. Patient of thirst and toil,
Son of the Desert! even the camel feels,
Shot through his withered heart, the fiery blast.
Or from the black-red either bursting broad
Sallies the sudden wirlwind. Straight the sands,
Commov'd around, in gathering eddies play;
Nearer and nearer still they darkening come;
Till, with the general all-involving storm
Swept up, the whole continuous wilds arise;
And by their noonday fount dejected thrown,
Or sunk at night in sad disastrous sleep
Beneath descending hills, the caravan
Is buried deep. In Caro's crowded streets
The impatient Merchant wondering waits in vain,
And Mecca saddens at the long delay. --
Yet, notwithstanding all those horrible circumstances of terror and danger --
trade, and the desire of gain, on the one hand, induce multitudes of people to
run the hazard. Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per ^ax^, per ignes.
HORACE. And on the other hand, enthusiasm and religious zeal send thousands to
tempt their fate, and take a passage to Heaven through those horrid regions.
Thus we see in what various ways delusion operates. -- The merchant might find
a livelihood, and the bigot his way to divine favor, just as well by staying
within the confines of their own native home.

ACCOUNT OF THE CEREMONIES OBSERVED BY PILGRIMS ON THEIR ARRIVAL AT MECCA.
The caravans are generally so ordered, as to arrive at Mecca about forty days
after the Fast of Ramedan, and immediately previous to the Corban, or Great
Sacrifice. Five or six days before that festival, the three great caravans,
viz. that from Europe, that from Asia Minor, and that from Arabia, unite; and
all, consisting of about two hundred thousand men, and three hundred thousand
beasts of burden, encamp at some miles from Mecca. The pilgrims form
themselves into small detachments, and enter the town to arrange the ceremonies
preparatory to the Great Sacrifice. They are led through a street of continual
ascent, till they arrive at a gate on an eminence, called the Gate of Health.
From thence they see the great mosque which incloses the House of Abraham. They
salute it with the most profound respect and devotion, repeating twice, "Salam
Alek Irusoul Allah!" that is to say, "Peace be with the Ambassador of God!"
Thence, at some distance, they mount five steps to a large platform faced with
stone, where they offer up then prayers; they then descend on the other side of
it, and advance toward two arches, of the same kind of dimensions, but at some
distance from each other, through which they pass with great silence and
devotion. This ceremony must be performed seven times.

From hence proceeding to the great mosque which incloses the House of Abraham,
they enter the mosque, and walk seven times round the little building contained
within it, saying, "This is the House of GOD, and of his servant Abraham." Then
kissing with great veneration a black stone, said to have descended white from
Heaven, they go to the famous well called Zun Zun, which the angel showed to
Hagar when she was distressed in the desert, and could find no water for her
so^ Ishmael, and which the Arabs call Zem Zem. Into this well they plunge with
all their clothes, repeating "Toba Alla, Toba Alla!" that is to say,
"Forgiveness, GOD! Forgiveness, GOD!" They drink a draught of that foe^id,
turbid water, and depart.

The duty of bathing and drinking they are obliged to pass through once; but
those who would gain Paradise bofore the others, must repeat it once a day
during the stay of the caravan at Mecca.

At fifteen miles from the town of Mecca there is a hill called "Ghiabal
Arafata," or "the Mount of Forgiveness." It is about two miles in circumference
-- a most delicious spot. On it ADAM and EVE met, after the LORD had, for their
transgressions, separated them forty years. Here they cohabited and lived in
excess of happiness, having built a house on it, called "Beith Adam," that is
to say, "the House of Adam." On the eve of the day of Sacrifice, the three
caravans, ranged in a triangular form, surround this mountain -- during the
whole night the people rejoice, clamor, and riot -- firing off cannon,
muskets, pistols, and fireworks, with an incessant sound of drums and trumpets.
As soon as day breaks, a profound silence succeeds -- they slay their sheep and
offer up their sacrifice on the mountain with every demonstration of the most
profound devotion.

On a sudden a scheik (or head of the temple), a kind of prelate, rushes from
amidst them, mounted on a camel -- he ascends five steps, rendered practicable
for the purpose, and in a studied sermon preaches thus to the people:

"Return praise and thanks for the infinite and immense benefits granted by GOD
to Mahomedars, through the mediation of his most beloved friend and prophet,
Mahomet: for that he has delivered them from the slavery and bondage of sin and
idolatry, in which they were plunged; has given them the House of Abraham, from
whence they can be heard, and their petitions granted; also the mountain of
forgiveness, by which they can implore Him, and obtain a pardon and remission
of all their sins.

"For that the blessed, pious, and merciful GOD, giver of all good gifts,
commanded his secretary, Abraham, to build himself a house at Mecca, whence his
descendants might pray to the Almighty, and their desires be fulfilled.

"On this command all the mountains in the world ran, as it were, each
ambitious to assist the secretary of the LORD, and to furnish a stone toward
erecting the holy house; all, except this poor little mountain, which, through
mere indigence, could not contribute a stone. It continued therefore thirty
years grievously afflicted: at length the Eternal God observed its anguish,
and, moved with pity at its long suffering, broke forth, saying, I can forbear
no longer, my child! your bitter lamentations have reached my ears; and I now
declare, that all those who go to visit the house of my friend Abraham shall
not be absolved of their sins, if they do not first reverence you, and
celebrate on you the holy Sacrifice, which I have enjoined my people through
the mouth of my prophet Mahomet! Love God! Pray! Give Alms!"

After this sermon the people salute the Mountain, and depart.

LETTER XXXII.
IN my last letters I endeavored to give you an account of the Turkish
government, laws, and constitution in general, so far as I was able to collect
information on the subject. I will now proceed to a description of those
particular parts of that vast empire through which I had occasion to travel.

During my stay at Aleppo, I experienced much politeness and hospitality from
the European gentry resident there, and particularly from Mr. --, at whose
house I entirely resided; and as the Franks live on a very good footing with
each other, the time passed so agreeably, that were it not for "that within," I
should have been happy enough -- We rode out occasionally, sometimes hunting,
sometimes merely for the ride sake. Sometimes with an intelligent native whom I
got to walk with me, or with some of the Franks, I walked about the town, in
order to amuse away the time and see what was going forward, notwithstanding
the cry of "Frangi Cucu!" or "Cuckold Frank!" which frequently followed us for
the length of a street. Sometimes we went of evenings to some of the outlets,
where preperation was made for our reception by servants, previously dispatched
for the purpose, and there regaled with coffee, wine, fruits, etc.

The first day we went on a party of the last mentioned kind, Mrs. -- did us
the honor to accompany us: the place appointed was in a range of beautiful
rural gardens that lie along the side of a river; where the well cultivated
earth teeming with a vast abundance of the best esculent plants, flowers,
flowering shrubs and fruit trees, afforded a most delicious regale to the
senses; and the plane, the willow, the ash, the pomegranate, and a variety of
other trees, clustered together in almost impervious thickets, yielded a
delightful shady retreat from the piercing rays of the sun. It was on this
occasion that I got the first specimen of Turkish illiberality, which, as I was
entirely unprepared for it confounded me, and nearly deprived me of temper and
of prudence. As we walked along, I observed several Turks addressing themselves
to Mrs. -- and me, who walked arm in arm, and speaking with a loudness of
voice, contortion of countenance, and violence of gesticulation, attended with
a clappling of hands, which, though I did not understand their language, I
could plainly perceive carried the appearance of a menace or insult. I was at a
loss what to think of it: Mrs. -- blushed, and seemed much hurt: Mr. -- and the
other gentlemen were silent, and betrayed not the least mark of emotion or
resentment. At length, when we got from them, I asked what it meant? and was
told, that it was all aimed at Mrs. --, or at least occasioned by her: that,
bigoted to the customs of their own country, and utterly ignorant of those of
any other, they were affected with great indignation at her dress, occasional
derangement of her veil, and, above all, at the shameless and unpardonably
wicked circumstance of a woman walking so openly and familiarly in the company
of men. -- Talking of this affair afterward with Mr. --, the lady's husband,
he assured me, that there was not an opprobrious and infamous epithet which the
vulgar ingenuity of the brightest que^n in Billings-gate could think of, that
they had not huddled upon us. I was beyond measure astonished at the coolness
with which he bore it, and said, that if I had understood what they had said, I
should most certainly have been unable to restrain myself, and would have
knocked one of them down as an example to the rest. Had you done so, returned
he, you would certainly have repented it: for, if you escaped being stoned, or
put to death upon the spo^, the legal punishment for an infidel striking a true
believer, you could not escape; and probably we, and all the Franks in the
city, would suffer for it: it would at all events cause a dreadful convulsion
in the place, and you would yourself fall a sacrifice to it.

Not long since I was conversing on this subject with a gentleman of my
acquaintance, and mentioned it with some asperity, as arising from a spirit of
bigotry peculiar to Mahomedans. "My good Sir," said he, "let me undeceive you!
the very same would be done in most parts of Spain. I was one day," continued
he, "walking in a town in Spain, in company with the wife of a gentleman who
resided there, who were both well known, and bore the most unexceptionable
character. Seeing me however walking with her, the populace, as we passed, held
up two fingers significantly, and cried to her, What a cuckold is your husband!
and concluded with 'Todas las Inglesas son putas,' or, "All English women are
-- s." He added, "that he was even in Cadiz, where commercial intercourse
renders them rather more liberal than in other part of the country, frequently
accosted by little children themselves, with 'Crees in Dios?' Do you believe in
God? and sometimes forming a cross with the thumb of the right hand and the
forefinger, 'Crees en este? Crees en este? No! No! Ah Judio! Moro! Barbaro!
Bruto! Protestante! Puerco! Voia al los Infernos!!' In English -- Do you
believe in this? Do you believe in this? No! No! Ah Jew! Moor! Barbarian!
Protestant! Hog! Go to Hell!!"

So much for human beneficience and charity, under the fostering auspices of
religion!

The house of Mr. --, where I was so hospitably lodged, was a magnificent
edifice, built in all the fullness of Eastern grandeur and luxury, and furnished
with all the splendor and state of Turkey, united with the taste and opulence
of Great Britain. It was indeed a house in which voluptuousnest itself might
sit down with satisfaction -- The most unaffected hospitality and generous
benevolence spread the board, and politeness and affability presided over all.
Never shall I forget it -- never shall I think of it without gratitude and
esteem.

A gentleman of the opulence and consequence of Mr. --, with a house such as I
have described, and a disposition to social enjoyment, was not, you will
conclude, without a resort of company and friends; in truth, he had friends
even among the better sort of Turks. Parties of pleasure had no intermission
while I was there; and as the ladies of Europe or of European extraction in
that country are highly accomplished, speak many languages, are indefatigable
in their efforts to please, and receive strangers from Europe with a joy and
satisfaction not to be described, Aleppo would have been to me an Elysium, if
the pleasures of the place did not from the beginning suffer diminution from my
own painful sensations, which were aggravated at last by an incident that arose
from my intercourse there -- of which more hereafter.

While I remained at Aleppo, I walked as I before told you, frequently about
the streets; and I think I never was witness to so many broils in all my life
put together, as I was in my wanderings there -- Not a time I went out that I
did not observe one, two, three, and sometimes half a dozen or more. They have
nothing terrible in them however, and, were it not extremely disgusting to see
men scold, would be very entertaining; for I will venture to say that a street
battle "a la Turque" is one of the most ludicrous exhibitions in the world. The
parties approach to each other, and retreat mutually, as the action of the one
gives hopes to the other of victory, lifting their hands, and flourishing them
in the air, as if ready to strike every moment, grinning and gnashing their
teeth, while their beard and whiskers besprent with the spume of their mouths,
and wagging with the quick motion of their lips and ghastly contortions of
their jaws, present the most ridiculous spectacle imaginable. They reminded me
at the time of a verse in an old English ballad: -- It Is merry in the hall,
When beards wag all.


Nothing, in fact, can exceed the extravagance of their gesture: the vehement
loudness of their voice, or the whimsical distortions of their countenances, in
which are displayed sometimes the quickest vicissitudes of fear and fury, and
sometimes the most laughable combination of both. All this time, however, not a
single blow is actually struck; but they compensate for the want of bodily
prowess by the exercise of the tongue, denouncing vengeance against each other,
threatening instant demolition, lavishing every bitter reproach, every filthy
epithet, and every horrible imprecation that they can think of, and both
boasting occasionally of their patience and forbearance, which fortunately
enabled them to refrain from annihilating their adversary. At last the fray
gradually decays: exhausted with fatigue, and half choked with dust and
vociferation, they retreat gradually backwards to their own doors; where
summing up all their malignity into a most horrid execration, they part for the
time, and retire to vaunt in empty threat, and growl away their rage, in the
recesses of their haram.

Yet those people are found terrible in battle by the Christian troops that
have from time to time been opposed to them: here, if proof be wanting of the
effects of religion on the human mind, is an incontrovertable one of its
powerful operations. Under the influence of their faith, which tells them that
they go to Paradise instantly if killed in battle with Infidels, they perform
prodigies of valor fighting against Christians; while, forbidden by that faith
to imbrue their hands in the blood of a true believer, their passions have been
gradually brought under the dominion of their religion, till that which at
first was faith at last becomes habit, and the appropriate energy and courage
of the man has sunk into the degrading and emasculant efforts of the woman.

The practice of fighting, or personal conflicts between individuals of the
same society, seems to have been condemned by the universal consent of all
religions. The Gentoos, as well as all the other sects of the various parts of
the East through which I have traveled, give vent to their passion in nearly
the same manner as the Turks. The Christians too are most strictly forbidden to
strike one another by the great Author of their faith: but it is their good
fortune, that they not only have the best religion in the world for their
guidance, but that they are the only people in the world who claim exemption
from the penalties of that religion, and think themselves wronged and their
personal rights infringed, if they are refused the privilege of breaking
through its rules whenever those rules are at variance with their convenience.

Be it your care, my dear child, to fortify your mind with the spirit of true
religion and sound morality, and let your practice in life be ever guided by
their precepts.

LETTER XXXIII.
THE avidity with which human creatures search for something to recreate the
mind and keep it in exercise, is of itself a convincing proof of the natural
activity of our intellectual faculties, and shows that, like the different
parts of the body, they were given by Providence to be called into effort and
improved by practice. As they who by the favors of opulence are exempted from
the necessity of actual bodily labor, are obliged to have recourse to
artificial labor called exercise; so they who have the misfortune to be
precluded from the employment of the mind by business, are obliged to seek
mental exercise in a variety of expedients, some of which are criminal, some
foolish, and some good for nothing or indifferent. Cards, dice, and games of
chance are (according to the extent to which they are carried) of the two
former -- tale and novel-reading of the two latter. Those however serve to
occupy the vacant hours of all the idle and unemployed. And when letters deny
their friendly aid, we find among ourselves the deficiency supplied from the
less ample resources of the memory; and story-telling, love tales, fairy tales,
and goblin and ghost adventures, are recited round the villager's fire or the
kitchen hearth in as great numbers, with as much ingenuity, and to as great
effect, as they are to be found written in the innumerable volumes on the
shelves of our circulating libraries.

In Turkey, where the art of printing has not yet been known, were the
circulation of literary productions is chained down within the narrow compass
of manuscript, and where therefore the efforts of genius are repressed by
discouragement, the business of story-telling makes in itself a profession,
which, as it is acquired by study and prosecuted with art, is followed with
considerably profit.

One day a friend (a French gentleman) who escorted me through the town called
to draw me out with him for a walk; he said he wished to show me some of the
caravanseras, observing that he thought I should be entertained with a view of
them. I agreed to go; and he brought me to two, which after he had shown to me
and explained their principle, police, and etiquette, I could not help admiring
and approving. To both these were attached eating-houses and coffee-houses, and
every appendage that could render them convenient and comfortable. As we were
about leaving the last I observed my friend stop and listen attentively. "Come
hither," said he, after a minute's pause -- "come into this coffee-house, here
is something going forward that may amuse you."

We accordingly entered the coffee-house, where we saw a number of people, some
seated in the Turkish fashion, some on low stools, and some standing; and in
the middle a man walking to and fro, speaking in an audible voice, sometimes
slowly, sometimes with rapidity, varying his tones occasionally with all the
inflections of a corresponding sense. I could not understand him, but he seemed
to me to speak with "good emphasis and good discretion:" his action was easy to
him, though expressive and emphatical; and his countenance exhibited strong
marks of eloquent expression. I could not help staring with astonishment at a
scene so new to me, and felt great approbation of the tones and manner of this
extraordinary orator, though I could not understand a single word he said. He
was listened to by all with great attention, and the Turks (albeit not used to
the laughing mood) frequently betrayed strong symptoms of risibility: but in
the height and torrent of his speech he broke suddenly off, scampered out of
the door and disappeard. I set it down that he was a maniac or lunatic of an
ingenious kind, and was for going away. "Stay," says my friend, "rest where you
are for a few minutes, let us hear further."

The orator had scarcely been gone three minutes when the room was filled with
the buzz of conversation, a word of which I could not understand, but which my
guide listened to very attentively. At length the buzz began to grow loud, and
soon increased into clamor; when a scene ensued of so very ludricious a kind
as forced me to cram my handkerchief into my mouth to suppress a laugh, or at
least so to stifle it as to avoid observation. In short, they were disputing
violently, and the beards were, as I once before mentioned to you, ALL WAGGING.
I became more convulsed with mirth; and my friend seeing that I was likely to
give offense, took me under the arm and hurried me out of the coffee-house: we
retired into a porch in the caravansera, where I gave vent to my suppressed
laughter till my sides were sore and my eyes ran tears.

"In the name of God, my friend!" said I, "tell me what is the meaning of all
that extravagant scene to which we have just now been witness: who is that
madman that spoke so much? and why did they all quarrel after he went away?"

"Come, come," said he, "let us retire to my house, and I will there explain
the whole of it to you, from beginning to ending."

I accordingly accompanied him home, where we found a very gay circle
assembled, to whom he described my astonishment; recounting my immoderate
laughter, till they all laughed very nearly as immoderately as myself. "You
must know," said he, addressing himself to me, "that he whom you took to be a
madman, is one of the most celebrated composers and tellers of stories in Asia,
and only wants the aid of printing to be perhaps as eminent in reputation for
making CONTES, as Marmontel or Madame D'Anois. As we passed along I heard his
voice, and, knowing it, resolved to let you see him, and brought you in for the
purpose. He was entertaining the company with a very curious, interesting, and
comical story; the subject of which was ava^ce: the hero a miser of the name of
Cassem. His misery and avarice are represented in it as bringing him into a
variety of scrapes, which waste his wealth; and his character is drawn with
such strength of coloring, and marked with such grotesque lines of humor --
he related it moreover with so much wit, in such admirable language, and
embellished and enforced it with such appropriate action, utterance, and
emphasis -- that it rivited, as you saw, the attention of all his auditors, and
extorted laughter even from Turkish gravity,"

"But how came he to break off so suddenly?" said I.

"That," returned my friend, "is a part of the art of his profession, without
which he could not live; just as he gets to a most interesting part of the
story, when he has wound the imagination of his auditors up to the highest
climax of expectation, he purposely breaks off to make them eager for the rest.
He is sure to have them all next day, with additional numbers who come on their
report, and he makes his terms to finish the story."

"Why then," interrupted I, "why did they* who remained behind fall disputing?"

"That I will explain to you," said he. Just as he broke off, Cassem the miser
(who, as far as I heard, seems as well drawn as Moliere's AVARE) having already
suffered a thousand whimsical misfortunes and dilapidations of fortune, is
brought before the cadi for digging in his garden, on the presumption that he
was digging for treasure. As soon as the historian was gone, they first
applauded him, and then began to discuss his story -- which they one and all
agreed in praising highly and when they came to talk of the probable issue of
the sequel of it, there were almost as many opinions as there were men in
company; each maintained his own, and they went to loggerheads as you law about
it -- when the chance is a thousand to one, that not one of them was near the
mark. One in particular ^urmiled that Cassem would be married to the cadi's
daughter; which gave great offense to some, and rou^ed another of the company
to declare, that he was well assured in his conscience that Cassem would be
brought to the bastinado or the stake, or else hanged, in the sequel."

"And is it possible," said I, "that a group of twenty or thirty rational
beings can be so far bereft of all common sense, as to dispute upon the result
of a contigency, which absolutely depends on the arbitrary fancy of an
acknowledged fabricator of falsehoods?"

" C'est vrai, Monsieur? and thereby they demonstrate the power of the poet
(for poet we may call him); and enter nous, I doubt whether it is not more
rational, as well as more fair, to dispute what the denouement ought to be
before than after the inventor of the piece has disposed of it, as is the
practice with us. When he has once finished his fable, you will find them all
content, and the voice of criticism silent. Now in France or England, our
critics lie perdue, in order to attack the poet, let him finish his performance
how he may. But you will recollect, Monsieur, that in Turkey criticism is the
honest spontaneous issue of the heart, and with us is a trade, where sometimes
lucre, sometimes vanity, but oftener than both, envy and malice direct the
decision, and dispose to cavil and censure.

"But we will go again tomorrow," continued he, "probably he will be there to
conclude or proceed further with his story;" I agreed to this and we parted.

On the next day we went, and not seeing the o^ in his place, lounged about the
caravansera, and going to another coffee-house found him de^g ^h all his might.
My friend told me that the story h^ was now on was quite different from the
former: however we watched his motions so effectually that we got the
conclusion of the story of Cassem, which completely disappointed the prognos^
of the two conflicting Turkish critics; for Cassem was neither ba^adoed,
staked, or hanged, nor married to the cadi's daughter, but lived to see that
extreme avarice was folly; and to be sensible that to make the proper use of
the goods of this life is to enjoy them.

LETTER XXXIV.
MY last letter has shown you, that the conceptions of genius, though they may
want the aid of the press to bring them in full and perfect disclosure to the
world, will yet burst through their bounds, and find some means of
communication with mankind; for though the art of printing be unknown in
Turkey, the emanations of superior intellect and fancy find their way to the
general ear through the medium of public declamation in coffee-houses. This
letter will serve to show you that malversation in office, public delinquency,
and all those crimes of the great, which with us are cognizable by no tribunal
but that of the public press, are not altogether so exempt from the last and
exposure of the satirist in Turkey, as the want of that great palladium of
freedom would dispose us to believe; and that, incredible as it may appear, the
magistrates are held up to ridicule in public exhibition, satirised with all
the extravagant vulgarity of coarse humor and unpolished wit, and exposed with
all the bitter exaggerations of envenomed genius.

The French gentleman whom I mentined to you in my last, as having procured me
that pleasant repast at the coffee-house, called on me a morning or two after
that, and reminded me how highly I seemed to be entertained: said, there were
often to be seen, by walking about and going into public places, a variety of
things, which however worthless and unentertaining in themselves, might, from
the novelty of their appearance, and their unlikeliness to any thing seen in
Europe, serve either to divert by their oddity, or promote the conception of
new ideas in the mind: he therefore recommended it to me, with all the zeal of
a person who took an interest in my happiness, to keep on my legs and in the
streets while I remained at Aleppo.

You will conclude that I readily complied, and we sallied ou^ directly in
quest of adventure. We proceeded, therefore, to one of the before mentioned
coffee-houses, where, as my friend observed to me, though there were no people
of great rank, there was generally something to afford contemplation or
amusement; and where, if nothing else occurred, the motley appearance of the
company was sufficient to excite a variety of whimsical emotions, and suggest
numberless ludicrous images to the imagination of an English or French man. As
there was no orator at work declaiming, I had time to indulge myself with a
more accurate view than I had before taken of the group that surrounded us: and
surely never was ponderous gravity more ludicrously, or in more various forms
depicted by any caricaturist in the world. -- Here it was to be seen, in all
its shadings, from the self-important nod of serious cogitation, down to the
soporific aspect of stolid stupidity. Not a muscle was moved in way of mirth,
not a face disgraced with a smile, and I could not help thinking all the time,
that if every nation of the earth was to take some animal for its insignia, as
the British assume the lion, and the Prussian the eagle, the Turks might be
divided in their choice between the appropriate claims of the owl and the ass.

Soon after we entered, a band of what they called music, struck up a concert.
And here again the notion of the owl and the ass struck me with increased
force, as peculiarly presiding over their music: for no other combination of
sounds that I know on earth, but the screeching of the one, and the braying of
the other, could form any thing to resemble this concert, with which the
auditory seemed vastly pleased, though I was obliged to betake myself to
slight, in order to get relief from the torture it give me. The Turks, however,
as I retreated, honored me with a few remarks, which as I did not understand,
I could not precisely feel* my friend however told me, they were to the effect
that we were Frangi Dumus (Frank H^g)* and had no more ear than that filthy
animal for music.

Come, said my friend, don't be discouraged! -- But the music -- the music!
interrupted I. -- Well then, ^id (...), the music, or rather the sounds were
execrable to be sure; they have at least served to establish this certainty,
that there is nothing, however discordant or d^stable, which habit will not
reconcile us to. Doubt not, said he, that the best piece of H^ndel or Correll^,
performed by the best band in Rome, would appea^ as ridiculous to them, as
their concert did to us.

We vi^ted many coffee-houses in the course of that day, in every one of which
we found something to divert or disgust us; at length as we entered one, my
friendly guide turning to me with satisfaction in his countenance, said "Here
is something about to go forward that will please you better than the concert
of music." What is it said I? A drama, returned he; a drama, to you most
certainly of a new and extraordinary kind; and I do assure you that so zealous
am I to procure you entertainment, I would rather than a couple of lou^s' you
could understand what is going forward: your hearty mirth and laughter, added
he, are sufficient to put one in spirits. He then directed my attention to a
fellow who was busily employed in erecting a stage, which he accomplished in a
time incredibly short. The light of the sun was completely excluded, and a
puppet show commenced, which gave great delight to all the audience, and
ignorant as I was of the language, pleased me very much.

I was astonished when informed that one man only spoke for all the personages
of the drama, for so artfully did he change his tone of voice, that I could
have sworn there had been as many people to speak, as there were characters in
the piece. The images were not actually puppets, commonly so called, but
shadows done in the manner of Astley's Ombres Chinoises. They were, however,
far inferior to his in execution and management, though the dialogue and
incident evidently appeared even to me, to be executed with a degree of the vis
comica far superior to any I ever saw in a thing of the kind in Europe; indeed
so perfect was the whole, that though I knew not a word of the language, I
comprehended clearly the plan of the piece, and many of the strokes of humor
contained in the dialogues. -- The plan was obviously taken from a story which
I have read in some of the Eastern tales, I believe the Arabian Nights
Entertainments, and it is founded on the law of the country, that a man may
repudiate his wife twice, and take her back again; but in the event of a third
divorce, cannot retake her to his marriage bed, unless she be previously
married and divorced by another man. To obviate which, husbands who repent
having divorced their wives a third time, employ a man to marry them, and
restore her back again; and he who does this office is called a Hullah. -- In
the piece before us, however, the Lady and the Hullah like each other so well,
that they agree not to separate; the husband brings them both before the cadi
to enforce a separation; and the scene before the cadi was as ludic^ous, and as
keen a satire upon those magistrates as can well be conceived, though of the
low kind.

The piece was introduced with a grand nuptial procession, in which the master
displayed the powers of his voice by uttering a variety of the most opposite
tones in the whole gamut of the human voice; sometimes speaking, sometimes
squeaking like a hurt child, sometimes hazz^ing as a man, a woman, or a child;
sometimes neighing like a horse, and sometimes interspersing it with other such
sounds as commonly occur in crowds, in such a manner as astonished me: while
the concomitant action of the images, grotesque beyond measure, kept up the
laugh; horses kicking and throwing their riders, asses biting those near them,
and kicking those behind them, who retire limping in the most ridiculous
manner; while their great standing character in all pieces, KARA-GHUSE (the
same as our Punch), raised a general roar of obstreperous mirth even from the
Turks, with his whimsical action, of which I must say that, though nonsesical,
though indecent, and sometimes even disgusting, it was on the whole the most
finished composition of low ribaldry and fun that I ever beheld.

When they come before the cadi, he is seated in his divan of justice; but as
soon as the complaint is opened and answered, he rises and comes forward
between the contending parties: here he turns to one and demands in a terrific
tone what he has to say, while the other puts cash in his hand behind, and in
proportion as the cash is counted in, increases the terror of his voice; he
then pockets the money, and again turns to the other, and demands what he has
to offer, while in like manner he receives the bribes from his adversary and
puts it in an opposite pocket: this alternate application lasts till the purses
of both are exhausted, when, giving a great groan, he retires on one side to
reckon the money of each from a pocket he has on either side, one called
plaintiff, and the other defendant; when balancing them, he finds plaintiff
better by one asper (or three-halfpence) than defendant, and pronounces his
judgment accordingly. The defendant appeals to the bashaw; they go before him:
KARA-GHUSE (Punch) however, takes the defendant aside, and in a dialogue, which
my friend assured me was pointed, witty, and bitterly satirical, developes to
him the whole system of magistratical injustice, advises him to bribe the
bashaw, and declaring his zeal for all young people fond of amorous enjoyment
(which he is at some pains to enlarge upon to the excess of indelicacy), offers
him the aid of his purse. The advice is followed; the bribe is accepted; the
cadi's decree is reversed, and himself disgraced, and the mob at once hustle
him and bear the Hullah home to his bride with clamours of joy. Here again the
master showed his extraordinary powers, giving not only, as before, distinct
and opposite tones of voice, but huddling a number of different sounds with
such skill and rapidity together, that it was scarcely possible to resist the
persuasion that they were the issue of a large and tumultuous crowd of men and
animals. With this extravagant melange the curtain dropped, and the performance
ended.

Returning home we conversed together on the subjest of the piece, which I
confess I could not get out of my head for some time. My friend explained to
me, as well as he could recollect, a great part of the dialogue, and assured
me, that the freedom of speech of Monsieur KARA-GHUSE had from time to time
created a great deal of uneasiness, not only to private offending individuals,
but to the magistracy itself -- that no offender, however entrenched behind
power, or enshrined in rank, could escape him -- that bashaws, cadis, nay the
Ja^ssaries themselves, were often made the sport of his fury; that he was not
more restrained in the effusions of obscenity which he utered, than in his
satire; that he was always well received and applauded, even venerated (as we
venerate the liberty of the press) as a bold teller of truth, who with little
mischief does a great deal of good, and often rouses the lethargic public mind
to a sense of public dangers and injuries. He added, that in some cases the
magistrate had been obliged to interfere; and the bashaw himself was seriously
called upon at times to stop the licentious tongue of this champion of Freedom,
KARA-GHUSE.

"Well then," said I, "it appears upon the whole that Monsieur KARA-GHUSE is a
very great black-guard, but a very witty, and a very honest one."

"You have just hit it," said he; "and if Master Kara-ghuse was to take such
liberties in France, Spain, Portugal, or Germany, all his wit and honesty would
not save him from punishment. In England you do not want him; every man there
is a KARA-GHUSE, and every newspaper a puppet-shew."

"And yet," returned I, "we complain sadly of want of liberty!"

"That is natural," returned my sagacious Frenchman, "perfectly natural.
Liberty is like money; the more we have of it, the more covetous we grow."

"Very true, Monsieur," said I, pleased with his compliment to our happy
constitution, and to clinch his observation, gave a Latin quotation, which when
a child I got out of Lilly's Grammar, "Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia
crescit;" and then changging nummus for libertas, "Crescit amor libertatis,
quantum ipsa libertas crescit."

"'It Is very well, Monsieur," said he; and to carry on your allusion, may we not
say, that they who do not know when they have enough, are as dangerously wrong
in the one case, as those who say we have too much, are in the other? The
English complaining of the want of liberty, reminds me of the coffee-house
orator's story of Cassem, who, wallowing in wealth, lost it all in the wild
pursuit of more. -- I hope however that they never will, like him, lose their
stock in vain endeavors to increase it."

LETTER XXXV.
WHILE I was, in the manner I have already mentioned, endeavoring to pass away
the time as cheerfully as possible, till a caravan was formed, or Company's
dispatches were coming over land, of which I might avail myself; I found my
situation in the house of Mr. -- growing extremely critical. That gentleman, of
whose good sense, and truly excellent disposition, I had too manifold proofs to
call them in question, had, though fallen into the vale of years, married his
lady at a very tender age. She was then young, beautiful, full of sensibility,
and gifted with such natural endowments both of mind and person, accompanied
with all those accomplishments which helped to dress them to advantage, that
she might well be acquitted of vanity, even though fancy suggested to her she
was fit to grace and confer happiness on a younger bed; while reflection on the
obvious disparity of the match (which the cool temper of satiety possibly
suggested to him) might perhaps have alarmed his mind to circumstances of
probable danger, that, before wedlock, were all hid behind the deceptive veil
of passion. Whether these were the private sentiments that influenced both or
either of them, I cannot presume to determine, though I think it probable: for
I was not long in the house till I plainly perceived they were on a very bad
footing with each other, and in short that disagreement was become habitual to
them. At first, that is to say, for a few days after my becoming an inmate of
their house, decency enforced concealment, and the ebullitions of peevishness
were stifled by the dictates of prudence; but the animosities of the connubial
state are those which of all others are the most impatient under control; and
as time, by producing familiarity, relaxed restraint, the pent-up passions
began to force their way, and open bickering took place in my presence.

It is but barely doing justice to myself to say, that I felt the most poignant
concern at seeing a couple, each so perfectly amiable in all other respects
blasting the hours that should be given to harmony and love, in jarring
reproach, and recrimination; and I would have given all I was worth that I had
never had occasion to esteem them so much, or that I could give them that peace
which seemed to have ^lown them for ever. Fain would I cast a veil over the
whole transaction fain would I bury it even from myself, in oblivion: but it
has been made by my enemies the subject of triumphant slander; and to do
justice to myself, and disclaim the extent of guilt which they would impute to
me, I am reluctantly obliged to avow the share I had, and declare how the
matter really stood. I must speak the truth, and hope you will not conceive
that I designedly lean too heavily upon any one, to ease myself of my share of
the load.

Whatever domestic uneasiness may subsist between a married pair, the man, if
prudent, will endeavor to conceal it; and the woman, if truly virtuous, will
take care to do so: should great disparity of age (as in the present instance)
be the case, the lady is more particularly bound to conceal any uneasiness,
lest it should be attributed to that cause which people are in such cases too
prone to suspect, dislike to her husband; and before young men, above all, she
should be most exemplary, as she must well know that their natural vanity,
combined with the leading idea of her aversion and infidelity to her husband,
suggest ideas to them from whence their warm imaginations draw inferences of a
nature too pleasing to be parted with, and too probable not to be put in
practice, or at least attempted. Here then a woman at once lays herself fairly
open to the assaults of illicit love. I think it will not be denied, that the
woman who promulgates the disagreements between her and her husband,
particularly if she suffers a young man to be privy to it, is either extremely
ignorant, or intentionally vicious, or both.

That the lady I allude to may in some respect be acquitted of this imputation,
I must tell you, that she was only eighteen years of age; her tender,
inexperienced mind had not yet arrived to that maturity which gives sound
judgment; and though of good natural talents, highly cultivated (for she spoke
fluently English, French, Italian, Arabic, Persian, and the Greek and Turkish
languages), she yet was simple* innocent, uninformed in the ways of the world,
and incapable of reasoning from causes up to consequences. But unfortunately
that simplicity is attended with as much mischief, though not guilt, as the
wilful misconduct of the more experienced; it has the same baleful effects with
the hearers, inspires the same confidence, emboldens with the same hopes, and
leads to the same pernicious practices.

I have already mentioned, and will now remind you, that I was then young.
Perhaps it was owing to a congeniality pointed out by our age, perhaps to a
compassionate politeness amounting to tenderness, which I always disclosed on
those unhappy occasions, joined perhaps to the ardent look of youth kindled by
the imaginations to which this imprudent conduct insensibly gave birth, that
the lady thought proper to take the very hazardous step of making a confidant
of a young man and a soldier -- and revealing to me the whole tale of her
grievances, with a pathetic eloquence, that would have made an impression upon
a much less susceptible heart than mine. I declare it most solemely, that
though this extraordinary mark of confidence and esteem communicated to my
heart strong sensations of unjustifiable pleasure: I so far got the better of
myself at first, as to receive the whole with the same appearance of
tranquillity, as if I had been only a confidential female friend. I pitied, it
is true; -- I expressed my pity: -- I advised, not treacherously but
faithfully; -- I said such things as occured to me to be most likely to assuage
and extinguish the flame of discord, and lead to an amicable adjustment; and I
parted for that time with her to go to a self-approving pillow, where, while my
fancy was inflamed and tickled by the flattering mark of regard shown me by so
all-accomplished a person. I had the soothing delightful consciousness of
having, as far as I was able, done my duty, and escaped the corroding
reflection of having violated the rights of hospitality.

Not an opportunity however afterward offered, that the same unhappy point was
not the subject of discussion, and unfortunately those opportunities but too
frequenlly occurred; till at length we began to feel that they were the
sweetest minutes of our lives, and were ^ought for with industrious avidity by
both of us. No human resolution was sufficient to withstand such an unlucky
concurrence of circumstances: from lamenting the grievances, we wished to
remove them; from wishing, we proceeded to consider the means: and when we had
got that length, the fl^ght was not far to the ext^s and -- the execution of
it. My passions hurried me before them, my expressions grew gradually more and
more ung^* our conversation became more interesting and warm; and though I felt
and struggled to be guided by the strict principles of honor, and formed a
thousand resolutions not to transgress the laws of hospitality, by injuring the
man who had treated me with such kindness, the struggle became too severve for
me -- the desire of pleasing a lovely woman, who had reposed such unbounded
confidence in me, and who seemed to expect and require of me to alleviate her
misery, at length bore down all the oppositions suggested by reason and
principle, and I agreed to become the instrument of her removal from this
unhappy situation. We fell -- but not entirely. There is one length to which no
earthly consideration -- no allurement however dazzling could tempt me -- it is
now the most cordial consolation to my mind; I never suffered myself to think
of trespassing on the decorum of his house, nor did we in any single instance
carry our intercourse to a direct violation of his bed. Though the transports
of youthful passion hurried us into conversations and reflections on the
subject of her determination to be separated from her husband, yet that passion
was of too delicate a kind to sink into the brutal sordid indulgence of
dishonorable stolen embraces. She wished for that separation, rather as a
subterfuge from incessant diurnal misery, than as a prelude to any vicious or
illicit enjoyment; and we looked with pleasure to the event, but we looked no
further.

It is thus that, in the down-hill path of vice, we are hurried on step by
step, fondly imagining that each successive object, which bounds our sight,
will stop our headlong career; while alas! every step we advance gives
additional rapidity to our descent: like the centripetal force of a projectile,
our pace increases with uniformly accelerated motion -- till disdaining all
control, and breaking down every impediment that reason, morality, or honor
throw in the way to rescue us or retard our ruin, we precipitate unexpectedly
into the last gulf of vice and infamy.

Fortunately, however, an incident intervened in the present case, which
arrested our progress down this hideous descent, and reserved us both I hope to
conviction of our folly, and repentance of our error. And I have the
consolation to reflect, that out of such a host of dangers and temptations as I
was beset with, I have escaped without the actual perpetration of a deed, which
would, had it happened, in all probability have embittered my life.

While we hugged ourselves in the security and secrecy of expressing our
genuine sentiments, her husband discovered our wishes, and all at once took the
necessary measures for preventing them. So that, overwhelmed with grief and
shame, I directly formed the resolution to leave Aleppo, and proceed in the
best manner I could on my destination.

Thus you see, my dear FREDERICK, was your father, by failing to resist the
first impressions of an unlawful and dishonorable passion, insensibly led to
the very brink of a precipice, the bare remembrance of which now makes him
shudder with horror. The story, by means unnecessary for me to mention, took
wind. The folly of some, the malice of others, and the unaccountable propensity
to falsehood of more, trumpeted it about with many exaggerations to my injury,
and I was held up as the deliberate seducer of innocence: but the whole
transaction is exactly as I have stated it; and the disagreements previous to
my arrival at Aleppo, which, in telling the story, they purposely left out,
were of such public notoriety, that every European, even the consul himself,
was fully acquainted with them. This is the consequence of a deviation from the
strict rule of right. Treasure it up in your mind, my child, never to be
forgotten; and let it operate as a caution to you, how you entangle yourself in
the snares of women: recollect that my escape was singularly fortunate, and the
mere effect of accident; and flatter not yourself, that because accident served
in one case it will in another. Providence has, for the wisest of purposes,
implanted in our nature a fondness for the fair sex; and so long as it is used
prudently and virtuously, it constitutes the first happiness of life; but if on
the contrary, it stimulates us to excess, impels to injure our fellow creature,
or break in upon the repose of a family; it is our reproach, our shame, our
curse, and very frequently our utter and irremediable ruin; add to this, that
there is in the general character of women, a capriciousness, a levity, and a
vanity, under the influence of which they sport with men, only to display their
power, and evince the force of their charms, which makes the cultivation of
their good graces in any way hazardous. To adopt the idea of an old epigram --
"There is no living with them, nor without them."

As your happiness, my dear boy, is the first object of my life, my efforts
shall be turned to the guiding of your greener years from any premature
impressions; and when reason and matured age fit you for the cultivation and
enjoyment of female society, be it mine to direct your steps away from that
class, who think rank a sufficient sanction for vice, who fl^re in all the
bronze of aristocratic assurance, under a load of obloquy, beneath which the
poorest peasant's wife would sink; who think that wealth and rank confer a
right to commit excesses that would degrade the meanest of the canaille; and
felicitate themselves with the reflection, that, under the protection of family
or an infamous husband, they may indulge in enormities, for which the lowest of
their sex are beating hemp in Bridewell.

LETTER XXXVI.
THE discovery to which I alluded in my last letter, surprised and grieved me
very much^ and indeed it astonished me the more, from the manner in which it
was communicated.

One day I received a polite message from the British consul, saying, he wished
to speak to me as soon as possible, upon a business of great consequence. I
thought at first, that it might be some plan for my proceeding on my journey --
perhaps Company's dispatches that had arrived to go over land; and at
intervals, something like apprehensions of the true motive of his sending for
me flew across my mind. I however went to him, when, after some little
introductory conversation, he told me, that my host Mr. -- had been with him
that morning, laying before him a complaint of a most extraordinary and serious
nature, of which, as it immediately concerned me, he thought himself bound to
inform me, in order that I might either contradict so gross a calumny if it
were untrue, or find means to avoid the obviously necessary result if founded
in fact.

He then proceeded to relate to me, that Mr. -- had informed him of a
conspiracy having been meditated against his peace and honor, between his wife
and the English gentleman whom he had entertained in his house; that their plan
was nothing less than an elopement, and that he did not know how soon it might
be carried into execution, if not timely prevented; and finally, that he had
demanded the assistance of the consul and his interest with the Turkish
magistrate to prevent it, by granting him an armed force for the protection of
his house.

I was much surprised to find that conversations so very guarded as ours were
discovered, and more so that the aggrieved person did not think proper to speak
to myself, and charge me in person with the offense; never reflecting the
while, that all my ideas were military, and his merely commercial: I was also
much at a loss to conjecture how he came to make the discovery -- but this I
found afterward he owed to a female servant, who had been improvidently
entrusted by her mistress with the secret.

Finding, however, that by whatever means he became acquainted with the affair,
it was a certain fact that he was apprised of it, I directly acknowledged the
whole truth with the utmost candor to the consul; told him the affair step by
step as it arose, assuring him (which I really thought to be the case) that
pity for the lady's deplorable situation made me listen to such a measure; and
that unlawful passion had so little to do with it, that in all our private
conferences we had never transgressed the limits of purity; and that her person
was, at least respecting me, and I firmly believed all mankind, spotless and
inviolate. I added, that great allowances were to be made for a young creature
barely eighteen years of age, consigned by the wickedness of avaricious parents
to the embraces of a man of sixty-five; who, amiable and worthy though he was,
in social intercourse with the world (which I knew him to be), was yet in the
most indispensable point of connubial felicity so utterly defective, as
necessarily to create disgust and abhorrence in a youthful mind. I remarked to
him, that, in the forming of laws, it as plainly appeared on their face, who
made them amongst the English, as it does on the face of the Gentoo laws, that
they were made by the Bramins: for, as by the latter the penalty of a few puns
Couries, a kind of small shells used in India, as a circulating medium in place
of coin, in value much below the smallest copper coin -- a Pu^s a certain
number of them.
of couries (not value a shilling) is annexed to the perpetration of a crime,
for which those of another class loose their lives; so, among us, it appears
that our laws are made by the aged, the decrepid, the sensual, and the rich.
Else it could never happen that there were in the same code, laws to punish
marriage between the young and vigorous, and enable the brutality of a parent
to take its full scope, and consign, as in the present instance, youth, beauty,
health, and every personal attraction, to the arms of age, infirmity, and
impotence. And I concluded by saying, that all parties aiding in such an
unnatural confederacy should be punished.

The consul fairly acknowledged there was too much truth in what I had said;
but remarked withal, that it was rather a hazardous experiment, and he was sure
it would be an endless one, to correct all the abuses to which the fallibility
of man, and his incompetency to form any thing perfect, necessarily left
society and their laws liable -- that the law was written, and it was the duty
of every individual to obey it -- and that in cases of adultery, the offense
could be justified on no solid grounds whatever, for, independent of the
feelings of the husband, which perhaps were more poignant in old age than
youth, the injury to his family was not to be got over, in probably giving to
him an heir no way akin to him. "It would be right, I think," said he, "to
stop such disproportionate matches; yet, once made, they should be as
religiously observed inviolate as those of love, among which we almost as
frequently, as in those of compulsion, see instances of infidelity. If you
doubt this," said he, "read the records of Doctors' Commons."

I agreed to the justice of what he said, at the same time assured him, that my
intentions went no farther than wishing the lady to be rescued from her
thraldom, which I told him was dreadful. -- "I am sure," said the consul, "that
Mr. Campbell thinks so, because I am convinced he would not otherwise say so.
But may not," said he, smiling, "may not Mr. C. have deceived himself? these
are things in which the passions are strangely apt to hoodwink the
understanding. However," continued he, breaking off pleasantly, "I must give
you all the comfort that truth will allow me to do: I am sure that the poor
lady is condemned to great wretchedness; partly from my own observation, partly
from public report, and partly from her own mouth: for you must know she has
several times complained to me of her husband's peevishness and tyranny; and
even besought me to use my influence and authority to relieve her from her
misery. Mr. --," continued he, "is a man whom on all other accounts I esteem,
and val^e highly. In this instance he has erred, and I cannot pity him, even
though he suffers all the torments of jealousy* and as there are laws for
punishing with death premature intercourse with the sex, I cannot see, any more
than you, why the sacrificing youth to extreme old age should not be equally
punished, for I am sure it is equally unnatural, and still more injurious to a
state. These are my sentiments," continued he; "but let not this declaration
induce you to think that I the less disapprove of your intermeddling. You have
allowed me the privilege of a friend, and I will not suffer it to be made an
empty one. You were more culpable than many young men would be; first, because
you are married, and should, upon the common principle of doing as you would be
done by, have refrained; and next, because you were enjoying the sweets of
hospitality in his house, and should have dashed from his lips, rather than
held to them, the deepest cup of bitterness."

"But, my dear sir," said I, "I do not attempt to justify -- I only endeavor
to mitigate the matter, and you will recollect that the very circumstance which
in one point of view aggravates, in another alleviates the fault: the living in
his house afforded those interviews and exposed me to those temptations under
which I was near sinking -- I should never have sought them: but he must be
more or less than man, that could have resisted them: and though I have a high
sense of Mr. Consul's strict honor and virtue, as well as prudence, he must
excuse me, though I doubt whether he could himself have resisted so long and so
effectually as I did. I am sure there are many who will censure, that could
not."

The consul smiled, and, turning the discourse from its direct line, observed,
that it was absolutely necessary I should desist, else he would be obliged to
use his influence and power to protect Mr. --.

In answer to this, I gave him my honor in the first place, that I would
proceed no farther in the business; and that, on the contrary, I was determined
to set out upon my journey to India directly, if means could be contrived for
my conveyance; adding, that I should consider it as a great favor, in addition
to those I had already received at his hands, if he would contrive some means
to set me forward in my route.

To this he answered, that as the making up of a caravan would be extravagantly
expensive, he knew no means that were not attended with certain hardship and
eventual danger; but finding me determined at almost any danger or hazard to
set off, he proposed to send for a man who knew every resource in that way, and
when he came would talk farther on the business; and in the mean time,
recommended great circumspection to me while I continued at Mr. -- 's house, to
which I very solemnly pledged my word.

Being now constrained by every consideration, as well of prudence and decency
as of inclination, to leave Aleppo immediately; I determined that no common
impediments should stop me, and waited with impatience the arrival of the
person on whom the consul rested his hopes of dispatching me.

He came in the evening, and after a conference with the consul he introduced
him to me, and acquainted me that he was a Tartar, and one of the vast number
of that description who are employed by the Turkish state in carrying
dispatches from court to the various viceroys and bashaws, and interchangeably
between them again; that they were men on whose fidelity the utmost reliance
could be had; and that this man, who had an excellent character, had agreed to
take me to Bagdad, provided I would submit to the disguise of a Tartar.

The agreement between us I entirely submitted to the discretion of the consul,
who had the goodness to settle it thus: -- The Tartar was to deliver me safe at
Bagdad; to supply me and my servant, who acted as interpreter, with an ample
sufficiency of provisions and horses on the road; to exchange my horse for me
as often as I pleased, and to go at such a rate, whether faster or slower, as I
thought proper: for this he was to receive one hundred pounds; and I further
promised, as an encouragement to him, that if he acted to my satisfaction, I
would, on our arrival at Bagdad, add a douceur of twenty pounds.

The next day he came, and I had a distinct view of this my new fellow
traveller and supposed master, for in several places, I was to pass for his
slave. He was one of those striking character figures that a painter would like
to take a sketch of -- and me-thought Tartar was written legibly in every
lineament of his countenance and person. -- He was tall, muscular, and bony --
his figure bespoke great hardihood, strength, and activity -- nor could the
trowsers which he wore conceal the Herculean texture of his limbs -- his
shoulders were expanded to an enormous breadth -- he was unincumbered with
flesh, or indeed rather extremely lean -- his forehead, though partly concealed
beneath his turban, was very high -- his nose large, hooked, sharp, and
prominent -- a pair of small, fierce, black, penetrating eyes, barely separated
by the nose, and a formidable pair of mustachios, which he carefully sleeked
with pomatum into a point resembling an awlblade, and which moved like the
whiskers of a purring cat, with every word he spoke, gave a whimsical ferocity
to the countenance, beyond the reach of description, and rendered him
altogether as discouraging a confidental friend, as ever a Christian trusted
his life to since Mahomet first set up the trade of a prophet. He surveyed me
with great attention -- opened his mouth two or three times like a gasping
pike, as if to speak -- stroaked his whiskers as often -- and at last
pronounced that he would undertake to conduct me; adding, in allusion to my
black hair and dark complexion, that I looked more like a native, than any
Frank he had ever seen. He ordered me to cut my hair quite short, to provide
myself with the Tartar dress and cap, in the fashion of his own; and saying he
would call on me in proper time, departed.

Thus equipped, we set out, not without great pain and regret on my part; pain
at leaving a most beautiful young woman, whom I pitied and esteemed, subject to
the resentment of a husband, at once jealous from nature, peevish from habit,
and enraged from her open and unequivocal demonstrations of hatred and regret
at having been betrayed by situaation into such a very serious dilemma.

After my departure from Aleppo, this affair was represented in a variety of
unfavourable lights to the different new comers from England; and as a story is
that commodity which of all others honest people do not love to steal any thing
from, in its passage though their hands, it found its way in various forms
(none of them however tending to so^en i^) ^o many of my friends and
connections, those from whom of all others I wished to conceal it. Laboring
under such calumnies, it cannot be considered as a violation of decorum, or
unnecessary infraction upon delicacy, if I state the truth, in order, though I
cannot acquit myself of censurable conduct, at least not silently to submit to
unlimited calumny, and charges of crimes which I hope I have too much honor
and integrity to commit.

I must add, that previous to my departure the consul did every thing that it
was possible for him to do, conducive to my safety and accommodation on the
road, which as we were obliged to go to the city of Diarbeker, a great length
out of our way, he observed would be long, dreary, fatiguing, and hazardous; he
procured me from others, and gave me himself, a number of letters, and at
parting defited me to comfort myself with the reflection, that when I arrived
at my journey's end, I should have to boast, that I went to India by a route
never traveled by an European before.

LETTER XXXVII.
AS I became familiarised to my Tartar guide I found his character disclose
much better traits than his first appearance bespoke, and I began insensibility
to think him a very entertaining fellow: preceiving that I was very low
spirited and thoughtful, he exhibited manifest marks of compassion; and taking
it into his head that I was actually removed for ever from my friends and my
family, he spoke in a style of regret and feeling, that did great honor to his
heart: and to say the truth, he did every thing in his power to alleviate my
feelings, conversing with me either by means of the interpreter, or in broken
lingua franca; supplying all my wants cheerfully and abundantly; changing
horses with me as often as I peased, and going slow or golloping forward just
as best suited my inclination or humor.

The first object he seemed to have in view on our journey, was to impress me
with a notion of his consequence and authority, as a messenger belonging to the
Sultan. As all those men are employed by the first magistrates in the country,
and are, as it were, the links of communication between them, they think
themselves of great importance in the state; while the great men whose business
they are employed in, make them feel the weight of authority, and treat them
with the greatest contempt: hence they become habitually servile to their
superiors, and by natural consequence insolent and over-bearing to their
inferiors, or those who being in their power they conceive to be so. As
carriers of dispaches, their power and authority wherever they go is in some
points undisputed; and they can compel a supply of provisions, horses, and
attendants, wherever it suits their occasions; nor dare any man resist their
right to take the horse from under him to proceed on the Emperor's business, be
the owner's occasion ever so pressing.

My feelings, which I can tell you were altogether of the most unpleasant kind,
served as a stimulus to my mind, and increased my anxiety to get forward; I
therefore pushed on as fast as the horses, which were in general excellent,
could carry me: and as we halted at a number of stages to get fresh horses and
provisions, my Tartar guide had frequent opportunities of indulging his
self-importance, and displaying his great authority and power. As soon as he
stopped at a caravansera, he immediately called lustily about him in the name
of the Sultan, demanding with an imperious and menacing tone of voice, fresh
horses, victuals, etc. on the instant. The terror of this great man operated
like magic; nothing could exceed the activity of the men, the briskness of the
women, and the terror of the children; for the caravanseras are continually
attended by numbers of the very lowest classes of the people; but no quickness
of preparation, no effort or industry could satisfy my gentleman; he would show
me his power in a still more striking point of view, and fall belabouring them
with his whip, and kicking them with all his might. I must confess I was much
hurt at this extravagant abuse of upstart power, and was two or three times on
the point of interfering; but fortunately, recollected that it would neither be
in character, nor have any good effect, and that if I presumed to speak, my
guide would be obliged in my defense to give me a flogging in order to prevent
suspicion.

This inconsiderate tyranny and cruelty, I had afterward reason to believe,
was by no means a part of his natural disposition; but vanity, to which so many
among us in Europe fall victims, urged him to excesses, which I dare say his
heart privately condemned.

It was on the fifth or sixth day (I cannot precisely say which) after our
leaving Aleppo, that we got to the city of Diarbeker, the capital of the
province of that name, having passed over an extent of country of between three
and four hundred miles, most of it blessed with the greatest fertility,
producing, in the few cultivated parts, grain, fruits of various kinds, and
silk in great variety and abundance, and abounding with as rich pastures as I
ever beheld, covered with numerous herds and flocks. The air was charmingly
temperate in the daytime, but, to my feeling, extremely cold at night.

Yet notwithstanding the extreme fertility of this country, the bad
administration of government, conspiring with the indolence of the inhabitants,
leaves it unpopulous and uncultivated. Diarbeker, proper, called also
Mesopotamia, from its lying between the two famous rivers Tigris and Euphrates,
and by Moses called PADAN ARAM, that is to say -- "The fruitful Syria;" abounds
with corn, wine, oil, fruits, and all the necessaries of life. It is supposed
to be the seat of the Earthly Paradise, and all geographers agree that it was
there the descendants of Noah first settled after the flood.

Insignificant as those circumstances may appear to mere calculators of profit
and loss, it cannot be denied that they have a powerful and pleasing effect on
the refined imagination. To be treading that ground where Abraham trod; where
Nahor the father of Rebecca lived; and where Laban, to whom Jacob fled to avoid
his brother Esau's resentment, and whom he served fourteen years for the love
he bore to Rachel, was to me a circumstance productive of delightful
sensations. How finely has that giant of the pen, Johnson, justified those
sensations in his Tour to the Highlands of Scotland and Western Islands; --
describing his emotions on visiting the famous island of Iona, or Colombkill,
he says -- "We were now treading that illustrious island which was once the
luminary of the Caledonian regions, whence savage clans and roving barbarians
derived the benefits of knowledge, and blessings of religion. To abstract the
mind from all local emotion, would be impossible if it were endeavored, and
would be foolish if it were possible. Whatever withdraws us from the power of
our senses -- whatever makes the past, the distant, or the future, predominate
over the present, advances us in the dignity of thinking beings. Far from me,
and from my friends, be such frigid philosophy, as may conduct us indifferent
and unmoved over any ground which has been dignified by wisdom, bravery, or
virtue! -- that man is little to be envied whose patriotism would not gain
force upon the Plain of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer among
the ruins of Iona."

The city of D^arbeker itself is situated in a delightful plain on the banks of
the river Tigris, and nearly at its head; it is one of the richest, most
trading, strong, and populous cities in Asiatic Turkey; and is adorned with
many pi^zzas and market places in the Turkish style, and a large magnificent
mo^que, formerly a Christian church; for Christianity flourished over this
country so late as the sixth century. There is even now a sect, whose patriarch
still resides here: and they show on the road near the town, a chapel where the
holy man Job is said to be buried. This city is supplied amply with water by a
canal cut from the Tigris, and has many caravanseras on both sides of the river.

Few countries in the world exceed that about this city for natural richness
and beauty: -- the bread and wine are excellent -- the fruit beyond conception
delicious -- and my friend the Tartar took care, under pretense of supercilious
hauteur, to tear in pieces a couple of fowls, and hand me now a leg, now a
wing, till I made the most delicious repast I ever remember to have eat in my
life.

It is computed that there are resident in this city no less than twenty
thousand Christian inhabitants, some of whom are of the Church of Rome; -- and
perhaps it is owing to that mixture, that the fair sex have more freedom, and
the men more politeness and affability, than those of any other city in the
empire: -- the chief business there, is making that fine leather commonly
called Turkey leather.

Figure to yourself, my dear FREDERICK, my Tartar guide, who was an admirable
actor, sitting at a caravansera in state at his dinner, devouring excellent
fowls, choice pillaws, and delicious fruit, in as great pomp as a bashaw; and
in order to keep up the semblance of authority over me, to favor my disguise,
handing to me, who sat at humble distance, a part of his provisions. You may
form to yourself an idea of the scene; but all the efforts of imagination must
fall short of the manner, the figure, the words, the looks, and the actions of
the Tartar; sometimes affecting contemptuous pity, sometimes supercilious
arrogance; sometimes brutal sterness, and sometimes the gentle blandishments of
conscious superiority; and all in such a masterly style of performance, that I
doubt whether Garrick himself, with all his powers of countenance, could outdo
him. Critical though my situation was, and much as I was harrassed with the
corrosions of mental pain, the extravagant action and lu^icrous pomp^sity of
this man frequently overbo^e my prudence, and compelled me to laugh
incontinently and loudly; -- on all such occasions he would put his hands
a-kimbo, draw up his eyebrows to his turban, screw down the corners of his
mouth in the most rueful manner, and give a loud whew! with his eyes fixed in a
stare at me, till entirely overcome with laughter, and ready to sink under it,
I clapped my face between my hands, and, as well as I could, bowed in token of
sorrow and submission; when, threatening me vehemently, and at the same time
uttering a lamentable expression of doubt that he was afraid he had had an
idiot imposed on him, he would bust^e about, direct the horses to be got ready,
and order me to get on horseback, with many denunciations of severe treatment,
and a thousand flourishes of his whip over my head.

As I have rode along musing upon the contemptible stratagems to which I was
reduced, in order to get through this country, for no other reason but because
I was a Christian, I could not help reflecting with sorrow on the melancholy
effects of superstition, and regretting that that place, which in the times of
primitive simplicity was called the Terrestrial Paradise; that place where GOD
first planted man after the flood; where the god-like Abraham and the holy Job
breathed the pure air of piety and simplicity; that place which from all those
circumstances ought to be considered above all others as the universal
inheritance of mankind, should now be cut off from all but a horde of senseless
bigots, barbarous fanatics, and inflexible tyrants. And I could not help
considering with melancholy concern, the blindness and infatuation of men, who,
less earnest to accommodate themselves than injure others, shut out their
fellow creatures from that which they themselves will not use, and, while they
suffer millions of the richest acres in the universe to be untilled, and spend
their sweetness in the desert air, with wicked jealousy, and envy more than
diabolical, begrudge to others the little spot on which they stand, and chase
them as they would a ravening tiger from their country.

LETTER XXXVIII.
AS we advanced toward the southward and eastward, in our way from Diarbeker
toward Bagdad, I found the air become sensibly warmer, and observed that the
disposition of the people grew more and more brutal. My guide's conduct for he
knew them well) became proportiontely artful, and my manners were of course to
grow so much the humbler. I observed, however, that his authority continued the
same, and that he seemed to exert it with greater rigor; not in severity or
chastisement, but in exacting implicit obedience. Yet still he evidently acted
with great caution and circumspection; for, in some districts, he either
avoided the little villages by a circuitous route, or dashed through them at a
very quick pace, while the gaping multitude considered us as on a dispatch of
haste and importance -- in others, he entered the towns without reserve, and
left it to ^ance to decide whether we should be discovered or not. At some
caravanseras he treated me with affected negligence, at others he made me eat
with him and drink wine, of which, in some places, he himself drank copiously,
and at others as scrupulously refrained from. And sometimes we lay at night out
in the open air, rather than enter a town; on which occasions I found the
weather as piercing cold as it was distressfully hot in the day time. Bred, as
the man was, a mixture of slave and, tyrant, I can suppose some parts of this
conduct to arise from caprice; but, as he was naturally kind, as many of those
aberrations from the usual mode of traveling were atttended with hardship and
inconvenience to himself, and as my servant and the other Tartar were clearly
of opinion he was right, I am rather disposed to believe that he, on the whole,
acted from principles of sound sense and policy.

He frequently advised me against indulging in laughter; said it was unmanly,
indecorous, inconsistent with the gravity becoming a wise man, and withal
dangerous.

One evening we came to a caravansera much fatigued, the day being extremely
hot, and we having rode very hard -- whether it was caprice or fatigue, or the
suggestion of policy that moved him, I cannot say, but he was certainly more
disposed to play the tyrant than I had ever before seen him. He flogged the men
who took the horses, kicked every one he met, made the house ring with his
enormous voice; directed supper to be got ready, ate growling, and finding
fault with every thing; and under pretense of disliking the ingredients of an
excellent pillaw, handed it over to me, saying, "Here, Jimmel (the name he
called me), here, take this filth, and cram it down thy coarse throat, it is
only fit for a Frank" -- I took it with best air of humility I could assume;
and tearing the meat with my fingers, which I also used instead of a spoon to
eat the rice, swallowed it eagerly; he watching me all the time attentively.
When I had finished it, I gave him a hint in the Frank language, that I should
like to wash it down with some wine; but he did not, or rather would not
understand me.

Supper done, he ordered a servant to attend him with some water, and directed
him to wash his feet; while that operation was performing, he continued
menacing every one about him. My servant, who sat next me and behind him,
interpreted every thing he said. "Yes, ye slaves," said he, as he lolled back
upon his cushion, "yes, I will make the best of you wash my feet; for who shall
refuse to wash the feet of him, who represents the Sultan of the World, the Son
of Mahomet, the Messenger of the Lord?" The poor fellow proceeded in his humble
office, and only interrupted him by saying, "Blessed be my Lord the sultan, and
glory be to the Lord our God, and Mahomet his prophet." "Yes, yes," continued
my Tartar, "bless God and the prophet, and pray for his servant our sultan, and
all who represent him like me, that slaves of your description are permitted to
live: nay, thou shall wash this Frank's feet:" then turning to me with an air
of magisterial tenderness, "Jimmel," said he, "hold forth thy feet, and let
them be washed by this disciple of Ali -- I say, hold forth thy feet."

Scarcely able to refrain from laughter at this Bombardinian of the East, and
his pompous manner of issuing his orders, I drew up my trowsers and took off my
boots -- the man brought fresh water, and fell to rubbing my feet with great
good will and humility; yet evidently felt so much hurt at the humiliation,
that I was sorry for it, and would rather have dispensed with the washing,
though it was a luxury.

In the midst of this operation, the Tartar, who was reclining on his cushion,
smoking, rose up, and stalking two or three times across the room, with the
most ludicrous air of self conceit and importance, took his tobacco pipe from
his mouth, brandished it in ostentatious parade, and in the tone and manner
rather of one that was ^aving than of a man in his sober senses, burst out with
an emphatical expression of satisfaction, and said, "This it is to be protected
by a great man: Mussulmen salam to him and wash his feet."

The extravagance of this sentiment, the absurdity of its application, and the
consequential solemnity of his action and countenance while he spoke,
altogether rushed upon me with such impetuous force, that I could not resist
it, and, in spite of every effort to restrain myself, burst into an immoderate
fit of laughter.

Had I the pencil of Hogarth, the pen of Shakespeare, or the powers of a
Garrick, I might attempt to give some idea of his countenance, when, turning,
he beheld me convulsed with laughter. I might attempt it, I say, but I could
not do it justice. Such a combination of ludicrous expression I never beheld;
it was indeed an epitome of all the lower order of human passions. Fury
predominated, but it was risible fury -- it was fury that rather grinned than
frowned; though under it were to be seen shame and mortification, sorrow and
resentment, pride and degradation, silly bashfulness and decayed importance.
For some time he stood transfixed to the spot, his eyes glistening like those
of a rat in a trap; his pointed whiskers moving with the contortions of his
lips, and his mouth every now and then opening like the beak of a wounded hawk.
To utter his sensations he was unable; and he continued in this state, not only
till my laughter was abated, but till I had time to reflect and be seriously
concerned.

At length, without saying a sentence, he wheeled about, threw off his
slippers, drew on his boots, vociferated till he brought all the people of the
caravansera about him, and ordered horses to be ready instantly. As orders from
such a person were not likely to be disobeyed, the horses were got ready. I saw
that I must either proceed, or come to an open rupture with him; so
recollecting that I was myself in fault, that a dispute might be fatal, and
that at all events it was only the humor of the moment, I drew on my boots
too, and was ready to go, though I was much fitter for a twelve hours' nap than
for an hour's traveling on horseback.

We mounted immediately, and it was my good fortune to have the best horse. He
set out upon the gallop, the moon shining as bright almost as day; I put
forward my horse, and kept rather before him, which vexed him so, that he beat
the poor animal he rode on most unmercifully. At length after about eight or
ten miles riding, he called a halt -- dismounted, and said he would rest there
all night. I saw it was I resentment: but knowing that it would be in vain to
remonstrate, I dismounted too; and, judging that the best way to mortify him in
return, was to comply with affected approbation, turned to my servant and told
him (knowing that it would go from him to the Tartar) that I was delighted with
the beauty of the night; remarking at the same time, that lying in the sweet
salu^ious air was far preferable to being confined in the sultry fi^th of a
caravansera.

As soon as this was communicated to the Tartar, he remarked, that the open air
was the fittest place for the beasts of the forest, and therefore suitable to a
Frank: but for his part, he had much rather repose on a cushion, which he
should have done, had it not been for my accursed ^sible faculties.

Here the conversation rested, and we fell asleep. In a few hours he awoke us,
and we set forward: after some pause, he began in the following manner, when
was interpreted to me, as he spoke, by my servant:

"Surely God made laughter for the derision and shame of mankind, and gave it
to the Franks and the monkies; for the one ha, ha, has, and the other he, he,
he is, and both are malicious, mischievous, and good for nothing but to f^et and
tantalize all that come across them."

Here he paused, as waiting for something to be said: however, I remained
silent. At length, he continued: "Not but that, with all their laughter, they
have the wisdom to take special care of themselves; for half a dozen monkies,
will he, he, he, and empty a whole orchard of its fruit in the reckoning of a
hundred; and a Frank will ha, ha, ha, and eat you up pillaws and poultry like a
wolf, and drink up wine with the same moderation that a camel drinks up water."

I thought I should have choked with smothered laughter: I would not however
interrupt him, and ^o contrived to keep it to myself: he proceeded to
apothegmatise:

"But with all their he, he, he is, and ha, ha, has, it sometimes turns out
that they are caught: the monkey is seized in a trap and caged or knocked in
the head, and the Frank is put in jail, and bastinadoed or hanged; and then the
tune is changed, and it is Oh, ho, ho!" Here he began to mimic crying so
admirably, and at the same time so ridiculously; that I burst out laughing
again.

"Observe, Jimmel," said he hastily, "observe! you cannot refrain! But by our
holy prophet," said he seriously, "it may end as I said: so look to yourself,
and avoid laughter in caravanseras, or we part; for there are places, and that
was one of them last night, where suspicion would ruin you. And if you lost
your life, what should I say for myself on my return to Aleppo? Eh, what should
I say for myself? Ha ha, ha! would not do. No, no, they would not believe it,
and I should lose my character."

"Why don't you laugh yourself?" said I.

"Very seldom, or rather never," returned he; "at least I would not in time of
danger. No, no, none but Christians and monkies makes a practice of laughing --
Turks and Tartars are wiser." I promised him, that I would in future take more
care; and, by way of appeasing him with a little slavery, said, that he played
his part so admirably, it was impossible to resist the impulse. But he
answered, with a grave face, that his action in that care was of too serious
nature to be made a subject of merriment -- and advised me to believe it so.

LETTER XXXIX.
THE solicitude of my guide for my safety was the earnestness of a man of
business zealous to discharge with the utmost punctuality the duty he had
undertaken; and I must observe to you, that the whole of his conduct evinced a
precision and punctually of dealing rarely found in our intercourse with
mankind. Previous to leaving Aloppo, he had undertaken to convey me safe -- he
was, as you may already perceive, indefatigable and unremitting in his
endeavors to do so; he had promised to supply me with food -- so he did, in
the most ample manner; he promised to go as I pleased fast or slow -- so he
did; he promised to change horses with me, as often as I thought proper to
desire -- he did so. But beyond this, he seemed to carry his care of me no
farther than to any bale of goods he might have in his charge. He was bound to
deliver me safe, in good order and condition, at Bagdad: so much he was
determined to do, and no more did he think of. I had got letters to the bashaws
of some of the towns through which we were to pass: but as the delivery of a
letter is, according to the custom of that country always accompanied with a
present, I thought it better to decline delivering them, except when necessity
compelled -- though the state of the country was so unsettled, that we often
had occasion for a guard.

As soon as the remembrance of the laughing affair was a little decayed, the
Tartar began to relax into good humor, and to talk with his usual vehemence;
for he was always, according to the flow of his spirits, either sullenly silent
or extravagantly l^quacious. His tongue might be considered as a thermometer,
by which the warmth or coldness of his temper might be calculated, and the
ex^emes* of garrulity and taciturnity were the indices. His conversation,
however, was very circumscribed, and consisted chiefly of stories of himself
and his horse, the amazing journeys he made, and the fea^s of manhood he
performed. One circumstance I must in justice mention, as I think it mark^
strongly the habitual delicacy and modesty of this people. Although he
frequently lamented my banishment from my family, and although we were for
eighteen days continually conversing on a variety of occasions that might lead
to the subject, he never once talked of women; never, in all his pity for my
situation, glanced even remotely at the possibility of my getting a substitute
in that way; never hinted that he thought of them himself. On seeing women,
coming to the wells, they remined me of some of the stories in the Old
Testament. I mentioned it, but it went no farther; for whenever the subject was
started, he threw cold water on it.

That he conceived me to be in some respects a parcel of property, I have good
reason to believe: for I observed that at some caravanseras the people
collected round me, and regarded me with strong symptoms of surprise and pity;
some viewed me with commiseration, some with contempt; but not one creature,
however wretched or abject, seemed to envy my situation.

I was the more confirmed in this opinion by an incident that happened between
Diarbeker and Mosul. One morning I was unusually overcome with the fatigues of
the preceding day: the Tartar called me, summoned me to horse; and finding that
I gave no answer, nor showed any token of awaking, he lifted me in his arms
bodily from my couch (such was his strength that he did it without any
difficulty), carried me out without the least ceremony, and, before I was so
completely awake as to be sensible of my situation, had me fixed upon a horie
ready to depart.

A transaction so very singular, you may well conclude, surprised me at the
time, and would not readily be forgotten: such a crowd of strange, confused,
and incongruous thoughts and sensations as occurred to me, I never before
experienced: they were painful, they were surprising -- but I was in such a
state that I could not afterward analyze them. The chief reflection that arose
from it was, that human sentiment must be in a deplorable state of degradation
indeed, when such a circumstance could occur from the notion that a man was as
much an asset or piece of property, could be transferred by the same means, and
moved in the same unfeeling manner, as any portion of inert matter that makes
up a bale of merchandise. Of the truth of this position I had soon after a
melancholy proof, in an incident which, though lamentable, was attended with
such ludicrous circumstances, that even now I never think of it without smiling
-- smiling, as I did then, with a heart bleeding with pity.

One morning I was awakened before daybreak with a bustle in the caravansera
where we lodged. I conjectured that the Tartar was preparing to get forward,
and rose in order to lose no time. I was so far right in my conjectures: the
horses were ready, and I came out to mount, and was very much surprised to
perceive several horses before me loaded with something which stood erect from
their backs, and which I had barely light to discern were not men. I concluded
that they were bales of merchandise packed in a particular form, and asked no
questions till full daylight disclosed to me that they were human creatures
tied up in sacks, and fastened astride on the horses' backs. There was a
strange union of horror and oddity in the conception, that struck me at once
with a mixed emotion of indignation, pity, and mirth. -- The former however got
the better, and I asked my servant with some warmth what it meant -- He said
that the sacks contained some young women whom the Tartar had bought. -- Good
GOD! said I, is it possible that he can have bought wretched females to treat
them with so little tenderness? He has bought them, returned my servant, in the
way of traffic, not for pleasure.

"Suppose he has," said I, "suppose even they were men, not to mention young
women, how can he imagine that they will survive this? Tied up and sweltered in
a sack -- fastened cross-legs, on a horse, and driven at such an amazing rate
(for by this time we had set forward, and another Tartar was whipping the
horses up all the time, and driving them on) -- how is it possible they can
survive? They must be smothered -- they must be shattered to pieces -- they
must be stripped, excoriated, and tortured to death!"

"If I might presume to advise," said he, "I would say that you had better make
no remarks upon it: it would only get them perhaps worse treated, and raise his
anger against you."

To conclude, I took his advice, and kept my mind to myself. The unfortunate
women were in this manner carried fifty miles, at the end of which their
tenderhearted purchaser disposed of them in some way of keeping till his
return; when I suppose they were to be carried back in sacks astride upon
horses, all the way to Aleppo, there to be sold to the highest bidder.

To us, my FREDERICK, who live in a country where an hour's detention in a
house against our will is punished as unlawful imprisonment, and who feel and
value the rich treasure of liberty above all earthly blessings, the bare idea
of slavery appears horrible; when the miseries of slavery are sharpened by
cruelty, our indignation burns at the offense: but such a complicated piece of
enormity as that I have mentioned, almost transcends belief, and indignation is
lost in amazement. There are but few men, even in our bracing climate, whom
fifty miles riding would not shake to pieces, and torture almost to death. No
woman would think of it. But when to that is superadded, first the compulsion
-- then the sorry and at best painful equipage of the horses -- the tender
persons, unaccustomed to riding, of the women -- the smothering heat of the
sack -- and above all the horrid climate, burning with an almost vertical heat
(vertical at least compared with our oblique sun) -- it will be allowed to be a
wonder, almost approaching to a miracle, that they survived one half of their
journey. The wonder-working hand of Omnipotence alone could bring them through
it; and when I asked in the evening whether they were dying or dead, and was
told that they were not only alive but in perfect health, I could not help
repeating that most beautiful expression put into the mouth of Maria by the
inimitable Stern, "God tempers the wind to the side of the shorn lamb."

This affair tended to prejudice me strongly against my Tartar guide, and I was
for some time that I could not look upon him without horror: but at length my
resentment abated; and reason, resuming her seat of cool decision, told me,
that though it was a crime and a grievous one, he was not so responsible for it
as those who, knowing better, authorized it by their concurrence, gave it the
sanction of law, and made it familiarly practiced; he only did that which he
had been even from his mother's breast instructed to do, and should therefore
not be judged by those rules which a Briton would lay down for the government
of such cases.

A Briton! -- Hold! Have I not now been uttering a most severe satire upon the
British nation? Yes! imputing to men a virtue which they want, is the worst
kind of satire -- I meant it not at the time, but will not retract what I have
written -- Britons deserve the lash of satire! They deserve a worse lash: for
the traffic in human bodies still stands a bloody brand of infamy on her great
national councils. Their brother's blood! the blood of millions of murdered
Africans, like that of Abel, cries to Heaven against them, and will not, I
fear, cry in vain.

Great God! -- What a horrible thought! -- what an indelible stigma! that a
legislator shall, in the cold blood of commerce, make a calculation of the
probable profit upon human lives -- put commercial expediency in the balance
against murder -- and make convenience the excuse for crime! -- Why, the robber
may do so! -- But shall Britons, generous Britons, who boastful claim
precedence of the world in freedom, humanity, and justice -- shall they look on
and see inferior nations spurning from them with horror the debasing traffic;
and stimulated by avarice, or misled by wicked policy, retain the blot that
other states have wiped away, and live at once the curse of one part, and the
scorn of the rest of mankind? -- Forbid it mercy! Forbid it Heaven! -- And oh!
may that virtuous man, who, disdaining the malignant taunts of the base and
interested, boldly steps forth the advocate of man and of his country, and
session after session springs from the couch of repose which opulence presents
him, to break the fetters and the scourges which improbity and avarice have
forged for our fellow creatures -- may he succeed and bear down all his
opposers! and may the justice of his country make his triumph and his glory as
certain and complete here, as the justice of that Being, under whole direction
he acts, will doubtless make them hereafter!

LETTER XL.
FROM the considerations I have already pretty fully mentioned, my mind was by
no means at case. The incessant traveling for so many days, at the rate of
seventy-five miles a day, to be continued I knew not how long, increased my
anxiety: and the apprehensions of accident, interruption, and above all
sickness, intercepting me on my way, haunted my imagination with all its
terrors. I was besides approaching fast to that region where the winds strike
all living things that draw them in instantly dead: and conceiving that the
more expeditions I was in getting over the journey, the greater chance I had of
escaping those mischiefs; I pushed heartily forward, and urged the Tartar till
he at last expressed his astonishment and approbation; paid me the compliment
to say, that I was almost equal to himself for enduring fatigue; and concluded
with a very sagacious surmise, that in all probability I had been myself a
carrier of dispatches among the Frank governments.

One day after we had rode about four miles from a caravansera, at which we had
changed our cattle, I found that a most execrable bad horse had fallen to my
lot: he was stiff, feeble, and soundered; in consequence of which he stumbled
very much, and I every minute expected that he would fall and roll over me. I
therefore proposed to the guide to exchange with me; a favor he had hitherto
never refused, and for which I was the more anxious, as the beast he rode was
of the very best kind. To my utter astonishment he peremptorily refused: and as
this had been a day of unusual taciturnity on his part, I attributed his
refusal to peevishness and ill temper, and was resolved not to let the matter
rest there. I therefore desired the interpreter to inform him, that as he had
at Aleppo agreed to change horses with me as often as I pleased, I should
consider our agreement infringed upon if he did not comply, and would write to
the Consul at Aleppo to that effect.

As soon as this was conveyed to him, he seemed strongly agitated by anger; yet
endeavored to conceal his emotions under affected contempt and derision, which
produced from him one of the most singular grins that ever yet marred the human
physiognomy. At length he broke forth:

"You will write to Aleppo, will you? Foolish Frank! they will not believe you!
By Mahomet, it would be well done to hear the complaint of a wandering Frank
against Hassan Artaz -- Hassan the faithful and the just, who for ten years and
more has been the messenger of an emperor, and the friend and confidant of
cadis, bashaws, and viceroys, and never yet was called so much as liar! Who,
think you, poor misguided one! who, think you, would belive that I broke my
promise?"

"Why do you not then," said I, interrupting him, "why do you not perform it by
changing horses, when you are convinced in your conscience (if you have any)
that it was part of your agreement?" -- "Once for all I tell you," interrupted
he, "I will not give up this horse. There is not," said he gasconadingly,
"there is not a Mussulman that ever wore a beard, not to talk of a wretched
Frank, that should get this horse from under me; I would not yield him to the
commander of the faithful this minute, were he in your place: I would not, I
tell you Frank -- and I have my own reasons for it."

"I dare say you have," returned I; "love of your ease, and fear of your bones."

At hearing this, he grew quite outrageous -- called MAHOMET and ALLA to
witness that he did not know what it was to fear any thing -- declared that he
was convinced that some infernal spirit had that day got possession of me --
and indeed seemed well disposed to go to logger-heads. At length observing that
I looked at him with sneering contemptuous defiance, he rode up along side of
me -- I thought it was to strike, and prepared to defend myself. I was however
mistaken; he snatched the reins out of my hand, and caught hold of them
collected close at the horse's jaw; then fell flogging my horse and spurring
his own, till he got them both in full speed; nor did he stop there, but
continued to belabour mine with his whip, and to spur his own, driving headlong
over every impediment that came in our way, till I really thought he had run
mad, or designed to kill me. Several times I was on the point of striking him
with my whip, in order to knock him off his horse -- but as often patience
providentially came to my assistance, and whispered to me to forbear and see it
out. Mean time I considered myself as being in some danger; and yet such was
the power he had over the cattle, that I found it impossible to stop him: so
resigning the event to the direction of Providence, I suffered him without a
further effort to proceed; I calling him every opprobrious name I could think
of in lingua Franca, and he grinning, and calling me Dumus, Jihash, Burhl (i.
e. hog, ass, mule), in rapid and impetuous vehemence of tone and utterance.

He continued this for a length of I dare say some miles* over an uncultivated
tract, here and there intersected with channels formed by rills of water in the
periodical rains; thickly set with low furze, ferns, and other dwarf bushes,
and broken up and down into little hills. His horse carried him clean over all:
and though mine was every minute stumbling and nearly down, yet with a
dexterity inexpressible, and a vigor altogether amazing, he kept him up by the
bridle, and I may say carried him gallantly over every thing. I was astonished
very much at all this, and toward the end as much pleased as astonished; which
he perceiving, cried out frequently and triumphantly, "O, la Frangi! Heli!
Heli! Frangi!" and at last drawing in the horses, stopping short, and looking
me full in the face, exclaimed in lingua Franca, "Que dice, Frangi -- Que dice?"

For some time I was incapable of making him any answer, but continued
surveying him from head to foot as the most extraordinary savage I had ever
beheld; while he stroked his whiskers with great self-complacency and
composure, and nodded his head every now and then, as much as to say, Ay, ay,
it is so! look at me! am not I a very capital fellow? -- "A capital fellow
indeed you are," said I, "but I wish I was well out of your confounded
clutches."

We alighted on the brow of a small hill, whence was to be seen a full and
uninterrupted prospect of the country all round. The interpreter coming up, he
called to him and desired him to explain to me carefully the meaning of what he
was about to say; which I will give you as nearly as I can in his own words, as
they were translated by the linguist:

"You see those mountains yonder," said he, pointing to the east; "those are in
the province of Kurdestan, inhabited by a vile race of robbers called Jesides,
who pay homage to a God of their own called Jesid (Jesus), and worship the
Devil from fear. They live by plunder, and often descend from those mountains,
cross the Tigris which runs between them and us, and plunder and ravage this
country in bands of great number and formidable strength, carrying away into
slavery all they can catch, and killing all who resist them. This country
therefore, for some distance round us, is very dangerous to travelers, whose
only safety lies in flight. Now it was our misfortune this morning to get a
very bad horse, for which, please ALLA (stroking his whiskers), some one shall
receive the bastinado. Should we meet with a band of those Curds, what could we
do but fly? And if you, Frangi, rode this horse, and I that, we could never
escape; for I doubt you could not keep him up from falling under me, as I did
under you: I should therefore come down and be taken -- you would lose your
guide, and miss your way, and all of us be undone. Besides," continued he,
"there are many villages here where people live, who, if they only suspected
you were a Frank, would follow and sacrifice you if they could to MAHOMET, and
where of course you must run for it."

As soon as the interpreter had explained this to me, "Well," continued the
Tartar, "what does he say now to it?" Then turning to me, and tossing up his
head -- "Que dice, Frangi?"

"Why, I say," returned I, "that you have spoken good sense and found reason;
and I am obliged to you."

This, when interpreted fully, operated most pleasingly upon him; his features
relaxed into a broad look of satisfaction, and he said: -- "I will do every
thing I can to make you easy and contented: and when I am obstinate, don't
resist -- for be assured I have reason for it; and above all things avoid
laughing in my presence. But we shall reach Mosul by and bye, and probably then
we may have no more rides." For I expected to get down the river Tigris from
Mosul to Bagdad, and had told him so, and he encouraged me with the expectation.

That night we came to a caravansera which lay at some distance from a village.
Here the Tartar, pleased with himself for the conduct of the day, and pleased
with me for my approbation of it, ordered a most admirable supper; and not
only, as was very common with him, rejected the best dish in order to present
it to me, but also selected for me the choicest bits of those upon the table.
He then ordered wine, observing that the fatigue of a government messenger
demanded indulgence; and using a salvo of my suggestion on a former occasion,
viz. that the Prophet would not be offended with travelers more than with the
sick for taking it as it were medicinally.

We accordingly had wine, and admirable it was, though by no means equal to
that we drank at the city of Diarbeker. I took little however, and the Tartar
was much surprised at my abstemiousness; remarking, that he never saw a Frank
before that was not a downright hog when he got the cup to his lips. My taking
it in small portions, while he drank it as we do table beer, particularly
astonished him. Before he lay down on his couch, he gave orders for horses,
threatening the people with severe castigition if they gave bad ones; holding
up as an example the person that gave us the stumbling horse that day, who he
declared should be bastinadoed as soon as he returned, if there was a cadi
within ten leagues of him; and I dare to say that he kept his word most
religiously.

The next morning we had excellent cattle; fear produced wonders among them,
and we set forward just as the sun rose. As we entered the first village, I was
somewhat alarmed by perceiving my guide draw up his horse -- deliberate --
mutter to himself -- and seem rather uneasy while he viewed a crowd that was up
the street before us; some of whom I perceived to be agitated with some
extraordinary motions of the body, while one man stood in the middle, rolling
his body into a variety of strange contortions. -- The Tartar, for a minute or
two, seemed to be debating within himself whether he should proceed or turn
about: at length putting me on his left hand, he set forward at full speed,
leaving the crowd on his right, who, seeing the rapidity of our pace, flew on
one side, and let us pass. We soon however heard shouting behind us, and could
hear plainly the words, "Ghiaour! Frangi Cucu!" and looking back, perceived
several ragged men like savages pursuing us, lifting stones occasionally, and
casting them after us with all their might. The speed of our horses at last got
us out of both sight and hearing; and I plainly perceived, and was for the
first time convinced, that my guide's conduct was directed by sound sense,
spirit, good faith, and integrity.

LETTER XLI.
THE extraordinary occurrence which I mentioned in my last letter required
explanation, and my Tartar friend was not backward in giving it; for he loved
exceedingly to hear himself talk, and, on any subject within the compass of his
knowledge, was shrewd, perspicuous, and even naturally eloquent: he had
moreover on that occasion acted the part of a skilful general; and as I
applauded his prudence and address, he was extremely kind and communicative,
and gave me a full account of that affair, his motives, his deliberations, and
the urgency of the case; and, in skort, every thing that could elucidate the
circumstance, or aggrandize his own importance. It would be a pity to take it
out of his own words: I shall therefore relate them to you, as I had them
through the medium of our linguist, for they made an impression on my memory
not easily te be erased.

"You must know," said he, "that there are spread over the face of this great
and glorious empire a number of dervises of different kinds -- holy men, who
renounce the enjoyments and pleasures of the world to converse with Mahomet and
worship Alla. Some of those are very good men, indeed saints, and never do any
thing bad; preaching and praying, without hurting any thing, even a rat or a
snake; nay, they would not hurt a Christian. There are others again, of whom I
have heard our bashaws and effendis, and even the Maazeen, declare that they
are forbid by the Koran; and yet the common people (the lower sort you know
have no sense) reverence and worship them -- they are called Santons; live by
themselves, sometimes under ground like rabbits, end sometimes in the thickets
and woods. They go where they please, take the best seat in any man's house,
cram themselves with meat and drink, and yet none resist them; for some will
not, and others dare not. Nay, they often pollute women in the open streets --
and they never set their eyes on a Christian or a Frank, that they will not
kill, if possible. For my part, I think that they ought to be hanged, every one
of them that had a head to be hanged by -- or rather staked -- for no
punishment is too great for them; but I dare not say so in that town -- if I
did, I should be stoned to death by the rabble.

"As soon as I perceived the crowd, and the rascals dancing, I knew that they
were santons, and was sure that they would stop us in order to extract money
from us; in which case they would most probably have discovered you -- for they
have the eyes of the devil. Nothing then could save your life; the crowd would
join them, and your brains would have been beat out with stones. I had a mind
to turn back and go round the town, but that might have caused suspicion, and
got us perhaps intercepted; so I determined to push by them boldly, which I
did, you can testify, like a brave man. You saw enough yourself, to convince
you of the danger you have escaped, and of my wisdom and valor; let me
therefore entreat you to be entirely guided by me, and above all things avoid
that accursed propensity to laughter."

Since I first formed the resolution of writing this account of my journey, I
have been at some pains to dip into the best histories of that country, and I
find that in every instance my Tartar guide's information was correct. Those
santons, as well as other classes of dervises and sheihs, travel about the
country, and levy contributions on the inhabitants: some are really what they
pretend to be, and are as pure and as pious as the monks of the primitive
Christian church; but the santons are monsters, who exist only by the barbarous
credulity and more than savage ignorance of the lower order of the people --
though reprobated, and indeed, execrated, by the better sort of Turks. They
affect to be dementated (which with the Mahomedans is the greatest mark of
sanctity), and under cover of that madness commit every excess and enormity,
not merely with impunity, but with applause. Such is the melancholy state of
degradation, to which the weight of superstition's chains bends the mind of
man! It is not long since I had a very pleasing discussion of this
extraordinary subject, with a gentleman of my acquain^ance, for whose veracity
I have great respect. Superstit^on and credulity very naturally led to a
consideration of the Turkish religion, and I expressed my satisfaction, that
the worst excrescences of the Christian schisms could not be compared with the
Turkish faith in their dervises. He said, that he agreed it did not go quite
the length of the santons; but he related to me a conversation between him and
a Roman catholic, not more than twenty-four miles from the enlightened city of
Dublin, which surprised me much.

"I was," said he, "when a youth, very free in censuring all religions, and
chiefly Popery; for, being bred among Roman catholics, I had the greater
opportunity of seeing their absurdities, which I treasured up as so much gain,
without ever taking into account their many virtues, of which they have their
share. One day I was on a party of pleasure, at a place called --, and in
presence of a poor country fellow ridiculed the priesthood, attributing to them
many vices, and particularly fornication and adultery. The man resisted me, and
declared it was impossible, Then I suppose, said I, if a priest and a woman
were locked up in a room together for a year, and the woman in a week after
coming forth was brought to bed of a child, you would not believe it to be the
priest's. No, said he, I would not. Then how comes the child? I don't know,
replied he -- any way but by him. In short, he would believe in
self-impregnation, or preternatural visitation, rather than allow a priest to
be capable of fornication."

"But," said I, "you supposed a case -- if the fellow was shrewd enough to say,
no such case could at all happen, he would have put you down; that was what he
meant, though he knew not how to go about expressing it.

The difficulties and hazards of the journey, which seemed to thicken upon us
as we advanced, made me pant for a speedy conclusion to it; and the adventure
of the last day opened more clearly to my view the dangers we had to encounter,
which were still likely to increase as we got to the eastward and southward,
where the fury of bigotry raged without remorse; where the greater distance
from the seat of government made the populace more lawless, and the magistrate
more corrupt and tyrannical; where the total seclusion from all well ordered
society rendered the manners barbarous; where strangers were seldom seen, and
when seen fleeced and persecuted; and where particularly I had reason to
believe, scarcely any Englishman had ever set his foot; and above all, where
the very winds that blew were charged with destruction, and carried instant
death upon their wings. I therefore earnestly longed to reach Mosul, where the
probability was, I should get at least the more comfortable and commodious
conveyance of water carriage, and where I might refresh myself completely,
after the fatigues of so many days journey; and, if there was occasion, claim a
guard and protection, having along with me a letter to the bashaw, which I
might withhold or deliver, just as best suited my inclination or convenience.

I could not help viewing with a sad and melancholy eye my present state;
wandering, I may say alone, unaccommodated and wretched, through an
inhospitable region, and more inhospitable people; where danger beset me in a
thousand forms, and every step I took, I took in hazard of my life; and
comparing it with those scenes of opulence and comfort which I had once
experienced, where every lawful wish met with its accomplishment; where every
necessity was supplied, and every difficulty obviated; where tender love and
attachment anticipated every desire; and soothed every care: where the mutual
endearments and reciprocal accommodations of tender relatives, wife, children,
faithful friends, and kindly intimates gave a zest to life, made me feel that
my existence was of interest to others as well as to myself, and communicated a
conscious importance which the isolated, solitary, selfish man can never feel:
I could not help looking back with grief and mortification, to think that I
once possessed those blessings, and should perhaps possess them no more; but,
on the contrary, might perish unknown, unheeded, and unlamented, in an unknown
corner of the wilds of an unknown hostile country, without one friend to solace
or to cheer me, or tell to those who loved or took share in my concerns, the
place where I lay, or the particulars of my fate.

Nor in this dismal train of reflections was Aleppo forgotten. It made the
great connecting link between my former happiness and present misery; it was,
as it were, the door through which I passed when I took my last farewell of
comfort: when it closed and shut me out, the prospect was indeed gloomy; nor
did I after feel one happy sensation, unless the convulsive transports of a
laugh, and the boisterous fleeting mirth arising from the singularities of my
guide, which, as the surge raised by the tempest above its proper height lifts
up the shattered bark only to cast it on the beach and leave it ship-wrecked,
elevated my spirits for the moment beyond their proper pitch, to retire
quickly, and leave them in the horrors of ten times deeper melancholy.

Perceiving how much cast down I was, my friendly Tartar began to rally me:
"Jimmel," said he, "the santons have frightened you: -- but don't be afraid --
HASSAN ARTAZ is no boy: he can bring you through greater difficulties than
those, should they befall us."

"But how comes it," said I, "Hassan, that you, who have so much power at the
caravanseras, have not power to resist those rascally santons, or the mobs of a
village?"

"Why, as to the mob," said he, "if I was by myself, or had only a true
Believer with me, I would make them fly before me like the dust before the
wind. As to the santons, no one can resist them: the Great, who hate them, are
obliged to show them respect: and the bashaw of Aleppo, nay the Commander of
the Faithful himself, could not save you, if one of them called on the mob to
stone you, or tear you to pieces. However, be of good cheer; for, please ALLA,
I will deliver you safe and sound to the Coja at Bagdad: besides, we shall very
soon be at Mosul from whence we will go down by water, which will be very
pleasant: and the chief danger then will be in fair fighting, which is better
than being cut off by santons. -- Should there be occasion," said he, looking
most ferociously and brandishing his whip -- "should we be attacked by Curds or
Robbers, you shall see -- you shall see, Jimme! -- Oh! holy Prophet, how I Will
fight!"

LETTER XLII.
IT was early in the evening when the pointed turrets of the city of Mosul
opened on our view, and communicated no very unpleasant sensations to my heart.
I found myself on Scripture ground; and could not help feeling some portion of
the pride of the traveller, when I reflected that I was now within sight of
Nineveh, renowned in Holy Writ. -- The city is seated in a very barren sandy
plain, on the banks of the river Tigris, embellished with the united gifts of
Pomona, Ceres, and Flora. The external view of the town is much in its favor,
being encompassed with stately walls of solid stone, over which the steeples or
minarets of other lofty buildings are seen with increased effect. Here I first
saw a large caravan encamped, halting on its march from the Gulf of Persia to
Armenia; and it certainly made a most noble appearance, filling the eye with a
multitude of grand objects, all uniting to form one magnificent whole.

But though the outside be so beautiful, the inside is most detestable: the
heat is so intense, that in the middle of the day there is no stirring out; and
even at night the walls of the houses are so heated by the day's sun, as to
produce a disagreeable heat to the body at a foot or even a yard distance from
them. However, I entered it with spirits, because I considered it as the last
stage of the worst part of my pilgrimage. But al^s! I was disappointed in my
expectation; for the Tigris was dried up by the intensity of the heat, and an
unusually long ^^ought; and I was obliged to take the matter with a patient
shrug, and accommodate my mind to a journey on horseback, which, though not so
long as that I had already made, was likely to be equally dangerous, and which
therefore demanded a full exertion of fortitude and resolution. -- There are a
thousand latent energies in every man, which only want the powerful voice of
necessity to call them out: and now drawn to the top of my bent, I prepared my
mind to set out in the morning, with as much cheerfulness as if the hopes of
water carriage to Bagdad had never once occured to my mind.

It was still the hot season of the year, and we were to travel through that
country, over which the horrid wind I have before mentioned sweeps its
consuming blasts: it is called by the Turks samiel, is mentioned by holy Job
under the name of the East Wind, and extends its ravages all the way from the
extreme end of the Gulf of Cambaya up to Mosul; it carries along with it
fleaks of fire, like threads of silk; instantly strikes dead those that breathe
it, and consumes them inwardly to ashes; the flesh soon becoming black as a
coal, and dropping off from the bones. Philosophers consider it as a kind of
electric fire, proceeding from the sulphurous or nitrous exhalations which are
kindled by the agitation of the winds. The only possible means of escape from
its fatal effects, is to fall flat on the ground, and thereby prevent the
drawing it in* to do this, however, it is necessary first to see it, which is
not always practicable.

But besides this, the ordinary heat of the climate is extremely dangerous to
the blood and lungs, and even to the skin, which it blisters and peels away
from the flesh, affecting the eyes so much that travelers are obliged to wear
a transparent covering over them to keep the heat off.

That night, Hassan said, that as we must proceed to Bagdad on horseback, he
would stay the next at Mosul to refresh us; which I objected to: he then spoke
of the succeeding part of the journey as a thing of nothing: we had already
come near nine hundred miles, and had not above five to go: besides, as the
weather was warmer, we would travel more in the night, and lie-by in the
daytime, in places with which he was well acquainted.

In short, the poor fellow seemed to take an interest in my safety, and to wish
to alleviate the pains of my mind; and he always concluded with a remonstrance
against laughing, which from frequently hearing I now understood even in his
own language. -- "Don't laugh* Jimmel, don't laugh," he would say with great
solemnity. -- By the bye, I observed, that when he was well disposed to me he
always called me Jimmel (a name which I presume he constructed, with my
servant's assistance, from the resemblance of sound between Campbel and Camel,
Jimmel being the Turkish for that animal); and when angry, he called me Frangi,
with all its gradations of Turkish abuse, Damus, Cucu, etc.

That evening, as we sat in the caravansera* a man entered and spoke to Hassan,
who seemed to pay great attention to what he was saying. -- He was a well made
man -- below the middle size -- and had that kind of countenance which bespeaks
shrewdness, ingenuity, and mirth. At length he retired; and soon after Hassan
bade us rise and follow him: he went into a sort of public room, where a number
of people were collected, sitting as is the custom in coffee-houses on low
stools. H^ssan pointed to me to sit down, which I did: then placing the
Interpreter near us, he sat himself: and straight I perceived the little man,
who had just been speaking to him, step forth from the crowd and begin to
pronounce a sort of prologue, which I neither understood nor wished to
understand: it appeared from his cadences to be metrical, and seemed, by the
little impression it made on his auditors, to have nothing particular to
recommend it. At length, however, he paused, and, hemming several times to
clear his pipes, began again to hold forth. "He is going to tell a story," said
the Interpreter. The attention of all was fixed upon him, and he proceeded with
a modulation of tones, a variety of action, and an energy of expression, that I
think I have never heard or seen excelled: his action indeed was singularly
admirable; and I could perceive that he was occasionally speaking in the tones
of a man and a woman: in which latter character he gave a picture of whining
ludicrous distress, that moved the risible muscles of all the company. I looked
at Hassan, and he was grinning as merrily as could any monkey or Frank in Asia.
The Linguist occasionally interpreted what the story-teller was saying; and I
soon began to suspect that it was a story I had more than once read in the
Arabian Nights, though altered, and in some measure dramatized by the speaker.
I looked several times archly at Hassan, and he returned my glance, as much as
to say, You see I don't laugh at all this. At length, however, the orator came
to a part where he was to mimic a poor little hunch back (for I now discovered
it to be the story of little Hunch-back) choking with a bone: he threw up his
back; squeezed till all the blood in his body seemed collected in his face, his
eyes rolled in their sockets, his knees knocked, he twisted and folded his
body, putting his fore finger, and thumb into his throat, and pulling with all
his might, as if to pull something out: at length he grew weaker, stretched his
arms down, and his fingers back, like those of a person stranggling -- kicked,
fell, quivered, and died. It is impossible for any description to do justice to
the perfection of his acting; and what rendered it the more extraordinary was,
that though it was a scene of death, and well acted death he continued to
render it so ludicrous in circumstances, as to suspend the audience between a
laugh and cry. They did not remain long so; for he suddenly bounced up, and
began the most doleful lamentation of a woman, and exhibited such a scene of
burlesque distress as I never witnessed. All burst out in torrents of laughter,
Hassan as well as the rest -- I alone remained purposely serious; and the
orator, according to custom, broke off in the middle of an interesting scene.

When we returned to the caravansera, I rallied the Tartar on the score of his
laughter: he growled, and said, "who could avoid it? Why did not you laugh as
you were wont?" -- Because, said I, he did not act as cornically as you. --
"No," returned he, "but because Franks and monkies only laugh for mischief, and
where they ought not. No, Jimmel, you will never see me laugh at mischief." --
"What," said I, "not a a poor man's being choked to death!" -- "Nay," said he,
"I seldom laugh, Yet I could not avoid it then." That very hour, however, a
puppet-show was exhibited in the same room, and my grave guide laughed till the
tears ran down his cheeks, and his voice sunk into a warning treble. Kara ghuse
was certainly extravagantly comical, though filthy; and frightened a cad^ with
a whole troop of Janissaries, by letting fly at them a shot or two -- a part
post --

The next day we set out well mounted, and pushed on with renovated spirits
toward Bagdad. -- Hassan could no more have the assurance to censure laughing
and, as I was little disposed to do it in time of danger, we were likely to
agree well. In short, we began to like one another's company; and if I brought
him to be a greater laugher than he used to be, he gave himself the credit of
having made me much more serious than I had been before -- I profiled by his
instructions.

It would be an effort as idle and fruitless on my (...) ^ntertaining and
uninteresting on yours, to attempt to give you a regular detail of our progress
from Mosul to Bagdad; the same general cautions were observed, with the same
occasional relaxations. Hassan still continued to treat me with a repetition of
himself and his horse, his own feats and his horse's feats; to be silent when
ill-tempered, and loquacious when gay; to flog the attendants at the
caravanseras; order the best horses, and eat the best victuals, and to give me
the best of both; and finally we had our fallings out and fallings in again:
but I had not the mortification of seeing any more women tied in sacks on
horse's backs, and excoriated with a ride of fifty miles a day.

As we rode along we overtook several times straggling callenders, a kind of
Mahomedan monks, who profess poverty and great sanctity; they were dressed all
in rags, covered with filth, ca^ried a gourd, by way of bottle, for water -- I
presume sometimes for wine too -- and bore in their hands a long pole decorated
with rags, and pieces of cloth of various colors. They are supposed by the
vulgar to have supernatural powers: but Hassan, who seemed to have caught all
his ideas from his betters, expressed no sort of opinion of them; he salam'd to
them and gave them money, however. It was extraordinary enough, that they were
all in one story -- all were going on a pilgrimage to Mecca -- or, as they call
it, Hadje.

As soon as ever we got out of their sight and hearing, Hassan shook his head,
and repeated "Hadje, Hadje!" several times doubtingly, and grinned, as he was
accustomed to do when he was displeased, without being able to manifest anger.
"Hadje!" he would cry, "Hadje, Hadje!" I asked him what he mean^; and he said,
that these fellows were no more going to Mecca than I was. I have a thousand
and a thousand times," said he, met callenders on the road, and always found
them facing toward Mecca. If I am going southward, I always overtake them; if
northward, I meet them; and all the time they are going wherever their
business carries them. I overtook, continued he, "one of them one day, and I
gave him alms and passed him by; he was coming he said, after me, toward
Mecca: but I halted on purpose for a day, and he never passed; and a merchant
arriving at the same caravansera informed me, he had met the very same fellow
four leagues farther northward; who had answered him with the same story, and
still had his face turned toward the south."

Fifty years ago, no man in Turkey would have dared to hold his language; but
every day's experience evinces that the light of reason spreads its rays fast
through the world -- even through Turkey; and furnishes a well founded hope,
that in another half century every monkish impostor (I mean real impostors,)
whether they be Mahomedan monks, or Christian monks, will be chased from
society, and forced to apply to honest means for subsistence.

END OF PART II.
A JOURNEY TO INDIA, etc. PART III.
LETTER XLIII.
MY DEAR FREDERICK,
AFTER passing through an immense tract of country, distinguished by nothing
that could serve even as a circumstance to mark and remember our daily
journeys, but which I observed to grow manifestly worse, both in soil and
climate, as we proceeded Southward, we came in fight of the famous city of
Bagdad, on the seventh day from that on which we left Mosul, and on the
eighteenth from that of my departure from Aleppo; in which eighteen days we had
rode fourteen hundred miles, pa^^ly through a route which no European, I have
reason to believe, ever took before.

On entering the city, I desired my guide to conduct me to the house of a
Merchant, to whom I had got letters of credit and introduction. He took me
accordingly through the windings of several streets, and at last stopped at the
do^^ of an Armenian Merchant, or Coja, where he made me alight, and come in. I
was received with great politeness; and, on producing my (...), sound that he
was not the person to whom it was directed: I accordingly made a suitable
apology, and was for retiring to find the house of the proper person, for which
purpose the Armenian offered me a servant, when, to my great astonishment, my
Tartar interfered; said that it was to this Merchant he brought all his goods,
and that I must remain where I was; at the same time ordering the Armenian, in
a peremptory tone, to take charge of me, and use me well. It was in vain that
the Armenian endeavored to explain to him the nature of the business, and that
I insisted I must go to the other Merchant -- HASSAN was peremptory, and
declared that I should not. It was so extremely outre and ridiculous, that I
could not be angry; and the good Armenian uniting his voice with that of the
Tartar, and entreating me to favor him with my company, I acquiesced, and
indeed remained in his house all the time I was at Bagdad. This was proof
positive, if any other than I already had was wanting, that he considered me
merely as a piece of merchandise, which he was bound (according to the language
of Merchants) to deliver in good order and condition.

I had undertaken, before leaving Aleppo, to give the guide, if he acted
conformably to my wishes, and behaved well, twenty pounds over and above the
hundred provided by the agreement: I therefore sent for him, to settle finally,
and part. He had heard that I was a person different from what he had supposed
me to be: but it did not alter his conduct, as might be expected, or make him
stoop to cringing; he still spoke with the same honest, bold familiarity; and
when I gave him the promised twenty pounds, he never hinted, cringed for, or
even looked as if he expected more: but when we came to part, the feelings he
disclosed, and those I myself felt, convinced me, that Man is not naturally
that brute which prejudice has made him; and, when left to his own operations,
the human heart would be uniformly kindly, affectionate, and sympathetic: the
poor, rough, unpolished Turk, betrayed the strongest marks of sensibility, and
I myself once more felt the uneasiness of parting.

I think this is the proper place to give you my opinion of the Turks, while
the recollection of honest HASSAN is fresh in my mind; and I cannot do it
better than by quoting the words of an excellent French Writer --

"The Turks (says M. du LOIR) are naturally a good people, which is not to be
ascribed to the climate; for the Greeks born in the same climate have very
different dispositions, and retain only the bad qualities of their ancestors,
v^z. roguery, treachery, and vanity. The Turks, on the contrary, priding
themselves on their integrity and modesty, are distinguished in general by an
open, ingenuous simplicity of manners; courtiers only excepted, who, in Turkey,
as every where else, are the slaves of ambition and avarice."

The name of Bagdad has been so renowned in Eastern story, and is the scene of
so many of those bewitching tales which we find translated, or pretended to be
translated, from the Arabic and Persian, that I felt great pleasure in seeing
it, and conceived myself to be at the very fountainhead of mavelous
adventure and romance. Fraught with this idea, I was impatient to go forth into
the town; and notwithstanding the weather was beyond conception hot, I paraded
a number of streets: but never did I, in the course of my life, see a place so
calculated to belie the opinion one would form of it from the eastern tales. It
appeared to me to be among the most disagreeable cities of the world, and has
no one circumstance that I could discover to recommend it: the heat is so
great, that in the Summertime the inhabitants are forced to keep their markets
in the night, and to lie all night in the open air, on the terraces of their
houses.

The Armenian with whom I resided, did every thing in his power to render the
place agreeable to me; and I shall always retain a lively sense of his goodness
and hospitality: he was not only generous and polite, but well informed, and
pleasing in conversation. I took occasion to express to him the disappointment
I felt at finding Bagdad so very different from what I expected; and told him
that I had, when a youth, learned to think highly of it, or rather
romantically, from reading Eastern tales. This led to a conversation on the
Arabian Nights Entertainments, a copy of which he had in the Arabic, and
produced it: he then showed me, with great triumph, a French translation of
them, printed at Paris, which he had read, and declared that the translation
was nothing it all in comparison with the original. I believe he was well
qualified to judge, for he was a perfect master of the French language.

We talked of the Eastern tale of the Glass Man, who, in a reverie, increases
his stock till he gets so rich as, in imagination, to marry the Cadi's
daughter, etc. etc. and in kicking his wife, kicks all his glasses about, and
destroys the whole of his visionary fortune. I praised the humor of it much --
"Sir," said he, "there is nothing in it that may not be experienced frequently
in actual life: those waking dreams are the usual concomitants of opium: a man
who has accustomed himself to the pernicicious practice of eating opium, is
constantly subject to them. I have, in the course of my time, found a thousand
of those dreamers holding forth in the plenitude of imaginary power. I have
seen a common porter become Cadi, and order the bastinado. I have seen a
wretched tailor raised by the effects of opium to the office of Aga of the
Janissaries, deposing the Sultan, and ordering the bowstring to all about him.
I have seen some indulging in the blandishments of love with Princesses, and
others wallowing in the wealth of Golconda. But the most extr^ordinary
visionary of this kind I ever met with, was one who imagined himself translated
to Paradise, coequal to Mahomet, and sitting by the side of that prophet,
arguing with him in defense of the use of wine and opium: he argued most
ingeniously, listened in silence to the supposed arguments of his adversary,
answered them, replied, rejoined, and still argued on -- till, growing at last
angry, he swore that he was as good a prophet as him, did not care a fig for
him, and called him fool and false prophet. A Turk who was present, in the
fullness of his zeal, laid a stick very heavily across his shoulders, and put an
end to the vision: and never did I see a wretch so abject, so forlorn, or so
miserably desponding; he put his forehead to the ground, which he wet with his
tears, crying, Mercy, Mahomet! mercy, holy Prophet! mercy, Alla! -- nor could
he find relief (such is the ruin of opium) till he got a fresh supply of it in
his mouth, which soon gave him a temporary respite from the horrors of his
situation."

Unquestionably, Bagdad was once a great city, of flourishing commerce; but the
Sultan AMURATH the Fourth, when he made himself master of it, put the richest
Merchants settled there to death; and it has ever since gradually declined.
About two days journey from it, lie the ruins of the once famous city of
Babylon. I was much disposed to go to see it, and thence drop down the
Euphrates to Bassora: but my Armenian host told me there was nothing in it to
recompense a person for half the trouble; for, of that magnificent city, which
was sixty m^les in circumference, which was encompassed with walls eighty-seven
feet in thickness, and three hundred and fifty in height, nothing was to be
seen but the bare foundations of some great edifices. The Tower of Belus, and
the Palace of Nebuchadnezzar, lie with the rest in undistinguished ruin. The
greatest curiosities, then, were, in the first place, the ruins of a building
said to be the famed Tower of Babel, which appeared to have been half a league
in compass; and the remains of a vast bridge over the Euphrates, where it is
half a league broad.

I was not more anxious to arrive at the city of Bagdad than I was to leave it;
and having written letters, and put them in a way of being forwarded to Europe,
I took leave of my friendly hospitable Armenian, and, with a thousand
acknowledgments for his kindness, set out on horseback to a place on the
Tigris, where I embarked in a boat, in order to proceed to Bassora. This river,
known since the first records of human existence by Geographers, is remarkable
for its rapidity, whence, PLINY says, it has the name of Tigris, (in the Median
language, a dart); and for its extraordinary course, which is in many places
under ground, rises in Armenia, sinks into the earth near mount Taurus, and
runs under a mountain -- then rising at the other side, follows its course
through the lake Thespites -- again sinks frequently under ground, and
continues hid at one time for a space of twenty-five miles; where, once more
emerging, it glides along wiih a very rapid stream, meets the Euphrates at a
place called Korna, passes through Bassora, and falls into the Persian Gulf.

As the boat in which I took my passage had no convenience for excluding the
violence of the sun, except an awning, I suffered extremely from the heat. The
River itself was grand; but the banks, and contiguous country, contained
nothing to attract notice -- no object to diversify the dreary, deser^ed aspect
of the scene -- nothing to afford room for reflection, or give birth to a new
idea. I do not remember to have ever passed through such a vast extent of
country, so uniformly dull and uninteresting. The only thing that served to
keep the mind alive, was the apprehension of robbers, who, in great numbers,
hover over this river, and plunder passengers. We had taken care, on leaving
Bagdad, to be well provided with firearms; and they did us yeomen's service --
for we were frequently attacked by robbers with a view to plunder, but found
that a shot or two dispersed and sent them off in consternation. One night,
however, in passing a creek, we perceived several boats issuing from it, in
great order, and in a manner that evinced method and premeditation: we silently
prepared for their reception, and were completely ready to meet them warmly,
while they thought us quite unprepared, and unconscious of their approach: they
first endeavored to board us by surprise: wishing rather to frighten than to
kill them, we began by firing over their heads; on which they set up the most
horrible shouts, and rushed on with a tumultuous rapidity, making the most
terrible noise in order to intimidate us: they were by this time quite near us;
we therefore took aim at them, and let fly, and immediately perceived them in
great confusion, some of the boats losing their helm, and falling with the
stream on the others: at last we saw them sheer off, and they gave us no
farther trouble.

LETTER XLIV.
AFTER eight or ten as disagreeable days as I remember to have spent in my
life, weakened with incessant watching, harassed with bodily fatigue, and
melted with the excessive heat of the sun, I arrived at the city of Bassora,
where I was received with the utmost hospitality by Mr. LATOUCHE, the Company's
Resident from Bombay, who did every thing possible for my accommodation, and
procured me every instruction respecting my further progress.

This city, as well as Bagdad, is famous in mavelous story. The country about
it is considered by the natives as the best spot in Asia, though the burning
winds annoy and frequently destroy travelers, overwhelming them with mountains
of hot sand, driven like waves of the sea, before the tempest out of the
neighboring deserts. It carries on a great trade, and is inhabited by vast
numbers of Christians and Jews. The English and Dutch have factories here, as
well for the purpose of commerce, as the transit of dispatches, by way of
Damascus and Aleppo, to Europe. The Richest merchandise of India and Europe are
brought here in caravans; and its opulence is greatly increased by the caravans
of Pilgrims, who pass through it on their way to Mecca, and pay great duties,
bartering for many rich commodities. The horses of this place are celebrated
for their superior excellence: it is said that they will run thirty hours
without meat or drink -- I doubt the fact, and should be sorry to see so
inhuman an experiment tried.

One comfortable circumstance attending Bassora is, that at night the streets
may be walked with perfect safety at all hours. It is subject to an Arab
Prince, who is tributary to the Turk, and whose revenue is very great, as well
from the abovementioned causes, as because he gives full liberty to all
Nations to come and trade to his capital.

From Bassora I took my passage in a date-boat going to Muskat, expecting to
get from thence a speedy passage to Bombay: but the boat sprung a leak at sea,
and we were obliged to run into Busheer, where I was very hospitably received
and entertained by Mr. GALLEY, the Company's Resident.

There really seemed to be an unusual fatality attending me throughout the
whole of my journey. You will recollect, in the first instance, I was
prevented, by the war with France, from going by the direct route which I
should otherwise have taken, and obliged to pass through the Low Countries and
Germany -- In the next place, at Venice I was disappointed in obtaining a
passage to Latachaea; and, immediately on the heels of that, lost my servant at
Trieste, by sending him for letters to Venice -- Afterward, when I had gone to
Alexandria with expectation of traveling through Egypt, and viewing that
interesting part of the world, I found myself prevented by the unhappy
circumstances of the country -- the plague raging in Alexandria, and all the
roads being blocked up by an incursion of the Arabs. Thus mortified and
disappointed, I turned about, in order to make my way in another direction; and
arriving at Cyprus, found, to my infinite surprise and regret, that an epidemic
disease, little short of the plague, prevailed there, and swept off the
inhabitants in great numbers: when, after surmounting all those obstacles, I
arrived at Aleppo, the first information I got was, that the caravan was gone,
and that it would be a long time before another would be ready; and my
departure from Aleppo was attended with circumstances no less inauspicious than
my entrance -- At Mosul I experienced another disappointment, by the river's
being dried up, and rendered impracticable by boats -- My passage from Bassora
to Muskat was impeded by the vessel springing a leak -- And now, when at last I
hoped to get from Busheer to Bombay, I was stopped by the intelligence that the
Gulf was blocked up by French privateers, insomuch as no vessel could hope to
escape, I was therefore obliged to remain at Busheer, till a Company's frigate,
commanded by Captain HARDY, and soon expected should afford me an opportunity
of proceeding to Bombay. Time, however, brought that period about; and I took
my passage, and arrived safe at Bombay, where I soon after embarked on board a
Portuguese vessel, being the only conveyance that offered for me to proceed to
Madras: she was first bound to Goa, and we arrived safely at that island, where
I was received with great politeness, and treated with the most friendly
attention, by Mr. HENSHAW, the English Resident.

Goa belongs to the Portuguese: the Viceroy of the Nation lives there in great
pomp. It was once the scene of the most abominable cruelties, exercised by that
flagitious people on the natives, under pretended ze^l for Christianity -- I
had read the Abbe RAYNAL'S glowing description of it; and as I trod the ground,
my frame trembled at the thoughts of the massacres perpetrated there.

I was impatient to get from Goa, and yet I looked forward to my departure with
a secret uneasiness, for which I was entirely unable to account -- I wished to
proceed, and yet some secret foreboding whispered to my heart that I was on the
verge of calamity: so powerful was it, and so obstinate, that I could neither
reason away its admonitions, nor resist its impressions; and something
incestantly told me, in as plain language as if a human being spoke, that I
should suffer a dreadful misfortune. As I had all my life been an enemy to
superstition, I felt my spirit insulted, and my understanding degraded, by the
involuntary victory which I allowed to this impression -- I combated it with
reason, with ridicule, with self-contempt -- all in vain: in spite of me, I
became the very slave of gloomy presentiment; and in order to get the
succedaneous aid of a friend's reason, as well as to be prepared, I
communicated the state of my feelings to Mr. HENSHAW. In vain he endeavored to
cheer me: all he could do was to give me his counsel; in consequence of which I
actually settled all my affairs up to that day, made my will, left it with Mr.
HENSHAW, and, full of dreadful forebodings of shipwreck, went on board a
Portuguese snow bound to Madras.

It was now the eighteenth day of May when we sailed from Goa. The hemisphere
had been for some days overcast with clouds: some light showers of rain had
fallen; and you may conclude that it did not tend to raise my spirits, or free
me from ominous apprehensions, to hear that those circumstances indicated an
approaching gale of wind. I observed, moreover, that the vessel was much too
deep in the water, being greatly overloaded -- that she was in many respects
defective, and, as the seamen say, ill-found, and in short very unfit to
encounter a gale of wind of any violence. I scorned, however, to yield to those
united impressions, and determined to proceed.

On the nineteenth, the sky was obscured by immense fleeces of clouds,
surcharged with inflammable matter; and in the evening, the rain fell in
torrents, the firmament darkened apace, sudden night came on, and the horrors
of extreme darkness were rendered still more horrible by the peals of thunder
which rent the air, and the frequent flashes of lightning, which served only to
show us the horror of our situation, and leave us in increased darkness:
mean-time the wind became more violent, blowing on the shore; and a heavy sea,
raised by its force, united with it to make our state more formidable.

By daylight on the morning of the twentieth, the gale had increased to a
furious tempest; and the sea, keeping pace with it, ran mountain-high; and as
it kept invariably to the same point, the Captain and Officers became seriously
alarmed, and almost persuaded that the South-West Monsoon had set in, which, if
it were so, would render it absolutely impossible for us to weather the coast.
All that day, however, we kept as close as the violence of the weather would
allow us to the wind; but the sea canted her head so to leeward, that she made
more lee than head-way; and the rigging was so strained with the work that we
had little hope of keeping off the shore, unless the wind changed, of which
there was not now the smallest probability. During the night there was no
intermission of the storm: many of the sails flew into ribbons; some of the
^igging was carried away; and such exertions were made, that, before morning,
every stick that could possibly be struck was down upon the deck.

About seven o'clock on the morning of the twenty-first, I was alarmed by an
unsual noise upon the deck, and running up, perceived that every remaining sail
in the vessel, the fore-sail alone excepted, was totally carried away. The
sight was horrible; and the whole vessel presented a spectacle as dreadful to
the feelings as mortifying to human pride. Fear had produced, not only all the
helplessness of despondency, but all the mischievous freaks of insanity. In one
place stood the Captain, raving, stamping, and tearing his hair in handfuls
from his head -- here some of the crew were cast upon their knees, clapping
their hands, and praying, with all the extravagance of horror painted in their
faces -- there, others were flogging their images with all their might, calling
upon them to allay the storm. One of our passengers, who was Purser of an
English East-Indiaman, had got hold of a case-bottle of rum, and, with an air
of distraction and deep despair imprinted in his face, was stalking about in
his shirt. I perceived him to be on the point of serving it about, in large
tumblers, to the few undismayed people; and well convinced, that, so far from
alleviating, it would sharpen the horrors of their mind, I went forward, and
with much difficulty prevented him.

Having accomplished this point, I applied myself to the Captain, and
endeavored to bring him back (if possible) to his recollection, and to a sense
of what he owed to his duty as a commander, and to his dignity as a man: I
exhorted him to encourage the sailors by his example; and strove to raise his
spirits, by saying that the storm did not appear to me by any means so terrible
as some I had before experienced.

While I was thus employed, we shipped a sea on the starboard side, which I
really thought would have sent us down. The vessel seemed to sink beneath its
weight, shivered, and remained motionless -- it was a moment of critical
suspense: fancy made me think I felt her gradually descending -- I gave myself
up as gone, and summoned all my fortitude to bear approaching death with
becoming manhood.

Just at this crisis, the water, which rushed with incredible force through all
parts of the vessel, brought out floating, and nearly suffocated, another
English passenger, who was endeavoring to take a little repose in a small
cabin boarded off from the deck: he was a very stout young man, and full of
true spirit. Finding that the vessel was not, as I had thought, going
immediately down, he joined me in exhorting the captain to his duty: we
persuaded him to throw the guns overboard, as well as a number of trunks and
packages with which the vessel was much encumbered; and with some little
exertion, we got the pumps set agoing.

Here I will stop, knowing the warm sensibility of my FREDERICK'S mind; and,
convinced that his sympathetic heart will go hand-in-hand with his Father's
suffering's, I will not overcharge it with grief by an immediate continuation
of the business, but defer it to another Letter.

LETTER XLV.
THE name of the English passenger, whom I mentioned to you in my last Letter
as assisting me in getting the Captain and Mariners to do their duty, was HALL.
He was a young man of a most amiable disposition, and with it possessed all
that manly spirit that gives presence of mind in exigences of danger. He and I
having, with great difficulty, got some hands to stick to the pumps, stood at
the wheel, at once to assist the men, and prevent them from quitting it; and,
although hopeless, determined that no effort practicable on our parts should be
wanting to the preservation of the vessel. The water, however, gained upon the
pumps, notwithstanding every effort; and it evidently appeared that we could
not keep her long above water.

At ten o'clock the wind seemed to increase, and amounted to a downright
hurricane: the sky was so entirely obscured with black clouds, and the rain
fell so thick, that objects were not discernable from the wheel to the ship's
head. Soon the pumps were choked, and could no longer be worked: then dismay
seized on all -- nothing but unutterable despair, silent anguish, and horror,
wrought up to frenzy, was to be seen; not a single soul was capable of an
effort to be useful -- all seemed more desirous to extinguish their calamities
by embracing death, than willing, by a painful exertion, to avoid it.

At about eleven o'clock we could plainly distinguish a dreadful roaring noise,
resembling that of waves rolling against rocks; but the darkness of the day,
and the accompanying rains, prevented us from seeing any distance; and if they
were rocks, we might be actually dashed to pieces on them before we could
perceive them. At twelve o'clock, however, the weather cleared up a little, and
both the wind and the sea seemed to have abated: the very expansion of the
prospect round the ship was exhilerating; and as the weather grew better, and
the sea less furious, the senses of the people returned, and the general
stupefaction began to decrease.

The weather continuing to clear up, we in some time discovered breakers and
large rocks without side of us; so that it appeared we must have passed quite
close to them, and were now fairly hemmed in between them and the land.

In this very critical juncture, the Captain, entirely contrary to my opinion,
adopted the dangerous resolution of letting go an anchor, to bring her up with
her head to the sea: But, though no seaman, my common sense told me that she
could never ride it out, but must directly go down. The event nearly justified
my judgment; for she had scarcely been at anchor before an enormous se^ rolling
over her, overwhelmed and filled her with water, and every one on board
concluded that she was certainly sinking -- On the instant, a Lascar, with a
presence of mind worthy an old English mariner, took an axe, ran forward, and
cut the cable.

On finding herself free, the vessel again floated, and made an effort to right
herself; but she was almost completely water-logged, and heeled to larboard so
much that the gunnel lay under water. We then endeavored to steer as fast as
we could for the land, which we knew could not be at any great distance, though
we were unable to discover it through the hazy weather: the foresail was
loosened; by great efforts in balling, she righted a little, her gunnel was got
above water, and we scudded as well as we could before the wind, which still
blew hard on shore; and at about two o'clock the land appeared at a small
distance a head.

The love of life countervails all other considerations in the mind of man. The
uncertainty we were under with regard to the shore before us, which we had
reason to believe was part of HYDER ALLI'S dominions, where we should meet with
the most rigorous treatment, if not ultimate death, was forgotten in the joyful
hope of saving life; and we scudded toward the shore in all the exulting
transports of people just snatched from the jaws of death.

This gleam of happiness continued not long: a tremendous sea rolling after us,
broke over our stern, tore every thing before it, stove in the steerage,
carried away the rudder, shivered the wheel to pieces, and tore up the very
ring-bolts of the deck -- conveyed the men who stood at the wheel forward, and
swept them overboard. I was standing, at the time, near the wheel, and
fortunately had hold of the taffarel, which enabled me to resist in part the
weight of the wave. I was, however, swept off my feet, and dashed against the
mainmast. The jerk from the taffarel, which I hold very tenaciously, seemed as
if it would have dislocated my arms: however, it broke the impetus of my
motion, and in all probability saved me from being dashed to pieces against the
mast.

I floundered about in the water at the foot of the mast, till at length I got
on my feet, and seized a rope, which I held in a state of great embarrassment,
dubious what I should do to extricate myself. At this instant I perceived that
Mr. HALL had got upon the capstern, and was waving his hand to me to follow his
example: this I wished to do, though it was an enterprise of some risk and
difficulty; for, if I lost the hold I had, a single motion of the vessel, or a
full wave, would certainly carry me overboard. I made a bold push, however, and
fortunately accomplished it. Having attained this station, I could the better
survey the wreck, and saw that the water was nearly breast-high on the
quarter deck, (for the vessel was deep-waisted); and I perceived the
unfortunate English Purser standing where the water was most shallow, as if
watching with patient expectation its rising, and awating death: I called to
him to come to us, but he shook his head in despair, and said, in a lamentable
tone, "It is all over with us! GOD have mercy upon us!" -- then seated himself
with seeming composure on a chair which happened to be rolling about in the
wreck of the deck, and in a few minutes afterward was washed into the sea
along with it, where he was speedily released from a state ten thousand times
worse than death.

During this universal wreck of things, the horror I was in could not prevent
me from observing a very curious circumstance, which at any other time would
have excited laughter, though now it produced no other emotion than surprise --
We happened to be in part laden with mangoes, of which the island of Goa is
known to produce the finest in the world; some of them lay in baskets on the
poop; a little black boy, in the moment of greatest danger, had got seated by
them, devouring them voraciously, and crying all the time most bitterly at the
horrors of his situation!

The vessel now got completely water-logged; and Mr. HALL and I were employed
in forming conjectural calculations how many minutes she could keep above
water, and consoling one another on the unfortunate circumstances under which
we met -- lamenting that fate had thus brought us acquainted only to make us
witnesses of each other's misery, and then to see one another no more.

As the larboard side of the vessel was gradually going down, the deck, and of
course the capstern, became too nearly perpendicular for us to continue on it:
we therefore foresaw the necessity of quitting it, and got upon the starboard
side, holding fast by the gunnel, and allowing our bodies and legs to yield to
the sea as it broke over us. Thus we continued for some time: at length the
severity of the labor so entirely exhausted our strength and spirits, that our
best hope seemed to be a speedy conclusion to our painful death; and we began
to have serious intentions of letting go our hold, and yielding ourselves up at
once to the fury of the waves.

The vessel, which all this time drifted with the sea and wind, gradually
approximated the shore, and at length struck the ground, which for an instant
revived our almost departed hopes; but we soon found that it did not in the
smallest degree better our situation -- Again I began to yield to utter despair
-- again I thought of letting go my hold, and sinking at once: It is impossible
thought I ever to escape -- why, then, prolong, for a few minutes, a painful
existence that must at last be given up? Yet, yet, the all-subduing love of
life suggested, that many things apparently impossible had come to pass; and I
said to myself, If life is to be lost, why not lose it in a glorious struggle?
Should I survive it by accident, life will be rendered doubly sweet to me, and
I still more worthy of it by persevering fortitude.

While I was employed in this train of reflection, I perceived some of the
people collecting together, talking, and holding a consultation -- It
immediately occurred to me, that they were devising some plan for escaping from
the wreck, and getting on shore: and, so natural is it for man to cling to his
fellow creature for support in difficult or dangerous exigences, I proposed to
Mr. HALL to join them, and take a share in the execution of the plan --
observing to him at the same time, that I was determined at all events to quit
the vessel, and trust to the protection and guidance of a superintending
Providence for the rest.

LETTER XLVI.
AS prodigality of life is, in some cases, the excess of virtue and courage --
so there are others in which it is vice, meanness and cowardice. True courage
is, according to the circumstances under which it is to operate, as rigidly
tenacious and vigilant of life in one case, as it is indifferent and regardless
in another; and I think it is a very strange contradiction in the human heart
(although it often happens), that a man who has the most unbounded courage, in
seeking death even in the cannon's mouth, shall yet want the necessary
resolution to make exertions to save his life in cases of ordinary danger. The
unfortunate English Purser could not collect courage sufficient to make an
effort to save himself; and yet I think it probable that he would have faced a
battery of artillery, or exposed himself to a pistol-shot, if occasion
required, as soon as any other man. Thus it appears at first view: but may not
this seeming incongruity be explained by saying, that personal courage and
fortitude are different qualities of the mind and body, and depend upon the
exercise of entirely different functions?

Be that as it may, I argued with myself, in the height of my calamitous
situation, upon the subject of fortitude and dejection, courage and cowardice;
and, nothwithstanding the serious aspect of affairs, found myself listening to
the suggestions of pride: What a paltry thing to yield, while strength is left
to struggle! Vanity herself had her hint, and whispered, "Should I escape by an
effort of my own, what a glorious theme of exultation!" There were, I confess,
transitory images in my mind, which, cooperating with the natural attachment
to self-preservation, made me persevere, and resolve to do so, while one
vestige of hope was left for the mind to dwell on.

Observing, as I told you before, the people consulting together, and resolving
to join them, I made an effort to get to the lee shrouds, where they were
standing, or rather clinging; but before I could accomplish it, I lost my hold,
fell down the hatchway (the gratings having been carried away with the
longboat), and was for some minutes entangled there amongst a heap of
packages, which the violent fluctuations of the water had collected on the lee
side. As the vessel moved with the sea, and the water flowed in, the packages
and I were rolled together -- sometimes one, sometimes another, uppermost; so
that I began to be apprehensive I should not be able to extricate myself: by
the merest accident, however, I grasped something that lay in my way, made a
vigorous spring, and gained the lee shrouds. Mr. HALL, who followed me, in
seizing the shrouds, came thump against me with such violence that I could
scarcely retain my hold of the rigging. Compelled by the perilous situation in
which I stood, I called out to him for GOD'S sake to keep off, for that I was
rendered quite breathless and worn out: he generously endeavored to make way
for me, and, in doing so, unfortunately lost his hold, and went down under the
ship's side. Never, never shall I forget my sensations at this melancholy
incident -- I would have given millions of worlds that I could have recalled
the words which made him move; my mind was wound up to the last pitch of
anguish: I may truly say, that this was the most bitter of all the bitter
moments of my life, compared with which the other circumstances of the
shipwreck seemed lessened -- for I had insensibly acquired an unusual esteem
and warm attachment for him, and was doubtful whether, after being even the
innocent occasion of his falling, I ought to take further pains to preserve my
own life. All those sensations were passing with the rapidity of lightning
through my thoughts, when, as much to my astonishment as to my joy, I saw him
borne by a returning wave, and thrown among the very packages from which I had
but just before, with such labor and difficulty, extricated myself -- In the
end he proved equally fortunate, but after a much longer and harder struggle,
and after sustaining much more injury.

I once more changed my station, and made my way to the poop, where I found
myself rather more sheltered -- I earnestly wished Mr. HALL to be with me,
whatever might be my ultimate fate -- and beckoned to him to come to me; but he
only answered by shaking his head, in a feeble, desponding manner -- staring at
the same time wildly about him: even his spirit was subdued; and despair, I
perceived, had begun to take possession of his mind.

Being a little more at ease in my new station than I had been before, I had
more time to deliberate, and more power to judge. I recollected, that,
according to the course of time, the day was far gone, and the night quickly
approaching: I reflected, that for any enterprise whatsoever, day was much
preferable to night; and above all I considered, that the vessel could not hold
long together -- I therefore thought, that the best mode I could adopt would
be, to take to the water with the first boyant thing I could see; and, as the
wind and water both seemed to run to the shore, to take my chance in that way
of reaching it. In pursuance of this resolution, I tore off my shirt, having
before that thrown off the other parts of my dress -- I looked at my sleeve
buttons, in which was set the hair of my departed children -- and, by an
involuntary act of the imagination, asked myself the question, "Shall I be
happy enough to meet them where I am now about to go? -- shall those dear last
remains, too, become a prey to the devouring deep?" -- In that instant, reason,
suspended by the horrors of the scene, gave way to instinct; and I rolled my
shirt up, and very carefully thrust it into a hole between decks, with the wild
hopes that the sleeve buttons might yet escape untouched. Watching my
opportunity, I saw a log of wood floating near the vessel, and, waving my hand
to Mr. HALL as a last adieu, jumped after it. Here, again, I was doomed to
aggravated hardships -- I had scarcely touched the log when a great sea
snatched it from my hold: still as it came near me, I grasped at it
ineffectually, till at last it was completely carried away, but not before it
had cut and battered and bruised me in several places, and in a manner that at
any other time I should have thought dreadful.

Death seemed inevitable: and all that occured to me now to do, was to
acclerate it, and get out of its pangs as speedily as possible; for, though I
knew how to swim, the tremendous surf rendered swimming useless, and all hope
from it would have been rediculous. I therefore began to swallow as much water
as possible; yet, still rising by the the boyant principle of the waves to the
surface, my former thoughts began to recur; and whether it was that, or natural
instinct, which survived the temporary impressions of despair, I know not --
but I endeavored to swim, which I had not done long, when I again discovered
the log of wood I had lost floating near me, and with some difficulty caught
it: hardly had it been an instant in my hands, when, by the same unlucky means,
I lost it again. I had often heard it said in Scotland, that if a man will
throw himself flat on his back in the water, lie quite straight and stiff, and
suffer himself to sink till the water g^ts into his ears, he will continue to
float so for ever; this occured to me now, and I determined to try the
experiment; so I threw myself on my back in the manner I have described and
left myself to the disposal of providence: nor was it long till I found the
truth of the saying -- for I floated with hardly an effort, and began for the
first time to conceive something like hopes of preservation.

After lying in this manner, committed to the discretion of the tides, I soon
saw the vessel -- saw that it was at a considerable distance behind me.
Liveliest hope began to play about my heart, and joy fluttered with a thousand
gay fancies in my mind: I began to form the favorable conclusion, that the
tide was carrying me rapidly to land from the vessel, and that I should soon
once more touch terra f^rma.

This expectation was a cordial that revived my exhausted spirits: I took
courage, and left myself still to the same all directing Power that had
hitherto preserved me, scarcely doubting that I should soon reach the land. Nor
was I mistaken; for, in a short time more, without effort or exertion, and
without once turning from off my back, I found myself strike against the sandy
beach. Overjoyed, as you may well suppose, to the highest pitch of transport at
my providential deliverance. I made a convulsive spring, and ran up a little
distance on the shore; but was so weak and worn down by fatigue, and so unable
to clear my stomach of the salt water with which it was loaded, that I suddenly
grew deadly sick, and apprehended that I had only exchanged one death for
another; and in a minute or two fainted away.

LETTER XLVII.
THAT admirable man and sagacious penetrating philosopher, Dr. FRANKLIN, has
left us, among innumerable instructions for the conduct of human life, and for
remedying many of the grievances of it, directions for going a voyage at sea,
and has particularly enforced the folly of quitting ships hastily, and yielding
one's self up to despair. I am convinced, that nine tenths of the people who
perish by shipwreck, perish from the want of presence of mind, and sufficient
fortitude to bear them out. The unhappy purser, who sat deliberately in a
chair, and suffered himself, without a struggle, to be carried overboard, is an
instance in point. The feeble conduct of the captain and crew is another. Had
he, instead of tearing of his hair, raving, and acting the part of a bedlamite,
encouraged his men, and taken vigorous measures in time; and had they, instead
of whimpering prayers on their knees, and whipping their images, made all
clear, and prepared for the worst; in short, had they, according to the moral
of the old fable, put their shoulder to the wheel, instead of calling on
Hercules, it is not impossible but the vessel might have been saved.

As for my part, the joy of escaping immediate death made me blind to the other
miseries of my situation. Naked, moneyless and friendless, upon an unknown, and
probably inhospitable coast, what reasonable cause had I to rejoice? Perhaps
the reverse. But that remains to be seen.

How long I continued in the swoon into which I had fallen, it is impossible
for me to tell; but, when I recovered, I found myself surrounded by a guard of
armed soldiers, sepoys, and pikemen. I knew them immediately to be the troops
of HYDER ALLI, and almost wished myself back into the waves again. Looking
round, I saw that the people and effects that had been saved from the wreck
were collected all together along with me.

In this state we remained till it was dark. A Lascar Natives of India,
employed sometimes as sailors, sometimes for inferior offices in the army, such
as pitching tents, drawing guns, etc.
belonging to the vessel, perceiving that my nakedness gave me great concern,
tore into two a piece of cloth which he had tied round his waist, and gave me
one part of it, which afforded a short apron. This simple act of a poor,
uninformed black man, whom christian charity would call an idolator, methought
had more of the true and essential spirit of charity in it, than half the
ostentatious, parading newspaper public charities of London -- the slough of
purse-proud vanity, and unwieldy bloathed wealth. Of all the acts of
beneficence that I ever met with, it struck me the most forcibly: it had
kindness, dis-interestedness and delicacy for its basis; and I have never since
thought of it without wishing that I could meet the man, to reward him for his
beneficence with a subsistence for life. The lower order of people of a certain
country, I know, would think a man in such circumstances as I was then in, a
fitter object of pleasantry than pity.

The vast quantity of salt water I had swallowed, still made me deadly sick in
the stomach: however, after some time, I threw it up, and got great relief. I
had hardly felt the comfortable effects of this, before I was ordered to march:
nine of us, all Lascars except myself, were conveyed to a village at a few
miles distance on the seaside, where we were for the night put into a square
place, walled round, open to the inclemency of the weather above and below, and
filled with large logs of wood; it blew most violently, and the rain fell in
torrents -- while not one smooth plank could be found on which to stretch our
fatigued and wasted bodies. Thus, naked, sick, exhausted with fatigue and
fasting, drenched with wet, and unable to lie down, our misery might be
supposed to be incapable of increase. But, alas! where are the bounds which we
can set to human woe? -- Thirst, that most dreadful of pains, occasioned by the
drenching with salt water, seized us: we begged, we entreated, we clamoured for
water; but the inhuman wretches, deaf to the groans and screeches of their
fellow creatures, (for some grew delirious with the agony of thirst), refused
them even the cheap and miserable indulgence of a drop of water!

The influence of the mind upon the body has been much insisted on by
philosophers and physicians, and I believe will be admitted by all wise men. I
was myself in this instance, a striking proof of it; for, though I had
swallowed and thrown up so much salt water, though my thirst had exceeded any
thing I had ever before felt -- yet, finding that water was not to be had or
expected, I composed my mind to do without it, diverted my thoughts from it by
the contemplation of the many other evils which beset me, and passed the night
without that horrible agony experienced by the others.

Indeed, a night of more exquisite horror cannot be imagined. The thoughts of
being a prisoner to HYDER ALLI, was, of itself, sufficient to render me
completely unhappy: but my utter want of clothes almost put me beside myself;
and lying exposed to the open air, where I was glad to sit close to the Lascars
to receive a little heat from their bodies, and to hold open my mouth in order
to catch a drop of the descending rain, was a state that might be considered as
the highest refinement upon misery.

About four o'clock in the morning, a little cold rice was brought us to eat,
and water was dug out of a hole near the spot for us; but as all things in this
life are good or bad merely relatively, this wretched fare was some refreshment
to us. I was then removed to the ruins of a toddy-hut, A small temporary hut,
where toddy (a liquor extracted from the cocoa-nut tree) is sold.
separated from the rest, and a guard set over me. Here I had full room for
reflection, and could "meditate even to madness." The whole of my situation
appeared before me with all its aggravating circumstances of horror; and to any
one who considers it, I believe it will appear that it was hardly possible to
fill the bitter cup of calamity fuller. Oh! what were my thoughts! My family
bereft of him on whose efforts they were in a great measure to depend for
support and protection -- you, then a little innocent cherub, appeared to my
distracted imagination twining round your mother's neck, and, in infant
clamor, calling your father -- while he, in a dreadful captivity, compared
with which even a cruel death were mercy, lay wasting, naked and forlorn,
perishing with the inclemency of the weather, wanting even food fit for his
support, and exposed to the scourge of every petty tyrant that barbarous power
might employ to guard him! -- Such were my reflections: they were in reason
well founded; for there was no probability of my being ever released, as my
captivity was unlikely to be known to my country, or by my friends.

In this state I was, when, to my utter astonishment, and to my no less joy,
the amiable companion of my shipwreck, Mr. HALL, appeared before me. I scarcely
knew how to think his appearance reality, as I understood that the Lascars then
along with me were all that were saved from the wreck; and he was, at the time
I parted from him, so exhausted both in body and mind, that I thought he would
be the last who could escape. He, however, shook me by the hand; and, fitting
down, told me that he had given me up for lost, and remained with the vessel
until the tide, having ebbed, left her almost dry -- that, immediately on
getting ashore, and being taken prisoner, he made inquiries about me, and heard
that I had been saved -- that, finding this, his joy was such as to make him
almost forget his own misfortunes -- and, exerting all his entreaties not to be
separated from me, they had been so far indulgent to him, and had brought him
to me, that we might be companions in bondage. He ^^ded, that out of eleven
Europeans and fifty-six Lascars who were on board, only he and I of the former,
and fourteen of the latter, were saved from the wreck, the rest having been
drowned in the attempt, excepting some who, overcome with terror, anguish and
anxiety, and exhausted with fatigue, had bid a formal adieu to their
companions, let go their hold, and calmly and voluntarily given themselves up
to the deep.

I here took occasion to remark to him, what I have already said to you, that
thousands lose their lives for want of perseverance, fortitude, and courage to
preserve them -- Had the English Purser collected courage enough to hold fast
till the tide ebbed, he might have been safe on shore as we were, as he was
superior to either of us in bodily strength.

"Ah! my friend!" said he, shaking his head despondingly -- "is he worse where
he is? I doubt whether death is not far preferable to our present prospects."

"Come, come," said I, perceiving he was melancholy, though I myself labored
under all the horrors he expressed -- "come, let us not think; all will yet be
well: I foresee it will; and you must known I have something of the prophet in
my nature -- perhaps the second sight." I then told him my presentiments on
leaving Goa, which much astonished him -- still more when I acquainted him with
the formal acts I had done in consequence thereof, by Mr. HENSHAW'S advice, and
with his privity.

In fact, our joy at meeting was reciprocally great, and in some respect
cheered us for the time under all our miseries in hand, and the dreary prospect
of those yet to come.

Perceiving that he stood as much in need of relief as I did when the Lascar
relieved me by dividing his cloth, I took mine off, tore it in two, and gave
him half of it: you may well conceive our misery from this, if other
circumstances were wanting, that such a thing as a rag of linen, not worth six
pence, was a very material accommodation to us both.

LETTER XLVIII.
YOUR letter, occasioned by the account of my shipwreck and subsequent
disaster, gave me, my amiable boy! as great pleasure as those disasters gave me
pain. Your account, too, of JOHN'S bursting into tears on the reading of it to
him, had almost a similar effect upon myself: and I trust in the Almighty
disposer of events, that that excellent turn of mind will be so fashioned by
the education I give you, as to make it the source of boundless gratification
and true greatness (by which I mean goodness) here, and of never-fading
felicity hereafter. You say you cannot account for it, but you found more
happiness at my escape, than misery at my misfortunes. I hail that circumstance
as the strongest mark of perfect excellence of disposition. A great moral
philosopher has laid it down as a maxim, that it is the surer mark of a good
heart to sympathise with joy than with sorrow; and this instance only comes in
aid of that opinion of you which my fond hopes have always nourished.

At the same time I must declare to you, that my pleasure at escaping shipwreck
was by no means as great as the agony my mind underwent as the prospect now
before me was poignant. I have already said, and indeed with truth, that I
should have with much greater pleasure embraced death: I, who had been already
some years in India, and had opportunities of hearing, as well from my father
as from other officers in the service, what the disposition of the tyrant in
whose power I had now fallen was, knew too well the horrors of my situation to
feel any thing like hope. The unmerciful disposition of HYDER, and all those in
authority under him, and the cruel policy of the Eastern chiefs, making the
life of any one, particularly a British prisoner, at the best a precarious
tenure, I did not know the moment when death might be infl^cted upon me with
perhaps a thousand aggravating circumstances: and at all events, the affairs
which demanded my presence in India so very importunately as to urge me to all
the fatigues and hardships of a passage over land, were, of themselves,
sufficient to make my mind uneasy; but the abject state of want and nakedness
in which it seemed I was likely to remain, struck a deep and damp horror to my
heart, and almost unmanned me.

Mr. HALL and I, however, endeavored with all our might to stem the headlong
torrent of our fate -- Melancholy preyed deeply and openly upon him, while I
concealed mine, and endeavored to cheer the sinking spirits of that noble
youth, who, I perceived was the prey rather of extreme sensibility than
feebleness of mind. All the horrors of shivering nakedness, though, to a mind
delicate like his, and a person reared in the lap of luxury, sufficiently
goading, appeared as nothing when compared with one loss he had sustained in
the depredations with which shipwreck is constantly followed up. In the cruel
suspense between life and death, which I have already described, previous to my
getting on shore, this amiable young man had secured and treasured next his
heart, as the inseparable companion of his fate, a miniature portrait of a
young lady; it hung round his neck, and was, by the unfeeling villains who
seized him on his landing, taken away. This cruel deprivation was an incessant
corrosive to his mind -- the copious source of anguish to his heart -- the
hourly theme of the most pathetic, affl^cting exclamations. "Had I," he would
cry, "oh! had I had but the good fortune to have gone to the bottom while yet
it hung about my neck, I should have been happy: but now, separated from the
heavenly original, and bereft of the precious image, what is life? what would
be life were I yet sure of it? What pleasure, what common content, has the
world left for me? None -- oh! none, none! Never shall this heart again know
comfort!

I did every thing I could to console him, and, as far as I could, prevent him
from dwelling on those gloomy subjects. Our conversations were interesting and
pathetic; but, alas! the picture, at every pause, chased away the flight
impressions of the preceding converse: no sufferings of the body could
countervail that loss -- no consolation mitigate it; and amidst the horrid
reflections which unparalleled calamity imposed upon his mind, the loss of that
one dear relic rose paramount to all -- and as every thought began, so it
ended, with the picture.

For some days we lay in this place, exposed to the weather, without even the
slender comfort of a little straw to cover the ground beneath us -- our food,
boiled rice, served very sparingly twice a day by an old woman, who just threw
a handful or more of it to each upon a very dirty board, which we devoured with
those spoons nature gave us.

At the end of that time, we, and, along with us, the Lascars, were ordered to
proceed into the country, and drove on foot to a considerable distance, in
order to render up an account of ourselves to persons belonging to government,
authorized to take it. It was advanced in the morning when we moved, without
receiving any sort of sustenance; and were marched in that wasting climate
eight hours, without breaking our fast; during which time we were exposed
alternately to the scorching heat of the sun and heavy torrents of rain, which
raised painful blisters on our skin: we had often to stand exposed to the
weather, or to lie down, under the pressure of fatigue and weakness, on the
bare ground; then wait an hour, or more, at the door of some insolent,
unfeeling monster, until he finished his dinner, or took his afternoon's nap;
and when this was over, drove forward with wanton barbarity by the people who
attended us.

You, my FREDERICK! who only know the mild and merciful disposition of the
people of Great Britain, where government, religion, and long habit, have
reduced charity and benevolence so completely to a system that they seem to be
innate principles of the mind, can have no conception of a people who will not
only look upon the worst human afflictions with indifference, but take a savage
delight in the miseries of their fellow creatures, even where no possible
advantage can be reaped from their inhumanity, and where the only reward they
can propose to themselves for their cruelty is the pleasure of contemplating
human sufferings.

Such, sorry am I to say it, is the disposition of some parts of the East
Indies that I have been in; and although those parts under the dominion of
Great Britain owe their emancipation from the most galling yokes to the English
-- and though, under their auspices, they live in a state of greater happiness
than ever they did, and greater freedom even than Britons themselves -- yet
such is the wicked ingratitude of many of them, such the inflexible animosity
arising from a contradictory religion, that the death or suffering of an
Englishman, or any misfortune that may befall him, often serves only as matter
of sport or amusement to them. It would be well if it rested there -- but
unfortunately they are worse again; for in general they have the like coldness
and indifference, or indeed, to speak more properly, the like aversion, to each
others good; and the same diabolical principles of selfishness and treachery
pervade the greater number in those vast regions, almost boundless in extent,
and almost matchless in fertility.

Two days after this, we were moved again, and marched up the country by a long
and circuitious route, in which we underwent every hardship that cruelty could
inflict, or human fortitude endure -- now blistered with the heat, now drenched
with the rain, and now chilled with the night damps -- destitute of any place
but the bare earth to rest or lay our heads on, with only a scanty pittance of
boiled rice for our support -- often without water to quench our thirst, and
constantly goaded by the guards, who pricked us with their bayonets every now
and then, at once to evince their power, entertain the spectators, and mortify
us. We arrived at Hydernagur, the metropolis of the province of Biddanore -- a
fort of considereble strength, mounting upwards of seventy guns, containing a
large garrison of men, and possessed of immense wealth.

It was about two o'clock in the morning when we arrived at Biddanore: the day
was extremely hot, and we were kept out under the full heat of that broiling
sun till six o'clock in the evening, before we were admitted to an audience of
the Jemadar, or governor of the place, without having a mouthful of victuals
offered to us after the fatiguing march of the morning.

While we stood in this forlorn state, a vast concourse of people collected
about, and viewed us with curiosity. Looking round through those who stood
nearest, I observed some men gazing at me with strong marks of emotion, and a
mixture of wonder and concern pourtrayed in their countenances. Surprised to
see such symptoms of humanity in a Mysorian Indian, I looked at them with more
scrutiinicing attention, and thought that their faces were familiar to me.
Catching my eye, they looked at me significantly, as though they would express
their regard and respect for me, if they dared; and I then began to recollect
that they were formerly privates in my regiment of cavalry, and were then
prisoners at large with HYDER.

I was not less surprised that those poor fellows should recognize me in my
present miserable fallen state, than affected at the sympathetic feeling they
disclosed. I returned their look with a private nod of recognition; but, seeing
that they were afraid to speak to me, and fearing I might injure them by
disclosing our acquaintance, I forbore any thing more. The guilty souls of
despotic governments are perpetually alive to suspicion: every look alarms
them; and alarm or suspicion never fails to be followed up with proscription or
death.

Men, when in the fullness of power and pride of office, very seldom give
themselves time to reflect upon the instability of human greatness, and the
uncertainty of earthly contingencies. When, invested with alll the trappings of
authority, I commanded the regiment to which those poor fellows belonged, I
would have thought that he spoke wildly indeed who would have alleged that it
was possible I could ever become an object of their pity -- that I should stand
naked and degraded before them, and they be afraid to acknowledge me; but,
though I should have thought so then, it was yet some comfort to me, when that
unfortunate event did come to pass, to reflect, that, when in power, I made
such use of it as to excite emotions in their bosoms of affection and respect.
Did the tyrant and overbearing insolent chiefs consider this, and govern
themselves by its instructions, they would go into the field with the consoling
reflection, that no gun would be levelled at their head except that of the
common enemy -- a thing that does not always happen.

LETTER XLIX.
HAD we been made prisoners of war in battle against an enemy, there is no law
of nature or nations, no rule of reason or principle of equity, that could
palliate such treatment as that which we now received: but, cast by misfortune
and ship-wreck on their shore, we were entitled to solace and protection. The
word wretches who hang out false beacons on the western coasts of England, to
allure ships to their destruction, would not be cruel without temptation; and,
if they did not expect to gain some profit by it, would rather decline knocking
their fellow creatures in the head* but those barbarians, without any profit
but what a malignant heart derives from the miseries of others, or any pleasure
but what proceeds from their pain, exercised upon us the most wanton cruelty.
Compared with such treatmen, instant death would have been an act of mercy to
us; and we should have had reason to bless the hand that inflicted it.

Mortifications of one sort or other -- the incessant torturing of the mind on
the rack of suspense -- the injuries to the animal system, occasioned by
constant exposure to the weather, and the want of food -- all conspired to
reduce me to the dimensions and feebleness of a skeleton. I had grown daily
weaker and weaker, and was now nearly exhausted, and quite faint; while, on the
other hand, my amiable companion in affliction was reduced by a dysentery,
which attacked him soon after our shipwreck, and which the torments of his
mind, the want of medicine and comfortable food, and, above all, the alternate
violent changes from profuse perspiration in walking to chilling cold at night,
had increased to such an alarming degree, that he was obliged to be carried the
two last days journey: -- In this state, we appeared to each other as two
specter hanging over the brink of the grave: and in truth, perceiving the
rapid progress he was making to his dissolution, I was affected to a degree,
that, while it really exasperated my own worn-down state, deprived me of all
attention to the rapid decline I was falling into, and almost entirely
engrossed my care. In my progress through life, I have had occasion to try
several men, and have found among them many who were every thing that a good
heart could wish to find: but this young gentleman had at once so much suavity
and spirit -- such gentleness and fortititude -- his sufferings (those of his
mind, as well as those of his body) were so exquisite, and he bore them with
such meekness, tempered by such uninterrupted good humor, and concealed and
managed with so much delicacy, that I do not transgress the bounds of truth
when I say I never met one who so entirely interested my feelings, and attached
my friendship so unalterably, upon principles of instinctive impulse, as well
as reason. Impelled by the irresistible claims he had upon my approbation and
esteem, I entered with all the warmth of a brother into his sufferings, and can
assert with truth that they constituted the severest trials I underwent during
my whole imprisonment.

While we stood in the court, waiting to be brought before the Jemadar, we
presented a spectacle that would have wrung pity, one would think, from the
heart of a tiger, if a tiger was endued with reflection. At length we were
summoned to appear before him, and brought into his presence. I had made up my
mind for the occasion -- determined to deport myself in a manly, candid manner
-- and to let no consideration whatsoever lead me to any thing disgraceful to
my real character, or unworthy my situation in life; and, finally, had prepared
myself to meet, without shrinking, whatever misfortunes might yet be in store
for me, or whatever cruelties the barbarous disposition or wicked policy of the
Tyrant might think proper to inflict.

On entering, we found the Jemadar in full Durbar. Court.
He was then occupied with the reading of dispatches, and in transacting other
public business. We were placed directly opposite to him, where we stood for
near an hour, during which time he never cast his eyes toward us: but when at
last he had concluded the business, in which he was engaged, and deigned to
look at us, we were ordered to prostrate ourselves before him: the Lascars
immediately obeyed the order, and threw themselves on the ground; but I
contented myself with making a salam, in which poor Mr. HALL, who knew not the
Eastern manner as I did, followed my example.

As soon as this ceremony was over, the Jemadar (who was no other man than the
famous HYAT SAHIB that has made some noise in the history of that war) began to
question me. He desired to know, who I was? -- what my profession was? -- what
was the cause and manner of my approaching the country of HYDER ALLI? -- To all
those questions I gave answers that seemed to satisfy him. He then asked me,
what news I had brought with me from Europe? -- inquired into the state of the
army, and number of recruits dispatched in the ships of that season -- was
minute and circumstantial in his questions respecting the nature and success of
the war in Europe -- and examined me closely, touching the resources of the
East India Company. I saw his drift, and was cautious and circumspect in my
answers, and at the same time contrived to speak with an air of candor that in
some sort satisfied him.

Having exhausted his whole string of questions, he turned the discourse to
another subject -- no less than his great and puissant Lord and Master, HYDER,
of whom he had endeavored to impress me with a great, if not terrible idea --
amplifying his power, his wealth, and the extent and opulence of his dominions
-- and describing to me, in the most exaggerated terms, the number of his (...)
^his military talents -- his vast, and, accor^^^ to his account, unrivalled
genius -- his amazing abilities in conquering and governing Nations -- and,
above all, his many amiable qualities, and splendid endowments of heart, no
less than understanding.

Having thus, with equal zeal and fidelity, endeavored to impress me with
veneration for his Lord and Master, and for that purpose attributed to him
every perfection that may be supposed to be divided among all the Kings and
Generals that have lived since the birth of CHRIST, and given each their due,
he turned to the English Government, and endeavored to demonstrate to me the
folly and inutility of our attempting to resist his progress, which he compared
to that of the sea, to a tempest, to a torrent, to a lion's pace and fury -- to
every thing that an Eastern imagination could suggest as a figure proper to
exemplify grandeur and irresistible power. He then vaunted of his Sovereign's
successes over the English, some of which I had not heard of before, and did
not believe; and concluded by assuring me, that it was HYDER'S determination to
drive all Europeans from Indostan, which he averred he could not fail to do,
considering the weakness of the one, and boundless power of the other. This
part of HYAT SAHIB'S discourse is well worth your remembering, as it will serve
to make a very diverting contrast with his subsequent conduct.

After having expended near half an hour in this manner, he called upon me to
come over near him, and caused me to seat myself upon a mat with a pillow to
lean upon -- encouraged me, by every means he could, by the most gentle
accents, and the most soothing, mollifying language, to speak to him without
the least reserve -- exhorted me to tell him the truth in every thing we spoke
of -- and hinted to me, that my falling into his hands might turn out the most
fortunate event of my life.

I was at a loss to what motive to attribute all those singular marks of
indulgence; but found that he had learned whose son I was, and knew my father
by reputation from the prisoners, our Sepoys, who were now prisoners at large
here: and as rank and office are the chief recommendation in the East, as well
as elsewhere, or rather much more than any where else, the sagacious HYAT SAHIB
found many claims to esteem and humanity in me as the son of a Colonel
CAMPBELL, which he never would have found in me had I been the son of a plain
humble farmer or tradesman in England.

After a full hour's audience, in which HYAT SAHIB treated me with
distinguished marks of his favor, considering my situation, he dismissed me
with the ceremony of beetle-nut, An aromatic nut which the East Indians chew;
it is warm and astringent, and considered by them a great restorative.
rose water, and other compliments, which are in that country held as the
strongest marks of politeness, respect, and good will.

Leaving the Durbar, I was led to the inner fort or citadel: and the officious
zeal of those about me, unwilling to let me remain ignorant of that which they
conceived to be a most fortunate turn in my affairs, gave the coup de grace to
my miseries as I went along, by congratulating me on the favorable opinion
which the Jemadar had formed of me, and intimating at the same time that I
would soon be honored with a respectible command in HYDER'S service.

If I was miserable before, this intimation entirely destroyed the last remnant
of peace or hope. I was determined to die a thousand deaths sooner than serve
any State hostile to Great Britain -- but still more a Tyrant, whose country,
nature and principles I de^ested, and could never think of without the greatest
horror; and I judged, that if such an offer should be made, and I refused it;
my life would fall a sacrifice to their rage and disappointment, or at least I
should live a life of imprisonment, and never more behold country, family,
friends, connections, or any thing that I valued in l^^e.

That night the Jemadar sent me an excellent supper, of not less than six
dishes, from his own table; and although I had been so long famishing with the
want of wholesome food, the idea of being (...) in the service of HYDER struck
me (...), that I lost all appetite, and (...) to eat a mouthful. Mr. HALL and
(...), were separated from the Lascars, Who were released and forced to work.

Notwithstanding the favorable intentions manifested toward me by the
Jemader, as I have already mentioned, no mark of it whatsoever appeared in our
lodging. This consisted of a small place, exactly the size of our length and
breadth, in the zig-zag of one of the gates of the citadel: it was open in
front, but covered with a kind of a shed on the top; and a number of other
prisoners were about us: each of us was allowed a mat and pillow, and this
formed the whole of our local accommodations. Upon my remarking it, we were
told, that in conformity to the custom of the Circar, Country or Province.
we must be treated so for some time, but that our accommodations would
afterward be extended, and made more agreeable to our wishes: even this was
better than our situation since we landed.

In addition to this luxury, we were allowed to the value of four pence
halfpenny a day for our maintenance; and a guard of Sepoys was put over us and
a few more prisoners, one of whom was directed to go and purchase our victuals,
and do such offices for us.

This guard was changed every week -- a strong mark of the suspicious and wary
tempers of those people, who could fear intrigues and cabals between wretched
prisoners like us and their soldiers.

In two or three days after this, HYAT SAHIB sent for me, treated me with great
kindness, gave me some tea, and furnished me with two or three shirts, an old
coat, and two pairs of breeches, which were stripped from the dead bodies that
were thrown ashore from the wreck -- every thing that was saved from it being
sent to Biddanore. At this interview ^he treated me with great respect -- gave
me, besides the articles already mentioned, thirty rupees -- and, upon my going
away, told me that in a few days a very flattering proposal would be made to
me, and that my situation would be rendered not only comfortable, but enviable.

It is impossible for me to express to you, my dear FREDERICK! the horror I
felt at the idea of this intended proposal -- for I knew but too well what it
meant. It was the source of bitter misery to my mind: nevertheless, I
determined to resist every effort that should be made, whether blandishment,
entreaty, or menace -- to lay down my life itself, though in obscurity, with
honor -- and to carry along with me, go where I would, the consciousness of
having done my duty.

I have in the course of my life met with many people, who, under the plausible
pretext of liberality and greatness of mind, have called themselves citizens of
the world, and declared that the country where they lived, be that what country
it might, was their's, and demanded their allegiance and protection: but I have
always shrewdly suspected, that such men act from a consciousness of being
outcasts of their own country -- and, scorned and rejected by their
fellow-citizens, would retaliate by affecting to deny their natural attachment.
There are men who neitheir love father, mother, sister, brother, or connection:
such, however, are, thank GOD! very thinly sown in this world; but, except it
be a few such unnatural people, I am convinced that there is no one whose heart
does not confess the patriotic passion, and burn with a flame, more or less
ardent, of love for his country. My predilectious that way are naturally
strong, and I am now happy to reflect that I evinced them by the most
unequivocal proofs: had I not, I were indeed, in my own opinion, fit for any
punishment, however ignominious: and to all such as lift their arms against
their country, as to Parricides, I will say, in the words of the poet,

"Never pray more -- abandon all remorse:
"On horrors head, horrors accumulate;
"Do deeds to make Heaven weep -- all earth amazed;
"For nothing can thou to damnation add,
"Greater than that."
LETTER L.
ON the evening of that day on which the Jemadar HYAT SAHIB had honored me
with an audience, given me clothes and money, and informed me that a proposal,
which he called flattering, would be made to me, I was sent for to attend, not
at the Durbar, but at the house of a man high in office. As I expected to meet
HYAT SAHIB himself, and trembled at the thoughts of his expected proposition, I
was surprised, and indeed pleased, to find that it was with one of his people
only I was to have a conference. This man, whose name I now forget, received me
with great kindness, encouraged me, made me sit down with him, and began to
speak of HYAT SAHIB, whom he extolled to the skies, as a person endowed with
every great and amiable quality; informing me at the same time, that he was
possessed of the friendship and confidence of his master, HYDER ALLI, in a
greater degree than any other person -- TIPPOO SAHIB, his own son, not
excepted: he then gave me the private history of HYAT -- saying, that he was
born a Gentoo prince, of one of the provinces of the Malabar coast, which had
fallen beneath the irresistible arms of HYDER, and had been by him annexed to
the vast Mysorean Empire. HYAT, he said, was then only a boy of eleven or
twelve years of age, of a most promising genius, and a quickness of mind
unusually met with in one of those tender years. HYDER, who was in all respects
a man of unrivalled penetration, thought he saw in the boy that which, if
properly cultivated, would turn out of vast use to a state; and as, in all
Mahomedan governments, unconnected, isolated boys, oft-times slaves, are bred
up in the seraglio to succeed to the great offices of the state, HYDER adopted
the boy, had him made a Mahomedan, and, in fact, treated him as if he had been
the issue of his own loins, and brought him up with all the affection and
tenderness of a fond parent. I am the more particular in stating this part of
HYAT'S history to you, as some respectable historians, deceived by erroneous
report, have said that he was the illegitimate offspring of HYDER. The sultan,
however, was not disappointed in the expectations he had formed; for HYAT SAHIB
had, in zeal, fidelity and attachment, as well as in intellectual faculties and
talents for governing, even surpassed the warmest hopes of his master.

Having given me this concise account of the Jemadar, he proceeded to inform
me, that the Arcot Sepoys, whom I have before mentioned to you, had discovered
to HYAT SAHIB who I was, given him a full account of my family, and informed
him that I had commanded a regiment of cavalry in the service of the Nabob of
Arcot, together with a corpse of infantry and artillery attached to it. In
consequence of this report, HYAT SAHIB, he said, had interested himself very
warmly in my favor, and ex^pessed an anxious desire to render me a service.

Thus far the discourse pleased me. Nothing was said in it to give me alarm; on
the contrary. I indulged a hope, that, knowing my rank, and the rank of my
father, he would no longer entertain a hope of my entering into the service of
HYDER, and for the time I was to be imprisoned, treat me with i^^^ble
indulgence. But I flattered myself too soon; or, as the old saying is,
"reckoned without my host."

When he had finished his history of HYAT SAHIB, which he overcharged with
fulsome panegyric, he told me, with a face full of that triumphant importance
which one who thinks he is conferring a great favor generally assumes, that it
was the intention of HYAT SAHIB, for and on behalf of his master the Sultan, to
give me the command of five thousand men -- an offer which he supposed I could
not think of declining, and therefore expected no other answer but a profusion
of thanks, and strong manifestations of joy on my part.

It is not possible for me to describe to you my dismay at this formal
proposal, or pourtray to you the various emotions that took possession of my
breast. Resentment had its share -- the pride of the soldier, not unaccompanied
with the pride of family and rank, while it urged me to spurn from me such a
base accommodation, made me consider the offer as a great insult. I therefore
paused a little, to suppress my feelings; and then told him my firm resolution,
never to accept of such a proposal; and upon his expressing great astonishment
of my declining a station so fraught with advantage, I laid down, in the best
manner I could, my reasons; and I must say, that he listened to all the
objections I started with great patience; but, in the conclusion, said he had
little doubt of finding means to overcome my reluctance.

He dismissed me for the present, and I returned to my prison, where I related
to my companion, Mr. HALL, every thing that passed between us: we canvassed the
matter fully, and he agreed with me, that it was likely to turn out a most
dreadful and cruel persecution. It was on this occasion that I first felt the
truth of the principle, that persecution never fails to be subversive of its
own end, and to promote that which it is intended to destroy. There is, in the
human mind, an innite abhorrence of compulsion; and persecution always gives
new strength and elasticity to the soul: and at last, when strained to its
utmost extent, makes man surmount difficulties which at first seem to be beyond
the reach of humanity.

Piqued by the idea of persecution, I began to feel a degree of enthusiasm
which I was before a stranger to: I looked forward, with a kind of gloomy
pleasure, to the miseries that brutal tyranny might inflict upon me, even to
death itself; and already began to indulge the exultation of martyrdom "No,"
said I, "my dear HALL! never will I tarnish the character of a British soldier
-- never will I disgrace my blood or my profession -- never shall an act of
mine fully the pure fame of my revered father -- never shall any sufferings of
mine, however poignant, or worldly advantage, however seductive, tempt me to do
that which his noble spirit would regard with horror or contempt. I may, and I
foresee I must be miserable; but I never will be base or degenerate!" Indeed, I
had wrought myself up to such a pitch of firmness, that I am persuaded the most
exquisite and refined cruelties which the ingenuity of an Iroquois Indian could
have inflicted on my body, would have been utterly incapable of bending the
stubborn temper of my mind.

The place in which we were lodged was situated in a way not very favorable to
our feelings. Just within sight of it, the commandant of the citadel held a
court -- by him yclep'd a court of justice -- where the most shocking,
barbarious cruelties were hourly exercised -- most of them for the purpose of
extorting money, and compelling the discovery of hidden, or ^^pposi^ious hidden
treasures. Indeed, five sixths of those who suffered were of this description;
and the process persued was as artful as barbarious: they first began with
caresses, then proceeded to examination and cross-examination, thence to
threats, thence to punishment, and finally, to the most cruel tortures.

Directly opposite to us, was imprisoned an unfortunate person, who had for
years been a close captive, and the sport and subject of those enormities. He
was a man once of the highest rank in the country where now he was a prisoner:
for a series of years he had been governor and sole manager of the whole
province of Biddanore. This was during the reign of the last Rana, or Queen,
whose family had been sovereigns of the country for time immemorial, till HYDER
made a conquest of, and annexed it to his other usurpations. Unfortunately for
him, he was supposed to have amassed and secreted enormous treasures, in
consequence of which he had already undergone the fiery ordeal of torture
several times. He was supposed to have produced, from first to last, about
fifteen lacks of pago^ and then, in the course of eighteen months, (...)
^^^aded gradually, from the high respect in (...) at first held, down to a most
abject (...) fl^gged, punished in a variety of (...) to the must cruel
tortures, (...) with the highest ^^gree of respect, and afterw^ (...) ^ght to
the lo^^^ stage of, misery and he must (...). One thing, however, I must not
forget, as the fortitude with (...) and all of them bore their punishment: it
was (...) heroic -- indeed, beyond al^ be^ief. Nothing could surpass it, except
the skill and inventive ing^nuity which the barbarians exhibited in striking
out new modes of torture. My soul sickened with horror at the sight: the
amiable HALL could worse support it than his own miseries, and lost all that
fortitude, in his feeling for others' misfortunes, which he displayed in so
unbounded a share in his own: and often, very often, we found the rigor and
severity of our own situation utterly forgotten in our anguish and sympathy for
the sufferings of others. Never shall I forget it: never shall I think without
horror of the accursed policy and wicked tyranny of the Eastern governments,
where every sense of humanity is extinguished, and man, more merciless than the
tiger, riots in the blood of his fellow creatures without cause.

Mr. HALL, notwithstanding the various sufferings both of mind and body which
he had undergone, began to recruit, and get a little better; and this
circumstance, of itself, diffused a flow of spirits over me that contributed to
my support. We consoled each other by every means we could devise -- sometimes
indulging in all the luxury of woe -- sometimes rallying each other, and, with
ill-dissembled sprightliness, calling on the goddess EUPHROSYNE to come with
her "quirps and cranks, and wreathed smiles:" but, alas! the mountain nymph,
sweet LIBERTY, was far away, and the goddess shunned our abode. We however
began to conceive that we might form a system for our relief, and by a
methodical arrangement, entrench ourselves from the assaults of grief: to this
end, we formed several resolutions, and entered into certain engagements --
such as, never to repine at our fate, if we could -- to draw consolation from
the more dreadful lot of others, if we could; -- and to encourage hope -- hope
that comes to all; and, on the whole, to confine our conversation as much as
possible to subjects of an agreeable nature: but these, like many other rules
which we lay down for the conduct of life, were often broken by necessity, and
left us to regret the fallibility of all human precautionary systems.

The youth and strength of Mr. HALL was to the full as adequate as mine to the
support of any personal hardship: his intellectual powers were excellent, his
temper incomparable, and his fortitude unparalleled; yet could I see, that
something more than appeared upon the surface wrought within him, and gnawed
his heart with hidden pain. United as we were by sentiment, as well as by
parity of suffering, I felt for him too deeply, not to have an interesting
curiosity to know what it was that preyed upon his mind: we had been, months
together, fellow sufferers; and I thought myself not without some claim to his
confidence -- I told him so, and desired him to impart to me his story; which
he, with his accustomed suavity and condescension, agreed to -- assuring me
that it was not such a story as could requite the trouble of hearing it, or
interest any one but himself, or some very warm friend indeed: such, however,
he added, he took me to be; and, as such, would tell it to me. I think it,
however, worth relating, and will give it to you in his own words; and, though
it be very short, must defer the relation to another letter.

LETTER LI.
MR. HALL having, as I told you in my last, obligingly agreed to favor me with
a relation of his story, I now give it to you as nearly in his own words as I
can remember them. He proceeded thus:

"Although you are now, my dear friend! a witness to my being the most
perfectly wretched of all created beings, yet the time is not long past when
fortune smiled upon and gave me promise of as much happiness as Man in this
wretched vale of tears is allowed by his circumscribed nature to hope for. I
have seen the time, when each revolving sun rose to usher me to a day of joy,
and set to consign me to a night of undisturbed repose -- when the bounties of
Nature, and the productions of Art, were poured with the profusion of fond
paternal affection into my lap -- when troops of friends hailed my rising
prospects -- when health and peace made this person their uninterrupted abode
-- and when the most benignant love that ever blessed a mortal filled up the
measure of my bliss. Yes, CAMPBELL! it was once my happiness, though now, alas!
the source of poignant misery, to be blessed with the best parents that ever
watched over the welfare of a child -- with friends, too, who loved me, and
whom my heart cherished -- and -- O God! do I think of her, and yet retain my
senses -- with the affections of a young lady, than whom providence, in the
fullness of its power and bounty to mankind, never formed one more lovely, one
more angelic in person, more heavenly in disposition, more rich in intellectual
endowments. Alas! my friend, will you, can you pardon those warm ebullitions of
a fond passion? will you for a moment enter into my feelings, and make
allowance for those transports? But how can you? Your friendship and pity may
indeed induce you to excuse this interruption; but, to sympathise truly, and
feel as I feel, you must have known the charming girl herself.

"My father, though he did not move in the very first walk of life, held the
rank of a Gentleman by birth and education, and was respectable, not only as a
man of considerable property, but as a person who knew how to turn the gifts of
fortune to their best account: he was generous without prodigality, and
charitable without ostentation: he was allowed by all who knew him to be the
most tender of husbands -- the most zealous and sincere of friends; and I can
bear witness to his being the best of parents. As long as I can remember to
have been able to make a remark, the tenderness of both my father and mother
knew no bounds: I seemed to occupy all their thoughts, all their attention; and
in a few years, as I thank God I never made un unsuitable return for their
affection, it increased to such a degree, that their existence seemed to hang
upon mine.

"To make so much of a child so beloved as his natural talents would allow, no
expense was spared in my education: from childhood, every instruction that
money could purchase, and every allurement to learn, that fondness could
suggest, were bestowed upon me: while my beloved father tracing the advances I
made with the magnifying eye of affection, would hang over me in rapture, and
enjoy by anticipation the fame and honors that, overweening fondness suggested
to him, must one day surround me. These prejudices, my dear friend! arising
from the excess of natural affection, are excuseable, if not amiable, and
deserve a better fate than disappointment. Alas! my honored father, you little
knew -- and, oh! may you never know, what sort of fame, what sort of honors,
await your child! May the anguish he endures, and his most calamitious fate,
never reach your ears! -- for, too well I know, 'twould give a deadly wrench to
your heart, and precipitate you untimely to your grave.

"Thus years rolled on; during which, time seemed to have added new wings to
his flight, so quickly did they pass. Unmarked by any of those sinister events
that parcel out the time in weary stages to the unfortunate, it slid on
unperceived; and an enlargement in my size, and an increase of knowledge, were
all I had to inform me that eighteen years had passed away.

It was at this time that I first found the smooth current of my tranquillity
interrupted, and the tide of my feelings swelled and agitated, by the accession
of new streams of sensation -- In short I became a slave to the delicious pains
of Love; and, after having borne them in concealment for a long time, at length
collected courage to declare it. Frankness and candor were among the virtues
of my beloved: she listened to the protestations of affection, and rising above
the little arts of her sex, avowed a reciprocal attachment. The measure of my
bliss seemed now to be full; the purity of my passion was such, that the
thoughts of the grosser animal desires never once occured; and happy in loving,
and being beloved, we passed our time in all the innocent blandishments which
truly virtuous love inspires, without our imagination roaming even for an
instant into the wilds of sensuality.

"As I was to inherit a genteel, independent fortune, my father proposed to
breed me up to a learned profession -- the Law; rather to invigorate and
exercise my intellects, and as a step to rank in the state, than for more
lucrative purposes. I was put to one of the universities, with an allowance
suited to his intentions toward me; and was immediately to have been sent to
travel for my fu^ther improvement, when an unforeseen accident happened, which
immediately crushed all my fathers views, dashed the cup of happiness from my
lips, and brought me ultimately to that deplorable state in which you have now
the misfortune to be joined along with me.

"It was but a few months antecedent to my embarking for the eastern world,
that my father, whom I had far some time with sorrow observed thoughtful,
studious and melancholy, took me into his study, and, seizing my hand, and
looking earnestly into my face, while his countenance betrayed the violent
agitation of his mind, asked me emphatically, if I thought I had fortitude to
bear the greatest possible calamity? I was horror-struck at his emotion,
accompanied by such a question -- but replied, I hoped I had. He then asked me
if I had affection enough for him to forgive him if he was the cause of it? I
answered, that the idea connected with the word forgiveness, was that which I
could never be brought by any earthly circumstance to apply to my father; but
begged him at once to disclose the worst to me -- as, be it what it might, my
misery could not surpass what I then felt from the mysterious manner in which
he then spoke.

"He then told me that he was an undone man -- that he had, with the very best
intentions, and with the view of aggrandizing me, engaged in great and
important speculations, which, had they succeeded, would have given us a
princely fortune -- but, having turned out, unfortunately, the reverse, had
left him little above beggary. He added, that he had not the resolution to
communicate his losses to me, until necessity compelled him to tell me all the
truth.

"Although this was a severe shock to me, I endeavored to conceal my feelings
from my father, on whole account, more than on my own, I was affected, and
pretended to make as light of it as so very important a misfortune would
justify; and I had the happiness to perceive that the worthy man took some
comfort from my supposed indifference. I conjured him not to let so very
trivial a thing as the loss of property, which could be repaired, break in on
his peace of mind or health, which could not; and observed to him, that we had
all of us still enough -- for that my private property (which I possessed
independent of him, and which a relation left me) would amply supply all our
necessities.

"Having thus endeavored to accommodate my unhappy father's feelings to his
losses, I had yet to accommodate my own; and began to revolve in my mind what
was likely to ensue from, and what step was most proper to be taken, in this
dreadful change of circumstances. That which lay nearest my heart first
occurred; -- you will readily guess that I mean my love; to involve her I lov^^
(...), far more, than my life, in the misfortunes of my family, was too
horrible a consideration to be outweighed even by the dread of losing her. I
knew not what to do, and I thought upon it till I became almost enfrenzied --
In this state I went to her, and unfolded the whole state of our concerns,
together with my resolution not to involve her in our ruin; -- when -- can you
believe it? -- the lovely girl insisted on making my fate indissolubly here is --
not, as she said, that she had the smallest apprehension lapse of time or
change of circumstance could make an alteration in our affection, but that she
wished to give my mind that repose which I might derive from security. This I
would by no means accede to; and, for the present, we contented ourselves with
mutual vows of eternal fidelity.

"As soon as I thought my father's mind fit for such a conversation, I opened
to him a plan I had formed of coming to India, to advance my fortune. His
understanding approved of it, but his heart dissented; and he said, that to
part with me would give the finishing stroke to his misfortunes; but, as my
interest was tolerably good, I represented to him the great likelihood I had of
success; and at last, with some difficulty, he consented.

"My next step was to acquaint Miss -- with my resolution. I purposely pass
over a meeting which no power of language can describe! -- then how can I? --
Oh! CAMPBELL, the remembrance of it gnaws me like a vulture here," (and he put
his hand upon his heart, while the tears rolled down his cheeks), "and will
soon, soon bring me to my end.

"Not to detain you with vain efforts to describe all our feelings, I will
confine myself to telling you that after having made every necessary
preparation, and divided with my much honored parents the little property I
possessed, I set sail for India, in a state of mind compared with which the
horrors of annihilation would have been enviable: the choas in my thoughts made
me insensible to every object but one; and I brooded with a sort of stupid,
gloomy indulgence, over the portrait of Miss --, which hung round my neck, and
was my inseparable companion, till the people who seized me as I came ashore
plundered me of it, and thereby deprived me of the last refuge for comfort I
had left. Oh! monsters! barbarians! had you glutted your savage fury by
dissevering my limbs, one after another, from my body, it would have been
mercy, compared with depriving me of that little image of her I love! But it is
all over, and I shall soon sink into the grave, and never more be blessed with
the view of those heavenly features, till we meet in that region where all
tears are wiped away, and where, I trust, we shall be joined together for
endless ages, in eternal, never-fading bliss!"

LETTER LII.
ON the day succeeding that on which the agent of HYAT SAHIB had held the
discourse with me, mentioned in my last letter but one, I was again sent for,
and brought to the same person, who asked me, whether I had duly considered of
the important offer made me by HYAT SAHIB, and of the consequences likely to
result from a refusal? and he apprised me at the same time, that the command of
five thousand men was an honor which the first Rajahs in the Mysorean
dominions would grasp at with transport. I told him I was well convinced of the
honor such a command would confer on any man but an Englishman, whose country
being the object of HYDER'S incessant hostility, would make the acceptance of
it infamy -- that although I knew there were but too many Englishmen apostates
to their country, I hoped there were but few to be found in India willing to
accept of any emoluments, however great, or any temptations, however specious,
to fly from the standard of their country, and rally round that of its
bitterest enemy -- that, for my own part, being of a name ever foremost in the
ranks of loyalty and patriotism, and of a family that had hitherto detracted
nothing from the honors of that name, such an act of apostasy would be
peculiarly infamous in me, and I could view it in no better light than
traitorous and parricidal -- that, independent of all those claims, which were
of themselves sufficient to deter me, I felt within myself a principle, perhaps
innate, perhaps inspired by military habit, that forbade my acceding -- and,
finally, appealed to the good sense of HYAT SAHIB, whether a man who in such
circumstances had betrayed his country, and sacrificed her interests to his own
convenience, was such a person as confidence could properly be put in.

Notwithstanding these, and a thousand other remonstrances, which I cannot
immediately recollect, but which the hazards of my situation suggested, he
still continued to press me, and used every argument, every persuasion, that
ingenuity could dictate, or hints of punishment enforce, to shake my purpose --
but in vain: attachment to country and family rose paramount to all other
considerations; and I gave a peremptory, decisive refusal.

Circumstanced as I was, it was impossible for me to keep an accurate journal
of the various incidents that p^^^ed, or vicissitudes of thought that occurred,
^uring the period of my imprisonment. Indeed, I was scarcely conscious of the
length of my captivity, and could not, till I was released, determine exactly
how long it had continued. You must therefore content yourself to be told in
general terms, that I was repeatedly urged on the subject by fair persuasives:
they then had recourse to menace; then they withheld the daily pittance allowed
for my support; and at length proceeded to coercion, tying a rope round my
neck, and hoisting me up to a tree. All this, however, I bore firmly: if it had
any effect, it was to confirm me in my resolution, and call in policy to the
aid of honor's dictates. Every man of feeling or reason must allow, that it
was better to die, than live a life of subjection to tyranny so truly
diabolical.

Mr. HALL and I, thus drove to the brink of extinction, yet consoled ourselves
with the reflection, that those whom most we loved were not sharing our unhappy
fate, and were fortunately ignorant of our sufferings; and as I enjoyed perfect
good health, hope yet lived within me.

There is a spring, an elasticity, in every man's mind, of which the owner is
rarely, very rarely conscious, because fortunately the occasions seldom occur
in which it can be brought to the proof, for, as lassitude is the necessary
forerunner of refreshment, so is extreme dejection to the most vigorous
exereise of our fortitude. So I found it: as the horrors of my situation
thickened round me, I felt my spirits increase; my resolution became more firm,
my hopes more sanguine -- I even began to look forward, and form projects for
the future: whole hours amusement, every day and every night, arose from the
contemplation of my beloved boy; I in imagination traced his growth, directed
his rising sentiments, formed plans for his future success and prosperity, and
indulged by anticipation in all the enjoyment which I now trust I shall yet
have in his ripened manhood.

Thus we continued for many months, during which no alteration whatsoever took
place in our treatment or situation. We heard a thousand contradictory reports
of victories gained over the English, and again of some successes on their
part: they, however, desisted to press me into then service. The only relief
from our sufferings lay in the resources of our own minds, and in our mutual
endeavors to please and console one another: the circumstances of aggravation
were the necessity of daily bearing witness to the most barbarous punishments
he inflicted upon wretched individuals under the semblance of justice, and the
occasional deprivation of our food, either by the fraud of the sepoys who
attended us, or the caprice or cruelty of their superiors. It is but justice,
however, to say, that they were not all alike: some overflowed with mercy,
charity, and the milk of human kindness; while others, again, were almost as
bad men as the sovereigns they served. We were not allowed the use of pen, ink,
or paper; and very seldom could afford ourselves the luxury of shaving, or
clean linen: nor were we at all sheltered from the inclemency of the weather,
till at length a little room was built for us of mud, which being small and
damp, rendered our situation worse than it was before.

The prisoner whom I have already mentioned, as having, in the time of the
former sovereign, held the first office in Bidanore, still continued opposite
to me; and he and I at length began to understand each other, and found means,
by looks, signs and gestures, to exchange thoughts, and hold an intercourse of
sentiments together. From the circumstance of his being a native, and better
skilled in the language than me, he had much better intelligence than I could
possibly have, and he was always eager to convey to me any circumstance or news
that he thought might be agreeable: some messages also passed between us, by
means of the sepoys who had alternately been his guard and mine -- for our
guards were changed every week.

Projects and hopes of a new kind now began to intrude themselves on my
thoughts; and I conceived a design, which I flattered myself was not entirely
impracticable to effect an escape, and even a revolt in the place. A variety of
circumstances concurred to persuade me, that the tyranny of HYDER, and his
servant HYAT SAHIB, was abhorred, though none dared to give vent to their
sentiments. I thought I could observe, that the native prisoner opposite to me
was privately beloved, and might, from the recollection of his former
dignities, have considerable influence in the place. Several Arcot sepoys and
their officers (some of them belonging to my own regiment) were also prisoners
at large; and withal I recollected, that difficulties apparently more
stupendous had been overcome by Englishmen -- having often heard it asserted,
that there was not a prison in the known world out of which a British subject
had not made his escape.

Fraught with those conceptions, I attempted to sound the officers of the Arcot
Sepoys, whether it were not possible for us to effect our escape? So ardent is
the flame of liberty in all men's breasts, so great is the detestation of human
nature to slavery, that I perceived a manifest willingness in the people about
us to join me in an attempt to procure our liberty, or bring about a revolt in
the garrison. My heart beat high with the hope; and I began to flatter myself,
that, the day was not far removed when we should not only bid defiance to our
tyrants, but even make them repent the day on which we were cast ashore on
their coast.

Having thus distantly sounded all who I thought were likely to concur, upon
the practicability of the attempt, and found them, as I conceived, disposed to
take share in it, it yet remained to consider of the quomodo -- and, after
having formed the general outlines of a plan, to lick it into shape. The first
of these was a critical consideration: the second required address and
management, and was likely to be impeded by the vigilance of the people about,
who would not fail to remark, and take the alarm, from any unusual intercourse
or discourse between us; and without a mutual communication of thoughts, and
full deliberation by all parties concerned, as well as knowledge of the fort
and its different gates, nothing could, with any prospect of success, be
determined -- nothing, without the most imminent hazard, be attempted. I
therefore held various councils with my own mind, and with Mr. HALL, on the
subject -- most of which were abortive, without at all discouraging us.

At last I began to think of sounding the Bidanore prisoner, ci-devant governor
of the place; and determined, if possible, to bring him into our consultations,
as I had before hoped to make him a party in the execution of the project: but
while I was settling all this much to my own satisfaction, an event occured
which extinguished all my hopes in that way -- of which you shall have an
account in my next letter.

LETTER LIII.
WHETHER the plan which I mentioned in my last was discovered or not, or from
what other motive it arose, I have not to this day been able to decide; but so
it was, that while my sanguine mind was overflowing with the hope of carrying
my project for an escape into effect, Mr. HALL and I were one day unexpectedly
loaded with irons, and fastened together, leg by leg, by one bolt. This, as
nearly as I can compute, was four or five mouths before my release. Of all the
circumstances of my life, it has made the strongest impression upon my mind: it
unexpectedly and suddenly broke down the most pleasing fabric my imagination
had ever built. The surprise occasioned by the appearance of the irons, and the
precautionary manner in which it was undertaken, was indeed great: still more
was I surprised to observe, that the person who was employed to see this put in
execution, manifested unusual emotions, seemed much affected, and even shed
tears as he looked on: and while the suddenness and cautionary mode of doing it
convinced me that some resistance on our part was apprehended, the sorrow which
the officer who superintended it disclosed, portended in my mind a fatal, or at
least a very serious issue.

Unfortunately, poor Mr. HALL had for some time been afflicted with a return of
his dreadful disorder, the dysentery; and our being shackled together increased
an unconquerable mortification of feelings which we had before undergone, from
a delicacy of nature that would have done honor to the most modest virgin, be
her sensibility ever so exquisite, or her delicacy ever so extreme -- And here,
my dear FREDERICK! I cannot let slip this opportunity of remarking to you, that
the man, as well as the woman, who would render himself truly amiable in the
eyes of his fellow creatures, should cultivate delicacy and modesty, as the
most captivating of all the moral virtues: from them, heroism derives
additional luster -- wit, ten-fold force -- religion and morality, the charms
of persuasion -- and every personal action of the man, irresistible dignity and
winning grace. From this unlucky event, I received a temporary depression; and
the rapidly increasing illness of poor HALL rendered my situation more than
ever calamitous; when, again, my spirits, eagerly prone to grasp at every thing
that gave a momentary hope of support, were a little recruited by confused
rumors of the English army having made a descent on the Malabar coast: and so
powerful is the influence of mind on the animal system, that Mr. HALL enjoyed
from the report a momentary alleviation of his malady; but, having no medical
assistance, nor even sufficient sustenance to further the favorable operations
of nature, he relapsed again; the disease fell upon him with redoubled fury: a
very scanty portion of boiled rice, with a more scanty morsel of stinking salt
fish or putrid flesh, was a very inadequate support for me, who, though
emaciated, was in health -- and very improper medicine for a person laboring
under a malady such as Mr. HALL'S, which required comfort, good medical skill,
and delicate nutritious food. The tea which HYAT SAHIB had given me was
expended; and we were not allowed to be shaved from the hour we were put in
irons, an indulgence of that kind being forbidden by the barbarous rules of the
prison: and, to refine upon our tortures sleep, "the balm of hurt minds," was
not allowed us uninterrupted; for, in conformity to another regulation, we were
disturbed every half hour by a noise something resembling a watchman's rattle,
and a fellow who, striking every part of our irons with a kind of hammer, and
examining them lest they should be cut, broke in upon that kind restorative,
and awoke our souls to fresh horrors.

As it must be much more naturally matter of astonishment that any bodily
strength could support itself under such complicated calamities, than that
infirmity should sink beneath them, you will be rather grieved than surprised
to hear that poor Mr. HALL was now app^oaching to his end with ho^^ly
accelerated steps. Every application that I made in his favor was refused, or
rather treated with cruel neglect and contemptuous silence; and I foresaw, with
inexpressible anguish and indignation, that the barbarians would not abate him
in his last minutes one jot of misery, and that my most amiable friend was
fated to expire under every attendant horror that mere sublunary circumstances
could create. But that pity which the mighty, the powerful and enlightened
denied, natural benevolence operating upon an uninformed mind, and scanty
means, afforded us. HYAT SAHIB, the powerful, the wealthy, the governor of a
great opulent province, refused to an expiring fellow creature a little cheap
relief -- while a poor sepoy taxed his little means to supply it: one who
guarded us, of his own accord, at hazard of imminent punishment, purched us a
lamp and a little oil, which we burned for the last few nights.

Philosophers and divines have declaimed upon the advantages of a well-spent
life, as felt in articulo mortis; and their efforts have had, I hope, some
effect upon the lives of many. To witness one example such as Mr. HALL held
forth, would be worth volumes of precepts on this subject. The unfeigned
resignation with which he met his dissolution, and the majestic fortitude with
which he looked in the face the various circumstances of horror that surrounded
him, rendered him the most dignified object I ever beheld or conceived, and the
most glorious instance of conscious virtue triumphing over the terrors of
death, and the cunning barbarity of mankind. Were the progress of virtue
attended with pain, and the practice of vice with pleasure, the adoption of the
former would be amply repaid by its soothings in the dreadful moment, even if
it were to accompany us no further. About a quarter of an hour before he died,
Mr. HALL broached a most tender subject of conversation, which he followed up
with a series of observations, so truly refined, so exquisitely turned, so
delicate and so pathetic, that it seemed almost the language of inspiration, as
if, in proportion to the decay of the body, intellect increased, and the dying
man had become all mind. Such a conversation I never remembered to have heard,
or heard of. Its effects upon me were wonderful; for, though the combination of
melancholy circumstances attending my now critical situation had almost raised
my mind to frenzy, the salutary influence of his words and example controuled
the excesses of my sensations; and I met the afflicting moment of his departure
with a degree of tranquillity, which, though not to be compared to his, has on
reflection appeared to me astonishing. This conversation continued to the very
instant of his death; during which time he held my hand clasped in his,
frequently enforcing his kind expressions to me with a squeeze -- while my
sorrow, taking its most easy channel, bedewed my face with tears. As he
proceeded, my voice was choked with my feelings; and I attempted once or twice
in vain to spe^k. H^s hand grew cold: he said his lower (...) were all
lifeless, and that he felt death coming ov^r him with slow creeping steps -- He
again moralized, thanking GOD with pathetic fervor for his great mercy in
leavi^g him his intellects unclouded, and the organ of communication (the
tongue) unenfeebled, that, to the last, he might solace his friend and
fellow-sufferer -- "Ah! CAMPBELL!" continued he, "to what a series of miseries
am I now leaving you! death in such circumstances is a blessing -- I view mine
as such; and should think it more so, if it contributed, by awakening those
people to a sense of their cruelty, to soften their rigor to you: but cruelty
like their's is systematic, and stoops not to the control of the feelings.
Could I hope that you would yet escape from their clutches, and that you would
once more press your family to your bosom, the thought would brighten still the
moment of our separation: and, oh! my friend! could I still further hope that
you would one day see my most beloved and honored parents, and tell them of my
death without wringing their hearts with its horrid circumstances, offer them
my last duties, and tell how I revered them -- If, too, you could see my --,
and tell her how far, far more dear than --!" Here he turned his eyes toward
the lamp, then faintly on me -- made a convulsive effort to squeeze my hand --
cried out, "CAMPBELL! oh, CAMPBELL! the lamp is going out!" and expired without
a groan.

The recital of this afflicting event has called up to my fancy so lively a
picture of the scene as it passed with all its horrors -- horrors which
outstrip all efforts of description, and baffle all power of language -- that
my feelings are in part renewed, and I find myself incapable of proceeding
further at present.

LETTER LIVE.
FOR some time I was lost in grief for the death of Mr. HALL. Though I had long
expected it, and might consequently be supposed to have wasted great part of my
sorrow in anticipation; yet, having only considered and felt the point before
his death merely as it respected him and his misfortunes, a great portion of
the calamity yet remained unconceived: and, now that he was dead, I began for
the first time to consider and feel the subject as it concerned myself.
Reflection told me, that he was happily relieved from woe, and in a state of
bliss -- "After life's fitful fever, he sleeps well:
" -- Nor steel nor poison,
"Malice domestic, foreign levy -- nothing
"Can touch him further!"


But I still remained a prey to perhaps new barbarities, without hope of relief
from the old. No partner to share, no social converse to alleviate, no friend
to console me under my afflictions, I looked at the body of my friend with
envy, and lamented that death had not afforded me, too, a shelter from the
cruelties which fate seemed determined to heap upon me.

It is impossible for me to express to you the agonies of mind I underwent
during the rest of the night. In the morning a report was made to the
commandant, of the death of Mr. HALL; and in about an hour after, he passed me
by, but kept his face purposely turned away from me to the other side. I
patiently waited for the removal of the dead body till the evening, when I
desired the Sepoys who guarded me to apply for its being removed. They
returned, and told me that they could get no answer respecting it. Night came
on, but there was no appearance of an intention to unfetter me from the corpse.
The commandant was sitting in his court, administering, in the manner I have
before described, justice! I called out to him myself with all my might, but
could get no answer from him. Nothing could equal my rage and consternation;
for, exclusive of the painful idea of being shackled to the dead body of a
friend I loved, another circumstance contributed to make it a serious subject
of horror. In those ciimates the weather is so intensely hot, that putrefaction
almost instantly succeeds death, and meat that is killed in the morning, and
kept in the shade, will be unfit for dressing at night. In a subject, then, on
which putrefaction had made advances even before death, and which remained
exposed to the open air, the process must have been much more rapid. So far,
however, from compassionating my situation, or indulging me by a removal of the
body, their barbarity suggested to them to make it an instrument of punishment;
and they pertinaciously adhered to the most mortifying silence and disregard of
my complaints. For several days and nights it remained attached to me by the
irons. I grew almost distracted -- wished for the means of putting an end to my
miseries by death, and could not move without witnessing some new stage of
putrescence it attained, or breathe without inhaling the putrid effluvia that
arose from it -- while myriads of flies and loathsome insects rested on it, the
former of which every now and then visited me, crawling over my face and hands,
and lighting in hundreds on my victuals. I never look back at this crisis
without confusion, horror, and even astonishment; and, were it not connected
with a chain of events preceding and subsequent to it, too well known by
respectable people to be doubted, and too much interwoven with a part of the
history of the last war in India to admit of a doubt, I should not only be
afraid to tell, but absolutely doubt myself whether the whole was not the
illusion of a dream, rather than credit the possibility of my enduring such
unheard of hardships without loss of life or deprivation of senses.

At last, when the body had reached that shocking loathsome state of
putrefaction which threatened that further delay would render removal
abominable, if not impossible, the monsters agreed to take it away from me --
and I was so far relieved: but the mortification and injury I underwent from
it, joined to the agitation of the preceding week, made a visible inroad on my
health. I totally lost my spirits; my appetite entirely forsook me: my
long-nourished hopes fled; and I looked forward to death as the only desirable
event that was within the verge of likelihood or possibility.

One day, my opposite friend (the native prisoner) gave me a look of the most
interesting and encouraging kind; and I perceived a more than usual bustle in
the citadel, while the sepoys informed me that they were ordered on immediate
service, and that some events of great importance had taken place. From this
feeble gleam, my mind, naturally active, though depressed by circumstances of
unusual weight, again took fire, and hope brightened with a kind of gloomy
light the prospect before me: I revolved a thousand things, and drew from them
a thousand surmises; but all as yet was only conjecture with me. In a day or
two, the bustle increased to a high pitch, accompanied with marks of
consternation: the whole of the troops in the citadel were ordered to march;
and the commandant, and a man with a hammar and instruments, came to take off
my irons.

While they were at work taking off my irons, I perceived they were taking off
those of the native prisoner opposite to me also. He went away under a guard:
we looked at each other complacently, nodded and smiled, as who should say, "we
hope to see one another in happier times not far distant." But, alas! vain are
human hopes, and short and dark is the extent of our utmost foresight! This
unhappy man, without committing any sort of offense to merit it, but in
conformity to the damnable, barbarous pol^ly of those countries, was, by the
Jemadar's orders, taken forth, and his throat cut! This the Jemadar himself
afterward acknowledged to me -- and, what was still more abominable if
possible, undertook to justify the proceeding upon the principles of reason,
sound sense, and precedent of Asiatic policy.

In order to elucidate the whole of this business, it is necessary for me to
recur to events which happened antecedent to this time, but of which, by reason
of my situation, I was then entirely ignorant; and as they involve, not only
the grounds of my subsequent escape and proceedings, but a considerable portion
of historical fact, and some of the material interests of the East India
Company, I will be the more particularly careful in relating them, and desire
from you a proportionate share of attention -- But their importance entitle
them to a separate letter: therefore conclude with assuring you, etc. etc.

LETTER LV.
HYDER ALLI KHAWN, late Nabob of Mysore, and father to the present TIPPO SAHIB
SULTAIN, was as extraordinary a man, and perhaps possessed as great natural
talents, as any recorded in the page of history. Born and bred up in the lowest
ranks of an unenlightened and ignorant people, and to the last day of his life
perfectly illiterate, he not only emerged from his native obscurity by the
vigor of his mind and body, but became an object of terror and admiration to
surrounding potentates. Early initiated in the habits and inured to the toils
of a military life, he rose, by the gradual steps of promotion, to a rank which
afforded an opportunity of displaying his capacity and prowess: he soon
obtained the command of that army in which he had once served as a common
soldier, and immediately demonstrated that the sublimity of his mind was formed
to keep pace with his extraordinary elevation.

The Marhattas, the most formidable people in Hither India, bordered on the
Mysorean dominions, and kept their neighbors, by frequent hostilities, in a
continual state of awe -- making incursions on their territories, and taking
possession, by force of arms, of large portions of their country: but no sooner
had HYDER got the command of the armies of his country, than he drove back the
Marhattas from the Mysorean dominions, which he extended by considerable
acquisitions from the Marhatta frontiers; and followed up his conquests with
such successful ardour, that he compelled that warlike nation to respect his
countrymen as their equals, if not superiors, in military achievement. Thus,
while he ingratiated himself with his sovereign and fellow-citizens by his
wisdom, he acquired the admiration of the soldiery by his personal address and
valor; and at the same time, by the severity of his decipline, and the
occasional austerity of his deportmet, maintained an awe over them, which
strengthened his authority with diminishing their affection.

HYDER was therefore now arrived at that point of elevation, beyond which no
exertion of mental capacity, if governed by virtue or integrity, could raise
him -- So far he owed all to guenius: but his towering ambition looked higher;
and, unrestrained by any principle of religion or morality, he determined to
accomplish, at any rate, that which he knew nothing but crime could accomplish.
With wicked deliberation he looked forward into the womb of time, and with
unparalleled policy arranged the whole system upon which he was to act, when
that order of things his penetrating and intuitive genius enabled him to see
would naturally arise from each other, should afford him a proper opportunity.
Although he was utterly ignorant of books, and of course could derive little
benefit from the examples of the great and ambitious men recorded in history,
yet, drawing upon the infinite resources of his own mind for information, he
adopted the very same means of furthering his views; and foreseeing, that, with
an immense army devoted to his interests, few things would be unattainable, he
applied himself diligently to model and form that of the KING of MYSORE to the
greatest perfection in discipline, and to render it attached to his person, and
subservient to his views, by a skilful mixture of severity and relaxation, toil
and reward, danger and applause, which none but a master-hand like his was
capable of exactly compounding.

The death of his sovereign the KING of MYSORE at length afforded him the
opportunity to which he had so long, and with so prophetic an eye, looked
forward -- and gave him ample room for self gratulation on the score of his
sagacity and prudence.

The heir in succession to the throne being then an infant, the politic HYDER,
setting aside all claims of the kindred of the young prince, took upon himself
the guardianship -- under the title of Regent assumed the supreme authority --
and, though too well aware of the inviolable attachment of the people to their
lawful monarch to put him directly to death, usurped the throne, and consigned
him to imprisonment in Seringapatam, the capital of the Mysorean dominions.

Having thus, by his talents, acquired the possession of the throne, he gave a
large range to the sublimity of his views, and soon displayed the exhaustless
resources of his mind in the new office of Governor and Legislator -- forming
such vast well-ordered military establishments, and such judicious and salutary
civil institutions, as made him blaze forth at once the terror of his
neighbors, and rendered him, in the sequel, the most powerful and formidable
potentate in the Hither Peninsula. In carrying on those, his deficiency in
letters was supplied by his vigilance and sagacity, sharpened by suspicion:
three secretaries executed all his orders in separate apartments: and if, on
comparison, they were found to differ, he who committed the error received
sentence of death. His natural cruelty made him take the execution of their
sentence upon himself not unfrequently: to slice off a head with his own hand,
or see it done by others, was a luxurious recreation to the sanguinary HYDER.

The natural sagacity of this great man suggested, that in order to accomplish
the extensive objects which his active and ambitious temper held up to his
imagination, the introduction of the most perfect military discipline was above
all other things necessary; and his judgment informed him that the European was
the best. He therefore held out the most tempting allurements to military
adventures, and particularly to those, whether black or white, who had been
trained in the service of the English East India company: he sent emissaries,
for the purpose, to all parts of India, with instructions to offer great
rewards; and carried this design so far, that whenever accident or war threw
persons of that description into his hands, he never failed to detain them,
and, if they refused to enter into his service, treat them with the most
unpardonable rigor and barbarity; and by these means brought his army to a
state of perfection till then unknown to a black power. He did not stop there,
but determined to establish a navy -- by large offers allured many
ship-carpenters and artizans from Bombay -- made no inconsiderable progress in
constructing dock-yards, and had actually equiped some ships (...) the line,
besides frigates, fitted to encounter European seas. Indeed, he seemed to have
carried his views of conquest even to the Polar regions; for it is a fact, that
he directed his people, in constructing those vessels, to fit them for
encountering seas of ice, or, as he called it, the thick water.

To a man of such ardent ambition and deep penetration, the vast power which
the English East India company had acquired, and were daily acquiring, in the
East, could not fail to be an object of jealousy. He conceived a deadly and
implacable animosity to the British Nation, which influenced his whole
succeeding life, ended only with his death, and was then transmitted to his son
TIPPOO SAHIB, with the exaction of a solemn oath, ever to retain those
sentiments.

A coincidence of circumstances, which has seldom occured in the fortunes of
men, tended, at a lucky crisis, to further the bold projects of HYDER; and
neither fortune, though extremely propitious to him, nor his own unbounded
talents and energetic spirit, favored the execution of them, more than the
bungling politics, the ludicrous ambition, and the consequent unjust fiable
proceedings, of one of our Pro^^^encies in India -- I mean Bombay. Fortunately,
the wisdom and moderation of our East India councils at this day, vindicate the
wounded character of the British nation, and justify me in the remarks I make.

An ambitious and profligate chief of the Marhatta Tribes -- his name RAGANAUT
ROW -- had been deposed by the wise men of his country, for having murdered his
nephew, in order to usurp the throne of Setterah. He fled to Bombay, and, by
specious promises and other means, prevailed on that Presidency to afford him
an asylum, and finally to take up arms in his defense against the united
Marhatta States, who at the very time were able to raise an army of three
hundred thousand fighting men. Hostilities were first commenced by the English;
and by them peace was first proposed. The treaty of Poonah was made, by which
it was provided that RAGANAUT ROW would quit Bombay; and by the English the
provisions of that treaty were broken -- for, in direct violation of it
RAGANAUT was kept at Bombay. This breach of the treaty led to another; for this
crafty and unprincipled chief made use of it with such address as to persuade
that Presidency to attack the Marhattas again: -- by magnifying the power of
his party among his countrymen, he prevailed upon them once more to assert his
rights; and the Presidency of Calcutta, I am afraid, were induced to join that
of Bombay in the plan.

It happened unfortunately, that at this time the Presidency of Bombay was
composed of persons the most unqualified, probably, that could be found in any
community for offices of such importance. One, particularly, was allowed, by
the almost unanimous consent of those who knew his private or public character,
to be ignorant, not only of the first principles of government, but of the
ordinary knowledge requisite for a gentleman; and for situations of moment he
was peculiarly disqualified by a fondness for minutiae, to which he paid more
attention than to matters of greater consequence. A temper and intellect of
this kind were rendered still more incapable of the enlarged views any
Representative of a great Nation in a distant colony should possess, by a
mercantile education and habits, which narrowed even his circumscribed mind,
and left him not a sentiment, not an idea, that was not merely commercial. The
administration of such men was exactly what might have been expected; and,
instead of asserting the dignity of Great Britain, or promoting the advantage
of their employers -- narrow policy, selfish views, and efforts arising from
mistaken notions of conquest, made the whole tissue of their conduct in India.

Blinded by the plausible insinuations of RAGANAUT, and stimulated, as I have
already observed, by a lust for conquest, which would have been unjustifiable
even in an hereditary despot, but which were peculiarly vicious and ridiculous
in a body of merchants who were themselves subjects, the East India company's
servants again determined to support, by force of arms, that most atrocious
murderer: and with the contemptibly inadequate force of four ^housand men,
encumbered with an unwieldy train of baggage and servants for the accommodation
of finikin voluptuous officers, and led by two doughty compting-house champions
(CARNAC and MOSTYN), with colonel EGERTON as military assistant rather than
commander, they set out, to encounter the whole torrent of the Marhatta force,
and conduct RAGANAUT to Poonah.

Had RAGANAUT advanced at the head of his own partisans only, the chiefs of the
Marhatta Nation might possibly have taken different sides of the question, and
left between them a breach for his arms or intrigues to make an entrance fatal
to the general cause of the country: but the assaults of a foreign army -- an
army of interested peculating strangers, as the company's troops then were --
an army of avowed natural enemies, professing a different religion,
entertaining different political principles, and formed by nature of a
different complexion -- roused and united them in one common cause, and
compressed discordant interests, which had been for time immemorial at
irreconcilable variance, into one compact body of resistance, which, as it
became more firm from the strokes of hostility, could not, in the nature of
things, be subdued; in the same manner as the unjustifiable confederacy of
kings against France lately united all the conflicting parties of that country
-- converted twenty-seven millions of people, male and female, into one compact
armed force -- rendered them not only invincible at home, but terrible abroad
-- and finally, has enabled them to bestride, Colossus like, the universe.

LETTER LVI.
THE approach of the British troops with RAGANAUT caused great alarm at Poonah;
and the ministers there sent to offer terms, which were contemptuously
rejected. They then determined to save, by prowess, those rights which they
could not preserve by justice or negotiation -- and took the field with such
great force, that their menacing enemies found it expedient to consider of a
retreat. The faithful RAGANAUT, finding his plans baffled, sent privately to
SCINDIAH, the Marhatta chief, proposing to him to attack the English, and
promising in that case to join him with his part of the army: his perfidy,
however, being discovered, the English commanders began to retreat, carrying
him along with them. They were, however, surrounded, and reduced to make the
most abject concessions -- offering a carte-blanche to SCINDIAH as the price of
a retreat: but that august chief nobly disdained to take advantage of their
situation, and contented himself with terms which justice should have ex^cted
from them, even if necessity had not compelled their acceptance. The
restoration of Salsette, and of the other conquests made by the company's
troops during the preceding hostilities, and the delivery of RAGANAUT'S person
into the hands of the Marhattas, were among the prov^sions. RAGANAUT was
delivered up: two he^itag^s were taken for the remaining part of the treaty,
and the harrassed remains of the English army were permitted to return to
Bombay.

RAGANAUT having found means to escape, reached S^^a^; and the company's chiefs
refused to comply with the provisions of the treaty: notwithstanding which, the
noble Marhatta dismissed the hostages, and prepared for a more manly revenge
than that which could be wreaked on two defenseless individuals. General
GODDART, who had been sent with an army from Bengal, was commissioned to
negociate for a pacification: but SCINDIAH making the delivery of RAGANAUT into
his hands an indispensable preliminary, the negotiation was broken off, and
both parties determined to refer the controversy to the decision of the sword.

Every thing seemed to conspire to chastise the rashness and folly of our
Indian councils. The difficulties in which our American contest had involved
the nation, were reported with exaggeration in India, and gave additional
firmness to our enemies in that quarter. The restless and intriguing spirit of
the court of Versailles found its way with Monsieur ST. LUBIN to the shores of
Indostan, and so powerfully worked upon the mind of HYDER, that he entered into
a treaty with France against England, and brought the strength of both into the
most formidable combination that ever was made in that country, to root out the
power of Great Britain from the East.

Thus, by the depraved politics of the councils of a petty settlement, were the
important interests of Great Britain in India, and the lives and properties of
all its servants in that quarter, at once exposed to the fury of three
formidable hostile powers -- the Marhattas, HYDER and the French.

I will not entangle my narrative with a detail of the various military
operations which arose from this confederacy: they were in general disastrous
to the English, whose power there was preserved from utter annihilation by the
energetic councils of Mr. HASTINGS, the unexampled courage of our troops, and
the unparalleled abilities and gallantry of the veteran Sir AIR COOTE. That
part which applies to my present narrative, is the only part I think it
necessary to detail; but I wish you to inform yourself of all of them fully, by
an attentive perusal of the different histories of that war.

In order to relieve the Carnatic, which was suffering under the ravages of a
formidable victorious army, who had not only cut off a great part of our forces
on that coast, but affronted our army even at the walls of Fort St. George,
descents upon the coasts of Malabar were planned, in order to make a diversion:
and General MATHEWS, in January 1783, landed with a small army under his
command, at a place called Rajamondroog -- took Onore, and several forts: and
being joined by other troops, which, under the command of Colonel HUMBERTSON,
had done considerable service to the southward, and were now commanded by
Colonel MACLEOD, marched from Cundapore, with an army consisting of twelve
hundred Europeans and eight battalions of Sepoys, toward Huff^ingurry Ghaut, a
pass that leads over these immense mountains which divide the peninsula,
running north and south from Persia to Cape Comorin. After surmounting
obstacles that would have discouraged a less enterprising commander, and for
which I refer you to his own letter, enclosed herewith, See Appendix
he mounted the Ghaut, carrying every thing before him with the fixed bayonet;
and reached within a short march of Hydernagur, the place where I was confined.
Those operations were undoubtedly much facilitated by the death of HYDER ALLI,
which happened while I was in prison, and which drew the at^ention of TIPPOO
SAHIB to affairs of more immediate importance than the defense of the Malabar
forts.

I have thus digressed from the straight path of my narrative, in order to
explain to you the occasion of the extraordinary revolution that so suddenly
took place in the fort, which I stated to you in my last letter but one -- You
will therefore look back to the conclusion of that letter, from whence I again
take up my narrative.

I was utterly at a loss to conjecture what this so sudden resolution to
release me and my opposite fellow-prisoner meant. I endeavored to get some
explanation of it from the persons about me; but all I could at the time
collect was, that the Jemadar had directed me to be taken out of irons, and
ordered me to appear before him. I walked out of the citadel with two or three
men who had got charge of me: it was a delightful afternoon; and my sensations
on once more visiting the open air -- at again viewing the vast expanse of the
firmament above, and the profusion of beauties with which nature embellished
the earth beneath -- were too blissful, too sublime for description. My heart
beat with involuntary transports of gratitude to that Being from which all
sprung; and I felt that man is, in his nature, even without the intervention of
his reason, a being of devotion. For an hour of such delight as I then
experienced, a year of imprisonment was, I thought, hardly too dear a price.
Those exquisite sensations insensibly led my heart to the most flattering
presages; the animal spirit appeared to have, in correspondence with the body,
shaken off a load of chains; and as I walked along, I seemed to tread on air.

As we proceeded forward, we found, at some distance from the fort, an open
dooly, into which the guards forcibly crammed me; and I was carried off, still
attended by the same men. As we went along, they gave me to understand that
HYAT SAHIB, the Jemadar, was at a place ten or a dozen miles distant from
Bidanore. I thought it within myself a most extraordinary circumstance, and was
at a loss to conjecture for what purpose he required my presence there.
Perhaps, thought I, it is to deliver me personally into the hands of TIPPOO --
perhaps to send me to Seringapatam. Suspense whetted my curiosity; and
impatience to know my fate, set my mind afloat upon a wide sea of conjecture.
Still, however, my senses acknowledged a degree of pleasure indescribable -- I
inhaled the fresh air with greediness, and, as I snuffed it in, said to myself,
"Well, well -- at the worst, this will enliven my spirits, and lay up a new
stock of health and vigor, to enable me to endure with manhood whatever other
sufferings the barbarians, into whose hands I have fallen, may have in store
for me."

When we had got about a mile from the fort, we met a person attended by three
others, all on horseback. He was a man of considerable rank in that country,
and I recollected to have seen him at the Jemadar's Durbar, where he had
manifested a favorable disposition toward me, looking always graciously, and
nodding to me, which, considering my circumstances and his, was not a little
extraordinary. The moment he recognized me, he leaped from his horse,
apparently in great agitation: then turning to the guards, ordered them to
leave me immediately -- saying at the same time that he would be answerable for
the consequences. They seemed at first to hesitate whether they would obey him
or not; but on his shaking at them his sword, which was all along drawn in his
hand, and smeared with blood, and repeating his orders a second time in a firm
and decisive tone of voice and manner, they all ran off.

As soon as we were alone, he revealed to me, that he had all along known who I
was -- had most heartily pitied my sufferings, and privately entertained the
most anxious wishes to serve me, but could not venture to interfere -- the
least jealousy, when once awakened, being there always followed up by summary
vengeance. He then mentioned his name, informing me that he was the son of a
Nabob near Vellore, whose dominions had been wrested from him by force, and
united to the Carnatic; that his family had received great favors from my
father, in return for which he felt himself bound to do me every service in his
power; but that, having been, after the misfortunes which befell his family,
taken into the service of HYDER, and holding then a place of consequence under
him, he was disqualified from demonstrating his gratitude and esteem in the way
he wished; he added, he had just come from the summit of the Ghauts, where he
left the English army posted, after their having beat the Circar troops, and
carried all the strong works which had been erected for the defense of the
passes, and were deemed from their situation impregnable; that the Jemadar,
HYAT SAHIB, had gone there to encourage the troops, and animate them to one
grand effort of resistance, and would remain there till the succeeding day --
Here he stopped, and seemed much agitated; but recovering himself soon, said,
in a ^olemn and alarming manner, "This day I heard HYAT SAHIB give orders to
bring you before him, in order that he might satiate his revenge by your death!
How happy am I in having an opportunity to rescue you! I will carry you back
with me, therefore, to Bidanore, and place you in a state of security with my
family."

LETTER LVII.
SUCH unprecedented generosity affected me sensibly. To run such a hazard as he
must have incurred, merely from a principle of gratitude for services so remote
in both time and person, was more than we could hope to find even among
Englishmen, who boast of their superior justice and generosity -- but in a
native of Indostan, where the tide of human feeling runs rather low, was
astonishing. As well as my limited knowledge of the language of the country
enabled me, I endeavored to make him a suitable acknowledgement: in such a
cause, dullness must have become eloquent: and I lamented that my deficiency in
the language prevented my giving vent to the extreme fullness of my heart. He
seemed, however, to be satisfied with my meaning; and I was just on the point
of returning with him to Hydernagur, when we were suddenly startled by the
Jemadar's music, which was soon afterward succeeded by the appearance of his
guards advancing toward us at some distance. He seemed confounded and alarmed
-- lamented, in warm terms, his incapacity to serve me -- and, pointed to a
path which wound through a wood that lay on either side of the road, directed
me to strike into it immediately, saying, that by following that route, I
should certainly fall in with the British army. He then rode away, and I
followed his advice, and proceeded for some time through the wood without
interruption; for, though I did not implicitly believe the assertion that HYAT
SAHIB meant to have cut me off, I deemed it prudent to avail myself of the
opportunity which offered to effect my escape, apprehending a worse fate than
death, namely, being sent prisoner to Seringapatam.

Finding myself fairly extricated, I began to examine my situation, and to
reflect on the different conversations which had passed between HYAT SAHIB and
me, and on his conduct previous to my being put in irons. I recollected the
information I had from time to time received, touching the Jemadar's
disposition, HYDER'S death, TIPPOO SAHIB'S character and avowed hatred of HYAT,
and the nature of the inhabitants. I moreover took into consideration, that my
strength was impaired, and my constitution undermined; and that my prospects in
India, in point of same or emolument, could only be promoted by some
extraordinary exertion, or some hazardous enterprise. The result of the whole
was a determination on my part to return back to the fort, and venture an
attempt to persuade the Jemadar to offer proposals for an accommodation to
General MATHEWS, and to make me the instrument of his negotiation.

In pursuance of this determination, I returned; and about six o'clock in the
evening re-entered the fort, and proceeded to the palace of the Jemadar, where,
desi^ing an audience, I was admitted. At the very first sight of him, I could
perceive in his appearance all the mortification of falling power. He received
me with a gloomy countenance, in which there was more of thoughtful sadness
than of vindictive fury. After a minute's silence, however, he said to me,
"Well, Sir! you have heard, I suppose, that the English army are in possession
of the Ghauts, and doubtless know that the customs of this country authorize my
proceeding against you with the utmost rigor." Here he paused for a few moments
-- then proceeded thus: "Nevertheless, in consideration of your family -- in
consideration of the regard I have for a long time conceived for you, from
observing your conduct, and strict adherence to truth in answering all my
questions, and still more on account of the suffering which you have sustained
with fortitude, I will allow you to escape: haste you, then, away -- fly from
this fort directly -- Begone!" Then waving his hand as a signal for me to
depart, averted his face from me, and looked another way.

I thought that this was a very favorable opportunity for my intended purpose,
and entreated him to hear me while I said a few words of perhaps more moment to
him than to myself. He again turned toward me; and, nodding assent, while his
eye bespoke impatient curiosity, I proceeded -- And, first, I expressed in the
strongest terms I was able, the high sense I entertained of the favorable
reception I met with when I first came to the fort; assuring him, that I should
never forget the kindness he showed me on that occasion* and that in my
conscience I imputed all the sufferings I had undergone wholly to orders which
he had been obliged to execute, and not to any want of humanity in himself.
Here I perceived the clouds which had overspread his countenance begin
gradually to disperse, and with the greater confidence proceeded to say, that
if he would condescend to give me a patient hearing, and not take my boldness
amiss, I would venture to intrude upon him with my advice. At this he stared at
me with a look of surprise -- pau^ed -- then said, that he authorized me to
speak whatever I pleased -- continuing, in a tone of gentle melancholy, "But of
what use can your advice be to me now?"

Having thus obtained his permission, I began by complimenting him on his great
talents and temper in governing -- on his fidelity, zeal and attachment to
HYDER -- and on the mild and beneficient use which he was acknowledged to have
made of the unbounded power vested in him by tha^ great Prince, which was the
more extraordinary, considering how many examples he had to justify him in a
contrary practice. I reminded him, however, that circumstances were at present
widely different from what they were -- that he had now got a very different
sovereign to serve -- that he had no longer the tender father (for to HYDER
might have been considered to him), but TIPPOO SULTAN, now the master, once the
rival, whose measures he had always opposed, against whom he had once laid a
most serious charge, and who, considering the firmness of his nature, could not
be reasonably supposed to have forgiven him; and I hinted, that whatever
external appearance of regard TIPPOO might from the political necessity of the
moment assume, his temper, and the spirit of Asiatic policy, were too well
known to have a doubt remaining, that so far from continuing him (HYAT) in the
same power and authority which he enjoyed during the life of his father HYDER,
he would, on the contrary, proceed against him with rigor and cruelty.

Here I perceived the Jemadar involuntary nodding his head in a manner which,
though not intended for my observation, denoted internal assent; and was
convinced that I had exactly fallen in with the current of his own thoughts. No
wonder, indeed, they should be his sentiments; for they had long been the
sentiments of all persons who had known the circumstances of the Nabob's family.

Having, therefore, gone as far on that point as I conceived to be necessary to
awaken the mind of HYAT to the precariousness, of rather danger of his
situation with TIPPOO, I painted to him, in the strongest colors I was master
of, the humanity, the fidelity, the bravery and generosity of the English,
which, I said, were so universally acknowledged, that even their worst enemies
bore testimony to them: and I assured him, that if, instead of making an
unavailing opposition to them, he would throw himself with confidence upon
their protection, and become their friend, he would not only be continued in
his station, power and authority, and supported as heretofore, but be made a
much greater man, with still greater security, than ever he had been before.

This was the general scope of my argument with him; but there were many more
which suggested themselves at the time, though I cannot now remember them. I
enforced them with all the power I had: they were supported by the acknowledged
character for generosity of the English, and still more by HYAT'S apprehensions
of TIPPOO; and they had their effect. That very night he authorized me to go to
the British General; and, though he would not commit himself by sending
proposals in writing, he consented to receive them from the General, and
promised to wait for my return till daylight the next morning -- adding, that
if I did not appear by that time, he would go off with his family and treasure
to some other place, and set the town, powder-magazine and storehouses on
fire, leaving a person of distinguished character to defend the citadel or
inner fort, which was strong, with a deep ditch, and mounted with many pieces
of cannon, and send immediate intelligence to an army of six thousand horse and
ten thousand infantry, who were at that time on their road from Seringapatam,
to hasten their progress, and make them advance with all possible rapidity; and
he further observed, that as TIPPOO himself would come to the immediate
protection of his country, and, if once come while the English army remained in
the open field, would give them cause to repent their temerity, there was no
time to be lost.

Accompanied by a person who had officiated as interpreter between the Jemadar
and me, and whose good offices and influence with HYAT, which was very great, I
had been previously lucky enough to secure, I set off at ten o'clock at night,
on horseback to the British army. My companion was in high spirits when we
first set out from the fort; but as we proceeded, he expressed great
apprehension of being shot in approaching the camp, and earnestly entreated me
to sleep at a choreltry, which lay in our way, till morning. His terror must
have been great indeed, to induce him to make such a proposal, as he knew very
well that we had pledged ourselves to be back before dawn next day. I rallied
him upon his fears, and endeavored to persuade him there was not the smallest
danger, as I knew how to answer the outposts, when they should challenge us, in
such a manner as to prevent their firing. As we advanced to the camp, however,
his trepidation increased; and when we approached the sentries, I was obliged
to drag him along by force. Then his fears had very nearly produced the danger
he dreaded, (the almost invariable effect of cowardice); for the sentry next to
us, hearing the rustling noise, let off his piece, and was retreating when I
had the good fortune to make him hear me. My companion, alarmed at the noise of
the musket, fell down in a paroxysm of terror, from which it was some time
before he was completely recovered. The sentry who had fired, coming up,
conducted us to a place where other sentries were posted, one of whom
accompanied us to a guard, from whence we were brought to the grand guard, and
by them conducted to the General.

LETTER LVIII.
I WAS no less pleased than surprised to find, that the commander of this
gallant and successful little army was General MATHEWS -- an old friend of my
father's, and a person with whom I had served in the cavalry soon after I
entered the service. When I arrived he was fast asleep upon the bare ground in
a choreltry. His dubash, whose name was SNAKE, recollected me immediately, and
was almost as much frightened at my appearance at first, as my interpreter
companion was at the shot of the sentry; for it was full five months since my
hair and beard were both shaved at the same time, during which period a comb
had never touched my head: I had no hat -- no stockings -- was clad in a pair
of very ragged breeches, a shirt which was so full of holes that it resembled
rather a net than a web of cloth, and a waistcoat which had been made for a man
twice my size -- while my feet were defended from the stones only by a pair of
Indian slippers. SNAKE, as soon as he was able to conquer his terror, and stop
the loquacious effusions of astonishment, brought me to the General, whom I
found fast asleep. We awoke him with great difficulty, and, on his discovering
me, expressed great pleasure and surprise at so unexpected a meeting; for,
though he had heard of my imprisonment at Bidanore, he did not expect to have
had the pleasure of my company so soon.

Having stated to the General the nature and object of my mission, and related
to him what had happened in the fort, he instantly saw the great advantages
that must accrue from such an arrangement -- entered into a full but short
discussion of the business -- settled with me the plan to be pursued in either
case of HYAT SAHIB'S acceding to or dissenting from the terms he proposed to
offer; and in less than an hour after my arrival, I was dispatched back to the
fort in the General's palanquin, with a cowl from him, signifying that the
Jemadar HYAT SAHIB'S power and influence should not be lessened, if he should
quietly surrender up the fort. Before my departure, the General expressed, in
the warmest terms, his approbation of my conduct; and added that considering
the importance of the fort, the extensive influence of HYAT SAHIB, and the
advantages that might be derived from his experience and abilities, coupled
with the enfeebled state of his army, the benefits of such a negotiation
scarcely admitted of calculation.

Notwithstanding the very flattering circumstances with which my present
pursuit was attended, I could not help, as I returned to Hydernagur, finding
some uneasy sensations, arising from the immediate nature of the business, and
from my knowledge of the faithless disposition of Asiatics, and the little
difficulty they find in violating any moral principle, if it happens to clash
with their interest, or if a breach of it promises any advantage. I considered
that it was by no means impossible, that some resolution adverse to my project
might have been adopted in my absence, and that the Jemadar's policy might lead
him to make my destruction a sort of propitiation for his former offenses, and
to send me and the cowl together to TIPPOO, to be sacrificed to his resentment.
These thoughts, I own, made a very deep impression on my mind -- but were again
effaced by the reflection, that a laudable measure, once begun, ought to be
persevered in, and that the accomplishing a plan of such importance and
incalculable public utility, might operate still further by example, and
produce consequences of which it was impossible at present to form a
conception. Those, and a variety of such suggestions, entirely overcame the
scruples and fears of the danger; and I once more entered the fort of
Hydernagur. At this time the British troops were, by detaching a part with
Colonel MACLEOD, to get round the fort, and attack it in the rear, and, by
death and sickness, reduced to less than four hundred Europeans and seven
hundred Sepoys, without ordnance.

When I delivered the cowl to the Jemadar, he read it, and seemed pleased, but
talked of four or five days to consider of an answer, and seemed to be wavering
in his mind, and laboring under the alternate impulses of opposite motives and
contradictory passions. I saw that it was a crisis of more importance than any
other of my life -- a crisis in which delay, irresolution, or yielding to the
protractive expedients of HYAT, might be fatal. To prevent, therefore, the
effects of either treachery or repentance, I took advantage of the general
confusion and trepidation which prevailed in the fort -- collected the Arcot
Sepoys, who, to the number of four hundred, were prisoners at large -- posted
them at the gates, powder-magazines, and other critical situations; and, having
taken these and other precautions, went out to the General, who, according to
the plan concerted between us, had pushed on with the advanced guard; and,
conducting him into the fort with hardly an attendant, brought him straight to
the Jemadar's presence while he yet remained in a state of indecision and
terror. General MATHEWS, in his first interview with the Jemadar, did every
thing to re-assure him, and confirmed with the most solemn asseverations the
terms of the cowl; in consequence of which the latter acceded to the
propositions contained in it, and the British colors for the first time waved
upon the walls of the chief fort of the country of Bidanore.

Having thus contributed to put this important garrison, with all its
treasures, which certainly were immense, into the hands of the Company, without
the loss of a single man, or even the striking of a single blow, my exultation
was inconceivable; and, much though I wanted money, I can with truth aver, that
avarice had not even for an instant the least share in my sensations. It Is
true, the consciousness of my services assured me of a reward; but how that
reward was to accrue to me, never once was the subject of my contemplation --
much less did I think of availing myself of the instant occasion to obtain it.
How far my delicacy on the occasion may be censured or approved, I cannot tell;
but if I got nothing by it, I have at least the consolation to reflect that I
escaped calumny, which was with a most unjustifiable and unsparing hand
lavished on others. The General, it is true, promised that I should remain with
him till he made some arrangements; and HYAT SAHIB offered, on his part, to
make me, through the General, a handsome present. The General, however,
suddenly became dissatisfied with me; and I neither got HYAT SAHIB'S present,
nor ever received even a rupee of the vast spoil found there.

Here I think it a duty incumbent on me to say something of General MATHEWS,
and, while I deplore the unfortunate turn in his temper, which injured me, and
tarnished in some measure his good qualities, to rescue him from that
unremitted obloquy which the ignorant, the interested and the envious have
thrown upon his fame. Light lie the ashes of the dead, and hallowed be the turf
that pillows the head of a soldier! General MATHEWS was indeed a soldier -- was
calumniated too; and although he did not use me as I had reason to hope he
would, I will, as far as I can, rescue his fame from gross misrepresentation.

An extravagant love of fame was the ruling passion of General MATHEWS: it was
the great end of all his pursuits; and while, in his military profession, he
walked with a firm pace toward it, he lost his time, distorted his progress,
and palsied his own efforts, by a jealous vigilance and envious opposition of
those whom he found taking the same road, whether they walked beside him, or
panted in feeble effort behind. This was his fault; it was doubtless a great
alloy to his good qualities: but it has been punished with rigor
disproportionate to the offense. Those who personally felt his jealousy, took
advantage of his melancholy end to traduce him, and magnify every molehill of
error into a mountain of crime. It is unmanly in any one -- indeed it is -- to
traduce the soldier who has fallen in the service of his country; but it is
heresy in a soldier to do so. No sooner did the buzz of calumny get abroad,
than thousands of hornets, who had neither interest nor concern in the affair,
joined in it. The malignant, who wished to sting merely to get rid of so much
of their venom -- and the vain, who wished to acquire a reputation for
knowledge of Asiatic affairs at the expense of truth -- united together, and
raised a hum which reached Europe, where the hornets (I mean authors), under
the less unjustifiable impulse of necessity, took it up, and buzzed through the
medium of quartos and octavos so loud, that public opinion was poisoned; and
the gallant soldier who, for the advantage of England, stood the hardest tugs
of war, and at last drank the poisoned cup from the tyrant hands of her enemy,
was generally understood to be a peculator, and to have clandestinely and
dishonestly obtained three hundred thousand pounds.

On this attention I put my direct negative. It may be said, however, that this
is only assertion against assertion -- True! Sorry should I be to rest it
there: my assertions are grounded on such proofs as are no^ to be shaken --
proofs on record in the office of the Presidency of Bombay.

As soon as Hydernagur was taken possession of, HYAT SAHIB immediately issued
orders to the sorts of Mangatore, Deokull, Ananpore, and some others in that
country, to surrender to the British arms. Some obeyed the mandate; but those
three resisted, and were reduced by General MATHEWS. Rendered incautious by
success, our army became less vigilant, and TIPPOO retook Hydernagur; and, in
direct breach of the capitulation, made the garrison prisoners, treated them
with a degree of inhumanity which chills the blood even to think of, and forced
General MATHEWS to take poison in prison!

Mean-time HYAT SAHIB, with whom the General had got into disputes, arrived at
Bombay, and laid a charge against him, which he, being in the hands of TIPPOO,
could not controvert, or even know. And what was the charge? The whole extent
of it was his (MATHEWS'S) having got two lacks of rupees, and a pearl necklace,
as a present -- a sum, considering the country and circumstanstances, not at
all extraordinary, but which is completely vindicated by the General's letter
to the Court of Directors, dated at Mangalore, the 15th of March, 1783; in
which he states the present, and requests permission to accept it. This, as I
said before, is on record, and was translated by Mr. SYBBALD, who was then
Persian interpreter at Bombay. The letter I allude to, you will see in the
APPENDIX. In short, General MATHEWS had his faults, but an unjust avarice was
not amongst them.

LETTER LIX.
HAVING, in my last letter, said as much as I thought justice demanded in
defense of General MATHEWS, against the charge of peculation, I am now to speak
of him as his conduct touched me. He was, as I have already mentioned, an old
friend of my father's, and an intimate of my own: I had reason, therefore, to
expect from him, according to the usual dispositions and manners of men, if not
partiality, at least friendship; and in such a case as I have related, where my
services gave me a claim to notice, it was not unreasonable to suppose that he
would have been forward to promote my interest, by stating my services in such
a manner as to call attention to them. He had, however, some disagreeable
discussions with his officers; and seeing I was on a footing with Colonel
HUMBERTSON, and still more with Major CAMPBELL (he who so ably and gallantly
defended Mangalore against TIPPOO'S whole army and six hundred French), and
finding me extremely zealous and importunate to have his arrangement with HYAT
SAHIB adhered to, he became displeased, and, though he himself had determined
that I should remain with him, changed his mind, and ordered me away at an
hour's notice -- many days sooner than he had originally intended to send off
any dispatches. He moreover occasioned my losing a sum of money, and on the
whole paid less attention to my interest than the circumstances of the case
demanded.

In the evening of the day on which he determined on my departure, I set off
with his dispatches to the governments of Madrass and Bengal, and reached the
most distant of our posts that night. From thence I had thirty miles to
Cundapore, a seaport town upon the Malabar coast, taken by us from the enemy.
During this journey, which was through the country of TIPPOO SAHIB, I had only
six Sepoys to conduct me: yet, such was the universal panic that had seized all
classes and distinctions of people at the progress of the British arms in that
quarter, I met only a few scattered Sepoys, who were so badly wounded I presume
they were unable to travel -- the villages throughout being completely
abandoned by all their inhabitants.

The sudden change of diet, which physicians tell us, and I experienced, is
dangerous, from bad to good, as well as the reverse, conspiring with the
mortification I felt at seeing things going on so very contrary to what I
wished, and what I had reason to expect, had a most sudden and alarming effect
upon my constitution; and I was seized on the road with the most excrutiating,
internal pains, which were succeeded by a violent vomiting of blood. At length,
with great difficulty, I reached Cundapore, where the commanding officer, and
all about him did every thing in their power to afford me assistance and
comfort under my miseries, which increased every hour rapidly. I felt as if my
inside was utterly decayed, and all its functions lost in debility: at the same
time my head seemed deranged -- I could scarcely comprehend the meaning of what
was said; lifting up my head was attended with agonizing pain; and if I had any
power of thought, it was to consider myself as approaching fast to dissolution.
I had the sense, however, to send to General MATHEWS, to acquaint him with my
indisposition, and utter inability to proceed with his dispatches. To this I
received the following letter:

Bidanore, Feb. 3, 1783. DEAR CAMPBELL,
I am sorry to hear that you have been unwell. Should your indisposition
increase, or continue, so as to tender you unable to pursue your journey with
the necessary expedition, I beg that you will forward the letters to Anjengo by
a boat, with directions to Mr. HUTCHINSON to send them per tappy Post, or
express.
to Palamcotah, and so on to Madras.

I shall hope to hear of your recovery, and that you will have gone to sea.

Yours very truly, RICHARD MATHEWS.


The receipt of this letter induced me, bad as I was, to make one other
exertion; and I resolved, though I should die on the way, not to leave any
thing which, even by malicious construction, could be made a set-off against my
claims: I therefore hired an open boat to carry me along the coast to Anjengo,
and set out with every prospect of having the virulence of my disorder
increased, by being exposed in an uncovered vessel to the damp of the night
air, and the raging heat of the sun in the day, and of being arrested by the
hand of death in my way. By the time I had got down the coast as far as
Mangalore, my complaints increased to an alarming height; and I became
speechless, and unable to stand. Fortunately there happened to be a Company's
vessel then lying at anchor off that place, the captain of which had the
goodness to invite me to remain on board with him, strenuously advising that I
should give up the thoughts of proceeding immediately on my voyage to Anjengo,
which I could not possibly survive, and to forward my dispatches by another
hand. The surgeon of the ship joining the captain in opinion that I could not
survive if I attempted it, and my own judgment coinciding with their's, I at
length consented, and remained there.

Tranquillity, kind treatment, and good medical assistance, produced, in the
space of two or three weeks, so material a change in my health, I was in a
condition to avail myself, at the expiration of that time, of a ship bound to
Anjengo, and which offering the additional inducement of touching at
Tellicherry, determined me to take my passage in her. When I arrived at
Tellicherry, and during my stay there, the great attention shown me by Mr.
FREEMAN, the chief of that place, and the comforts of his house, restored me to
a great share of health and spirits -- And here a very singular circumstance
occurred.

One day a vessel arrived; and perceiving a boat coming on shore from her, Mr.
FREEMAN and I walked down to the beach, to make the usual inquiries -- such as,
where she came from? what news she brought? etc. etc. As soon as the boat
touched the shore, a gentleman leaped out of it, whose person seemed familiar
to me: upon his nearer approach, I discovered that it was Mr. BRODEY, a
gentleman who had been kind enough to take upon him the office of my attorney,
upon my leaving India some years before -- not my attorney in the ordinary
acceptance of that word, but a liberal and disinterested friend, who
obligingly undertook the management of my affairs in my absence, without the
smallest hope of advantage, or rather under circumstances which served as
preludes to further obligations. I was certainly pleased and surprised to see
him; but his astonishment to see me amounted almost to a distrust of his
eyesight: he had received such indubitable proofs of my death, that my sudden
appearance on his landing, at the first rush of thought, impressed him with the
notion of a deceptio visus. My identity, however, was too positive for
resistance; and his wonder melted down into cordial satisfaction, and
congratulations on my safety. He then took out a pocket account-book, in which,
for security against accidents, he kept accounts-current, written in a brief
manner -- and showed me mine, settled almost to the very day, upon which was
transcribed a copy of a letter he had received, and which he thought was a
testimony of my death. So, cutting out the account, and presenting it to me, he
expressed, in the most cordial and handsome manner, his joy that it was into my
own hands he had at last had an opportunity to deliver it. This gentleman is
now in this Kingdom, and too well known for me to describe him. Suffice it to
say, that in England, as well as in India, he has always enjoyed the esteem and
respect of all his acquaintances, to as great an extent as any other person I
know.

I again embarked to proceed on my voyage, and had hardly got on board when a
ship dropped anchor along side of us, in which captain CAMPBELL of Comby, a
very near connection of mine, was passenger. On hailing one another, he heard
that I was on board, and immeditely was with me. Those who sincerely love each
other, and whose hearts confess the fond ties of consanguinity, can alone
conceive what our mutual pleasure was at meeting so unexpectedly in so remote a
corner of the world. He was then on his way to join the army. This amiable
young man, now reposes in the bed of honor at Mangalore! He fell, after having
distinguished himself in the very gallant defense made by that place against
the whole force of TIPPOO. With regret we parted: and in due time I arrived at
Anjengo without any accident befalling me, which was rather extraordinary.

Leaving Anjengo, I set out for Madras, designing to go all the way by land --
a journey of near eight hundred miles. I accordingly struck through the Kingdom
of Travancore, whose sovereign is in alliance with the English; and had not
long entered the territories of the Nabob of Arcot, before Major MACNEAL, an
old friend of mine, and commandant of a fort in that district, met me preceded
by a troop of dancing girls, who encircled my palanquin, dancing around me
until I entered the Major's house.

It would be difficult to give you an adequate notion of those dancing girls.
Trained up from their infancy to the practice of the most graceful motions, the
most artful display of personal symmetry, and the most wanton allurements, they
dance in such a style, and twine their limbs and bodies into such postures, as
bewitch the senses, and extort applause and admiration where in strictness
disapprobation is due: nor is their agility inferior to the grace of their
movements -- though they do not exert it in the same skipping way that our
stage dancers do, but make it subservient to the elegance, and, I may say,
grandeur, of their air. They are generally found in troops of six or eight,
attended by musicians, whose aspect and dress are as uncouth and squalid, as
the sounds they produce under the name of music, are inelegant, harsh and
dissonant. To this music, from which measure as much as harmony is excluded,
they dance, most wonderfully adapting their step to the perpetual change of the
time, accompanying it with amorous songs, while the correspondent action of
their body and limbs, the wanton palpitation and heaving of their exquisitely
formed bosoms, and the amorous, or rather lascivious expression of their
countenance, excite in the spectators emotions not very favorable to chastity.
Thus they continue to act, till, by the warmth of exercise and imagination,
they become seemingly frantic with ecstacy, and, sinking down motionless with
fatigue, throw themselves into the most alluring attitudes that ingenious vice
and voluptuousness can possibly devise.

That such incitements to vice should make a part of the system of any society,
is to be lamented: yet, at all ceremonies and great occasions, whether of
religious worship or domestic enjoyment, they make a part of the entertainment;
and the altar of their gods, and the purity of the marriage rites, are alike
polluted by the introduction of the dancing girls. The impurity of this custom,
however, vanishes in India, when compared with the hideous practice of
introducing dancing boys.

The Major, after having entertained me in the most hospitable manner,
accompanied me to Palamcotah, to the house of Doctor DOTT, who lived in a
generous and hospitable style. I had once had an opportunity of evincing my
good disposition to this gentleman, when he was most critically situated; and
the reception he gave me demonstrated, that he than retained a lively sense of
my conduct to him.

Leaving Palamcotah, I continued my route through Madura. This country is
rendered remarkable by the revolt of the famous ISIF CAWN, who made a bold and
well-conducted attempt to erect himself into the sovereignty of that province,
independent of the Nabob of the Carnatic, in whose service he was: and as the
affair occurs to my thoughts, I will, for your information, notwithstanding its
being unconnected with my story, digress into an account of it. As soon as the
revolt of ISIF CAWN was known, General MONSON, an officer of great military
skill and personal merit, went against him at the head of the King's and
company's troops, and invested the sort of Madura, in which that rebellious
chief was posted. The general made a practicable breach, and, in storming, was
beat back with great slaughter by ISIF; and the setting in of the monsoons
immediately after, retarded the further operations of our army against the
place; and in the interim, peace having been concluded between the courts of
St. James's and Versailles, the King's troops were withdrawn.

On the recall of the King's troops, an army of company's troops was formed, to
proceed against Madura, in order to reduce this gallant turbulent rebel to
subjection; and the renowned general LAWRENCE being rendered incapable of
actual service, and obliged to remain at the presidency by extreme age and
infirmity, the chief command devolved upon my father by seniority: he headed
the expedition; and, after overcoming innumerable difficulties thrown in his
way by the inventive genius and enterprising spirit of ISIF CAWN, again made a
breach, which was deemed practicable by the chief engineer, now Sir JOHN CALL.
An assault was made with no better success than the former; for our army was
again repulsed with incredible slaughter: more than two thirds, I believe, of
our European officers, were among the killed or wounded; and the death o^ Major
PRESTON, second in command, a man endeared to the a my by the possession of
every advantage of person, heart and talents -- an active, intrepid and able
officer -- aggravated the calami^ies of the day.

If, impelled by my feelings, or tempted by remembrance of the past. I
sometimes digress from the direct path of my narrative, my FREDERICK will
accompany me, not only wi^h patience, bu^ I dare say with pleasure: I cannot
refrain, therefore, from mentioning a memorable occurence during that fiege,
not only as it is somewhat extraordinary in itself, but as it relates to a very
near and dear connection. Colonel DONALD CAMPBELL, who then commanded the
cavalry, received no less than fourteen sword-wounds and a musquer-ball in his
body -- yet continued doing his duty with such cool in^repidity, that brave
soldiers who were witnesses to it, expressed the utmost astonishment: upon
being requested to quit the field, he replied, that as his family were provided
for, he had nothing to fear; and as it was very unlikely his life could be
save^, he would not deprive his country of any advantage that might be derived
from his exertions for the short residue of it, but continue to the last moment
at his duty. With all this firmness and magnanimity, he was gentle,
good-humoured, modest and unassuming; and was admired for his great personal
beauty, as well as military talents, particularly by the Duke of CUMBERLAND,
under whom he served in the war in Germany as a subaltern officer, in so much
that his Royal Highness had his picture drawn. It was to him the company were
first indebted for the introduction of perfect military discipline into their
army in India. In the various relations in which he stood, whether domestic ^r
public, as the subject, the citizen, the father, or the friend, he was so
uniformly excellent, that the shafts of malevolence, which the best and wisest
of men have but too often felt, seldom reached him; and he may justly be
reckoned amongst that very small number of created beings, of whom scarcely any
one had the audacity to speak ill. Upon my first arrival in India, I was put
under his command, and lived in his family -- when, instead of deporting
himself toward me with that reserve and austerity which rank and reputation
like his, coupled with the circumstance of his being my uncle, might in some
sort have justified, he took me into his confidence, treated me with the
greatest affection, and acted rather as the brother and the equal, than as the
parent and superior; and thus his gentle admonitions had more effect in
restraining the sallies of youth, and impetuosity of my temper, than the four,
unpalatable documents of a supercilious preceptor could possibly have had.

The wonderful effects of this happy temper in swaying the stubborn disposition
of headstrong youth, was exemplified in another instance -- of which, since I
am on the subject, I will inform you. Mr. DUPRES, then governor of Madras,
wrote to him about a young gentleman, in the following words:

MY DEAR COLONEL,
In the list of officers appointed to your garrison, you will see the name of
--. This young man (nephew to Mrs. DUPRES), with abilities that might render
him conspicuous, I am sorry to say, stands in need of a strict hand. All the
favor I have to request of you is to show him no favor: keep him rigidly to
his duty; and, if he requires it, rule him with a rod of iron. Should his
future conduct meet your approbation, it is unnecessary for me to ask it, as
you are always ready to show kindness to those who merit it.


The peculiar style of this letter made such an impression on my memory, that I
am able to give the exact words. Colonel CAMPBELL, however, took his own
unalterable method, mildness -- treated the young gentleman in such a manner as
to raise in him a consciousness of his dignity as a man, the first and best
guard against misconduct -- and appointed him to the grenadier company. The
result was answerable to his expectations; for the young man's conduct, both as
an officer and a gentleman, was such in the sequel as to reflect credit on
himself and his family; and his very honorable and hopeful career was at last
terminated by a cannon-ball at the siege of Tanjore.

If the veneration in which I shall ever hold this most dear and respected
relative admitted of increase, it would certainly receive it from the contrast
I am every day obliged to draw between him and the wretched butterflies who
sometimes flutter round us under the name of men: for, how can I help
contrasting his inflexible courage, united to angelic mildness, with the
insolence of lilly-livered Hectors, who, conscious of the most abject
cowardice, dare to give an insult, and basely skulk from honest resentment
beneath the arm of the law! -- fellows who, like Bobadil in the play, can kill
a whole army with the tongue, but dare not face a pigmy in the field! -- and,
while they want the prudence to restrain the torrent of effeminate invective,
have patience enough to bear a kicking, or a box in the ear! -- who bluster and
vapor to hide the trembling limb and poltroon aspect, as children whistle in
the dark to brave the ghosts they dread! Beware of all such wre^ches as you
would shun plague or pestilence. I hope you do not imagine that I have so
little common sense or philanthropy as to censure those who, from physical
causes or constitutional delicacy, are averse to contest: No, no -- I do assure
you, on the contrary, that my observation leads me to think such men, though
slow to quarrel, and inoffensive in conduct, are very gallant when honor or
duty demand from them a conquest over their we kness. I have, in my time, seen
such men a^ first the sport, and at last the terror of your blustering bushes;
and I have always thought, that in such a triumph over their feelings, they had
more true merit than men constitutionally courageous: the latter has his valor
in common with the mere animal; the other possesses the valo^ of sentiment. I
mean that most ignominious of all beings, who, prodigal in offense, yet
rel^ctant in separation -- who, hoping to find some person passive as
themselves over whom to triumph, hazard the giving of an insult, with the
malignant view to gasconade over him if he submits -- and, if he resents, to
wreak the whole vengeance of law upon him. In society with such men, there is
no safety; for they leave you only the casual alternative to choose between
shame and ruin. Him who submits, they call poltroon; and him who resents, they
fleece in form of law. There are others who, to bring their fellow creatures
down to their own level, brave the execrations of mankind, and the vengeance of
Heaven: such ha^p^es do exist, who, though bold enough to insult, are tame
enough to receive chastisement without resistance; and, though tame enough to
submit to chastisement, are so furiously vindictive as to proclaim their shame,
their cowardice, perhaps in the face of an open court, in order to glut their
revenge by the pillage of their adversary's purse. Let such men enjoy the
fruits of their machinations, if they can -- To their own feelings I consign
them; for I can wish a villain no greater curse than the company of his own
conscience, nor a poltroon a more poignant sting than that which the contempt
of mankind inflicts upon him.

LETTER LX.
PASSING through Madura, I arrived at Trichinopoly, where I met Mr. SULLIVAN,
the resident of Tanjore, who very politely furnished me with a letter to Mr.
HIPPESLEY, his deputy at Tanjore, from whom I received many marks of civility.
At that place I had the pleasure of meeting a gentleman with whom I had been at
college, and for whom I had always entertained a great esteem: this was Colonel
FULLARTON. It is an old maxim, that we should say nothing but good of the dead
-- "De mortuis nil nisi bonum." It is not a new maxim, I believe, to avoid
praising the living: I am aware of the indelicacy of it; and therefore
purposely avoid in this, as I shall in other instances, speaking the full
opinion I entertain* To the general esteem in which he was held by all ranks of
people in India, I refer you to Colonel FULLARTON'S character: it is of such a
sort, that I wish to hold it up for your imitation. At a time of life when
others have arrived to some perfection in their profession, he made choice of
his, and entered for the first time into the arduous military department, with
a command for which the training of many years is no more than sufficient to
prepare other men. The Minister of that day gave him this important charge,
underwent the clamours of Opposition for it, and was justified in the event.
When the Colonel came to act, so far from being deficient, his whole conduct
was distinguished, not less for military talent than courage -- while the most
fortunate command and temper and captivating address subdued the spirit of
prejudice, reconciled the most discordant, and gained him, though a King's
Officer, the esteem as much of the Company's as King's troops. In short, all
ranks of people, civil as well as military, whether belonging to King or
Company, united in approbation of his conduct -- a thing not before, nor since,
but in the person of LORD CORNWALLIS.

Too m^^^ cannot be said of the advantages resulting from a proper command of
temper. To promote that in my FEDERICK, will be attended with little
difficulty: on the contrary, my only doubt is, that the placability and
mildness of his disposition will too often subject him to imposition. JOHN is,
however, of a different temper; there is something in it which requires both
admonition and good example to repress within proper bounds: to show him the
beauty as well as use of a mild, cool temper, such instances as Colonel
FULLARTON may be of weight, and I wish him to reflect upon it. And here I am
reminded of a person and a circumstance so exactly in point, that I cannot
refrain from noticing them: they convey no inadequate idea of the happiness
resulting from a gentleness of nature, and dominion over the mind; and as the
person I allude to is dead, I may speak of him with the greater freedom in that
full strain of praise of which his shining virtues deserve.

Of all the men I have ever had the good fortune to know, Sir ARCHIBALD
CAMPBELL possessed, in the highest degree, that heavenly turn of mind, which
not only is at peace with itself, but diffuses harmony and cheerfulness around
it. No business, however urgent in occasion, restricted in point of time, or
embarrassed with difficulty -- no accident, however unexpected, or event,
however sinister -- none of those innumerable minutiae which fret and chafe the
tempers of other men, ever suspended the cool tenor of his thought even for a
moment: nothing shook the serenity of his temper -- nothing deranged the
presence of his mind: uniform and placid, he in all situations had the full
dominion of himself, and in the field it gave him a decided superiority; nor
was this felicity of nature confined to his public conduct; it attended him at
the domestic enjoyments of the fireside -- at the social board -- in the
private recesses of his closet; and the very same habit of soul which, in his
great public duties, rendered him valuable to his Country, and formidable to
her enemies, gained him the admiration and esteem of his friends, the unbounded
affection of his family, and the blessing of all his dependants.

An incident that occured in my presence may serve in some measure to decipher
the mind of this admirable man -- I shall never forget it. Previously to his
going to India, he had exerted his interest to obtain from the East India
Company some reward for my services; and, a few days before his departure,
promised to speak again to Mr. DEVAYNES, Chairman of the East India Company. I
waited on him on the day he was setting off: he was just about to depart, and
surrounded by a numerous circle. In the midst of this bustle, and the
confusion, one would suppose, inseparable from such a crisis, he recollected
his promise -- told me Mr. DEVAYNES had that minute taken leave of him, and he
had forgot to mention me, but said that he would write to him on the subject:
and, though he was at the instant on the point of moving to the carriage that
was to carry him off, sat down, and with that amiable sweetness of manners and
happily collected mind so peculiarly his own, wrote a letter for me to Mr.
DEVAYNES -- holding conversation, the while, in the most lively, engaging
manner, with the persons around him. The conciseness and perspicuity of
language in which this letter was couched, will serve to elucidate what I have
said -- I therefore transcribe it for you:

St. James's Hotel, Sept. 30, 1785. DEAR SIR,
I forgot to mention to you this forenoon, and again to repeat my earnest
wishes, you would take the case of Mr. CAMPBELL speedily into your
consideration. His sufferings were of such a nature, and his services so
meritorious, that I am persuaded, upon a fair investigation of both, you will
give him your firmest support. I have looked into all his papers; and the
testimonies of essential services rendered to the Company by him, do him, in my
opinion, the highest honor. Unless such merits are recompensed, few will risk
every thing, as Mr. CAMPBELL did, to promote the success of the Company's arms
in India: but I trust you will see it in its proper light; and in that hope I
shall only add, that whatever acts of kindness you show to him, will be
considered as an obligation conferred on,

DEAR SIR, Your faithful and most obedient humble servant, ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL.

To William Devaynes, Esquire.

Be assured, my dear boys, (for now I speak to JOHN as well as FREDERICK), that
one act of triumph over the temper is worth a million of triumphs over our
fellow creatures, and that the perfect dominion of our mind is more
advantageous and laudable than the dominion over Provinces or Nations. The one
attaches merely to our corporeal part, and is buried with our dust in the
grave: the other follows our immortal part, and passes with it into eternity.

On my leaving Tanjore, Colonel FULLARTON honored me with the care of a letter
to Lord MACARTNEY, then Governor of Madras -- an extract of which I give you,
as it applied to my business particularly:

Tanjore, March 20, 1783. MY LORD,
I had the honor to write to your lordship on the 8th by Captain HALLAM, who
carried from hence very large packets to you. The opportunity of Captain
CAMPBELL tempts me to trouble your lordship, merely to inform you, that all my
letters from Bidanore ascribe in a great degree the success of our arms in that
quarter, and the romantic Revolution effected there, to the influence he had
with HYAT SAHIB, and to the proposals of surrender which he suggested, and
transacted with the General and Jemadar. I think it necessary that you, my
lord, may know how much the Public is indebted to Captain CAMPBELL, whose good
fortune in this affair has only been equalled by his good conduct. He is
perfectly acquainted with the state of affairs on the other coast, and has seen
and heard much of our transactions here; so that no person can give a more
clear or unbiassed view of events.


I had also the good luck to meet, at Tanjore, Mr. BUCHANAN, a very near
connection of mine, for whom I had long entertained a sincere and warm regard.
It has been my misfortune to have been obliged frequently to censure some of my
relatives for ill nature and ingratitude: I never did so without the most
painful sensations. When, on the contrary, I am enabled to speak to their
honor, I feel a proportionate share of pleasure: I am therefore happy in
mentioning Mr. BUCHANAN as a man as amiable in his private as respectable in
his public character; but the satisfaction I felt at this meeting was much
alloyed by finding him in a very bad state of health.

Before I left Tanjore, I had an opportunity of being eyewitness to that
extraordinary and horrid ceremony, the burring of a Gentoo woman with the body
of her husband. As this is a point which has occasioned much speculation and
some doubt among Europeans, I enclose you an accurate account of the ceremony,
as minuted down at the time it happened.

Description of the Ceremony of the Gentoo Women burning themselves with the
bodies of their Husbands.
"This day, --, I went to see a Gentoo woman resign herself to be burned along
with the corpse of her deceased husband.

"The place fixed upon for this tragic scene, was a small islet on the bank of
one of the branches of the river Cavery, about a mile to the Northward of the
fort of Tanjore.

"When I came to the spot, I found the victim, who appeared to be not above
sixteen, sitting on the ground, dressed in the Gentoo manner, with a white
cloth wrapped round her, some white flowers like jessamins hanging round her
neck, and some of them hanging from her hair. There were about twenty women
sitting on their hams round her, holding a white handkerchief, extended
horizontally over her head, to shade her from the sun, which was excessively
hot, it being then about noon.

"At about twenty yards from where she was sitting, and facing her, there were
several Bramins busy in constructing a pile with billets of firewood: the pile
was about eight feet long, and four broad. They first began by driving some
upright stakes into the ground, and then built up the middle to about the
height of three feet and a half with billets of wood.

"The dead husband, who, from his appearance, seemed to be about sixty years of
age, was lying close by, stretched out on a bie^, made of Bamboo canes. Four
Bramins walked in procession three times round the dead body, first in a
direction contrary to the sun, and afterward other three times in a direction
with the sun, all the while muttering incantations; and at each round or
circuit they made, they untwisted, and immediately again twisted up the small
long lock of hair which is left unshaven at the back of their heads.

"Some other Bramins were in the mean time employed in sprinkling water out of
a green leaf, rolled up like a cup, upon a small heap of cakes of dry cow dung,
with which the pile was afterward to be set on fire.

"An old Bramin sat at the North-east corner of the pile upon his hams, with a
pair of spectacles on, reading, I suppose, the Shaster, or their Scriptures,
from a book composed of Cajan leaves.

"Having been present now nearly an hour, I inquired when they meant to set the
pile on fire: they answered, in about two hours. As this spectacle was most
melancholy, and naturally struck me with horror, and as I had only gone there
to assure myself of the truth of such sacrifices being made, I went away
toward the fort. After I was gone about five hundred yards, they sent some one
to tell me they would burn immediately; on which I returned, and found the
woman had been moved from where she was sitting to the river, where the Bramins
were bathing her. On taking her out of the water, they put some money in her
hand, which she dipped in the river, and divided among the Bramins: she had
then a yellow cloth ^olled partially round her. They put some red color, about
the size of a sixpence, on the center of her forehead, and rubbed something
that appeared to me to be clay. She was then led to the pile, round which she
walked three times as the sun goes: she then mo^nted it at the North-east
corner, without any assistance; and sat herself down on the right side of her
husband, who had been previously laid upon the pile. She then unscrewed the
pins which fastened the jewels or silver rings on her arms: after she had taken
them off, she shut them, and screwed in the pins again, and gave one to each of
two women who were standing: she unscrewed the car-rings, and other toys, with
great composure, and divided them among the women who were with her. There
seemed to be some little squabble about the distribution of her jewels, which
she settled with great precision; and then, falling gently backwards, polled a
fold of the yellow cloth over her face, turned her breast toward her husbands
side, and laid her right arm over his breast; and in this posture she remained
without moving.

"Just before she lay down, the Bramins put some rice in her lap, and also some
in the mouth and on the long gray beard of her husband: they then sprinkled
some water on the head, breast and feet of both, and tied them gently together
round the middle with a slender bit of rope: they then raised, as it were, a
little wall of wood lengthways on two sides of the pile, so as to raise it
above the level of the bodies; and then put cross pieces, so as to prevent the
billets of wood from pressing on them: they then poured on the pile, above
where the woman lay, a po^ful of something that appeared to me to be oil; after
this they heaped on more wood, to the height of about four feet above where the
bodies were built in; so that all I now saw was a stack of firewood.

"One of the Bramins, I observed, stood at the end of the pile next the woman's
head -- was calling to her through the interstices of the wood, and laughed
several times during the conversation. Lastly, they overspread the pile with
wet straw, and tied it on with ropes.

"A Bramin then took a handful of straw, which he set on fire at the little
heap of burning cakes of cow dung; and, standing to windward of the pile, he
let the wind drive the flame from the straw till it catched the pile.
Fortunately, at this instant, the wind rose much higher than it had been any
part of the day; and in an instant the flames pervaded the whole pile, and it
burnt with great fury. I listened a few seconds, but could not distinguish any
shricks, which might perhaps be owing to my being then to windward. In a very
few minutes, the pile became a heap of ashes.

"During the whole time of this process, which lasted from first to last above
two hours before we lost sight of the woman by her being built up in the middle
of the pile, I kept my eyes almost constantly upon her; and I declare to GOD
that I could not perceive, either in her countenance or limbs, the least trace
of either horror, fear, or even hesitation: her countenance was perfectly
composed and placed; and she was not, I am positive, either intoxicated or
stupefied. From several circumstances, I thought the Bramins exulted in this
hellish sacrifice, and did not seem at all displeased that Europeans should be
witnesses of it."

From Tanjore I proceeded to N^gapa^^am, which had been taken from the Dutch by
the Company's troops, and where Mr. COCHRAN, and old friend of mine, was Chief.

The communication by land between Negapatnam and Madras being interrupted by
the enemy's troops, I embarked in a vessel, and proceeded thither by sea --
Major JOHNSTON, of the Engineers, being also a passenger.

LETTER LXI.
HITHERTO every step of my journey has been marked by occurrences so
unexpected, and accidents so extraordinary, that I should feel some repugnance
to relate them, lest my veracity should be called in question, were they not
attested by so many living persons of respectability, and by written documents
of authority on record. Were one to consider them merely as the offspring of
fiction, they would perhaps have interest enough to catch the attention; but,
viewing them as facts, they borrow, from their number and rapid succession, as
well as from their singularity, so much of the complexion of imaginary
adventure, that the combination cannot, I think, fail to interest your mind as
well as your feelings.

Arrived at Negapatnam, within a short run of Madras, it is natural for you to
suppose that adventure was at an end, and that fortune, fatigued by the
incessant exertion of her caprice, might have left me to proceed the short
residue of my way without further molestation. It fell out otherwise: she had
marked me as her game, and resolved to worry me to the last moment; for, as we
approached Madras, we were chased by a French frigate, and taken near Fort St.
George.

This appeared to me the greatest misfortune I had yet met with, and likely to
be the most fatal in its consequences. In order to explain this, I must recur
to certain circumstances, which though I was informed of them since my release
from Hydernagur, I did not relate to you, because they were no way connected
with my narrative till now.

Monsieur SUFFREIN, the French Admiral, having a number of British prisoners in
his possession, whom he found it extremely inconvenient to support, made a
proposal for an exchange -- which, from some failure in the conveyance, or
ambiguity in the terms of the correspondence, was neglected.

The motives or accidents which gave rise to this neglect have never been
completely developed; and perhaps the Admiral himself, Sir EDWARD HUGHES, and
Lord MACARTNEY, were the only persons who knew the bottom of that transaction.
In such cases, however, the ignorance of fact is generally supplied by
conjecture; and men have presumed to censure unequivocally on the mere
hypothetical suggestions of their own imaginations. Candor, however, in such a
case, where it could not speak with certainty, would speak with caution. An
Historian, particularly, should steer clear of party rancour, and not suffer
the prejudice or malignity which misled himself, to go down to and mislead
posterity. Where positive proof is wanting, if we are obliged to decide, we
must judge by analogy and inference; and in the case now before us, we have
little but the characters of the persons concerned to guide us in our decision.

Of the horrid catastrophe which succeeded the neglect of exchanging prisoners,
it is hardly possible that any one but Monsieur SUFFREIN himself could have had
a conception. To suppose, that, under such an impression, our leading men would
have hesitated to prevent it, would be to suppose their intellects weak, and
their hearts corrupt and inhuman. I fancy it will be difficult to fasten on
Lord MACARTNEY either the one or the other; for he was wise and humane: those
whom the disappointment of unreasonable expectations, or the malevolence of
party, have induced to suspect his Lordship's heart, have been forced by his
conduct to revere his talents; and the breath of calumny has never touched the
humanity of Sir EDWARD HUGHES. Whatever their motives, therefore, may have been
-- reason, conscience, and candor, must acquit them of the consequences. It
should be recollected, too, that Monsi^ur SUFFREIN'S character was a very
probable security, in the mind of men of sense and honor, against any act of
horrid inhumanity: his conduct as an officer had made a new era in the Naval
History of France: his talents and courage might be compared, without
disadvantage, to those of the best of our British Admirals; and he had
exhibited marks of uncommon generosity to those whom the chance of war had
thrown into his hands. It would therefore have been something more than
prescience to have presupposed what actually happened; and I declare most
solemnly, that the inference I draw from the whole information I have had on
the subject is, that, calamitous though the event was, it attaches no positive
guilt on any of the parties concerned. The fact is plainly this: The French
Admiral having no place on the coast where he could secure his prisoners, and
grieving, as he himself subsequently wrote to Mr. HASTINGS, to see the unhappy
men, who had been six or seven months at sea, dying of the scurvy, delivered
over the prisoners, to the number of above three hundred, to HYDER. Their fa^e
afterward was such as it would har^o^ up your soul to hear related.

Take the whole of the circumstances into one glance, and see what my feelings
must have been on finding myself once more a prisoner. HYDER ALLI, who was,
when compared with the worst despots of the European world, a monster, must yet
be considered, when put in comparison, with his successor TIPPOO, mild and
merciful. HYDER, from policy and hypocrisy, showed some lenity to the prisoners
who fell into his hands. Instances are known where British captives have broke
through the crowd that surrounded him into his presence for protection -- when
he has hypocritically feigned anger, threatened the persons who had treated
them ill, reprobated severity, and sent them off satisfied for the present.
TIPPOO, on the contrary, was so perfectly savage, that cruelty seemed to be,
not only the internal habit of his soul, but the guide of all his actions, the
moving principle of his policy, the rule of his public conduct, and the source
of his private gratification. Like the tiger which, BUFFON tells us, kills the
whole flock before he begins to feed, every appetite of his yielded to the more
urgent calls of barbarity; and while one drop blood of remained unspilled, one
agony uninflicted, one tear unshed, the natural appetites of TIPPOO stood
suspended, and the luxuries of life courted his enjoyment in vain. Like the
hyena which THOMPSON calls the fellest of the fell, the fury of his nature was
neither to be controuled by resistance, nor assuaged by blandishments. Aloof
from the general order of the workings of Providence, he stands a single
instance, in which the Omnipotent has presented a glowing living picture, ALL
SHADE: not one ray breaks in, to relieve the glomy aspect of the piece; but,
distinct from the whole human race, of him alone it may be said, that he never
yet disolosed, even for a moment, one spark of virtue.

From barbarity so inflexible to those taken in the ordinary chance of war,
what could I expect if I fell again into his hands -- I who had been the
instrument of one of his chief Governor's defection -- who had, by my
negociations, contributed to deprive him of a Province, and, what perhaps might
have had greater weight with him, robbed him of the gratification of a long
harbored revenge, by putting his enemy HYAT SAHIB under the protection of the
Company? Diabolical vengeance never perhaps met with a subject of such sublime
enjoyment, as the torturing of me would have been to this monster. Couple this
then, my FREDERICK, with the fears of SUFFREIN'S doing by me as he had already
done by the other English prisoners -- and guess what my terror and
consternation must have been at falling into the hands of the French!

Having struck our colors to the French frigate, the Captain ordered us to
follow her, and steered to the northward. We obeyed him for some time: at
length night fell; and, a fresh and favorable breeze fortunately aiding the
attempt, we put about, ran for Madras, and luckily dropped anchor safely in the
roads. In the escapes I had hitherto had, there was always some disagreeable
circumstance to alloy the pleasure arising from them -- In this instance, my
joy was pure and unqualified; and I looked forward with a reasonable hope that
the worst was all over.

Here I found Lord MACARTNEY governor, struggling to support the credit of the
Company, and directing their affairs through such embarrassments and
difficulties as made the most wise and temperate despair of success. So arduous
an undertaking as the government of Madras then was, has ^a^ely occurred: and a
more successful final accomplishment is not to be instanced. In the incessant
conflicts to which he was exposed, he maintained his post with inflexible
firmness and unabated energy of mind -- and, in the most trying circumstances,
discharged his important duty with zeal, integrity and wisdom. The strict
discharge of the duty he owed to his country, raised clamours against him among
an interested few in India; but the united applauses of all parties, on his
return to England, stamped currency on his fame, and has broken the shafts of
detraction.

LETTER LXII.
AFTER so many hazards and hardships as I had undergone, it was a most pleasing
reflection to find myself in a society composed of my oldest professional
connections, and warmest and sincerest friends: but this was a happiness I
could not long enjoy: for, being charged with a mission from HYAT SAHIB to the
Governor-General and Supreme Council, I was constrained to proceed to Bengal,
and accordingly set sail, for Calcu^^a, which I ^eached in little more than a
week, without encountering any accident, or meeting a single occurence, worth
the relation. Upon my arrival there, Sir JOHN MACPHERSON, who was in the
Supreme Council, gave me a kind invitation to live at his house, and presented
me to Mr. HASTINGS, with whom I entered into a negotiation on behalf of HYAT
SAHIB, which will appear by the following letters:

LETTER TO WARREN HASTINGS, ESQUIRE.
Calcutta, May 3, 1783. HONORABLE SIR,
Indisposition has put it out of my power, since the first day after my arrival
here, to have the honor of paying you my respects, and of laying before you,
for the information of the board, the objects of my mission to your
superintending government.

As these objects are of public importance, and as ill health may prevent me,
for some time longer from having the honor of waiting upon you, I take the
liberty to beg your attention to this address.

The great revolution in favor of the India Company upon the west side of
India, and to which I had the happiness of being in some little degree
instrumental, has been certainly brought about by the zeal and spirit of
General MATTHEWS; but that officer ascribes to the orders and supplies of your
government the principal merit of the undertaking: he looks to the same
government for support in the arrangement which he has made, and may make, for
the security of the conquered province.

The hurry in which I left him, and his anxi^ty for my speedy communication of
his successes, gave no time for a formal communication to the Governor-General
and cooncil. of the particulars of his successes, and of the arrangements which
he wished to be adopted. He wrote a short account of the first to the
Presidency of Fort St. George; and gave me a public letter to the Commander in
Chief of the Military Establishment of that Presidency to which I particularly
belong, in attestation of the services I rendered in the negotiation between
him and the Governor of Bidanore, for the surrender of that capital and
province. A copy of that letter I have the pleasure to lay before you.

As I was charged with a particular commission from HYAT SAHIB, the manager of
the Bidanore province, to the Governor-General and council, as appears by his
letter, which I had the honor of presenting to you, General MATHEWS gave me,
in verbal instructions, and memorandums written in his own hand, the
particulars of what he wished me to represent to your Government: he gave me,
besides, short notes of introduction to two of the members of Government, whom
he knew personally -- referring them to me for an account of his situation, and
allowing me, I believe, more credit than I deserve, for the share I had in
contributing to his final acquisition of Bidanore without drawing a sword.

It would be tedious, and more fit for the detail of conversation than of a
public address, to inform you of the various steps that led to the surrender of
the capital and province of Bidanore. I had had several conferences with HYAT
SAHIB before HYDER'S death, and endeavored to suggest to him the advantage
which would arise to him from a revolt in favor of the Company. My efforts in
these conversations ended ultimately in the most rigorous distress to myself: I
was put in irons, and remained so for four months, in a situation only of
existence without any hopes of ever escaping. When General MATHEWS had stormed
the Ghauts, HYAT SAHIB sent for me, and, after various struggles, and much
indecision, agreed to my proceeding to the English camp; and I conducted
General MATHEWS, almost unattended, into Bidanore. HYAT SAHIB at length agreed
to submit: but as, in his various conversations with me before and after that
event, he made a very particular distinction between the government of Bombay
and the chief government of the English in Indostan, so he proposed that I
should immediately depart, after he had given up the place and all the forts of
the Province, with a letter to you, to obtain your sanction to me to his
arrangements with the English General.

These arrangements were not even clearly defined before my departure; and so
anxious was he for my speedy arrival at Calcutta, that he only gave me the
general propositions that are contained in his letter.

Permit me here to observe, that it is by the treatment which HYAT SAHIB meets
with, that the other chiefs of HYDER'S country will estimate the advantage of
abandoning the interests of TIPPOO SAHIB, or will confirm their dependence upon
him. TIPPOO was prevented by his father from all intercourse with the Governors
of his provinces, or any interference in country affairs; so that those left in
charge at his father's death are stranger's to him, and are men to whom he has
little attachment. He is, besides, considered to be of a cruel disposition. His
father was cruel upon a political principle: he is thought to be so from nature.

The unfortunate differences about money which arose in General MATHEWS'S camp,
and of which you will probably hear from the Presidency of Bombay, took up much
of the General's time, and may have retarded his operations: however, his
success in the reduction of Mangalo^e gives a security to his conquests. The
revenues of the Bidanore Province are about twenty lacks of pagodas per annum.

The particular situation of the capital merits attention. It is placed in a
valley of considerable extent in circumference: according to the best
observation I could make, there is an ascent to it, from all sides, of near
seven miles: it can only be approached by four roads, which are cut among the
hills, and which were judiciously fortified with great pains by HYDER: woods,
to the depth of many miles, are a frontier round its skirts; and where these
admitted a passage, HYDER took the precaution to plant bamboos and thorns -- so
that I have little fear but that General MATHEWS will be able to defend these
passes; and as for provisions, and military stores of all kinds, that were
found in Bidanore, of the latter particularly, what, according to General
MATHEWS'S own declaration, would equip nine such armies as his.

Cundapore is the next seaport to Bidanore, and is distant about fifty miles:
Mangalore is distant about a hundred miles. The road leading from Mangalore
joins with that from Cundapore, where the ascent of the hills commence: another
road from Bidanore leads to Seringapatam, and a fourth into the Marhatta
country.

It was from the lower country, along the seacoast, between Onore and
Mangalore, which is watered by many rivers, and is the best cultivated country
I ever saw, that HYDER got the greatest part of his provisions for his army in
the Carnatic; and, independent of the advantages which the Company have gained
by the acquisition of these countries, the consequent losses of the Mysoreans
are immense, and such as will disable them from assisting the French in the
Carnatic.

It becomes not an officer of my rank to make any observations that relate to
the conduct of the different governments of my employers; but I am obliged to
observe, in justice to HYAT SAHIB'S declaration to me, that he will not rely
upon any arrangement made in his favor by the Governor and council of Bombay,
unless he has a speedy answer to his letter from this government. He has
requested me to return with that answer, and with the sanction of the
Governor-General to the cowl given to him by General MATHEWS. Though I am worn
down by my sufferings in prison, and my health can scarcely enable me to be
carried by land, I am ready to undertake this service; for I know it is the
greatest I may ever have it in my power to render to the company and to my
country.

My return to the other coast with a favorable answer to HYAT SAHIB, will be
the signal to other Chiefs to throw off the yoke of TIPPOO; and if Colonel LONG
has made any progress in the Coimbatore country, or that General MATHEWS has
not been too severely pressed by TIPPOO, I may arrive upon the other coast in
time to be of real use to the company.

I know, Honorable Sir, the liberal and great system of your administration: I
will not, therefore, point out any little circumstances about the footing upon
which I should return to HYAT SAHIB, or remain upon the other coast. I wish
only to be rewarded by my employers as I am successful; and I shall leave it to
your goodness, and to your distinguished zeal for the public propriety, to give
me any instructions for my conduct, or to charge me with any advices to General
MATHEWS, as you may think proper.

I hope you will pardon this long and irregular address, and honor me by
communicating any part of it that you may think worthy of communication to the
gentlemen of the council.

I have the honor to be, etc. etc. DONALD CAMPBELL.
P. S. When you are at leisure, and I am able to have the honor of attending
you, I would wish to communicate to you a more particular detail of my
conversation with HYAT SAHIB -- what General MATHEWS'S hopes of support from
this government were, and the future plans he then meditated -- and my ideas of
the measures that should be pursued by the Presidency of Fort St. George, to
support General MATHEWS, and improve the advantages he has gained.



To Warren Hastings, Esquire Governor-General of Bengal.

LETTER FROM HYAT SAHIB, ALLUDED TO IN THE FOREGOING.
(Usual Introduction.)
I have directed the affairs of the Soobeh of Hydernagur for some years past,
on the part of the NAVVAUB HYDER. When lately attacked by the victorious forces
of the English under the command of General MATHEWS, I opposed him, and
fulfilled my duty in every respect: but seeing the superior fortune and force
of the English, and receiving proposals for peace from General MATHEWS, by
these circumstances, but more especially by the persuasions of Captain
CAMPBELL, the son of Colonel CAMPBELL, who was formerly at Chinaputtan, I was
induced to come to terms, and delivered up to General MATHEWS the treasury,
property, stores and keys of the sorts of this country. If I had been disposed,
I had it in my power to have appropriated this collected wealth to other
purposes; but, from a regard to the high fortune of the KING of ENGLAND, and
the uprightness and integrity of the English people, I have included myself in
the number of your servants, and have determined, with the utmost sincerity and
purity of heart, to serve you well and faithfully. By the blessing of GOD,
under your auspices, my endeavors toward the well and full performance of my
duty shall be ten-fold greater than heretofore; and as General MATHEWS intends
to proceed to Seringputtam, your loyal servant will assist, to the utmost of
his ability and power. You will be fully informed on this subject by Captain
CAMPBELL. Honor, and favor, and reward, must flow from you.

From the time of your first establishment in this country to the present
period, the engagements of the English have been sacredly performed and adhered
to; nor have they been wanting in their protection of the honor and dignity of
the Surdars of Bengal, and other places. I hope, from your favor and
benevolence, that you will issue your commands to General MATHEWS, to favor me
with all due kindness and attention. I have taken shelter under the shadow of
your benevolence. Captain CAMPBELL has shown me great kindness in this respect,
and, by encouraging me to hope for your favor, has led me to become your
servant. You will be fully informed of the state of affairs in this quarter by
Captain CAMPBELL'S letters.

Written on the 25th of Suffur, A. H. 1197. A true copy, J. P. AURIOL, Sec.


LETTER TO WARREN HASTINGS, ESQUIRE
Calcutta, May 25, 1783. HONORABLE SIR,
Some time ago, I did myself the honor of writing to you, on the subject of my
mission from HYAT SAHIB to his government.

It is with pleasure I now understand that you have come to the resolution of
sending an answer to his letter. I cannot help delivering it as my opinion,
that a decided and avowed protection granted to him from this government, will
be productive of great public utility: but should you, and the other gentlemen
of the council, think proper to decline this, from motives best known to
yourselves, and of which I shall not pretend to judge, I beg leave humbly to
represent, that the sooner HYAT SAHIB'S letter is acknowledged, the more
satisfactory it will be to him, and the more efficacious in its probable good
consequences.

I am ready and anxious to proceed immediately to the other coast with the
answer to HYAT SAHIB, and shall take the liberty of hoping that you will give
me instructions to remain some time with him, that he may have an opportunity
of transmitting, through me, any communication that he may wish to establish
with this government. I have the pleasure to inform you, that that Presidency
to which I particularly belong, have granted me their consent to be employed in
the final arrangement of the Bidanore treaty, should your board think proper to
choose me as a fit person; and they have further unanimously done me the honor
to approve of my conduct in the commencement of this business.

With respect to the appointments you may judge right to allow me, I trust
entirely to your own ideas of propriety. I wish for nothing more than what is
sufficient to defray the expenses of such a journey, and to enable me to
maintain that character in a situation of this kind which is requisite to
promote the public good. I have the honor to be, with the greatest respect,

HONORABLE SIR, Your most faithful and most obedient servant, DONALD CAMPBELL.


After some delay, I received instructions, together with a letter from Mr.
HASTINGS for HYAT, with which I set off in order to deliver it into his own
hands, as follows:

LETTER TO CAPTAIN DONALD CAMPBELL.
SIR,
I have it in command from the Honorable the Governor-General and council, to
transmit you the enclosed answer from the Gevernor-General to the letter which
you brought from HYAT SAHIB, the Fousdar of Bidanore, to this government, upon
the occasion of his surrendering that country to the company. As you propose to
return to Bidanore, the Board request that you will deliver this answer in
person to HYAT SAHIB, with the assurances from them of every protection and
support which the eminent services rendered by him to the company give him so
good a right to expect, and which they have it in their power to grant; and you
will acquaint him, that they have further agreed to recommend him in such terms
to the Honorable the Court of Directors, as may encourage him to hope for
every attention from their justice.

Considering the great importance of the acquisition of Bidanore to the
company, its proportionable disadvantage to the enemy, and the magnitude of the
object to be obtained by holding out every possible incitement and
encouragement to the Managers of the Mysore country, to throw off a new and
unsettled dependence on the enemy's government, in order to obtain a more
secure and beneficial tenure from the company's possession, the Board are the
more read^ly inclined to afford this early return to the advances of HYAT
SAHIB, in the hope that it will inspire him with fresh confidence in the
English government, and rivet his attachment to it.

It will be at your option, either to return immediately with HYAT SAHIB'S
answer to the Governor-General's letter, if you shall deem it of sufficient
consequence to require it, or to remain with him, if you conceive that your
residence there for any time will be more conducive to the public interests;
but, in either case, you are desired to report the particulars of your
reception and proceedings to this government, with any other information which
you may think it useful for them to know.

I am, SIR, Your most obedient, humble servant, J. P. AURIOL, Sec.
Fort William, May 29, 1783.

It would be unpardonable in me to let this occasion pass, without expressing
the high sense I entertain of Mr. HASTINGS'S politeness, and Sir JOHN
MACPHERSON'S kindness and hospitality, during my stay at, Calcutta. As to Mr.
HASTINGS, in his public capacity, it would be presumptuous and injudicious to
say much, as he now stands for the judgment of the highest tribunal in this
country. My own observation leads me to consider him as a man of sound, acute
and brilliant talents, and of a vast and comprehensive mind -- of manners
sociable, amiable, meek and unaffected -- and of a disposition truly
benevolent. His superior knowledge of the political interests of Indostan, and
particularly of the affairs of the East India company, has never been
questioned; and, if the suffrage of the people of India may be allowed to
decide, his conduct as Governor-General, though, like every thing human,
intermixed with error, was, on the whole, great and laudable -- for I declare I
scarcely ever heard a man in India, Native or European, censure him, although
he was often the subject of conversation with all persons and in all companies
in the East.

The social virtues of Sir JOHN MACPHERSON are so well known, that it would be
superfluous to notice them. The same friendship and hospitality I experienced
in his house, has been shared by many, who are not backward in doing him ample
justice on that head. But his conduct during his short administration can be
known only by those who make the political concerns of India a subject of
studious attention: To enter into a detail of his various wise regulations for
the restoration of the company's affairs, would be destructive of the end I
propose, which is, by a concise and simple summary of the whole, to render a
fair picture of his administration so clear as to be understood by any person,
however ignorant he may be of the politics of that country, and so brief as not
to discourage the reading of it.

Sir JOHN MACPHERSON took the reins of government into his hands on the first
of February, 1785. He found the company's revenues diminished, and their
expenditure increased, by the continual claims of Proprietors, Directors, and
Ministers, to a share in the patronage of Mr. HASTINGS -- and a public debt
accumulating to an enormous amount. He therefore saw the necessity of putting
in practice every expedient possible, and trying every experiment that the
state of the country suggested, as likely to promote an increase of the
revenue, a diminution of the public expenditure, and a liquidation of the debt.
He, therefore, on the fourteenth day of his administration, commenced a reform,
which he continued with indefatigable zeal and industry to introduce through
the various departments of government -- and, beginning with himself,
discharged his body-guards. While he was thus employed in India, the Company
and Parliament in England were unremittingly engaged considering and molding
into shape a system of reform also; and, extraordinary as it may appear, the
fact is, that the sagacity of Mr. MACPHERSON had adopted by anticipation, and
actually reduced to practice, the identical speculative reforms which the
Parliament and Company were proceeding upon in England; and the general plan of
reform which passed the court of directors on the eleventh of April, 1785, had
been actually carried into execution by Sir JOHN MACPHERSON in Bengal, in the
months of February, March and April, 1785. He made arrangements for the
diffusion of knowledge -- established the settlement of Pulo Penang, or Prince
of Wales's Island -- settled the bank of Calcutta on a firm basis -- regulated
the markets -- and, by a plan of his own conception, secured the Company from
the accustomed fraudulent compositions with Zemindars, by bonding their
balances, and making the bonds cancelable only by the Court of Directors. In
fine, he introduced and carried into effect a system of reform which had a most
sudden and salutary effect on the British affairs in India; and in an
administration of only eighteen months, he had the felicity to perceive the
fruits of his wisdom and industry maturing -- to receive that best of earthly
rewards, the esteem and applause of his fellow-citizens -- and to be honored
by the best of Sovereigns with the dignity of a Baronet.

While I was at Sir JOHN MACPHERSON'S house, I happened, in conversation one
day with Mr. MACAULY, Sir JOHN'S Secretary, to be talking over some part of my
adventures; and found to my astonishment, that he had, in his route to India,
accidentally hired the very servant whom I had lost at Trieste by sending him
for letters to Venice; and Mr. MACAULY assured me, that he found him possessed
of all the good qualities I had expected to meet in him: but the poor fellow
had died before my arrival at Calcutta, to my great mortification and
disappointment.

As the season in which I was to leave Calcutta was very unfavourable for a
voyage by sea, and the coast thereabouts is one of the most inhospitable in the
world, I set off by land for Madras, and in my way had an opportunity of
surveying that curious and grotesque monument of superstitious folly, called
the Jagranaut Pagoda. It is an immense, barbarous structure, of a kind of
pyramidal form, embellished with devices cut in stone-work, not more singular
than disgusting. Christian idolators, in forming types and figures of divine
beings, always endeavor to represent them with personal beauty, as
proportionate to their divine nature as human skill can make it. Those Pagans,
on the contrary, in forming their idols, cast out every vestige of beauty --
every thing that, by the consent of mankind, is supposed to convey pleasing
sensations; and, in their place, substitute the most extravagant, unnatural
deformity, the most loathsome nastiness, the most disgusting obscenity. It is
not in language to convey an adequate idea of their temples and idols; and if
it was, no purpose could be answered by it, only the excitement of painful and
abominable sensations. To keep pace with the figures of their idols, a chief
Bramin, by some accursed artificial means, (by herbs, I believe), has brought
to a most unnatural form, and enormous dimensions, that which decency forbids
me to mention; and the pure and spotless women, who from infancy have been shut
up from the sight of men, even of their brothers, are brought to kiss this
disgusting and misshapen monster, under the preposterous belief that it
promotes fecundity.

In this Pagoda stands the figure of Jagranaut, (their god under Brama); and a
sightly figure it is truly! -- nothing more than a black stone, in an irregular
pyramidal form, having two rich diamonds in the top by way of eyes, and a nose
and mouth painted red. For this god, five hundred priests are daily employed in
boiling food, which, as he seldom eats it, they doubtless convert to their own
use in the evening.

I stopped at Vizagapatnam for a few days with Mr. RUSSEL, who was chief of
that place. His style of living was so exactly similar to that of an elegant
family residing at their country house in England, that I felt myself more
happy and comfortable than I had been since my arrival in India; and that
happiness was much increased by meeting Mr. MAXTON, who was married to Mr.
RUSSEL'S daughter. This gentleman and I had, when mere boys, been shipmates on
our first going out to India: a warm friendship took place between us, which
has met with no interruption, but rather increased from lapse of time, and
greater habits of intimacy. To see a man whom I so entirely esteemed, in
possession of the most perfect domestic felicity, and surrounded by a number of
amiable connections and friends, was to me a subject of the most pleasing
contemplation.

LETTER LXIII.
LEAVING Vizagapatam, I took my route along the coast, and arrived at
Masulipatam, where I heard rumors of the unfortunate fate of General MATHEWS.
This threw such a damp upon my spirits, that all the hospitality and kindness
of Mr. DANIEL, the chief, could scarcely raise me from despondence; and on my
arrival at Madras, I found the whole amply confirmed.

As HYAT SAHIB'S affair yet remaining unsettled, and I considered myself in a
degree pledged to obtain him some satisfaction for his services in surrendering
the province of Bidanore, and to fulfill my engagements with him and the Supreme
Council, I determined to proceed to Bombay, notwithstanding the disaster of
General MATHEWS, which had entirely crushed all my private prospects in that
quarter, and to cooperate with HYAT SAHIB in such measures as might yet remain
to us for promoting the public good. I left Madras, therefore, and prosecuted
my journey without any material interruption until I reached Palamcotah, where
the chagrin arising from my various disappointments, cooperating with fatigue
and climate, threw me into a fit of sickness, which confined me to my bed for
five or six weeks. Upon recovering a little, I crawled on to Anjengo, where, at
the house of Mr. HUTCHINSON, the Resident, (who treated me with cordial
kindness), I waited for an opportunity of getting to Bombay, and during that
time laid in a stock of strength and spirits: at length a Europe ship touched
at Anjengo on her way to Bombay, I obtained a passage and proceeded.

At Bombay I found HYAT SAHIB, it having been deemed expedient to send him away
from Bidanore on the approach of TIPPOO with his army, where I received from
him a confirmation of what I have stated respecting General MATHEWS receiving
only two lacks of rupees and a necklace. And now, as peace was negociating
between us and TIPPOO, and my remaining on the Malabar coast could be of little
use, I determined to return to the Carnatic. And here I have an incident to add
to the many disagreeable occurrences of my life, in which, with intentions the
most innocent, I was made the subject of obloquy and unmerited scandal.

Just at the time I was leaving Bombay, a young lady, the daughter of a person
formerly of high rank in India, and now a member of Parliament, but whose name
it would be useless to mention, wished to return to the Carnatic; and I, at the
request of herself, and another lady with whom she lived, unguardedly took
charge of her during the journey. Before our departure, I reflected upon the
difficulties and impropriety of this step, and communicated my ideas to the
ladies, who, instead of listening to the objections I started, pressed me to
fulfill my promise: I consented, purely from principles of politeness and
goodnature. During the course of our journey, she unfolded to me, of her own
accord, certain acts of cruelty and injustice she had suffered from her father,
at the instigation of her mother-in-law, with a story of her innocence having
fallen, and her reputation having been destroyed, by a connection of the lady
under whose charge she was, and who for that reason had pressed her departure
with me; and added, she was so disgusted with India, that she determined to
quit it; and entreated me to assist her in the accomplishment of her wishes. I
disapproved, in the most unqualified terms, of her project -- gave her the best
and most disinterested advice -- and, through the whole disagreeable business
which was imposed upon me, acted merely with a view to her honor and
happiness; and several of the most respectable people in Palamcotah, where she
passed some time, and at Madras, where she afterward resided, could attest the
delicacy of my conduct toward her, as well as the concern and interest I took
in every thing that was likely to be of advantage to her.

This is a fair statement of the matter; and yet, on account of it, I was most
infamously scandalized; and the scandal reached even the ears of my father,
whom, however, I soon satisfied on that head. But that which stung me to the
quick was the conduct of some of my own relations, (who, if they even could not
justify or approve, ought at least to have been silent), in becoming the most
virulent of my detractors -- though, when the character of those very relations
had on former occasions been reflected upon, I stood up and defended them at
the imminent hazard of my life. Such conduct appeared to me most atrocious;
for, whether from affection, selfishness, or pride, I always strenuously
supported my relations, if I heard them traduced in their absence -- and, when
I was not able to justify their proceedings, at least suppressed the
conversation. To a man who had uniformly acted so. were there even no
reciprocation of family affection, mutual justice demanded different treatment
from that I experienced, which could have sprung only from depravity of heart,
poverty of intellect, and the most abject meanness of spirit. And what is
remarkable on this, as well as on other occasions, those who had been under the
greatest obligation to my father and myself, were the most inveterate.

On the death of my father, looking over his papers in the presence of the
Deputy Sheriff of Argyll, and three other gentlemen, we met with a letter on
the subject from the young lady's father to mine, reflecting in a gross manner
on my character. I directly wrote to that gentleman, explaining the whole
affair, and demanding justice to be done to my reputation. Upon an
ecclairecissement of the matter, he wrote to me a complete apology,
acknowledging that he had acted on that occasion through misrepresentation, and
had too easily given credit to ill-founded reports; and saying, that as the
letter in question had, by the perusal of the Deputy Sheriff and other
gentlemen, in some measure become a matter of public notoriety, he thought it
incumbent on him to make that apology, and to express his sincere regret for
any detriment I might have sustained, by his yielding unguardedly to a sudden
impulse of passion, caused, as he was then perfectly convinced, by
misinformation.

Thus was my character at once cleared of a calumny which the industrious
villainy of a few had contrived to propagate through every spot of the earth
where I was known.

This story may serve as an instructive lesson to you, my FREDERICK, to avoid,
in the very first instance, any connection with women that in the probable
course of things can lead to private acts of confidence: they are at best
indiscreet -- tend, as in this case, to make a man a dupe -- and never fail to
lead to scandal and reproach. You will also, from the letter of the lady's
father, found eight or ten years after it was written among my father's papers,
see the impropriety and hazard of committing your thoughts incautiously to
paper. I have known it frequently, as in this instance, end in mortification
and regret.

Before quitting entirely the Malabar coast, I took a trip to Surat, which
amply repaid me for my trouble. It surpasses any part of India for extent and
variety of commerce, for populous streets and suburbs, and for a continually
moving scene of opulence. For a more minute account of it, I refer you to the
Abbe RAYNAL, who, though not generally accurate, is so elegant, that you will
be able, from his description, to form a lively conception of the place, and
its singular customs.

Here I was received in a very friendly manner by Mr. SETON. And indeed I may
now once for all declare, that at every place where I stopped, and every post I
passed, from my leaving England till my return, I experienced the most kind and
liberal reception, and the most assiduous attention: my wants of every kind,
whether of vessels, boats, guards of Sepoys, letters of introduction, etc.
being supplied by anticipation, I had scarcely occasion to make a request, or
express a wish; nor was the attention shown to the public service less than
that which was manifested for my private convenience. To kindness so truly
consolatory as it then was to me, I never look back without sentiments of
u^bounded gratitude and unfeigned acknowledge (...).

My journeys by land in India after my shipwreck, independent of long voyages
by sea, amounted to more than three thousand miles. After getting back to
Madras, my health being materially injured, I resolved to return to England*
but, having seen almost all the Company's possessions, I felt a curiosity to
see China, and determined to make that my way. To render this route more
agreeable to me, Lord MACARTNEY, in addition to his other favors, gave me the
following handsome letter of introduction to Mr. PIGOU, the Company's chief
supercargo at Canton:

Fort St. George, July 23, 1784. SIR,
This letter will be delivered to you by Captain DONA^D CAMPBELL, of this
Establishment -- a gentleman who has signalized himself on many occasions, but
more particularly by his ability and address in accomplishing the surrender of
the fort of Bidanore, at which place he had been long a prisoner. His ill state
of health contracted there, renders a voyage to China, perhaps to Europe,
absolutely necessary. Should he remain any time at your Settlement, I shall be
much obliged to you for any attention and civility shown to him; and I shall be
happy, on any occasion you may afford me, of returning your polite attention to
an officer of so much merit as Captain CAMPBELL, and of proving how much I am,

SIR, Your most obedient and most humble servant, MACARTNEY,

To William Henry Pigou, Esquire.

I had also a letter to Mr. FREEMAN, another Supercargo there; by whom, as well
as by Mr. PIGOU, I was treated with great politeness; and Mr. FREEMAN being
obliged to leave Canton, and go to Macao, for the recovery of his health,
invited me to accompany him there. I availed myself of the opportunity: and, as
we went all along through the rivers, had an opportunity of seeing more of the
country than many of the Europeans who visit that country. With the
observations which I made in the course of this excursion and my residence at
Canton, I would furnish you, but that Lord MACARTNEY'S embassy is just returned
from that country; and there is every reason to hope that he, or some of the
gentlemen who attended him, and who possess superior abilities and more ample
materials, will favor the public with a much more perfect account than mine
could possibly be.

While I remained at Canton, a very disagreeable rupture took place between the
Factory and the Chinese. An English ship lying at Wampoa, in saluting,
shattered a Chinese boat; by which accident, two men in it were much hurt with
the splinters, and one of them died of his wounds soon after. The matter was
clearly explained to the Mandarins; and they seemed to be satisfied that it was
merely an accident. A few days after, the Supercorgo of the ship was forcibly
seized, and carried into the city: the Council met, and determined to send for
the sailors from the ships; and in the evening after dark, fifteen or sixteen,
boats, with four or five hundred men attempted, in an irregular manner, to come
up to Canton -- were fired upon by the Chinese boats and forts in passing, and,
with a few men wounded, were compelled to retreat. Nothing could surpass the
consternation and indecision of the Council; and after the most humiliating
language, they were obliged to appease the Chinese, and settle the affair by
giving up the gunner of the ship to their resentment.

On the 29th December, 1784, I embarked in the Ponsborne East-Indiaman, Captain
HAMMET, in which I had come from Madras to China; and, after a tolerable voyage
of five months and two days, got on board a fishing boat off Falmouth, and was
put on shore there, having been exactly four years and five days from England.

Such was my impatience to see you, that I wrote from Falmouth for you to meet
me at Bath. We arrived there the same day: and never in my life did I
experience such transports as in first pressing you to my bosom; I found you
all that my heart could wish; and I must, in justice to my opinion, aver, that
not one action of your life has tended since to give me a moment's pain: on the
contrary, I have every reason to be satisfied that my sanguine hopes of you
will be realized. The turn of your thoughts and actions have been vigilantly
watched and closely examined by me; and from your affection to myself and your
mother, your gentle deportment to my domestics, your frankness and candor with
your brother and school-fellows -- even from your fondness for your favorite
dog Pompey, and frequent silent contemplations of the etchings of his
countenance, I have drawn the most pleasing presages of purity and innocence of
heart, sweetness of temper, and refined honor and generosity. If it pleases
GOD to spare your life, and strengthen your constitution, I shall still be the
happiest of men, notwithstanding the inroad made upon my feelings by the
hardships and afflictions I had undergone, of which many arose from unavoidable
accident, and some from malignant and unnatural persecution, arising from base
envy, dictated by cowardly revenge. I do not wish you to know who the wretches
are: I only wish you to know that such detestable passions do exist in human
nature -- that, warned by their wickedness to me, you may, in your progress
through life, be cautious, temperate and guarded.

Another thing I am anxious to impress upon the mind, particularly, of your
brother JOHN, is the danger of a warm, impetuous temper. Many of the hazards
and difficulties of my life arose from the predominance of a fiery spirit, and
an ungovernable, mistaken ambition. A single instance will serve to show it.
When I was under the command of Captain, afterward General MATHEWS, in his
regiment of cavalry, being cantoned at a place called Tuckolam, in the
neighborhood of extensive woods, information was brought us that wild bulls
infested the neighboring villages, and had killed some people: we prepared to
enter the wood, and destroy, if possible, these ferocious animals, which had
become the terror and destruction of the contiguous country. The origin of
those wild herds was this -- From time immemorial, a religious custom had
prevailed among the Pagan inhabitants, of offering a calf to the wood upon the
accomplishment of any favorite purpose, such as the safe delivery of his wife,
or the obtaining an employment, etc. In process of time, those calves bred, and
became numerous and incredibly fierce. Independent of protecting the
defenseless natives, it was in itself a most interesting kind of hunting. The
mode of doing it was this -- A large party, well mounted, galloping in a body
up to a great flock, and marking out the fiercest champion of the whole,
attacked him with swords and pistols. One day, a bull which was wounded, and
thereby rendered more fierce, though not less vigorous, got posted in some
thick bushes, in such a manner as to be approached only in front: a whim of the
most extravagant kind came into my head, suggested by vainglory and youthful
fire -- I thought it ungenerous for so many to attack him at once; and, wishing
to have the credit of subduing him, I dismounted from my horse, and attacked
him with a pike: I soon, however, had cause to repent this rash and
unwarrantable step; it had nearly been fatal to me -- for the bull soon threw
the pike into the air, and, had it not been for the very gallant exertions of
my brother officers, who rode in upon him, and rescued me at the moment that
the brute's horns had touched my coat, I must have been killed. An Indian
officer, who was in my troop, particularly distinguished himself, at the
imminent hazard of his life, the bull having tossed his horse and himself to a
distance from his horns. At this time I was but eighteen years of age, and had
not the judgment to reflect, that if I had been killed, my fate would be
attended with only pity or scorn for my folly; whereas, had I succeeded, the
whole reward of my danger would have been the useless applause of some
youngsters, idle and incensiderate as myself -- while my rashness would have
been reprobated by every man whose good opinion was worth enjoying. One or two
people who were present at the time, are now living in great repute in England.
We succeeded, however, in driving those wild cattle into the interior recesses
of the wood, dividing the flesh of those we killed among such of the poor
S^poys as would eat it, and thereby rendered essential service to the
contiguous villages.

Often when I have heard, in coffee-houses and play houses, some of our
sporting sparks boasting of their prowess over a timid hare or a feeble fox, I
could not help recollecting with respect the hunters of India, who chase the
destructive monsters of the forest -- the boar, the tiger, the hyena, the bull,
or the buffalo; and, while they steel the nerves, animate the courage, and, by
habitual deeds of pith, fit themselves for war, ^ender essential service to
their fellow creatures, and save the lives and property of thousands. Such
greatness of spirit, under the control of good sense, and the direction of
prudence, must render a man respectable -- but, if not managed with discretion,
leaves a man no other praise than that of a magnanimous madman. Take every
opportunity, my dear FREDERICK, of inculcating these precepts in the mind of
your brother: the natural warmth of his temper often makes me fearful of the
mischievous consequences which I have myself too often experienced -- though, I
thank GOD, it never stimulated me to revenge, or to a premeditated intention of
injur^^g any one.

I have already said more than once, that I have a most perfect conviction your
amiable disposition will ensure to you the love of mankind; but it will at the
same time subject you to many impositions -- to gaurd against which, a great
share of sternness is sometimes necessary: there is, besides, a certain degree
of fortitude absolutely requisite to give luster to a gentle disposition;
without it, meekness is thought timidity -- modesty, weakness -- and the
charming mildness of the forgiving heart, abused as the pitiful resource of
abject apprehensio^ and a mean spirit. There are times, therefore, when the
wickedness of men, and the customs of the world, make it necessary to lay aside
the lamb, and assume the lion. EUROPE at this moment presents an awful and
alarming crisis. In a neighboring country, the conduct of the higher classes
of society has produced a dreadful convulsion:social order has been subverted,
and the stability of property annihilated: all reasoning from the history of
former times is found inapplicable to the present: the system of warfare itself
has undergone a revolution; and no man is able to say from positive inference,
"Thus will it be to morrow." Our insular situation, thank GOD! protects us: and
the precarious footing upon which civil order and property stand in most
countries on the continent, make our state in England enviable. The time is
nevertheless pregnant with extraordinary event; and you are now approaching
that age at which men should be ready to act at the call of their country. It
is therefore fitting for you to make such things the subject of frequent
contemplation -- to habituate your mind to the meeting of danger, so as to be
ready, at a moment's warning, to lay down your life, if necessary, for the good
of your country; for, after all, my FREDERICK, what avails it whether we die in
this way or in that? -- to die with honor and a good conscience, is all. Let
prejudice be laid aside -- and who, possessed of common sense, could hesitate a
moment to prefer death in the field, to death with the loathsome aggravation of
sickness, the crocodile tears of pretended friends, and the painful emotions
and lamentations of those who really love us?

Finally, I must observe, that at the time I left India, the affairs of the
British Nation wore so very lowering an aspect, all persons acquainted with our
concerns there, allowed nothing but a long series of wise measures, with the
best efficient servants to execute them, could re^cue the company from ruin. I
am happy in being able now to state, without the possibility of contradiction,
that the clouds which menaced us in that quarter have since been gradually
dissipating beneath the measures of the BOARD of CONTROL, under the direction
of Mr. DUNDAS; and are at last entirely dispersed by the glorious
administration of Lord CORNWALLIS, whose wisdom in the cabinet tended no less
to the security, than his military talents, justice and moderation, to the
honor, of GREAT BRITAIN in the East. The choice of such a person for the
government of India, reflects credit on HIS MAJESTY'S Councils, and evinces
that the paternal care and solicitude of our amiable SOVEREIGN extend to the
most remote part of the Empire.

END OF PART III.
APPENDIX. LETTER FROM GENERAL MATHEWS, TO THE COURT OF DIRECTORS OF THE EAST
INDIA COMPANY. (REFERRED TO IN THE FOREGOING LETTERS.)
HONORABLE SIRS,
I HAVE the honor of informing you of the success of your arms on the Malabar
coast. You will have received advices of the outset of the expedition from
Bombay, and the general purport of it. On the 12th of December, I sailed with a
small party; and thought proper, of my own accord, to land at Rajamundroog, in
preference to any other place -- because, on this part of the coast. I had the
double advantage of being able to secure myself until reinforced, and to
procure provisions, which I could not have done at Cundapore, or any place to
the southward, by reason of the numerous garrisons, and the vicinity of them to
the capital. The measures and dispositions of the gentlemen at Bombay were
such, that I could not place any dependence upon being timely reinforced from
thence, or of having any supply of provisions. Rajamundroog is on the top of a
high hill, and commands the entrance of the best river on the coast. We took it
by storm. The moment we landed, a short time was taken up in preparing to move
toward Onore; for we had not a cooly, carriage, or bullock, to convey any
stores. The battering cannon, ammunition, provisions, etc. were sent by sea;
and the great additions that HYDER had made to the fortifications of Onore and
fortified Island, prevented my entering the river with the small craft, and
obliged me to land every thing through a heavy surf on the beach, and then to
cross the river to the northward of the fort. These impediments were got over;
and a practicable breach being effected, the assault was made -- and the
garrison, consisting of two thousand five hundred men, were either killed,
drowned, or made prisoners. -- Shortly after this event, the troops from the
southward, under Lieutenant Colonel MACLEOD, were landed at Rajamundroog. To
wait for a junction, would take up much time: so, that not a moment should be
lost, I embarked, and landed near Cundapore, under the fire of the Bombay Grab
and the Intrepid, and immediately seized a small fort that served to secure our
stores. The enemy were in sight, and seemed numerous: some prisoners that we
took, reckoned them at twelve hundred horse, one thousand Sepoys, and five
hundred Peons. My party was composed of three hundred and fifty Europeans, six
hundred Sepoys, and four small fieldpieces -- with which I marched, first
toward the enemy, who drew back, and then I proceeded to Cundapore. They
incommoded my rear very much; but being determined to attack the fort, I only
acted on the defensive, and at seven in the evening got possession of the fort,
and the several redoubts that commanded the river. The grand object of the
expedition, an attack upon Bidanore, remained to be undertaken; and much
serious reflection it required before the hazardous enterprise should be
determined on. -- Your Honors will now take a view of the state of my army: No
carriage-bullock, and the few draft not able to draw eight light fieldpieces
-- not a cooly to carry musket, ammunition or provisions -- not a tent -- and
many officers, HIS MAJESTY'S in particular, had not a single servent -- neither
bullock or sheep to be had, the enemy having drove them off. The army, at this
time, consisted of about eleven hundred effective Europeans, and three thousand
Sepoys. The distance from Cundapore to the foot of the Ghaut is thirty miles,
through a woody country: the enemy's army had been reinforced, and lay in the
way. The reports of the strength of the various works that defended the pass up
the mountains, was such as gave me but very faint hope of success; and the
difficulty of supplying my troops with rice, was almost of itself sufficient to
deter a person from the attempt. However, having positive orders to take
possession of Bidanore, I resolved to make a trial, and issued directions for
the march. We had not gone six miles, before the enemy opposed us in force. We
pushed forwards; and, by the effect of well served artillery, and the
steadiness of the men, the enemy retired as we advanced. The skirmish continued
about three hours -- after which we were left to pursue our route unmolested;
nor did the enemy make any stand till we were on the fourth day's march, within
three miles of the pass -- where, the ground being favorable, they attempted
opposition, and were roughly treated, losing, by the bayonet and shot, above
three hundred men. They were pursued to a small fort, which was immediately
abandoned; and then fled to the first barrier or entrance of the pass. This was
a line of masonry that covered all the open ground, and was closed by woods to
the right and left. Upon six bastions were mounted fifteen pieces of cannon;
and on the left was a work on a steep mountain, with two twelve pounders. This
altogether had too formidable an appearance to attack in front; but having
reconnoitred the right, I imagined that the flank might be turned by ascending
the hill through the wood. Early in the morning, two parties were formed -- one
to attempt the flank, the other to escalade the wall; but the enemy saved us
that trouble by evacuating the place. This was a happy moment to try the pass;
for the enemy, by felling trees, etc. would have thrown so many obstacles in
the way, that the want of provision would have compelled me to relinquish the
design. A party was instantly ordered to follow the enemy up the hill, which,
with little loss, gained the second barrier, on which were mounted eleven guns.
Fifty of the enemy were killed or taken at this work. Having this success, I
relieved the exhausted by fresh detachments, which excited emulation, and
encouraged the ardour of the Sepoys; for, to the unremitting exertions of this
branch of your troops is due the honor of this day. Battery after battery was
taken; and the possession of the sort on the top of the Ghaut, about five in
the afternoon, called Hyderghur, crowned the whole. At this fort we found
mounted thirty pieces of cannon, from twenty-four to four pounders; and at the
different works in the pass, forty others, from four to twelve.

When we contemplated the numerous redoubts and the height of the Ghaut, and
were told by prisoners that we had drove off seventeen thousand men, including
dismounted cavalry, regular Sepoys, and match-lock Peons, we could not consider
the victory we had gained as due to us -- our weak efforts would have been in
vain. The progress of your arms is to be ascribed to the Divine will. In the
course of this war, Providence has been peculiarly bountiful -- When we were in
want of rice, we were sure to find a supply left for our use by the enemy --
when our musquet-ammunition was expended, the enemy's magazines furnished us
abundantly -- cannon we found in every fort, and such quantities of warlike
stores, that we are apt to suppose that HYDER supplied all his garrisons from
this coast and from Bidanore. Hyderghur is about fourteen miles from
Hydernagur, alias Bidanore, the capital of the Province.

In the night of the day that we gained the Ghaut, I was visited by Captain
DONALD CAMPBELL, the son of Colonel CHARLES CAMPBELL. He had been wrecked off
the coast, was seized, and kept in irons, until the approach of this army
caused the Jemadar to release him, to employ him as an Ambassador. His message
was, that the Jemadar having lost his Master (HYDER), and being upon bad terms
with TIPPOO SAHIB, would willingly put himself under the protection of the
Company, provided that the management of the country was continued to him. The
idea of getting possession of the capital and the forts of the kingdom toward
Seringapatam, as well as the very great advantage I might expect from his
experience, abilities and influence, with the weak state of my army, induced me
to close with the proposal; and I sent him a cowl, signifying that his power
and influence should not be lessened. This, though not drawn with a pen of a
lawyer, was equal in value to the capital of Bidanore. Captain CAMPBELL
returned with it, and was to tell the Jemadar that I should march in ^he
morning.

Not expecting the great success that we had met with by forcing the pass on
the main road, I had detached Lieutenant Colonel MACLEOD to the left to ascend
the Ghaut through a narrow path, in order to attack Hyderghur in the tear. The
absence of this detachment, and the fatigue of the former day, reduced my party
to about four hundred Europeans and seven hundred Sepoys; and all my guns were
at the bottom of the Ghaut. With this detachment I moved toward Bidanore, and
was within a mile of the walls before any message came from Captain CAMPBELL or
the Jemadar: but having nothing to apprehend in the field from the panic-struck
enemy, we continued our march until the welcome approach of Captain CAMPBELL
assured me the place was our own. On entering it, I was pleased to see about
four hundred of your Sepoys that had been taken in the Carnatic, who offered me
their service. Upon visiting the Jemadar, I repeated my assurances, that while
he behaved faithfully to the Company, the management of the country should be
continued to him; and, although the sword must be in your hands, that he should
have as much power and influence as his station required and that you would not
refuse settling upon him very ample allowances. The enemy being in force, and
my army much weakened, with other disagreeable matters that occured, prevented
my further advance than to take possession of two forts to the Eastward; for,
being apprehensive that the Killidar of Mangalore would not deliver up that
place to the order of HYAT SAHIB, and considering that famous seaport of more
consequence to your affairs than acquiring territory beyond the mountains, I
held myself in readiness to march that way, and was forced to lay siege to it.
A practicable breach being made, the Killidar thought proper to surrender it.
Upon this happy event give me leave to congratulate you; for it partly secures
our conquests from Carwar to Cananore. There are two or three places that I
have not been able to summons; but as these garrisons cannot expect any
succor, they will fall of course.

Thus have I given your honors a short recital, from the first landing of your
arms on the 12th of December, to the reduction of Mangalore on the 9th of
March; in which short time a series of success has attended us that can hardly
be paralleled. All the enemy's marine has fallen in our hands, among which are
eight ships of the line, either built or on the stocks; and five of them might
be sent to sea in a short time. After informing you of the happy and glorious
success of your arms, it is painful for me to tell you, that dissension in the
army, on account of plunder and booty, has arisen to such a height as to
threaten open mutiny. I have informed your Honors of the terms that the
Jemadar required, and that I in your name granted; and you know in how peacable
a manner this capital was resigned to you. I am sorry to say, that HIS
MAJESTY'S officers have been foremost in the clamours; and that the agents
appointed by them have occasioned me much trouble and anxiety, and a great deal
of discontent throughout the army. I shall send you copies of the several
letters that have passed, for your determination. They may suppose that I have
appropriated treasure to my own use, or bargained to restore the private
property of the Jemadar to him; or that I should agree that he should call all
treasure and jewels his private property, to the exclusion of what of right
should belong to the Honorable Company or the captors. I have only to assure
your Honors, that I have made no bargain whatever, either public or private,
but what was expressed in the cowl sent from Hyderghur, to which Captain
CAMPBELL was witness: and as I have frequently mentioned to my friends, that I
would not receive a present of consequence without the consent of the
Honorable Company, I shall inform you, that on my first visit the Jemadar
insisted on making me a present of a lack of rupees; and when he pleased to
give a donation to the army of two lacks and thirty thousand of rupees, which
sum waits your pleasure, he requested I would accept of another lack of rupees.
To both of these requests respecting myself, I replied, that provided your
Honors would give me leave, I should certainly embrace that fortunate moment
to gain an independence, and shall wait your orders as to the disposal of two
lacks of rupees. How far my former and the present services may entitle me to
your good opinion, and to your acquiescence in thus rewarding me, is left to
the generosity of your Honors: but I beg that you will believe, that during
the course of my services, every thing of a similiar nature shall be laid
before you.

If it were possible to satisfy the avidity of a body of men, this little army
would have a suffiency of honor and profit to fill the most greedy; but the
infirmities of nature are not to be controuled by reason. Avarice of the most
pernicious tendency has pervaded the limits of sense, and stepped beyond the
bounds of duty. The army, not content with acquiring, at the different places,
that has been taken on the coast in ships of war, naval stores, merchandise,
etc. etc. and in goods of various kinds at Bidanore, which altogether the
Jemadar says may be valued at thirty lacks of pagodas; they seek to deprive the
Jemadar of his private property, under pretense of the lawful rights of war;
and assume a style and manner in their clamours and united addresses, that
appears intended to force from me what I think ought to be preserved for the
public service, and for the benefit of the Honorable Company. The manner that
the fort and city was delivered to the company, does not authorize me to touch
private property; and the cowl implies a perfect securtiy for all such. Would
your honors be pleased, that by any rapacious action of your Commander in
Chief, that he or the troops should forfeit the good opinion that may be
entertained of them from their rapid success, or that the public service should
be considered as a secondary object? Our name has fallen almost to contempt,
but, as far as lays in my power, it shall be recovered, if not raised to its
former eminence.

Mangalore, March 16, 1783.

