AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE BENEVOLENT CONGREGATIONAL MEETING HOUSE IN
PROVIDENCE, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, A. D. 1798, IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE.

BY SAMUEL W. BRIDGHAM, A. M.

Hic dies vere festus atras
Eximet Curas.
HORACE. PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY CARTER AND WILKINSON, AND SOLD AT THEIR BOOK-STORE.
1798.

AN ORATION.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
WE are now assembled to celebrate the most splendid era that graces the annals
of nations: An era, the recollection of which kindles up a laudable and lively
ardour in the breasts of patriots. Ever since the memory of man, most nations
have distinguished certain epochas commemorative of great events. The object of
this assembly is not to celebrate the natal day of a powerful monarch, at whose
feet we supine ourselves with base humility; not to bear in mind the many
victims which have been immolated, to satisfy the thirst of regal ambition; but
to water with our tears the laurels that decorate the tombs of our ancestors,
to rejoice in liberty, and to hail the birthday of our national independence.
The celebration of this day, like the tattered ensign which has survived the
battles of our fathers, brings to our recollection the miseries of foreign
subjugation, inspires us with military ardour, unites with a magic power the
sons of freedom, and vibrates her energies in the bosoms of Americans. Already,
on similar occasions, has the tongue of the orator bestowed all the tropes of
eloquence, and the pen of the poet lavished all the flights of fancy upon the
splendor of American victories. The heroes who bled in our revolutionary war,
have been sung by our bards in the highest strains of panegyric. But on this
anniversary, new scenes arise in our political hemisphere. Twelve months seldom
produce a greater change in the political sentiments of any nation, than that
which the events of the same period have produced in America. Let us pass over,
but not forget, the deeds of former times, and take a short survey of the
causes which produced this great revolution in our bosoms.

Twenty two revolving years have now elapsed, since the sun of freedom arose in
majesty on this western world. When he first appeared above the horizon, his
beams, like those of yonder brilliant luminary, at times were encircled with
vapor and smoke; but his luster increased in full proportion to his ascent. We
pursued him in his refulgent career, until every cloud was lost in his
brightness. We beheld him diffusing life, and splendor, and joy, over four
millions of people. Since the termination of the late American war, the United
States have attracted the attention of all nations. Our profitable commerce has
whitened our coasts with the canvass of the world. The tree of liberty, planted
by the hand of GOD himself, cherished by our ancestors, and watered with their
blood -- that tree whose branches shade the Union, has invited the oppressed
from all quarters of the globe, and with them some turbulent and factious
spirits, who never can rest under any government, have been admitted. " Hinc
ille mali labes" -- hence part of our misfortunes -- they are not only
admitted, but join our public councils. Such is the incautious benignity of our
laws! No tyrant here sways the iron scepter of uncontrouled dominion. Our
Constitution and Government are founded on the immutable principles of justice,
and our laws display mildness in their composition, and inflexibility in their
execution. Their influence, like the light of Heaven, spreads equally on all
distinctions of men. This happy condition of our country has raised her high on
the rolls of fame. Her brilliancy lights up the countenance, and her imposing
majesty commands veneration.

Nations and individuals are governed by the self-same principles of action.
Impartiality, integrity, honor and virtue, have ever been the striking
characteristics of the United States, in their intercourse with foreign
nations. In no instance can they be charged with a violation of any of these
great and fundamental principles of justice and policy. Whenever
misunderstandings have prevailed, they have always hitherto, one instance
excepted, been adjusted by amicable accommodation. Since the commencement of
the wonderful convulsions which at this moment agitate all Europe to its
center, the situation of the United States has been truly alarming. England,
that nation from whom we once boasted that our ancestors descended, has
committed depredations on our commerce. Jealous of our friendship, from that
strong attachment which at the commencement of the French revolution seemed to
have bound us to France by an inseparable connection, and stung with the
remembrance of former resentments, she attempted the disturbance of the
tranquillity and repose of this country. Every action which wore the least
appearance of partiality toward France increased her jealousy, and sharpened
the dagger of her resentment. But the great event we now celebrate, and the
pure and unconquerable spirit of united America, have taught her the useful
lesson, that we are, and will be, free and independent.

Had France been equally rational and docile, our friendship with her might
have still subsisted. But she spurned the olive branch which we held out to all
nations, and which England, Spain, and many other powers, have thought it an
honor to accept.

The French revolution, that great system, burst forth so suddenly, and with
such a glare of novelty, that the eyes of mankind were dazzled with its beams.
America beheld the spectacle with astonishment, and was for a time fascinated
with the striking but deceptive colors which glittered in the eyes of a
deluded imagination. At this period France solemnly proclaimed to the world
that a free Constitution was her object, and that liberty and equality, or the
rights of man, were the pole star of her conduct. Firmly relying on the
sincerity of ^his declaration, American hearts triumphed at the glory of her
victories. Blinded with the false glare of her professions, and with a strong
sense of obligation to a country whose rulers had been our friends, we implored
Heaven that conquest might attend her arms. But these enchanting scenes, these
" baseless fabrics of a vision," which so enraptured Americans, are dissolved,
and, like a beautiful frost-work, melted into nothing. Our fondest
expectations, the tender leaves of hope, were blasted by the mildews of faction
and anarchy. Fondness for novelty, though in some degree common to all men, is
particularly characteristic of the French nation. The merits of that political
fabric, by revolutionary demoniacs in France called a Constitution, were to be
decided, not by the unbiassed determination of the people, but they were
compelled to admire and adore it with the bayonet at their breasts. While the
people of France were enraptured with this new political prodigy, their
iniquities were confined within their own territories. The bloody massacre of
their King and Queen, of their men of honor, of genius, of virtue, of science,
of morality and of religion, was but the commencement of the awful tragedy of
wicked rapacity and legalized murder. The charm of novelty was however soon
dissipated; but the thirst for domination and power still remained. Intoxicated
with ambition, they viewed the rising interests of their neighbors with
suspicion. Their envy excited schemes of innovation, inconsistent with their
own pretended Constitution and the rights of the people, contrary to the laws
of nations, and repugnant to the eternal principles of humanity, justice and
religion. What part of their Constitution, or what rights of the people,
authorized them to confine thousands, without even the forms of trials, in
dungeons, or to stretch them on the scaffold of judicial murder? Where were the
laws of nations, when they invaded Holland, and displaced the Stadtholder? When
they penetrated Italy, subjugated her provinces, erected their military
governments, and reduced a flourishing country to a heap of ruins? When they
assaulted the happy and unoffending Cantons of Switzerland? When they
piratically invaded the commerce of America? Where was their humanity, when
they countenanced wild and savage tumult to prowl about the streets of their
mighty metropolis? When they massacred universally, without distinction of age
or sex? When the smoke of villages darkened the face of Heaven? Where was their
religion, when even the house of GOD was polluted by their crimes, and by their
sacrilege the tomb itself was no refuge from their violence? Where was their
justice, when, after pillaging almost to annihilation the trade of the United
States, they demanded of them upwards of FIFTEEN MILLIONS OF DOLLARS, merely
for the purchase of common civility? This is their boasted liberty and
equality! How opposite in its effects to American freedom, that emanation from
Heaven, which sublimes our souls, and which is interwoven with the very web of
our existence. An enthusiastic people, struggling for universal empire, and the
subjugation of the world, is pourtrayed in lively colors in every feature of
French politics. While France pursued rational liberty, we rejoiced in the
glory of her arms; but when she lost sight of her first object, and pursued a
phantom -- when she deluged the world with blood, we lamented her departure
from the paths of political integrity. The paroxysm of this revolutionary fever
in France, has produced atrocities sufficient to " harrow up our souls" with
indignation, and " to curdle the blood in our veins." Liberty has been
profaned, humanity has been outraged. True liberty, the daughter and best gift
of Heaven, is inseparable from virtue, from science, from morality, and from
all the tender ties of social life. To preserve our Constitution and government
entire, is our united object. -- Amidst all the violent convulsions produced by
the French revolution, America has preserved a firm and unshaken neutrality.
Notwithstanding the bold clamours of malevolence, and the sly insinuations of
intrigue, America has never departed from the great principles of national
justice, integrity and honor, or violated the solemn faith of national
compacts. We have not only suffered great injuries from the hands of France,
but we have been treated with the grossest insult, and most supercilious
contempt. All this we have borne with calm dignity, and unabated resolution.
She was sensible of our attachment to her, and availed herself of it. She let
loose her armed vessels, like tigers, to prey upon our defenseless commerce,
while she hypocritically courted our friendship. Little did we think that the
smile of friendship on the face, veiled the canker of malice at the heart. No
pretext has been omitted to plunder our property, and to insult the majesty of
the nation. Her ships of war, for robbery and plunder, have approached within
the very bodies of our counties. To adjust these injuries, ministers, clothed
with full powers for negotiation, were dispatched from the United States to
France. The effects of this embassy are too well known to require any comment.
Methinks I see indignation flash in your countenances, and the American blood
boil in your veins, while I mention the subject. Upwards of FIFTEEN MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS have been demanded of us, merely as the price of an audience with five
execrable tyrants. These are the fruits of French liberty. Will you, my
countrymen, ingloriously submit to these base requisitions? Will you tamely
surrender your independence into hands polluted with robbery and with murder?
Will you hear the yoke and the scour^^ of foreign usurpation, like beasts of
burden and basely cringe and ^^wn for more imposition* Or will you rise and
resent your injuries, with an indignation proportionate, if possible, to the
aggravations of the offense? The number and the spirit of the addresses, which,
on the disclosure of the base designs of that haughty republic, have been
presented to our Executive from all quarters of the Union, declare, with
emphasis, the feelings of our cit^zens upon this great n^tional subject. "Let
us," in the bold and energetic language of my immediate predecessor, GEORGE R.
BUR^^^^, Esquire
"at least receive one volley, before we throw down our arms." The very term
independence of which it is our pride to boast, implies an entire separation
from dependence on a connection with any power or nation on earth for
protection, when the existence of our country is endangered. Let us neither
grovel at the feet of the French republic, nor cringe to the monarchy of
England; but firmly repeat, what our great ancestors in the face of Heaven
declared, "that we are, and of right ought to be, a free, sovereign and
independent people." Weak and timorous debates no longer degrade our national
councils. In this common danger, all party contests sink into oblivion; and
whilst our unanimity remains firm and decided, I trust our strength will remain
irresistible. From St. Croix to St. Mary's, but one voice, the voice of
firmness to support our government, and to oppose the vile machinations of an
insidious foe, echoes from the people -- while the genius of our country cries,
" To arms! to arms!"

Here let us pause a moment, to indulge that sense of gratitude which we feel
toward the great Executive of our nation. The blessings of peace induced him
to make every overture, and to comply with all the requisitions which were
consistent with the honor, the safety and the dignity of his country; but when
he discovered an attempt to humiliate and debase us, his bosom glowed with that
ardour of resentment which burns in the breast of an undaunted patriot. The
philanthropy, ^he patriotism, and the firmness of our President and his
predecessor, command the respects and veneration of Americans. Fame shall
escort the names of WASHINGTON and ADAMS down the long range of future ages,
and Time shall record them with a name as lasting as his own.

I cannot close my observations on this great occasion, without warning my
fellow-citizens of the danger of foreign influence. It strikes at the very root
of the Constitution. It secretly cankers the vitals of government, and unne^ves
the arm of jus^ice Though its first aspect is as harmless as the light vapors
that wantonly play across the summer's sky, yet it bears in its bosom the
elements of death. France has employed her secret ^gents* her private
correspondents, and her jac^b^nic inc^ndiaries, to rouse sedition, and to
spread over our land the spirit of disorganization. But by the influence of the
genius of freedom, and by the interposition of Heaven, their wicked
machinations have all been defeated. Let us then guard against this pestilence
that walks in darkness. In vain will he shelter himself in his cavern from
the strong rays of national resentment.

Citizens in Arms, I rejoice that your numbers and your Referring to the
company of Cadets.
char^^ters increase in proportion to the danger of the times. It Is a mark of
true magnanimity, to cultivate with attention the military art for the defense
of your country. -- Should she call, gladly obey her summons, in full
confidence that should you perish in her cause, patriots will weep over your
graves, and flowers of glory will bloom upon your tombs.

Fellow-Citizens,

FINIS

