ADDRESS DELIVERED AT NEWFIELD, CONNECTICUT.

^N THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, JULY 4, 1798.

By the Rev. SAMUEL BLATCHFORD.

PRINTED BY LAZARUS BEACH.

At a meeting of the Inhabitants of Newfield, on the 4th of July, 1798.
Voted -- That the Committee for the day be appointed to wait on the Rev. Mr.
BLATCHFORD, and return him the thanks of this meeting, for his address
delivered this day, and request a copy of the same for the Press.

JOSIAH LACEY, President.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
THERE can be no one present who requires an apology for the business of this
day: and were there any we conceive it needs none. Animated in our country's
cause, and fired by the love of patriotic virtue, we feel it to be an
interesting duty to commemorate our deliverances, to exult under a just sense
of the blessings we enjoy, to cherish a high spirit of Independence, and to
cultivate dispositions worthy our priveleges and humanity. The grateful
returns, these, to society and to heaven, for gifts so signal and unrivalled.

I could have wished, indeed, that the part I now take, at your request, had
been assigned to some other: my short residence in this country, and the little
comparative knowledge I have of those brilliant transactions, which made the
fourth of July a proud day for America, have naturally induced a diffidence,
which is not lessened, by a reflection on several characters which compose this
assembly; whose fortitude, whose sacrifices, and personal exertions,
contributed to raise that fair monument of Glory, which has exc^ted the
admiration of a world, and increased the happiness of millions!

IT has been truly observed that Liberty is to the political body, what health
it to the natural; its enjoyment, its vigor, and its brilliance. So far as it
is wanting, a country is distempered and deformed; and where it is totally
destroyed, a country however advantageously placed on the great map of the
universe, is but a scene of substantial misery, a prison of living men, where
life and freedom, and property, every thing which reason holds dear, are the
contemptous sport of caprice and cruelty -- but here Freedom and Independenee
have unfurled their banners. The Constitution under which you live was framed
by yourselves -- Your rulers are the objects of your voluntary choice -- Your
public expenditures are directed to the good of the whole, and the conscience
of every individual is consequently charged with making the national funds
adequate to the exigences of the State; with discouraging all foolish talking
and jestings which may tend to lessen the reverence due to constituted
authorities; and with watching, with anxious ^are, that those bonds are nor
slackened which hold society together. By a remiss conduct as it respects these
high concerns yours will be the blame, when the huricane is abroad in the
world, and doing its work of mischief.

THE REVOLUTION which gave birth to your priveleges and raised you to a
distinguished rank amongst the nations of the world, affords many interesting
scenes of contemplation to the patriot and philosopher, who will love to dwell
upon the subject, instruct their offspring in the principles which induced it,
and inculcate upon them the wisdom and virtue of living under a good government.

THERE is a fatal prejudice in favor of prerogative, by which sovereigns
imagine themselves set above the laws of strict equity; and which they too
often use as masks only, more surely to conceal and disguise their ambitious
views. It is however certain that in Princes as well as in Subjects, injustice
may be compared to counterfeit money which discovers real misery; and that part
of the community involved in it will seek, naturally, as speedy a relief as may
be.

YOUR Forefathers sought it in a way honorable to themselves, and in the issue
astonishingly advantageous to society. -- They separated themselves from their
native Country -- broke through the connections of their youth -- braved the
dangers of the Atlantic Ocean, and found an assylum in the uncultivated wilds
of America. Here indeed they had to cultivate a fortitude which could brook
sufferings -- and a mind not to be subdued by hardship; but their trials were
of a very different nature from those they had left behind them. -- They formed
a social compact and bound themselves to each other by the sacred bonds of
christian fellowship. They enjoyed civil and religious Liberty. -- GOD ALMIGHTY
was at this moment marshalling his forces, and arranging his instruments, to
produce the existence of a civilized nation formed on a plan of rational
freedom; the fair residence of honor, truth, mercy, liberty, and justice.

AMIDST the many kind and generous affections which the wise and benevolent
author of our beings has implanted in our constitution, the love of our Country
is certainly one of the noblest and most amiable. Other passions center often
in our ownselves; partial friendships generally look no farther than the
particular convenience of the persons by whom they are contracted; but this
carries along with it such marks of unbounded generosity and diffusive
benevolence, which constitute the highest Glory and the brightest ornaments of
human nature. Your ancestors felt it in its full force. Distance from their
native soil could not sever the bond of union, and length of time, rather
increased than lessened their attachment to their ancient home. Their pleasures
rose in proportion as the honor of Britain was advanced. They had joy for its
prosperity, sympathy for its sorrows, and arms to vindicate its injured rights.

THIS principle was carried down from one Generation to another, and the
American Revolution arose a Phoenomenon in the Universe.

THE cause of this astonishing event is not to be found in this country; it
must be sought for in the archives of the British Parliament. -- It originated
in the crocked policy of the Cabinet of St. James'!

THAT noble spirit of Independence, which made the first settlers of the
Wilderness so tenacious of their rights, and which they bequeathed to their
descendants as a legacy of inestimable value, could not bear the imposition of
an unjust exaction, which in principle went to the command of the purse of the
continent without its consent.

REMONSTRANCES and Petitions, humble yet manly, affectionate yet firm, followed
each other in quick succession, but neither the towering ambition of the
english monarch, nor the unjust claims of his parliament were to be satisfied
by these; and it was determined to extort that by force which could not be
obtained by art. -- The fatal appeal is made, the appeal is made to arms. The
sword of slaughter is drawn, and war hangs out its bloody flag! -- What a
mournful reflection have we to make, when we think of the thousands, and tens
of thousands of hardy veterans and valient youths that plunged into scenes of
blood and were cut off by an untimely death -- can we help weeping over the
immense quantity of human gore which impurpled the seas, and dyed the earth, to
the unspeakable anguish of fathers, mothers, relatives and friends. -- Those of
you who bore commissions in your country's cause, and marked the rapid (...)
and wide destruction of the destroyin^ A^gel, as he pursued his tremenduo^^
c^urse along the ranks, can be^^ (...) the thing. Your ready memory collects
with ^ase the images of woes long since past, when a dying soldier, yielding
life out in convulsive pangs, was no uncommon sight; yourselves in jeopardy of
equal fate!

The struggle was severe and long -- your hopes and fears were suspended on the
doubtful events of War. Your spirits sometimes flagg'd -- your courage ^ever --
and finally success was yours. The GOD OF ARMIES led you on to victory and
triumph; supported your just rights, and established the* Independence you had
avowed.

BRITAIN confounded and amazed learnt the news of the capture of Burgoyne and
the surrender of Corwallis* and Britain's King was forced to yield, to your
undaunt^d resolution, the brightest Jewel of his Crown.

GENTLEMEN, every attempt to traduce their just rights, will meet with a just
and spirited opposition. And the success with which your arms were crowned will
teach wicked and arrogant men the vanity of their endeavors to subjugate the
independent and the brave. America triumphed over the arm^ of England, and she
has sufficient energy and inclination left to repel any insult offered to her
honor from whatever quarter it may come.

LET this be a day of universal gratitude, let our national altars smoke with
the incense of a just praise offered to the friend^ of the Revolution.

GREECE could not forget a Solon and Lycurgus too -- Miltiades and Leonidas. --
Rome could boast of Cato and of Pompey, and "the Chinese erect triumphal arches
to those who promote the general happiness at home; as well as to the Heroes
who brought their ensanguined trophies from beyond the walls of the fartherest
Tartary."

WE approach your shrine, Oh, gentle Warren and recognize in you the first
distinguished martyr to your country's sacred cause, we saw you quit the
home-felt pleasures of domestic peace, assume the life, and with the life the
hazard of a Soldier -- you fell, but with your hono^^ thick about you -- a
wreathe of glory binds your brow, and posterity will not forfei^^ your virtues.

TO Montgomery's memory to be just we must be grateful: high in the confidence
of the public, his intrepid valor led him on to the most dangerous of all
attacks -- he left behind him an example of unbroken courage, and sunk amidst
the havoc of promiscuous death.

OUR hearts will never forget the brave virtues of Green and Wooster -- Putnam
Gates and Lincoln with all those dauntless warriors, whose conduct formed a
galaxy of heroism.

THESE were in the field -- and in the council your present virtuous and
patriotic President held a distinguished place with Hancock, Jay and Trumbull,
Franklin and all whose great abilities were called forth in unison with the
fairest designs of national service -- their eloquence spoke to the souls of
their countrymen, whilst their vigorous yet mild exertions conducted the
revolution.

But the highest attempts to pourtray the character of that distinguished
chief, who was the savior of his country and the rather of American
Independence must be inadequate to the thing. Early taught to love and venerate
the man* I used to wish him well before my mind could judge of his deservings.
The unabated fervor has increased with my years, and now I Will teach my
children from the breast to lisp the name of WASHINGTON.

After a course of glory, he has retired from the walks of public life, to the
privacy of domestic peace: but though retired he marks with a steady eye the
interests of his country -- his patriotic fire is not consumed by age, and at
this moment we hear him speak "I am ready again to go forth with my fellow
citizens to the field of battle, in defense of the liberty and independence of
my country." [ Here, a general applause, whilst the drums beat and fifes
played.]

GENTLEMEN, patrimony to all succeeding gen^rations.

CULTIVATE national justice, for let us suppose, says a celebrated philosopher,
a people to be perfectly unjust, we shall soon perceive them to be perfectly
unhappy. Restless and jealous of each other, their constitution will be never
the same thing long together. Being the declared enemies of mankind they will
be equally miserable by the sensations which they raise in others as by those
which they feel in themselves; Being feared and hated by other nations, they
must likewise fear and hate them. It Is not necessary that neighboring powers
should take up arms to subdue them. It Is sufficient that each of the
individuals guide their conduct by the maxims of the state, and accordingly
make use of every method, though ever so detestable, to raise themselves upon the
ruins of each other; then we shall have such a race of men revived, as formerly
struck a terror into Cadmus, when they sprung out of the earth, and lived
together for no other reason but to destroy each other. Such a society of men
could not subsist, nor does ancient history furnish us with any example of this
nature, whatever the modern may do. Beware of Infidelity, for this loosens the
cords of moral obligation, and is the fertile parent of disorganization and
corruption. The happiness of states is not to be measured by external grandeur
and power, for no country can be happy without religion. It is a dangerous
expedient to throw ourselves out of the protecting arms of GOD. Such a people
may be successful for a time in their measures; deserts, forests, even vast
seas may not be sufficient bulwarks against their ambition; and divine
providence may make use of their fury to bring his own judgments to pass. Yet
I am persuaded that in the issue they will be brought down even to the dust.
Receive it as a certain maxim, that none can harden their hearts against God
and prosper.

CHERISH union among yourselves, -- be purely Americans -- party differences
will sap the foundation of your political existence -- Be brothers in virtue,
in courage and Independence -- Join hands and hearts in the common cause --
Rally round the venerable fabric of the government you have yourselves erected
-- Let no foreign finger touch it, its touch is deadly poison! strengthen the
hands of those honorable characters, your rulers, the objects of your voluntary
election; and let the world know, that although many of the veterans of
seventy-five be dead, their descendants are alive, possessed with a sacred
ambition of emulating their fathers, whenever their country shall need their
services. With the consecrated standard of Independence in our hands, let us go
and enjoy this day, and exulting in our national freedom, let our souls be
filled with the most raised conceptions.

"No trifling, trilling notes be ours,
Noble themes claim noble powers,
Object immense! a nation freed!
We hail the record* and sub^cribe ^he deed.
Catch it, ye winds, and bear from zone to zone,
And where the tale is told, be the ^ame blessing known.
The triumph's sacred, and this laureat day
To future times its lessons shall convey!"
FINIS.

