TREATISE ON THE YELLOW FEVER; SHOWING ITS ORIGIN, CURE AND PREVENTION.

BY JOSEPH BROWN.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AT THE (...) OFFICE.

To the CITIZENS of NEW YORK,
The following TREATISE, on The YELLOW FEVER, Is respectfully addressed,

By their most obedient and Very humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.
West-Chester, February, 1798.
ERRATA.
6th line from beginning -- for "are due," read is due.

Last line of page 7 -- for "carry," read convey.

3d line, from bottom page 8 -- for "electric," read elective.

1st line, page 9 -- for "substances," read component parts.

17th line, from top same page -- for "nitric," read nitre.

14th do. page 1^ -- dele the word "the," before two causes, etc.

17th do. do. -- for "traits," read fact.

21st and 22d do. do. -- for "speculators," read spectators.

18th do. page 16 -- for " three weeks," read six weeks.

17th do. page 20 -- for "32d," read 32 degrees.

19th do. page 22 -- for "one or two," read one of two.

7th do. page 24 -- dele the period after the word by.

14th do. page 26 -- for "certainly," read constantly.

19th do. page 29 -- for "ourselves," read our successors.

10th do. page 30 -- for "one or two," read one of two.

12th do. do. -- dele the word "disease."

10th do. do from bottom. -- dele the word "art."

2d do. do. -- for "lean," read lead.

{oil} Some of the above are alterations from copy, and some of them errors
which escaped the eye of the revisor.

A TREATISE, etc.
THE prevalance of the Yellow Fever, as it is generally denominated, in many of
the sea port towns of Ameca, has naturally excited the attention of every class
of citizens, and drawn forth observations and remarks from some of our most
respectable philosophic and medical characters, to whom much praise are due;
the subject however does not appear to be exhausted, it is yet susceptible of
improvement. I shall endeavor to place it in a new point of view, in as concise
a manner as I am able. The attempt may be the means of calling forth the
observations of others better qualified to illustrate the subject. I regret
that neither my abilities or situation enable me to do it that justice which it
certainly deserves.

The origin of the disease has been variously accounted for, and with some
degree of warmth by those who consider it as of foreign birth, with a view to
exculpate their country from the stigma which attaches to a city that generates
so destructive a calamity. However praiseworthy it may be to endeavor to
exonerate any place from so soul an imputation, yet we ought to be extremely
cautious of crediting a belief in its foreign origin, unless supported by
incontestible facts, because it may lull us into a fatal security, and induce
us to neglect those means of preservation, which a contrary opinion puts us in
possession of. I believe it most just, and at any rate most salutary, to
consider the yellow fever as endemial to many of our cities; because the same
means that would prevent its rise here, are precisely those that retard and
remove its pestilential effects when imported, to wit, cleanliness and good air.

The great improvements that have been made within a few years in chemistry,
form a new era in that science, which will most extensively influence the
practice of medicine, particularly in the treatment of the disease in question,
and others of similar nature, though different in degree, viz, the plague,
West India, Bengal, camp, goal fever, marsh fever, bilious fever, autumnal,
remitting, and most probably the common intermittent.

As I do not exclusively address myself to men of science, I shall endeavor to
divest my observations as much as possible of technical terms, that the plain
citizen, whose health is his greatest good, may comprehend something of the
nature of the disease, and of course will be more cheerfully inclined to
contribute his mite toward preventing its origin and removing its effects.

I propose to consider the subject under three heads or questions.

1st. What is the cause of the yellow fever? 2d. What is the best mode of
treating it? 3dly. What are the surest means of preventing it?
In considering the first question we must examine the nature of the air we
breath, or atmospheric air, and the operation breathing effectuates on the
animal machine. By the assiduous application, and unremitted attention of
several eminent philosophers and chemists, among whom the names of Hales,
Black, Macbride, Priestly, Cavendish, Lavoiseir, Foureroy, Berthollet, Chaptal
and De Morveau will not be forgotten while science is recorded. We are now able
to analyze the atmospheric air, which instead of being a simple element, is
found to be a chemical compound, a knowledge of whose principles becomes the
more interesting, as nature has made them her principal agents in most of her
operations; which may be considered as her grand laboratory, from which the
seeds and pabulum of animal and vegetable life are derived, and to which their
subsequent decomposition returns the same principles which before were
extracted. The physical properties of atmospherical air are fluidity,
invisibility, gravity, elasticity, compressibility, and negation of smell.
though foetid and odorant substances sometimes affect our organs, they are to
be attributed to the extraneous bodies mixed and floating in the air, which is
itself perfectly inodorous.

From the most conclusive and satisfactory experiments of Priestly and
Lavoisier, it is ascertained, that the atmospheric air will not, in its
totality, maintain animal life, or promote combustion; the proportion of air
that answers either of these purposes, compared with the atmospherical air, is
only as 28 is to 100, which has been called by the French academicians
oxigenous gas, or oxigen; the residue, or 72-100 of the atmospherical air has
been called azote, or nitrogene. Mr. Lavoisier's experiments make the
atmospheric air to be composed of 72 parts of azote, 27 parts of oxigen, and
one of carbonic acid, or fixed air.


It has become necessary, that a revolution in the science of chemistry should
be attended with a similar revolution in its language; for it is impossible to
retain a vicious nomenclature when the science becomes enlightened, extended,
and simplified: the words used should always identify the fact, that the
knowledge of the one should always lead to a knowledge of the other. I am sorry
here to be obliged to criticize on some of the words that have been adopted,
because they do not carry the unequivocal appropriate ideas which we have a
right to expect, when an innovation is introduced: the word oxigen is derived
from the greek, and signifies the begetter of acid, or the basis of acidity; so
far the word perfectly corresponds with the fact, and probably it is from this
principle only, that it is of such infinite and indispensable importance to
animal life: but as it is the essence of life, this circumstance gives it a
priority of claim to stand its Godfather; I shall therefore substitute for it
the term animal vital air; this indeed does not designate all its qualities,
nor is it necessary that it should; but it defines, with sufficient
correctness, its great leading trait -- the supporter of animal life: the words
azote, or nitrogene, are more exceptionable than oxigen; azote is likewise
derived from the Greek, and signifies without life, which is just as
descriptive of the halter or the guillotine, as air: nitrogene is likewise of
Grecian origin, and is meant to show, that it is the basis of nitre; that it is
so, I readily admit, but I am not disposed to believe, that this trifling
circumstance was of sufficient consequence to give a name to the sine qua non
of vegetable life; I think it ought rather to have been called vegetable vital
air -- a name which I shall take the liberty to adopt; for it is a fact as well
ascertained, as it is possible for a chemical fact to be, that in this air
plants live and vegetate, without it they die: animal vital air is more
ponderous than atmospheric air, as 1000 is to 1103; vegetable vital air, on the
contrary, is lighter, as 985 is to 1000; these two airs, in the proportion of
28 of the former to 72 of the latter, forms the atmospherical air, which is a
chemical compound, and is about 850 times lighter than water.

It is an axiom in chemistry, that all substances in nature, whether in a
simple or compound state, would invariably continue in that same state, unless
for a principle which pervades all creation, and is called electric attraction,
or affinity of composition: unions formed from this cause, are more or less
perfect, in proportion as their substances have a greater or less affinity for
each other. I shall exemplify my meaning by a substance with which we are most
of us acquainted, to wit, nitre, or saltpetre 100 parts or pounds of nitre are
composed of 30 pounds of nitric acid; 63 pounds of potash, and 7 pounds of
water, which christalizes it.
, which is compounded of nitric acid The nitric acid is formed of 3 parts of
vegetable vital air, and 7 parts of animal vital air, which was discovered by a
very fine experiment made by Mr. Cavendish.
, or what is commonly called aqua fortis, and potash: now it has been
discovered that the sulphuric acid, or as it is commonly called, oil of
vitriol, has a greater affinity for potash than the nitric acid has;
consequently, by placing these substances in a certain temperature together, a
decomposition of the nitre takes place -- the nitric acid is discharged, and a
new union between the potash and sulphuric acid is formed, which is called the
sulphat of potash. Nitre may likewise be decomposed in another way: it is known
that Barytes, or the Terra Ponderosa, has a greater affinity for the nitric
acid than what potash has -- let them therefore be placed conveniently
together, and a decomposition of the nitric is produced, the nitrate of Barytes
is formed, and the potash set at liberty.

On this principle, when any portion of atmospheric air comes in contact with
any substance that has a greater affinity with either of its component parts,
than these parts have for each other, a decomposition of this portion takes
place, and a new union is formed.

It is a primordial and invariable law of nature, that all and every part of
creation, as well animate as inanimate, should be in a constant state of
renovation, through a continual circulation of decompositions, and successive
generations. The wonderful discoveries of the chemists point out to us in the
most positive manner, that the absolute existence of animals and vegetables
depends on a mutual reciprocity of each others wants; animals absorb animal
vital air, and emit vegetable vital air; on the contrary, vegetables absorb
vegetable vital air, and emit animal vital air; the leaves are the medium
through which this exchange is made by plants; the lungs and the excretory
pores, on the surface of the body, are destined to this purpose in animals --
or, in other words, vegetables, when in a state of active existence, have a
greater affinity for vegetable vital air, than what animal vital air has,
consequently the vegetable vital air of that part of the atmospheric air which
comes in contact with vegetables in a state of verdure, quits its connection
with the animal vital air, and attaches itself to the plant; on the contrary,
the animal vital air of the atmosphere has a greater affinity for the blood of
animals than it has for vegetable vital air; whenever, therefore, it comes in
close or near contact with this substance, a new union is formed: it is,
however, not to be understood as forming an union with the blood on the same
principles as the sulphuric acid does with the potash, previously combined with
the nitric acid, because, in this case, a violent effervescence takes place, in
dislodging the nitric acid, but this union may be more aptly compared to that
which takes place between quick lime and fixed air, or carbonic acid, for two
reasons -- in the first place, the heat that is generated in the lime from this
union, is perfectly similar to the heat of animals, which is acquired by the
absorption and condensation of animal vital air Mr. Chaptal observes, that
respiration may be considered as an operation, by means of which, vital air
posses continually from the gaseous to the concrete state; it must, therefore,
at each instant, abandon the heat that held it in solution, and in the state of
gas. This heat produced at every inspiration, must be proportioned to the
volume of the lungs, to the activity of this organ, to the purity of the air,
the (...) of the inspirations, etc. etc.
: in the second place, the lime is more or less acrid in proportion as it is
less or more saturated with its appropriate acid: on the same principles the
blood of a living animal is less or more acrid, or fit for the purposes of
life, as it is less or more neutralized with animal vital air, which is the
basis of acidity; the blood itself can never show any great degree of acridity
or corrosiveness, because it would destroy animal life before it arrives at
this state; but that the secretions from the blood may, and sometimes do become
very considerably acrid, is most certain -- particularly the bile which is
always eminently affected in all the diseases in question; the bile, in its
healthy state, is very considerably alkaline, although secreted from blood
perfectly neutralized -- at least, as much as venous blood can be, for the bile
is not secreted from artereal blood; but when the blood is not, from a
deficiency of animal vital air, sufficiently neutralized, it is in this case
easy to conceive that the bile secreted from such blood will be in excess, and
must possess a quality verging toward an acrid state -- which, according to
the deficiency of animal vital air, and the heat of the season, as we shall by
and by see, may produce a disease of slight affection only -- as the fever and
ague, or of the most virulent kind, the plague itself.

Every animal is furnished with lungs, or something corresponding thereto,
through which the blood in constant succession passes, by which means it is
brought in close contact with the atmospheric air, and from which we now know
it absorbs that part of it which we call animal vital air; after the
atmospheric air has thus been respired, it loses its property of supporting the
lives of other animals: when an animal has died in this respired air, and
another is substituted to the first, it perishes instantly, and in its first
effort to respire: it should seem, however, that animals may, by habit, become
capable, to a certain point, of breathing impure air.

The phoenomena of respiration are but lately ascertained though from the time
of Hippocrates it has been admitted, that in the air resides a principle
necessary to life, which by him was called the pabulum vitae; this idea was
connected with no hypothesis; systems the most vague and void of all
foundations, have at different times been held up; at one time considering the
air as a stimulus in the lungs, which kept up the circulation; at another the
lungs were considered as a bellows to cool the body, heated by a thousand
imaginary causes. Physiologists of the present day seem to consider them as the
outlets of certain putrid effluviae, which would corrupt the living body in the
same manner that it produces corruption in those that are dead. The rationale
is extremely against such a theory; for is it conceiveable that the same viseus
can be at the same moment performing two functions diametrically opposite to
each other? that of absorbing and secreting through the same vessels, unless
they suppose it similar to elective attraction, as mentioned before, where
potash having a greater affinity for the sulphuric acid than for the nitric
acid, discharges this acid with which it was previously combined. But there is
no sort of analogy in this case, for the matter discharged from the lungs
instead of being an acid, is more of an alkaline nature, mixed with carbon;
which I think is very sufficiently accounted for, on the following principles:
In examining the construction of lungs, we find them furnished with two setts
of vessels, a larger and a smaller; through the larger the whole of the blood
of the system is constantly transmitted, for the exclusive purpose of
attracting animal vital air from the atmosphere. The smaller set is
appropriated to the exclusive support of the lungs themselves, and to furnish a
considerable secretion, necessary to lubricate a part which is in such constant
motion, to facilitate the return of the respired air in the atmosphere; and to
(...) the acrimony of any heterogeneous matter with which the atmosphere is
frequently charged. This secretion will sufficiently account for the great
quantity of moisture discharged in expiration. The excretory pores distributed
over the whole surface of the body are sufficiently competent to discharge this
duty which has been assigned to the lungs by our modern physiologists.

It has been long an established principle among physicians, that all animals
have a constant tendency to putrefaction; but it has been reserved for our own
times, to point out the cause that is capable of correcting this tendency.
Borehave in his aphorisms,. 83, says, insects, fishes, amphibious creatures,
birds, beasts of all kinds, and even men of their own nature, constantly
incline to putrefaction, but never turn acid Van Sweten in his commentaries on
this aphorism says, all the known animals (except a few juiceless insects, for
moisture is required in putrefaction, and the parts of animals never putrefy if
they are dried) putrefy, if exposed to the heat of an air, which shall cause
the liquid to rise in the Farenheitian thermometer to any degree between the
32d and the 92d. The greater the heat is within this limit, so much the sooner
for the most part will the putrefaction begin, for beyond the 92d degree the
heat rather drys up all moisture, and so hinders putrefaction, and the nearer
the descending heat approaches to a like degree of coldness with that of ice,
the slower the putrefaction comes on. In fishes it generally comes on very
soon, more slowly in other animals. Nor does it appear by any experiment, that
the parts of animals have ever degenerated of themselves into an acid; this
therefore may be taken for a general rule. It appears therefore, that one of
the great charactaristic differences between the animal and vegetable kingdoms,
is this, that animals constantly tend to an alkaline or putrescent state, and
vegetables to that of acidity. We have seen before that the two kingdoms are
constantly mutually correcting each others morbid tendency, through the medium
of the atmosphere.

From these premises it is easy to conceive, that when the atmospherical air in
any particular place, is not from any cause sufficiently replete with animal
vital air, this grand corrector of putrescency, that then the animals residing
within that district must, more or less, become diseased, according to their
previous putrescent tendency; for Boerhave observes in his. 84, that the
antecedent causes of this putrefaction, are feeding upon animal food, except
the milk of grazing cattle, especially upon insects, fishes, birds of prey,
alkalessent vegetables; a fullness either of good blood, or of blood acceding
toward putrefaction; the strength of the vessels, viscera, bile, stagnation,
or too much agitation, through the animal motion either growing languid, or
being raised too high, great heat affecting the body frequently and long. This
aphorism in some measure explains why a deficiency of animal vital air does not
equally affect all those who are exposed to it. Galen likewise lays it down as
a rule, that it is always necessary to remember, that no cause can effect
without a predisposition of the body, otherwise all who are exposed to the rays
of a summer sun, would be seized with fevers, as well as those who use too much
exercise, are passionate or grieved. Moreover all would fall sick during the
dog days, or die of the plague. M. Chaptal has taken notice of a fact which is
of some importance, and deserves to be related here; it is, that "frugivorous
animals vitiate the air less than carnivorous animals," which may be accounted
for in this way, that frugivorous animals having less tendency to putrefaction
than carnivorous animals, they require less animal vital air to correct that
disposition; for instance, an animal fed altogether on vegetables, would be
able to absorb a sufficient quantity of animal vital air to prevent
putrefaction, out of an atmosphere that contained only 20 per cent of this
principle, whereas an animal fed altogether on animal food, with a less
quantity than 25 per cent, would probably be affected with a putrid or bilious
fever.

A diminution of animal vital air, at a season when the thermometer is at or
below 32d. may produce no bad effect; but the same diminution continuing, and
the heat increasing, a fever and ague may be occasioned by it: a still greater
increase of heat may occasion a dysentery, a further diminution of animal vital
air, and an increase of heat, the yellow fever, or even the plague itself may
be generated. The Plague, therefore, can probably never originate in a cold
climate, but it may, when carried here, exert its pestilential influence, by
producing an increased decomposition of animal matter, and of course,
generating much vegetable vital air, with which the atmosphere becomes
surcharged, whereby the animal vital air is so diminished, that the natural
tendency to putrefaction cannot be sufficiently corrected; consequently, the
disease goes on rapidly, increasing its dreadful influence, until one of the
two causes intervenes to stop its progress -- either a less disposition to
putrefaction, or an increase of animal vital air.

I shall now adduce a few traits to corroborate this system: Forestus Lib. VI.
Obs. 9. Tom. 1, P. 25.
relates, that a large fish of the whale kind, of immense bulk, ran ashore on
the Dutch coast, nor could again reach the sea, notwithstanding its utmost
efforts, and at length died on the sands; numerous speculators ran thither from
every part. Forestus himself was present. The neighboring inhabitants, not
being able to remove the dead fish, on account of its prodigious bulk, and
neglecting immediately to divide the carcass into small pieces, the whole
putrefied, and infected the country with a horrid rancid stench, in consequence
of which, a pestilential fever broke out in the district of Egmont, and the
adjacent parts, that carried off great numbers. This case goes merely to one
fact, to show that putrid animal substances, in a state of decomposition, are
alone sufficient to generate pestilential fevers, by supersaturating the
atmosphere with vegetable vital air.

The next case I shall relate is much in point, and is recorded by Sir Michael
Foster Fast. 17. Burn's Justice, Vol. II. P. 361.
: a Mr. Clarke was brought to his trial at the Old Bayley sessions, in April,
1750 -- it being a case of great expectation, the court and all the passages to
it were extremely crowded; the weather was hotter than is usual at that time of
the year; many people who were in court were sensibly affected with a noisome
smell, and it appeared soon afterward, upon an enquiry ordered by the court of
Aldermen, that the whole prison of Newgate, and all the passages leading thence
into the court, were in a very filthy condition, and had long been so. What
made these circumstances be at all attended to, was, that within a week, or ten
days at the most, after the sessions, many people who were present at Mr.
Clarke's trial, were seized with a fever of the malignant kind, and few who
were seized recovered. The symptoms were much alike in all the patients; and in
less than three weeks, the distemper entirely ceased. At the time this disaster
happened, there was no sickness in the gaol more than is usual in such places;
the circumstance, that distinguishes this from most of the cases of the like
kind which we have heard of, suggests a very proper caution, not to presume too
far upon the health of the gaol, barely because the gaol fever is not among the
prisoners; for, without doubt, if the points of cleanliness and free air have
been greatly neglected, the putrid effluvia which the prisoners bring with them
in their clothes, or otherwise, especially where too many are brought into a
crowded court together, may have fatal effects on people who are accustomed to
breath better air: though the poor wretches, who in some measure are habituated
to the fumes of a prison, may not always be sensible of great inconveniences
from them. The persons of chief note who were in the court at this time, and
died of the fever, were Sir Samuel Pennant, lord mayor for that year, Sir
Thomas Abny, one of the justices of the common pleas; Charles Clarke, Esquire. one
of the barons of the exchequer, and Sir Daniel Lambert, one of the aldermen of
London: of less note, a gentleman of the bar, two or three students, one of the
under sheriffs, an officer of chief justice Lee, who attended his lordship in
court at that time, several gentlemen of the jury on the Middlesex side, and
about fifty other persons, whom business or curiosity had brought thither.

I have related this case rather lengthily, with a view to make a few
observations on it: it shows that a malignant fever may, like the last case,
arise from putrid offensive matter, and a confined air: it also shows that the
prisoners, who contributed largely to generate the disease, did themselves
escape its destructive influence, by being in some measure habituated to it;
for that nature can, and does by degrees assimilate our constitutions to
varieties of climate and atmospherical changes, are facts that constantly
occur, without which the West and East Indies, the coast of Guinea, and the Low
Countries of the southern States, would be uninhabited by Europeans, or the
inhabitants of the more northern and elevated parts of America. It is probable
also, from low diet, the natural tendency of the prisoners to putrefaction was
less than that of the high fed judges, lawyers, and Middlesex jurymen, who were
victims to the disease.

This case likewise furnishes us with another fact of some importance: it
states, that the disease commenced in April, and in about six weeks, that is
the beginning of June, disappeared. Now, from what has been before observed, in
the month of June, the natural tendency to putrefaction, from the increase of
heat, must have been much more powerful than it was in the month of April; of
course, the disease, instead of entirely ceasing, ought to have increased
rapidly; why it did not, I shall now endeavor to account. In the month of
April, in northern climates, vegetation is still dormant, consequently the
atmospherical air must then be surcharged with vegetable vital air: as the
summer advances, this vegetable vital air will be in great demand, for the
nutriment of plants; of course, not only a diminution of it takes place, from
being absorbed by plants, but a great quantity of animal vital air is generated
by them, and thrown into the atmosphere, from whence it will be absorbed by
animals, to whom it is a sine qua non.

Plants not only have the faculty of emptying into the atmosphere animal vital
air, by perspiration, but they possess likewise the means of throwing into
circulation an immense quantity from another source, to wit, from rain and
dews: to understand this aright, it is necessary to premise, that from the best
authenticated facts, water, instead of being a pure element, is discovered to
be compounded of two species of air, viz. animal vital air, and inflammable
air, or, as it has been called, hydrogene, in the proportion of 85 of the
former, and 15 of the latter: now it is well known that plants have a greater
affinity for hydrogene, than animal vital air has; of consequence, when water
or dew fall on the leaves of plants, the hydrogene is absorbed, and the water
decomposed; therefore the animal vital air must be thrown into the atmosphere;
the heat and light of the sun greatly facilitates this operation: one square
inch of water contains near nine hundred square inches of animal vital air.

This is by no means a solitary case of a malignant fever ceasing in the heat
of summer; the history of the plague furnishes us with a great many: I shall
select two or three. When the plague raged at Aleppo, and in the beginning of
July, the hottest season of the year came on, the disease remarkably
diminished; and toward the end of the same month entirely ceased. Aleppo is in
about the latitude of Baltimore. 6 Russel's Not. Hist. of Aleppo. p. 192.
In general it has been observed in Aleppo, that the plague always ceases in
the hottest season of the year, as manifestly appears from the accounts of
several years in which the plague raged. Van Sweiten Com. Vol. 16. p. 32.
In the year 1738 and 1739 the plague raged at Oczakow; in each year it broke
out in April, raged till the 12th of June, after which day it decreased apace;
and wholly ceased in September: it returned again in the month of February in
the following year, and was totally extinguished in the month of July.
Schrieber de pestilentia. p. 75.


I have thus shown that malignant diseases may arise from a combination of two
causes -- heat and a deficiency of animal vital air. That the yellow fever
which has ravaged many of our cities, did originate among ourselves, I will not
undertake to say, but that the heat of our climate, the filth of the streets,
the putrefaction in the docks, added to the inhabitants living on so much
animal food, are not only sufficient to give rise to it, but full activity,
cannot be doubted; and it is, in my opinion, a matter of no importance to
determine whether the disorder was imported or not, since we have adopted it,
by making it so welcome.

I might have quoted a variety of other facts to substantiate the same
principles, particularly the jail fever at the black assizes at Oxford, the
case of the unfortunate prisoners confined in the black hole at Calcutta by the
Nabob Surajeddoullah, etc. but it would have been nearly a repetition of the
same effects, produced by similar causes. I shall now proceed to consider what
is the best mode of treating the yellow fever.

It is a great point gained always, when a physician can indubitably fix on the
cause of a disorder; his efforts to remove it will then be grounded on a
rational practice. The yellow fever I have said, arises from a combination of
two causes, a certain degree of heat, and a deficiency of animal vital air,
whereby the circulating fluids acquire a strong tendency to putrefaction. Of
all the secretions made from the blood, none so readily feel the influence of
putridity as the bile, whose use appears to be, from its alkalessent nature, to
render the oily parts of the food miscible with the aqueous in the duodenum;
which is the intestine next below the stomach, in which the food has been
previously digested, for the bile is never discharged into the stomach in an
healthy state, it can get there only by vomiting, or some such effect; the idea
of the stomach being overcharged with bile is an error.

The progressive effects of heat above 32d of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and a
deficiency of animal vital air below 27 per cent. of the atmosphere will be as
follows: the blood by having too little of the principle of acidity in it,
secrets bile in too large a quantity, consequently instead of simply
converting the food to a bland chyle, its excess will occasion a fever and
ague, or a dierrhoea; when the primary causes above mentioned are increased in
degree, the bile not only becomes increased in quantity, but its quality also
is materially affected; it acquires a tendency to throw the food into a
putrefactive fermentation, which becomes a rotten sanies, and an excoriation of
the bowels takes place, which constitutes dysentery; or when insensible
perspiration happens to be deficient, a fever will be induced, and will be
known by the name of Yellow Fever, bilious fever, camp fever, goal fever, etc.
according to the place and particular accompanying circumstances; a further
increase of one or both of the predisposing causes will occasion the plague.

In the Yellow Fever therefore, the primary object of the physician will be as
soon as possible to empty the contents of the bowels, and to throw into the
atmospheric air an additional quantity of animal vital air, which is easily
procured by the decomposition of nitre. We have already seen, that nitre is a
neutral salt, composed of potash and the nitric acid, and that sulphuric acid
has a greater affinity for potash than the nitric acid has; consequently, by
being mixed together, the nitric acid will be discharged. A simple and ready
method is this -- in a chafing dish of coals, place a large gallypot nearly
filled with sand, in the sand place a smaller gallypot about half full of
sulphuric acid, into which gradually throw nitre in powder; an effervescence
immediately commences, which is the separation of the nitric acid; the fumes as
they immediately arise from the pot are acid and corrosive, and should be
avoided as not being respirable until more diluted in the air. This method was
lately very successfully used at Sheerness in England, on board the ship Union,
in which a malignant fever had for a considerable time raged with some
violence, but by the use of this means was entirely removed: It was suggested
by Dr. Carmichael Smith, for which he was afterward made (it is said)
physician extraordinary to the King. The principles on which he recommended it
were these, he imagined that the contagion arising from the malignant fever was
occasioned by certain alkaline effluvia, discharged from the bodies of the
patients, that by throwing into the air the nitric acid, to be attracted by
those effluvia they were to be neutralized, and of course rendered inert. How
far such an opinion can be supported on philosophical principles, I shall not
undertake to discuss, for having determined not to find fault with the opinions
of others in giving my own, I shall not throw the gauntlet to the doctor. Nitre
may be decompounded by heat only, which is probably the best method of doing
it, as it respects a complete separation of its principles, by which means it
will be more susceptible of new combinations. It must be put in a retort and
kept in a red heat for some time before the gas begins to separate. In
hospitals, by means of tubes, the gas may be thrown into any ward; but in
private houses the use of it would become more difficult, unless carried there,
which may easily be done in a machine to be mentioned by and by. One pound of
nitre contains about 12,000 cubic inches of animal vital air, which is about
1-5 of its weight. Animal vital air may also be procured in large quantities
and with great facility, by pouring sulphuric acid on manganese in powder, the
vessel containing the manganese should be placed on a chasing dish of coals.

The disease in the beginning is confined to the fluids only, it is of great
importance therefore, to diminish their quantity, and repair the loss if
possible with those of a more accessent kind, obtained from vegetables only. On
this principle, bleeding in considerable quantities is a practice well founded,
and which has been recommended by Galen, Botalli, Sydenham, Van Sweiten, and
many others of great respectibility. There is a point however beyond which this
liquid of life cannot be drawn with impunity, unless the loss could be
immediately repaired, which can be done in one or two ways only: the first and
most natural is by food, but this unfortunately is very difficult to be done,
as the patient generally loathes all food, but a small renovation can be
expected from this source. From the other way great expections were once
formed, though it is much to be regretted were soon abandoned; I mean the
transfusing of good sound blood from the veins of an healthy person or some
animal into the veins of the patient who loses a proportionate quantity of his
bad blood. That the operation has been frequently performed, the books tell us.
When the disease like the Yellow fever is confined to the circulating juices,
the theory is rational, and deserves to be considered; I give it merely as a
hint.

I have already observed, that vegetable vital air is generated by animals, and
expelled from their bodies by means of excretory vessels on their surfaces, it
is in other words a decomposition of animal matter which is discharged from the
body not only as useless but pernicious. In a healthy state of the blood a
retention of this matter will occasion a variety of very serious evils; but in
a diseased state, and particularly of the one under consideration, it is of the
utmost importance that every facility be given to its outlet; whatever then
will contribute to promote perspiration should be freely applied, and
assiduously persevered in.

I have mentioned before, that vegetable air is in a small degree lighter than
animal vital air; this is to be understood in a pure uncombined state, in which
case the vegetable vital air would naturally tend to elevate itself above the
animal vital air, but the affinity they have for each other, although it be not
a strong one, will naturally incline them to an union, which is greatly
promoted by agitation. There is another circumstance respecting airs or gazes
which should not be forgotten, which is, that their weight depends altogether
on the caloric or heat and moisture with which they are combined; water for
instance deprived of its caloric becomes ice, give it an additional quantity of
caloric and it becomes vapor or gas. Vegetable vital air therefore, discharged
from an animal by perspiration, being inveloped in a considerable humidity,
will not ascend from the body with that facility which it would otherwise be
capable of, consequently the body becomes encircled with an atmosphere greatly
surcharged with vegetable vital air, which probably in this state may be
capable of being taken into the body again by means of the absorbent vessels;
to prevent which and to give full operation to new air that may be thrown into
the sick room, the vitiated air should be constantly removed; it may be done by
throwing a current of air on and near the bed, but which may be attended with
the bad effect of checking perspiration, which should be carefully avoided, for
the reasons already assigned. The known compressibility of airs, suggests the
propriety of using the following described machine, which may be called an
abstractor



A A tubulated metallic box of any dimensions, say 6 inches square. B A value
in the tubulure. C A gun barrel screwed to the tubulure. D A piston to be
worked by. E The handle. F A flexible tube of any convenient length, inserted
into the gun barrel at C, by which means, as the piston is worked, the air
enters the flexible tube at G, and is forced into the box through the valve.
It is evident therefore, that the air may be extracted from any place wherever
the point G of the flexible tube can be applied, either on the bed, under the
bed, or in the bed itself, without in the least incommoding the patient. A box
of 6 inches square contains 216 inches; now it is a fact well known, that air
may be compressed into a volume of 128 times less than what it commonly
occupies; consequently a box of the above dimentions may be made to contain
27,648 square inches of air, which may be taken to the top of the house and
discharged, by drawing out the piston and forcing the valve open with an iron
rod. This operation may be repeated as often as it may be thought necessary, by
which simple contrivance the air of the room may be kept perfectly sweet
without endangering a check to the perspiration. This is the instrument I had
reference to, when speaking of transporting animal vital air from any place
where it may be conveniently manufactured, to the chamber or bed of the
patient. To the retort containing the nitre to be decomposed, or to the vessel
containing the manganese and sulphuric acid, let there be affixed and well
luted, a large tubulated mattress, to the tube of which let the tube of the
abstractor be affixed; as the gas rises in the mattress a few strokes of the
piston will drive it into the box, which when filled may be carried to the bed
of the patient and there discharged in the manner already directed.

The atmosphere contains, as I have already mentioned in a note, by Mr.
Lavoisier's estimates, about one per cent of carbonic acid, a gas more
generally distributed throughout the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms
than any we are acquainted with; it is disengaged in this form by the
putrefaction of animal substances, the decomposition of vegetables heaped
together, the fermentation of wine, beer, cider, etc. by all calcareous
substances, when exposed to a strong heat, etc. in this acid neither animals
nor vegetables can exist; an animal immersed in it almost instantly dies. I do
not however consider this air as deliterious or poisonous, as it is generally
understood, but an animal dies in it nearly on the same principles that it
would do if immersed in water, that is from a total deficiency of animal vital
air; consequently a sudden stop is put to the circulation. The lungs of the
drowned person are collapsed; if inflated again in a reasonable time with
common air, he may be reanimated. The lungs of a person suffocated with
carbonic acid remain inflated with this acid; of course it becomes more
difficult to reanimate him, because this air must be first extracted.

The weight of carbonic acid, compared with common air, according to Mr.
Kirwan, is as 45 to 68 nearly; from this circumstance, it naturally subsides
to, and occupies the lowest places, from whence it may be very readily removed,
by the application of a quantity of quick lime, with which substance it has a
great affinity: 1200 pounds of quick lime will absorb about 800 pounds of
carbonic acid, to convert it into slacked lime; for this reason, then, a
quantity of quick lime should always be kept near or under the beds of patients
in the yellow fever: its application would be attended with another advantage
-- it absorbs also a great quantity of, humidity, which is apt to prevail in
such rooms, and which should never be attempted to be removed by fire, as fire,
by its combustion, absorbs animal vital air in great quantities: the carbonic
acid has been recommended as an antiseptic remedy, but this fact wants
confirmation.

Having thus shown the cause of yellow fever, and the best mode of treating it,
I shall now proceed to the third question, and point out the surest means of
preventing it. After saying that fifth may generate the disease, it can
scarcely be necessary to say, that cleanliness in a great measure will prevent
it: an invariable attention must certainly be paid to this object, as well in
persons and houses, as the streets and docks; for it should never be out of my
mind, that heat and moisture are the two great agents that constantly incline
all animal substances to decomposition, which then form a gas of extreme
expansibility, occupying the place in the atmosphere of a principle that is of
the last importance to animal life. It may happen, notwithstanding very prudent
care, that an excess of vegetable vital air may predominate in the atmosphere;
you will then ask what is to be done to prevent it? plant trees in every street
-- trees, as has been remarked before, not only absorb vegetable vital air, but
generate, in large quantities, animal vital air, and decompose water. The
animal and vegetable kingdoms are constantly laboring for each other, and by
this admirable reciprocity of service, the atmosphere is constantly changing,
and an equilibrium maintained between its constituent principles.

Hot, dry, and stagnating air, has been observed the forerunner of pestilential
diseases; that they should be so, from the foregoing theory, is inevitable, for
the following reasons: heat, by dilating the texture of animals, increases
their natural tendency to putrefaction: drowth diminishes the requisite
proportion of animal vital air in the atmosphere, by not furnishing the
requisite quantity of water to be decomposed by the leaves of vegetables (for
water, by its decomposition, purifies the atmosphere, by pouring into it
streams of animal vital air) consequently this air, by stagnation, becomes
overcharged with vegetable vital air, and not being agitated and removed by
gentle breezes, pestilential diseases begin their destructive career; whenever
these circumstances, in a greater or lesser degree, shall therefore occur in a
city, diseases of a more or less serious aspect will be the consequence; but by
planting the streets with trees, and procuring a supply of water to sprinkle
the streets and trees occasionally in the heat of the day, it is more than
probable the yellow fever will never thereafter depopulate the city.

The local situation of New York is equal, if not superior to any commercial
city in America, probably in the world; it possesses almost every thing but
one, to render it the jealousy of nations: when we see the elegance and numbers
of her public buildings, the splendour of her equipages, and the extravagance of
her citizens, we are astonished that this one thing, which is easily
procureable, should be wanting -- that is, a plentiful supply of good fresh
water, particularly when it is known that this supply may be had for about half
the price that is now paid for a scanty supply of tub water. The whole river
Brunks, if it were necessary, may be turned through the streets of New York:
nothing could possibly tend so much to blend the utile dulci as this; it would,
in an eminent degree, secure the health and wealth of the city: it would, in
fact, be its protector against those two great scourges of cities -- fire and
pestilence.

I have before remarked. that animals living on vegetable food, do not destroy
so much animal vital air as those that live on flesh; of course, they do not
want so much; it is therefore an object of considerable importance, to abstain,
during the dog days, as much as possible from the use of flesh meats, and
particularly fish: abstain also from the use of much spirituous liquors, they
tend to heat the blood, without correcting its putrid tendency; on the
contrary, beer, cider, and wines, are necessary: abstain likewise from crowded
houses, particularly theaters, whose air is not only contaminated by the number
of people breathing it, but the candles, by their combustion, tend rapidly to
render it unfit for the support of animal life. It would be a very good
practice, and not attended with much expense, if the proprietors of houses of
this description, were to cause a quantity of nitre to be decomposed in them
when crowded.

The practice of burying in church yards and vaults in New York, has been I
fear too long sanctioned by custom, to be affected by any feeble efforts of
mine; but the accidents that have happened in many other places from a similar
practice, will I hope be a sufficient apology for speaking a few words on this
subject. According to Mr. Petit, a body buried four feet under ground without a
coffin, will be from three to four years before it be quite decompounded, if
buried deeper, the time will be longer; if buried in a coffin, it will require
ten years to produce the same effect. The quantity of vegetable vital air
constantly emitting from bodies previous to the above periods is great,
consequently combining with an excess of vegetable vital air already in the
atmosphere, may be the means of very serious mischief; the risk however from
those causes is by no means so great as from the opening of vaults in cities,
the most serious evils have frequently arisen from this cause. Burials then
should be at some distance from a city; I have no objection that the inanimate
bodies should still be consigned to the purveyance of the priests, it is in
many places a perquisite of the church; common decency will point out the
proper interment; if you please the burial service for the dead may still he
said over it, the living may benefit from it. It appears to me however, that
the mode used in Spain on this ceremony is better understood and more rational
than elsewhere; the bodies are decently dressed, and carried on an open bier to
the place of interment, into which it is placed, and with it a quantity of
quick lime, which greatly facilitates the decomposition of animal substances,
whereby the particles composing it are the more readily enabled to form new
combinations; they will quit the solitary abode of the dead, and will again be
immediately brought into an active state of existence; their first combination
will be to form vegetables, probably odorant plants and sweet scented flowers
will owe their sweetness and beauty to the identical corpuscles that once
animated our dearest friends and nearest relations, from whence through the
medium of the atmosphere they will probably again constitute the rosy health
and lively bloom of toasted beauty. In this rotine, for hundreds of ages, they
have already invigorated our ancestors, and for thousands more to come will
probably be performing the same duty for ourselves. How infinitely more joyous
is such an exposition of facts than the hic jacet inrollment in vaults and
church yards, and the solitary, gloomy and disgusting state in which the
priests and ancient philosophers have supposed human bodies subject to. If
notwithstanding these facts, prejudice and vanity should still induce any to
build sepulchers for themselves and family, the legislature should order, that
bodies consigned to such keeping should first be made a mummy of, in which
state they may occupy a solitary nich in the gloomy dungeon, erected by
biggotry and folly, from whence on the commencement of a new state of things,
they may in their mummied state, emerge to be held up to derision, as
contraveners of the laws of nature. The atmospherical air is common stock, and
ought not to be suffered to be polluted by any man's avarice or folly.

Would it not be infinitely better, both for the sake of humanity and
commercial benefit, that when a malignant disease rages on board a vessel newly
arrived in port, the crew should be sent on shore to a proper situation, where
necessary attendance could be given them, and the vessel, after being
sufficiently impregnated with animal vital air, suffered to unload, than be
obliged to perform that tedious expensive and absurd operation called a
quarantine?

This naturally brings us to the consideration of a subject of some importance,
to wit, Is the Yellow Fever contageous? By contagion I understand a specific
disease, capable of being communicated to a second person in one or two ways,
either by actual contact and lesion of the skin, of which kind are hydrophobia,
syphilis disease, leprosy, yaws and itch; or by the medium of the atmosphere
through the absorbent vessels, on the surface of the body, of which kind are
the small pox, measles, chicken pox, and hooping cough; these are all the
diseases that are, literally speaking, contageous according to the definition
of the word as above stated; but although I do not consider the Yellow Fever in
all situations contagious, yet in certain cases it approximates so near to it,
that it becomes difficult to draw the line. For instance, a man in health
visiting a patient in the Yellow Fever, in an atmosphere that has not more than
20 per cent of animal vital air in it, would probably under certain
circumstances of heat and tendency, acquire the same disease; this looks
something like contagion, though it be in fact very dissimilar, for let the
patient be removed to a room where the atmosphere contains 28 per cent of
animal vital air, and the heat and tendency are the same as in the former case,
yet he might be visited there in perfect safety. An hundred instances of this
kind might, if necessary, be adduced from the history of the disease in
Philadelphia and New York. That vegetable vital air might be absorbed through
the absorbent pores, or the surface of the body, I think extremely probable,
but under what circumstances in might be done so as to become injurious to
health, I can find no facts that lean to any certain conclusion. Can animal
vital air be absorbed in the same way? Dr. Priestly, in making some experiments
to ascertain to what source the color of the blood is owing, relates a fact
which almost conclusively determines this question in the affirmative. He
exposed fresh drawn blood to vegetable vital air, to atmospherical air, and to
animal vital air; in the first of which it quickly became black throughout, in
the second, red on the surface but black below, in the third, the red on the
surface was much more vivid: he then filled a bladder with blood and exposed it
to animal vital air, which acquired a red color over its whole surface. If
then the affinity between blood and animal vital air is so great as in form an
union through the intervention of a bladder, the probability is strongly to be
presumed, that an union may take place on the surface of the body.
it would become a very valuable discovery if it could be determined in the
affirmative. It is a hint that might be improved on by those who have it in
their power to make the requisite experiments. A means of determining with
facility and certainly the exact proportion of the component parts of the
atmosphere is likewise wanting; the utility of it is very obvious.

FINIS.

