A CHARGE DELIVERED BEFORE THE MORNING STAR LODGE, IN WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS,
UPON THE FESTIVAL OF SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST. JUNE 25, A. L. 5798.

BY THE REV. BROTHER WILLIAM BENTLEY, OF SALEM, MASSACHUSETTS.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE BRETHREN.

Worcester: FROM THE PRESS OF BROTHER ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN. JUNE, A. L. 5798.

BROTHER BENTLEY's CHARGE.
BRETHREN,
AT your invitation I appear on the present occasion, confident that you will
indulge my freest thoughts when evidently intended to afford aid to the Craft.

FREQUENT addresses exclude us from the common topics; but in seeking variety,
we ought not to forget our institution. The history and the character of our
order have the first claims upon our attention, and will be the best guide to
our duty.

WHEN our Order was introduced into this Colony, and from Boston into British
America, an evident change had begun in the manners and the political
sentiments of the people. The ancient rigor of church discipline had been
relaxed, and the crown was attempting to increase its prerogative. But the
political prospects of the country were enlarged. Interest, rather than
religion, had drawn men into the capital, and the general character was at a
crisis. The son of a bishop had been in the chair, and a conspicuous prelate
Dean Berkeley, afterward Bishop.
was in America, expecting to enjoy a religious establishment. The short life
of governor Burnet prepared for the advancement of governor Belcher. Political
men, whatever system they may adopt, are sure to accomplish a change of manners
in a simple people. The courts having been repeatedly removed from the capital,
new associations were formed in opposition to the new form of power. Ministers
and churches exerted, in secret, an influence they no longer openly claimed.
Belcher yielded in turn to all parties, in hopes to reconcile them. He had been
in Germany and in England, and was acquainted with our order, which he
permitted one of his family to encourage. When associations had become common,
it was to be expected, and to be hoped, that some would exist free from party
strife, and remain sacred to social pleasure. For this purpose, with the
manners of Europe, MASONRY was introduced. It has continued to spread, as our
country has been prepared for its growth.

AT present, the number of Brethren in Boston is greater than in any place
throughout the Union. But the increase has been great in our capital, since the
revolution, particularly in the number of Lodges. The spirit of the people,
among whom early associations appeared, has formed an habitual inclination.
Their political clubs, their mechanic societies, their marine society, their
private clubs for friendship, for religion, for letters and for humanity: All
their social institutions flourish together. As they rise or sink upon
comparison, the number of the associated is not lessened, but the relation is
changed at pleasure, as age, taste, or duty may lead. Such an associated place
may not be found upon the globe, or such harmony. Hardly any man of rank, or
reputation is to be found, who has not had his club nights, and these are
frequently passed in private houses. What a change the increase of public
amusements may accomplish, is not to be imagined from present consequences. We
are happy in an appeal to the public, whether Masons, in their public character
have deviated from the spirit of their Institution. Bad men have been found.
But Masons have lived in love, without any interference with Church or State.

THEIR progress has lately been rapid. Petitions are constantly before the
GRAND LODGE for new Lodges. They accompany the increasing wealth and
independence of the YEOMANRY, and will continue while we enjoy our unexampled
prosperity. Such are the prospects of an Institution, designed to preserve the
purity and the full extent of private friendship by association. An Institution
which never hopes to influence the affairs of State; which knows no sect in
religion; and no qualification but of the good citizen. May it be glorious in
its success.

IN passing over an history of sixty years, we are able fairly to judge of the
causes, which have operated against our Institution, in our own country and the
world; and while we observe the opposition to its progress, we may learn the
duties we owe to its character and reputation. And we may consider three
principal causes. The Clergy, who have an influence upon the popular opinion,
being the guardians of the public morals; the Magistrates, who are invested
with the civil authority; and that wonderful engine, ridicule, which has
wrought the most powerful effects upon the human mind.

WHEN we speak of the Clergy, we intend not the order, but certain men in it.
And we regard not these men, so much as the age in which they have lived, and
the prejudices they have entertained. Father Robinson justly said, Robinson's
Claude, on the composition of a Sermon.
"The history of the Pulpit is curious and entertaining. It has spoken all
languages, and in all sorts of style. It has partaken of all the customs of the
Schools, the Theaters and the Courts of all Countries, where it has been
erected. It has been a seat of wisdom, and a sink of nonsense. It has been
filled by the best and the worst of men. It has proved in some hands, a trumpet
of sedition, and in others, a source of peace and consolation." When we speak
of the Clergy then, we speak not of the whole order. We love the priest in the
patriarch of the first families of mankind, and we honor the Clergy, as the
enlightened friends of the best civil society. But into this order, men will
intrude, who have studied their Bible, and not mankind for whom it was written.
Who know more of their own opinions from dogmas, than from history and
investigation. And who hate what they have not been taught to practice, having
never associated with mankind. Such as employ an ingenuous concern for the
morals of society, and maintain a constant vigilance against the prevalent
abuses of all institutions, while they distinguish the abuses from the
institutions themselves, we reverence. We ask their reproofs, and we are sure,
that they will be candid. Let these righteous men smite us, and it will be
kindness. Their lessons will establish us, and not destroy us. It is into the
hands of other men we fear to fall. -- Men, who have no charity for each other,
and so surely can have no charity for us. Who hate the nearest sect most, not
because it is the worst, but because it is the nearest. Not because it most
obstructs the light from heaven, but because it obscures the light of their
fame and interest. Men who ply the shuttlecock of faith, with the dexterity of
expert gamesters, and have the art of making the multitude fly with its
feathers. What do they blame? Is it association! They cannot blame this
absolutely. For if there be a charge against them, it is for the abuse of this
principle in their own interest. They must then charge us with an abuse of our
association. The charge they find in our manners, not in our principles. But
they charge all sects in Christendom, with the same tendency, when they have
the best men on earth belonging to them. But what is the abuse. All Masons are
not sober men. Let us try to reform them then. Paul tells us, that the
Christians of his days turned the Communion into an excess, by which some lost
their lives. Masons have not done worse than this. But did Paul upset the
tables, and rout the company, and say that he would have no eating and drinking
together, as long as he lived. No. He invented means to correct abuses. And to
all, who will be so kind, we will hearken. The causes of illiberal conduct can
be easily known. Men have been ignorant of the sects, to which they have been
intolerant, and ignorance has been the parent of their fears. Education has
excited an abhorrence, which interest has strengthened. The prevalent vulgar
errors have given the multitude into their power. But to whom are we more
indebted, than to the wise men of the Clergy. The scandal will be removed, when
the order becomes enlightened. The civil authority has been exercised with
greater wisdom, as it has been less under ecclesiastical influence. -- Because
more was feared for the Church, than the State. As we recede from the power of
the Church, which like the cold of the North has checked the growth of every
thing divine, we advance toward a milder sky. The bigotry of Spain, and the
power of the Inquisition in Portugal, opened a persecution against every thing
they did not create, and could not absolutely command. The toleration found
necessary for the population of Rome, proved more benign, and as the Princes of
Italy gave freedom to Commerce, they became less suspicious of foreign
Institutions. In France, which so bravely maintained the Gallican privileges
against the Universal Bishop, and thus enervated the power of the Church,
MASONRY had full encouragement in the genius of the nation. The Church had been
already instructed not to refuse amusements, but to associate them even with
religion. Here MASONRY appeared with a pomp and parade, unknown in any other
country, and here it had its additional grades, to which no other nation had
advanced. At Court these grades were not unknown. In Germany, these
associations were in the spirit of the North, and the antiquities of the North
show the nobility as members and patrons. Such have been the most eminent
Princes of the empire. Such was the great Hero of Prussia, and such are the
Princes of those happy and well instructed Regions.

IN the British Empire, the parent of ancient Masonry, Distinguished from the
Eclectic.
its progress has been well known, from the connection between their history and
language and our own. The English nobility, but particularly the gentry, have
esteemed its honors. The spirit has been well preserved among the generous
Irish, and has never been degraded by the Scots. The British Colonies in the
East and West Indies, have preserved its reputation. In the Republics, it has
had all its character, as Holland will assure us. Guarded against political
discussions, it can give no cause of jealousy to an enlightened administration.
And sacred to friendship, it will always bless the public spirit. But in its
triumph, it has had sullen, and not always silent foes. Its simplicity only can
ensure it general success, yet this simplicity has been an objection, even to
higher institutions. Superstition has imposed an unkind opinion upon the
vulgar. Other Institutions have been jealous. Suspicion has hovered over its
secrets, and bad consequences, if they have not been known, have been feared.
As all societies have degraded each other, by charging the vices of a few upon
the many, we have also had a part in the shame.

RIDICULE, ever busy, not only to expose, but insult, has been licensed in all
its chosen shafts. Proud of the laughter of the multitude, it has strengthened
objections, without the trouble to examine them. Ridicule, doubtless, is a
chosen instrument in the hand of TRUTH. When a sharpened arrow of the judgment,
and guided by the eye of discretion, whither benevolence points its way and
gives it strength to enter, it demands all the genius of SHAFTESBURY to give it
due praise. But though it be a sharp, it should not be a poisoned arrow. If it
pierce error, it should not wound the soul. Then the memory holds the shame of
error, while the understanding hates the blame. We are our own physicians in
the remedy. But such is not the common ridicule of the world. It is as far from
it as the kiss of a friend, from the dagger of an assassin. When prejudice
sports with false allusions, fear is strengthened into hatred, and truth is
bent into deformity. Ridicule is then poison to a weak mind. The most simple
fashions, the most innocent customs, and the most familiar manners may rise
disgusting to the sight. As in religious rites, whether it be wine, or bread,
or water, each in turn may be ridiculous to the sectary, and the use and the
end be forgotten. Sympathy may be denied every token of its duty, from fear of
contempt. The addresses of the Clergy and Brethren have already disarmed
buffoonery, by the moral and religious force given to the MASONIC
CONSTITUTIONS. We must not say, we care not for ill opinions. We ought not to
renounce what we approve, if free from blame; but we ought to remember that
every thing useful to ourselves and the world, will in some degree depend upon
character. We should not give up our pleasures, because some men condemn them.
We should not leave our forms, because subject to ridicule from those who feel
not their love. We should relinquish nothing we can innocently enjoy. -- But as
the world sees us, we should be ambitious to display the virtues we profess.

THE present state of Europe has fixed the attention of the world upon our
order. Its rapid spread in the present century, the character of its members,
the coincidence of its designs, and its secret communications, have contributed
to urge enquiries into its history, its principles, and its influence upon
civil society, and to bring the crisis of its fate. The power of political
associations was never more seriously feared, and the alarm has been as great
as the danger. No discoveries have yet been made, which can fairly impeach the
institution of FREE MASONRY. The opinions of a country, in which it has had
distinguished honors, will assist the language of prejudice; but charges which
are not well supported by the best evidence, will not be received by candid
minds. Vulgar traduction of character, party colored representation of
principle, make no impression on my mind.

Watson's address to the people of England.


Partial and in direct evils should not be conclusive against any society,
which adopts good principles, till the evils become general and unavoidable.
Masonry has attracted the public notice. More is feared from the association,
than from the principle. Civil society can apprehend no evil, while its leading
members are known, and are free from any suspicion of designs against civil
establishments. But the progress of a new philosophy, which has accomplished an
important change in the opinions of Europe, has been great, and this philosophy
has insinuated itself into all societies. Its friends and its enemies have been
astonished at its success, and while its friends have continued active to
combine all causes to aid its progress, its enemies became more jealous of
every thing, which could be employed in its service. Questions never thought of
before, have been asked about the origin of Free Masonry. False friends, and
serious enemies have conspired to represent it, as suited the purposes of
ridicule, or aversion, of their fears, or their wishes. But as yet they have
acted without permanent effect, from the unwarranted boldness of their
conjectures, from their disagreement in the history and the object of the
order, and particularly from their ignorance of the manners of the age in which
it first obtained public notice.

THE Tomb of Morlai, is one of the contemptible efforts which provokes a smile
from the initiated, but excites pity toward those, who rashly admit jealousies
uncomfortable to themselves and their neighbors. This extravagant attempt to
represent Masonry as inimical to royalty, has a rival only in the counterpart
of Professor Robinson, who recites the history of its use among the friends of
Charles the first of England. But if Morlai, five hundred years since,
illuminated Lodges with principles hostile to royalty, how unhappy were the
friends of Charles in the choice of an institution for his defense. But how
happy the adepts to remain concealed, till they appeared in the close of the
French Revolution "to manage the good natured and benevolent associates of the
preparatory Lodges." Such men could never seriously attempt to trace the
institution, because such an attempt would have brought them, where such an
enmity, by consent of historians, was without any political cause. Compare the
history of the mother Lodges Tomb of Morlai: This work ought to be compared
with Robinson.
with the history of their dates in the thirteenth century, especially in
Stockholm and in Scotland. Traditions professedly received in this age, have
left no belief of a political origin, and they are at least good against bold
insinuations. MASONRY, whatever was its ancient history, has preserved itself
free from any imputations of a design upon the liberties or governments of
Europe, till the present century. Its prosperity has given the alarm. It has
embraced men of every character in the state, and in the world of letters.
Pride of distinction, in imitation of the orders in Europe, induced the Lodges
of France and Germany, to accept the orders of the Knights, while men
accustomed to literary honors, exceeded even the Universities in the number of
their degrees. These were sacred to a more intimate friendship, and as they
flattered innocent prejudices, they were thought beneficial to the common
cause, though accommodated only to exclusive privileges. But as the practice
was not universal, and is modern, we can distinguish the ancient institution
from all orders, which have been united with it, as easily as we can primitive
from corrupted Christianity. The English Lodges exhibit the true form of the
Institution, and vouch for its independence of all the orders, with which it
has been connected.

THESE Lodges, from which we have derived our existence, exempt us from any
censures to which modern degrees might give occasion. The form of the primitive
Lodges was retained in America, till the revolution. The attachment to the
French, which was then so strong, and so sincere, awakened an inclination to
imitate them, but no attempts were made, beyond the orders, which existed under
the monarchy. The first members of a Lodge in Massachusetts, some of which are
living, and many of them have been well known to us, cannot be suspected of any
sinister design in that age. And we know enough of the progress in every other
colony, to determine that no causes did counteract the original design. The
designs of the British Government had been long enough pursued, to satisfy us
of the influence they would employ in the colonies. How far political opinion
could influence the Scotch Lodge in 1752, may be judged from the circumstance
that it was instituted as soon as more than one Lodge was formed, and before
any other causes than incidental curiosity and emulation could exist. There was
no general or sudden change from the first establishment ever observed, and the
Convention in 1785, in which all the prejudices of the English and Scotch
Lodges were investigated, did not even imagine a political cause of their
separate existence. The public fears may instruct us how much we may have
gained in our reputation by association with the names of degraded orders, or
by societies expelled from Christian countries.

BY a late work, Robison's Proof of a Conspiracy, etc.
confessedly written, from periodical papers, not always the vehicles of truth,
and with evident design to alarm the public mind, our attention has been called
to the ILLUMINATI, who have been considered as an order of Masons, though at
the same time, it is confessed, that they have not common principles.

IN this work it is justly granted that Masonry proceeded from England to
Germany. The order of ILLUMINATI has lately originated in Germany. According to
Robison's account in 1775, Dr. Adam Weishauft founded the order; for all that
is said of its foreign correspondence, and progress is conjectural. The
insinuations respecting Dr. Priestley and Zollikofer, would make any work
infamous.
The mother Lodge of this order was at Munich, and from the public prejudices,
it was suppressed in 1786. The alarming confession of four members in 1783 did
not provoke an instant dissolution. Step after step was taken by the elector,
and three years passed from the confession to the third edict, which abolished
the order. But Weishauft had the offer of a pension, which he refused. This
seems not to be an unequivocal proof of guilt. But in the work before us, the
charge of guilt is not extended to the whole order of ILLUMINATI but is
confined to supposed higher orders not yet fairly detected; and it is
confessed, that base as were the higher degrees, very worthy men had united in
the lower, without knowledge of any evil tendency. This confused account is
given in a manner adapted to excite the strongest prejudices. Like a
disingenuous adversary, he alarms, by an unknown order, our fears of an
innocent order, which he pretends to despise, while he confesses "that the
order took its rise among FREE MASONS, but is totally different from Free
Masonry." But a philosopher might say, how absurd is it to despise a ritual,
which has so adequately answered its purposes, and which has such real power
over human nature, as to combine men together, to overthrow kingdoms. What a
principle must it command! While if it be a trifle, why should such vehement
zeal be expended upon it? Can trifles have such dangers? It seems by the
account, that Free Masonry, and its kindred institutions, is a rival, and a
powerful rival to all governments under heaven. It is then a most powerful
combination. And what else is any government? And surely the more simple the
means to combine men, in the secret of government, the better for mankind.
Weishauft upon the secret art of governing, 1795.


BUT if we hear the invectives against an order, we ought to hear its
vindication. Weishauft says, that in the oath of the order, this caution was
expressed, "I being previously assured that it shall contain nothing contrary
to religion, the state, or good manners." Such a caution ought at least to
satisfy us, that it borrowed no bad principles from an order on which it was
ingrafted. To this confession, the objection is, that Weishauft did not declare
all he knew of the higher orders or degrees. In regard to Weishauft, we ought
to hear other testimony than that from an unknown stranger, and from unknown
writers. Dr. Staeudlin, Spirit and History of Skepticism. 2 Vols. 8vo. 1794.
professor of divinity at Gottingen, pronounced favorably of Weishauft. And
Willich Willich's preface to his Elements of Kant's Philosophy. 5 Vol. 8vo.
1798.
says, "I can safely aver that his literary works have been received upon the
Continent, with almost universal approbation. In this assertion I am supported
by the conductors of the first German reviews in general, and particularly by
the respectable evidence of professor Staeudlin, himself, as well as by that of
the celebrated professor Eberhard, of Halle, both of whom have ranked M.
Weishauft's writings among the first philosophical compositions of Germany." Of
his work, "On Truth and Moral In 3 Vols. 8vo. Last Vol. Regensburg, 1796.
Perfection," he says, "he supports with energy, the truth and certainty of
human knowledge, and at the same time places the interesting nature of these
questions in a clear point of view. He has defended his private character, to
the satisfaction of his learned friends in Germany."

SUCH accounts from Germany, if they will not exculpate him from every charge,
will teach us to suspend our judgment in regard to a crime, so high colored,
as to involve at once all the guilt of every unreasonable opinion: A crime as
great against discretion and policy, and all hopes of success, as it is against
humanity and civil society. -- A crime which ought not to have been punished
with the qualifying clause, promising a pension, from any government under
heaven. The English Reviewers Critical.
may justly say of such a writer as Robison, that the tendency of his work is
pernicious, as it excites suspicion without evidence. The celebrated Zimmerman,
Zimmerman's Survey of Europe. -- On Solitude. -- On National Pride.
whose works have been circulated in this country, opposed the ILLUMINATI, The
jealousies of State were assisted by the delusions of zealous men.
and addressed the Emperor to interfere decisively by civil authority. The
Emperor's death prevented: But Zimmerman's Tissot's Life of Zimmerman.
zeal precipitated his judgment, and the Baron Knigge, one of the accused,
instituted a process against him for a libel, and he could not exculpate
himself. Distraction ensued upon mad zeal, and the worthy man perished a victim
to the terrors of his own imagination in 1795. Such the pernicious folly of
persecuting upon suspicion. This is the outcry of prejudice, whatever a man may
say, or do. Man denke:Sailer ein ILLUMINAT! Er dessen aeltere und neuere
Schriften ueberall das laute gegentheir sprechen. Gotha. Jan. 6, 1796. A candid
correspondent says this is the most impartial review of Germany.


IT would not sufficiently answer the purpose of a zealous writer, to say that
this order existed but for a few years. It must possess some occult arts of
propogating its pernicious opinions. The attempt to prove this secret progress
in Germany, is too ridiculous to be refuted.

THE progress of the ILLUMINATI in France is assigned after Weishauft's order
had been abolished in Germany. But if it owed its progress to Free Masonry, how
happens it that Free Masonry had such opposite effects in Lions and in Paris?
How did the ILLUMINATI remain unknown to the clubs, who were not in the same
measures? or, Why were they not in one club? Or did Orleans write only for the
Jacobins, propoganda, or poor Jesuits? The interference of the Jesuits is
contradicted by the whole history of the times. See Watkin's answer to R. Free
Mason's Repository.
A glance at the many narratives See Louvet's Narrative, etc. etc. etc.
from those who were active at the commencement of the French Revolution, will
convince us that these insinuations have been the work of imagination. The
state of parties will convince us, that the work was accomplished before the
influence of any opinions was visible among any pretended orders of Masons. It
would be much more wise, to trace it to the American Revolution, and thence to
the American Lodges, who perhaps never dreamed of it. For the part Orleans took
in France is no better proof, than may be taken from GRAND MASTER WARREN, who
lived and died in our revolution, and whose reputation is the glory of the
American Lodges. This worthy man was a Grand Mason, and most active in the
revolution. Did the American Revolution begin in the Lodges? The circumstantial
evidence would be too tedious, in regard to the innocence of the whole body of
Masons in France. See Jones's Masonic Miscellany, 1797.
What has been offered from the Abbe Barruel Barruel. Hist. du Jacobinisine.
8vo. 3 Vols. 1797.
fixes nothing upon Free Masonry. It detects the spirit of the New Philosophy,
but it employs agents, not from Lodges, but from Philosophers. The economists
of France did not rest upon Free Masonry, and the writer, who employs this
evidence, must do great honor to his own understanding, willingly to admit a
general charge of irreligion, when he confesses it, an innovation by an order
whose duration was short; especially when he admits that the British never
suspected of sedition, an order, which he declares to have originated in their
own country. To find the fountain, and to confess it pure, is to confess that
its streams must have been troubled in its course.

BUT the writer still hopes to attack the principles as well as history of Free
Masonry after all his concessions. It is pleasing to compare his reflections.
For if what he has said be true, "that declarations on universal philanthropy
Hoffman wrote his Vienna Journal in 1792, to oppose the progress of philosophy
in its evils from modern notions of philanthropy, and the knowledge among the
people. But Wichman and Kaestner in 1793, attempted to prove that no eminent
men, or liberties of the press, have effect sufficient to produce a revolution.
be dangerous," their only qualification, which the nature of society can
admit, must be association, which comprehends the nature and duty of particular
societies. And if the ancient systems are to be preferred to modern, because
established upon experience, and not upon theory, experience has abundantly
proved that associations for purposes of charity and philanthropy can have the
greatest influence upon the character of mankind. And according to ancient
Masonry, as may appear from its history, there can be no philanthropy
inconsistent with law, society and religion, as they are established by mankind
in civil life. We may then assert our cause and say, that the whole intercourse
of life requires active and mutual services, and special obligations; and that
to increase these agreeably to the laws of nature and society, upon general
principles, is the best institution of social life, which combined law and
liberty can protect. We must leave Robison to an inquisitive public, and
forgive a worthy divine See a late Fast Sermon.
who has noticed the book, and has made our order ridiculous, even by applause
on such an occasion. May the fate of Zimmerman be never the fate of Robison, or
the American Geographer!

BUT should it appear that there have been extravagant men, in these
extraordinary times, we should remember that they rose out of the character of
the age. The part they had taken as citizens at first, and the discontents they
felt afterward made them invent new forms of association. They seized upon
such expedients, to promote their designs. Other orders have been corrupted.
And, Have not the meek disciples of Jesus published their political faith
within the walls consecrated to the gospel of peace? We reprobate not
christianity, when this liberty is abused. The change in Europe is accomplished
by no order of men. The spirit has taken hold upon human nature. When the Abbe
Barruel tells us, that from the honest simplicity of the first or primary
Lodges, they were not admitted to the secrets of the conspiracy, he says all we
can ask of a prejudiced Author to exculpate Masons with candid men, for such
are the only Lodges of our ancient Institution. But how absurd is the
suspicion! If the higher orders hold the secret, how are they to influence the
Brethren, but as they influence mankind? If they do not converse with them in
their Lodges, they can know them only as citizens. Masons are not then in the
secret. Have not such men excluded Going out from us, they were not of us. --
John.
themselves from all communications in the Lodges? And will they have better
opportunities to converse with the Brethren out of their Lodges than in them.

SUCH are the insinuations of prejudice and party. Such is the confession, that
Lodges are not fit places for conspiracy. All their evidence amounts to this
truth, that when a spirit of revolution, or any thing else, prevails in a
county, it pervades all classes of citizens. The books, the churches, the
private societies will be full of it. And to reason fairly, as the spirit of
revolution seized some masons, so it seized some christians, and as christians
form a sect, so masons formed an order to enjoy their opinions. And the
conclusion is as safe for one as the other, that they ought to be abolished.
And as a part of this wonderful discovery is claimed by Robison, let him have
the honor of it.

WE do not refuse a fair investigation. We ask no privileges, which can
endanger the State. Sooner may all our glory pass away, than one law fail. Let
us turn to the history of Masonry, in the full records of its character and
transactions. In what institution is there greater subordination? Is not its
language from ancient governments? Does it not indulge the parade of forms, and
the emblems of power, and employ the corresponding honors of the state? Are
not its honors perpetual in the rank and the name? Has it not invited to the
highest honors, the first magistrates of noble families? Has it not accepted
Kings and Princes, the most jealous of their power? Has it not flourished in
every form of government? Men have found means to associate political
principles with Christianity, because, as Masonry, it does not profess to give
exclusive favors to any form of government. But because Christianity does not
decide upon the form of government, Are not its precepts sacredly tenacious of
good citizenship? And is Masonry less explicit? Are not Lodges accessiable to
all parties? Have not the designs of party, led men away from the primitive
Lodges, in which all sinister designs were prevented by mutual jealousy? Are
not characters known? The Protestants and Catholics, after their separation did
not hold themselves accountable for each other. AS AN ORDER, WE ARE SACREDLY
BOUND TO THE LAWS AND CONSTITUTION, AND TO THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT IN
OUR COUNTRY, and of this truth, our Grand Lodge has lately given an open
declaration, by an address to the President of the United States. And that our
benevolence is no modern subterfuge, the manuscript of Mr. Lock is a full
attestation.

THE confidence of the world, we hope to deserve, but we will claim it of the
Brethren. We will cultivate it for the purpose of good citizens. Reason is
always slow without experience. Let us then employ ourselves in constant
offices, which will confirm our sincere affections. Let our countenance, our
civilities, our guards and our virtues, be inspired by the spirit of our
association. Constant services bind the Brethren together. If nothing be
gained, the best promises will be disregarded. A Lodge flourishes, when it
multiplies its good actions.

THE increasing population of this country, the progress of the arts, and the
character of society in it, exact of all the Brethren, the purest manners, and
the best spirit of their Institution.

MAY good Masters give their reputation to guard the Lodges without, and their
counsels to guide them within.

MAY the West ever give the longing expectation of returning light with glory.

WHEN the light is bright in the South, may the Brethren find the work happily
advanced by seasonable duty, that they may have time for refreshment without
fear.

MAY prudence and wisdom guide the pen, and true virtue supply the treasure of
the Lodges. May the friendships of our hearts give cheerfulness to our spirits,
and gratitude to our festival. -- Peace to the Brethren. -- And when the wit of
classic ages is lost, and Butler and all his humble imitators are forgotten,
may we accommodate a lovely song and say, Let madness, let folly, our order
oppose,
Love and true friendship will rout all our foes.
TWO PILLARS support the Lodge, where we dwell;
Where Friendship's our magic, and Union the spell.
May we practice all duties of friendship and love,
To insure us all seats in the GRAND LODGE above.


FINIS.

