

COUNTRY HABITATIONS.
SECURITY against Fire and (...) is peculiarly deserving of attention in
building Country Habitations; detached as they are from the immediate
assistance of neighbors.

In the time of the revolution war I lost two houses by fire, from accidents;
and living on a navigable river, the house in which I then resided was beset in
the night by a number of armed men. Their numbers could not be known, nor could
they be repelled from within, otherwise than by first opening the door. They
were let in upon terms. The house was badly constructed for defense; and I
always disliked the common mode of building, with combustible materials,
without reserve, especially in the roofs. The annexed drawing, of a plan and
elevation, may afford hints to persons who would build near rivers, or would
effectually guard against fire. It is not here the intention to give a design
to be particularly followed; but principles only on which others may build to
suit themselves*

The floors of basement stories in dwelling houses, are wholesomer and better
when solid and of the common earth, naked or laid with brick, stone, or cement,
than floors laid upon joists over cellars or near the ground. Floors laid on
joists near the ground or over cellars, confute a damp air under them long
enough for becoming an unelastic dead air; which producing a mouldiness and
smell of vaults, gradually is mixed with the air of the roofs above, so as to
be even smelt in some. Delicate people, used to dry warm houses of the towns,
seldom take a cold on sleeping in log pens or houses having damp earthen
floors, when they travel in the frontier of the country.

Court houses and other stone or brick buildings, which are not airy, when shut
up for some time, contain a somewhat stagnant unelastic damp air, which is also
unwholesome: but this is not at all the case of inhabited, much-frequented, or
airy houses; when the air has some degree of current, and is all alive.

The floor of a basement story may be of brick or flagstone upon the ground.
The second or best story to have its floor laid with rough strong boards or
planks, only three or four inches wide, nailed down across strong stiff joists,
and covered with a thick bed of a strong cement, the color whereof should
yield to utility. Pieces between the joists stiffen them and prevent lateral
weakness*
Carpets may cover the whole. The wash-boards and surbase may be of cut stone
or marble. The floor of the third story to be laid with thick narrow boards and
cement as the first; but the wash-boards to be of cement rounded off. Cellars
to be under a detached building, or under the staircase, or some one room of
the principal house.

Wood is to be avoided as much as possible. The door and window frames may be
of stone or iron* The joists and boards for the platform roof and floors, also
for the stair case if this should be of wood, are all to be defended from
contact of fire by cements. No outside cornish is requisite to a platform roof.

(...) houses of the ancient civilized world had, and most of the Asiatic and
African houses on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, still have platform
roofs. The houses in Algiers are all so, and of one height; so that the ladies
visit from house to house and street to street, by walking on the roofs of the
houses. Platform roofs are cheaper than common ridge-roofs, shingled; and are
safer against fire inside and out, and against the pressure of wind. Most
houses burnt in country places take fire in the roofs whilst the family is gone
on visits or to church. Then it is that children or servants take candles or
light-wood to rummage closets, cuddies, and cock-lofts, which usually are
lumbered with combustibles: or flakes of burning soot fall on the shingled roof.

A platform roof may be thus constructed. Joists 12 or 13 inches deep at the
big end, are to rest on the middle wall, and from thence slope two-tenths of an
inch per foot to the smaller end on the exterior wall. Their thickness 2 5-10
or three inches. The distance between them 12 or 14 inches, from center to
center. Or the joists may be equally deep from end to end; and battens which
slope are to be fixed on the joists, for forming the platform roof with the
said degree of slope. Between the joists, at every five or six feet, fix to the
joists at right angles, pieces of plank, nearly the depth of the joists. These
would add to the strength of the joists, as so many braces, preventing their
weakness laterally. Stout, rough, narrow boards, 3 or 4 inches broad, are
nailed down across the joists with large nails; the better if ragged. The sun
is powerful in drawing nails. On (...) a cement an inch or two thick, whilst it
is hot in slacking the burnt powdered limestone one part, mixed with clean sand
and brick-dust two parts. No more at a time is to be slacked than what the
trowels can mix and work up whilst (...). Dossie. In slacking no more water is
used than what will well wet through the heap of sand: then to this add and mix
up the unslacked burnt limestone in powder; and be careful never to drown the
mass for a moment. This fault would be incurable.
When the cement is dry, in a hot sunshine day, with a brush lay upon it hot
tar three or four parts, and of fish oil one part, well mixed together over a
gentle fire. This coat may be repeated. Forbid walking on it for months after.
Fish-oil corrects tar in its faculty of letting water through it; and the
mixture gives a close varnish. After this, lay upon the cement tar and fish-oil
boiled down together till they become half-stuff, What in Maryland are called
inch-planks, are boards in Pennsylvania. Tar, long boiled, produces pitch. When
tar is but half boiled down, to a medium thickness, between tar and pitch, it
is then called Half-stuff.
and sift very coarse sand or small pebbles over the whole. Over this lay more
half-stuff, now without oil, and more sand (...) pebbles without sand. It may
be a better way to lay on a bed of the sand (...) pebbles dry, and then,
levelling it, pour on hot tar, or tar and oil, barely to soak through the bed.
So it is, a gentleman of Carolina informed me he made beds of a sandy soil,
formed something higher than the common level of the ground, for thrashing out
his rice crops. With gourds were gradually poured upon one of these beds, many
barrels of hot tar. After a while the beds became like stone. Many years ago, I
was shown the kitchen of Captain Lux of Baltimore. It was a house which had
been used for storing barrels of tar. The floor was now a composition of tar
and earth, and appeared like stone* I chiefly noticed the fireplace, which
also was a composition of tar and earth, appearing like stone, and being quite
incombustible. So on wharves are seen old spots, where tar had been spilt,
which cannot be burnt.


Mr. Latrobe permits me to give here the composition of a cement used by him,
and the manner of applying it to platform roofs. "The floor must rise about two
or three inches in ten feet (two or three tenths of an inch in a foot.) First,
lay a floor upon the Rafters, For so flat a covering or platform, rafters are
useless, and expense is saved. The joists, a little sloped, suffice; or battens
upon the joists may form the slope.
of narrow well-seasoned plank cut into slips not wider than four inches. 2dly.
Lay down upon the floor with boiling tar, a coat of sheathing paper, such as is
used for sheathing ships. 3dly. One bushel pounded chalk, or unslacked lime, or
lime slacked in the air, or of water slacked lime dried and pounded very fine.
Two bushels clean coarse sand, and as much tar as is necessary to reduce it to
a substance that will spread toughly when hot. The tar must be boiled and the
materials gradually mixed with them till they are in a proper state to lay on
the paper. The stratum may be three quarters of an inch thick. Skreen gravel,
so that the largest particles may be as big as large sized peace, and none much
less than swan shot. Take a very hot day, when the composition is somewhat
softened by the heat of the sun, and with a garden roller, roll in as much of
this gravel as it will take. The floor will then be a beautiful pavement,
resembling Scagliola, and may be worked in mosaique. This covering is so light,
that very little timber is required in the roof."

Objections readily occur to new projects; and it is right that they should be
well weighed and considered. It is said platform-roofs may answer in southern
climates; but that in our more northern country, the weight of snow would be
too great to be borne. This objection has the less force with me, who have had
some experience on this head. I covered a house, thirty-six feet square, with a
flat roof which sloped about a quarter of an inch to a foot The joists of
poplar were two feet apart; nine inches deep at the upper end (the ridge of the
roof) and about six and a half inches at the small end, where they rested on a
wall. From the ridge to this wall was ten feet in length, and the joists from
thence continued tapering further eight feet, where they rested on a plate
supported by brick pillars. Pine sawed laths, inch thick, were nailed across
the joists. Common weak oyster-shell mortar, from old Indian collections of
shells, was laid on the laths, three-fourths of an inch thick. Tiles six
quarters of an inch thick were bedded in the mortar. The joints were filled
with tar and sand; and the tiles and joints were covered and filled with half
stuff, on which sand was strewed thick and rolled A gust of wind carried off
most of the sand. Then again half-stuff and sheathing paper were laid on, and
upon the paper half-stuff, sand and pebbles. Gusts of wind blew most of the
paper off. It remained only on the roof over one of the rooms; which was tight,
excepting in one place, where rains poured through, (...) a single thin coat of
tar and fish-oil, laid on hot with a hair brush, totally stopped the leak. This
roof bore the snows of near twenty winters, in Maryland, without the least
attempt to shovel off the snow. Have given the place (...) to my son, he had
occasion to pull down the house.

The leaking in this experiment was the more excessive, from the mortar being
made of rotten shells; which made an imperfect cement: and moreover, too much
was expected from tar and pitch, as resisters of water; when in fact they let
it through rapidly; until mixed with fish-oil, which proved to be a perfect
corrector: neither was the paper properly fixed; for it could not be nailed
down. Though the joists were of a brittle wood, slender and distant from each
other, yet the span from wall to wall was but about nine feet.

In the annexed plan is a main partition wall, across where the chimney is,
from whence the joists extend 21 feet to the exterior wall. The weight of
extraordinary quantities of snow and heat often repeated in the course of a
winter, is to be guarded against. If there was no chance of omission to shovel
off the snow every time it should fall, less strength would be requisite: but
there probably would be neglect in this; or the house might happen to be
uninhabited during some winter or other; I would therefore have the joists
strong and numerous, and the joists immediately below those of the roof, should
be made to bear some portion of the weight, by planks between the lower and
upper joists; which are to be about two feet, the depth of the space (...) for
the external air to pass through and carry heat from under the platform roof,
so as to cool the work and chambers, and admit a person to go between them and
examine leaks*

Another objection is, that sudden changes of the weather between great heats
and torrents of cool rain, are very trying. But it is pretty certain that
attention in the choice of the materials and laying on the covering will be
effectual in resisting injuries from the weather; especially when relieved from
much heat by the vent between platform and ceiling.

The stair case in the above design may be best in (...) the corner rooms, or
passages. The cellar may be under (...). To make these corner rooms otherwise
than square, would give them the appearance of an old castle, if rounded, and
of a modern fortress if the extreme angles were made at all acute; which is to
be avoided. It is in all things to support the character of a house, a mere
habitation. Wood on stair cases may be coated over with a cement. Nothing is
said of any use of the flanks, formed by the recesses of the exterior walls:
though holes in them would effect much good in airing the rooms. Among a
civilized people, and in a Country of Laws, there ought to be no occasion for
any extraordinary application of them.


Preserving the principles, and the form; the size will be according to the
ability and discreet views of the proprietor. In the annexed plan, the Feet.
Feet. 2 Passages are in the clear 2^ by 9 5-10 each 2^^, both 4^^ 4 Rooms, the
corners 12 by 12 114 576 2 Ditto, 20 by 21 420 840 Whole area 18^^

The drawing is of an elevation and plan fronting south. The entrance is at
either of the sides, east or west: There are objections to balconies: but if
desired, the east and west sides of the house (...) be preferred, for having
shade in the morning on the west, and in the evening on the east. The width may
be ^ 5-10 feet of the recess, and 5 5-10 projecting; making 8 feet the width of
the balcony.

Between the ceiling of the uppermost story and the platform roof, is to be a
clear space of two feet in depth, with holes through the opposite walls. The
hot air will thus be carried off from the under part of the platform, and there
will be a space for examining leaks. The air holes in the walls may be 8 or 10
inches diameter, with wire or well tarred twine Lattices, for excluding birds;
and during the winter, inside close shutters are to be fixed.

A balustrade of plain bannisters squaring to 2 by 3 inches, thin side outward,
and leaving clear intervals of 6 or 7 inches, will admit of snow being more
freely blown off as it falls: otherwise a close parapet of wall, ornamented
with pedestals forming panels, would be preferable. Turned bannisters would not
be so simply neat, nor admit of so much freedom to the snow being blown off, as
these plain bannisters. Rope-netting or lattice would also admit of snow
accumulating on the diagonal ropes and their angles.

Height:
Basement elevation of the walls 9+1=10 feet. Second story, 12+1=13 Third
story, 9+1=10 Vent space, 2+1=3 Whole height -- 36
In proportion as the walls are high, they should be thick and strong. The
three-story house would have 36 feet of wall above ground. A two-story, would
have 26 feet, and a one-story house would have 15 feet. So that if one story
requires a wall 1 brick thick, two stories may have the basement 1, and three
stories 2 bricks thick: or say 1, 2, 2 bricks thick, the basement or first
stories. The foundation wall should be three feet in the ground, for gaining
firmness and to be out of the reach of severe frost.

It may be sufficient for some families, and best suit their purposes to have
but one or two stories of rooms. The lower the walls the stronger. It would be
no great task to force water up, every evening in summer, for cooling the roof
and other purposes. At Algiers, much of the women's work is done on the roof,
where water is always at hand. They especially wash and dry their linen there.
In Spain, they have their cloacas on the platform roof; where also are two
cisterns of water: one for the use of the cook, the other for more common
purposes, washing, etc. From this the pipes of the cloacas are sluiced. At
Cadiz, water is received into the cisterns on the tops of the houses, from
reservoirs or heads of water on the hills out of the town. Water might be
raised to a head at the top of Mr. Morris's Quarry Hill, on the Schuylkill, for
supplying reservoirs on the tops of the houses in Philadelphia. Consult
ingenious men. The tide falling eight feet; and running 2 5-10ths miles in an
hour, at least equal to the walking of horses in mill-work, could not works be
so constructed that the impetus of the water of that river should move a wheel
(I think a horizontal one) that would force the water wanted up to the head on
the top of that hill? A horizontal wheel under water would forever turn one and
the same way, whether the water runs ebbing or flowing; as above twenty years
ago I experienced in a model. Thus from water thrown up, every house might have
family baths; the most important of all building-improvements for the health
and comfort of families, that (...) in our climate especially. You now rise
from bed and wash face and hands -- your tip ends. Why not rise and plunge into
your wash-bason (...) bath adjacent to your bedchamber, ^ instead of using a
gallon vessel of water, only for hands and face! Every family in this sine
climate ought to have its bath; and (...) proper bathing places should be
provided for (...)

Bathing moistens, soaks, washes, supples and refreshes the whole body. When
the water is tepid, bathing is always safe, cleaning and refreshing; when cold,
or made more than blood warm, it is wholesome or not according to the state of
health* but is very beneficial in many cases, when well advised to use the one
or the other, according to the state of health.




The basement and second stories may be divied according to the views of the
builder, rather than by the annexed plan. The third story having the four
square rooms at the corners of the plan thrown into closets, about 2 5-10ths
feet deep, will admit of the thin partition as above laid down, to be omitted;
and then the whole area (clear of the closets proposed) will divide into four
roomy bed-chambers.

The middle wall crossing the passages and dividing the large rooms, will bear
most of the weight on the roof, and must therefore be particularly strong. The
joists of the platform run from this wall north and south to the exterior walls.

The recesses of the walls are shallow as may be; 1 5-10 foot clear of wall
will do. If deep, they retain or concentrate heat, and harbor musketoes.

If the corner rooms be 10 feet sq. or 100x4=400 feet, The middle rooms 18 by
20 ft. sq. or 360x2=720 The passages 7 5-10 by 25, or 187x2=374 Whole area 1494
Construction of chimnies to the best advantage is very important; yet, till
lately, the principles have been but little understood. Mr. Peale, of the
Museum in Philadelphia, has given me some account of the fine effects of his
patent improvements, and says, that Fire-places which were used to smoke, on
his principles are cured of smoking; and such entire command is had of the
draught of air, that with but little of attention to the state of the fire, as
to its burning clear or not, by moving the sliding mantle downward for
increasing the draught, then returning it for letting the heat into the room,
and closing the valve in the throat of the chimney, just far enough for
carrying off the watery particles of the fuel, only a small portion of the heat
is suffered to escape up the chimney: consequently with very little consumption
of fuel, even large rooms may be kept comfortable in the coldest seasons, as
during the last winter he continually experienced; and the house is perfectly
secure from any fire left in the fireplace at night. I have in the late winter
seen one of Mr. Peale's fire-places in its improved state, where the room was
uncommonly large, 26 by 25 feet square and 15 feet high. On inquiry, it was
ascertained to me that during the winter only small fires were kept burning
from the morning, about seven o'clock till nine or ten at night, when it was
let go down, and the family left the room to go to bed; that it preserved a
warmth, not less than 48 of Farenheit, in the room till the fire was renewed
next morning; and this was the case in the coldest nights, when out of doors
the thermometer was at 10 degrees. That in the day the heat was steadily kept
at about 60 degrees. There is, next door to mine, a fireplace very noted for
smoking. After many vain attempts to cure it, it was closed up with brick-work,
plaistered over, and so remained till lately, when Mr. Peale directed his
improvements to be applied to it. Now it is perfectly free from smoking in the
very worst of winds and weather. What further proved to me the due portion of
heat having been steadily preserved in Mr. Peale's above room, during the
winter, was the high perfection in which, in March, I saw in it a collection of
green house-plants, oranges, etc. that had stood there the winter through. The
room had two windows fronting westerly, and two southerly, and I never saw
green house-plants more perfectly kept.


