EUGENIUS AND SELIMA; OR, THE FATAL EFFECTS OF PARENTAL TYRANNY.

A MORAL STORY.

SOLD AT THE PRINTING-OFFICE WEST-SPRINGFIELD.

M,DCC,XCVIII.

EUGENIUS AND SELIMA.
A GENTLEMAN of fortune in this metropolis, (whom it will not be improper to
distinguish by the name of Morosus) sent his only son, Eugenius, to the
University; -- there to finish his studies under the care of a tutor.

The fortune and engaging carriage of this young gentleman rendered him an
agreeable guest to all the polite and gay assemblies of the place, and his
sprightliness and vivacity a welcome visitor of the houses of the more private
persons of fashion.

Being one night at a card party at Mrs. R -- 's, he was introduced to Mrs. C
--, and her beautiful daughter Selima. Eugenius was struck at first sight with
the charms of this young lady, and felt a pleasing sensation in contemplating
her perfections. Mrs. R --, observing his embarrassment, took him by the hand,
and presented him to the lady and her daughter. "I introduce to you," said she,
addressing herself to the latter, "a young gentleman who has long wished for
the pleasure of being in your company." "Madam," said he, bowing and emboldened
by what Mrs. R -- had said, "'it is not alone to be in your company that I
desire; I beg leave to be permitted to increase the number of your admirers."
He now paused, but perceiving the ladies had left them together, he was
resuming his discourse, when she interrupted him. "You confound me, sir," said
she, "as I am sensible I am unworthy such flattering compliments." Here Mrs. R
-- and her friend entered, and the discourse turning on different subjects,
till the company increased, they sat down to cards, leaving Eugenius absorbed
in thought.

Love now began to make powerful inroads in his heart, Selima sat opposite him
during the evening, and the more he beheld her the more his passion
augmentened; but he feared his addresses were fruitless, as she did not once
deign him a tender look. Love, however, had, in reality made as powerful and
rapid a progress in her heart as in his, though modesty taught her to disguise
it.

The evening passed principally at cards -- Eugenius indeed found nothing to
cross his desires, yet it is consequent to love to be attended with inquietude;
-- he longed for another opportunity of speaking to her; but at that time it
was impracticable, as she and her mother withdrew at a very early hour. Before
he departed, he paid his compliments to Mrs. R --, who asked him how he had
liked his evening's entertainment. He replied, he was perfectly happy in the
society of such agreeable persons, and hoped for the renewing of that pleasure
the next evening.

Eugenius waited with impatience the expected moment which should again bring
him into the presence of the dear object of his affections, in which interview
he resolved to come to an explanation; -- but imagine his disappointment when
the time arrived, and he was informed, indisposition prevented, her mother, and
which necessarily hindered her being there. His conjecture was immediately,
that it was merely an excuse, and their absence was purposely calculated to
deter his further pursuit. The idea was sufficient to make him unhappy, and he
now began to ruminate upon the absurdity of his mistake in having regarded the
distant respect she had shown him, as a mark of affection, which was, he now
thought in reality only the simple effects of politeness. He left Mrs. R -- 's
that evening with less satisfaction, as may naturally be supposed, than he had
done the proceeding.

After having passed a restless night, next morning he paid a visit to Mrs. R
--: that lady rightly judged the cause to which she was indebted for the honor
of this his early visit, and to remove his suspicions, assured him he had been
deprived of Mrs. C -- and her daughter's company, solely by the indisposition
of the former. Luckily, during their conversation, the ladies entered. After
they had paid their congratulations to Mrs. C --, on her restoration to health,
and other usual compliments had passed, Mrs. R -- took the mother by the hand
and withdrew into another room in order to give Eugenius an opportunity of
discovering his sentiments to Selima: nor did he fail of making use of the
present advantageous moment. "Madam," said he, taking her tenderly by the hand,
"this is the first time I have had the pleasure of being alone with you; permit
me, now I enjoy that opportunity, to inform you the impression your charms made
on me the first time I had the honor of seeing you, and believe me, my dear
Selima, that if ever passion was fervent and true, mine is so; -- and, knew you
the unhappiness I endured the short time I was deprived of your company, it
would be sufficient to give you a clear proof of the truth of what I have said,
and of the sincerity of my affection. -- Such, my dear Selima is the
declimation of my heart; I scorn deceit; -- speak then, my lovely girl,
determine with a smile, my happiness; or fix with a frown my eternal misery."
"Ah sir," returned she, "could I think what you have said to be true, and that
it is I who have caused the tender unhappiness in you, you fain would have me
believe; I should reflect on it with pleasure; but should I listen to your
pursuasive words, I fear I should be drawn to imbibe a tenderness which might
hereafter prove difficult to banish. Yet this, in justice I must say, among the
fine speeches I have had said to me on this subject, yours seem to wear most
the appearance of simple sincerity. I should hope, sir, that what I have
already said, will be sufficient to make known to you my sentiments on what you
have just now said."

The happiness which these few words of Selima conferred on Eugenius, can only
be conceived by those who have been in a similar situation. But her mother and
Mrs. R --, now entering, no further discourse passed. It may be supposed he was
easily prevailed on to stay dinner; and in the evening more company coming,
they sat down to quadrille. He had again an opportunity of conversing with
Selima, she having declined playing. "Is it possible, Selima," said he, "that
such a reserved indifference should be thought a recompense worthy the love you
must be convinced I entertain for you. I fear some more happy rival occasions
this behavior to me; be engenious and easy my troubled soul, for it were death
to continue in that tormenting situation, which your treatment has reduced me."
"You are mistaken, sir, I assure you," replied she, "and insensible of the
feelings my heart but too freely indulges in your behalf; -- your behavior
charms me, and I confess, what modesty ought to have obliged me to conceal,
that your tenderness has affected me much; but whilst you are thus earnestly
soliciting to know what my sentiments are toward you; permit me to require you
to return me the sincerest proof of your regard by endeavoring to make your
parent and mine approve of it, and then you will find I shall not be averse to
your wishes."

She uttered this with the most enchanting sweetness and innocent simplicity.
He promised to acquaint his father immediately; and they spent the remainder of
the evening in assuring each other of a mutual tenderness and affection; and
when the company separated, he departed perfectly satisfied with the assurances
she had given him of her love, and not doubting but his father would consent to
their union, as he could have no reasonable objections to her person, nor to
her fortune, since it was equal if not superior to his own.

The visible happiness in his countenance was quickly perceived by his tutor,
who enquired the reason. Eugenius thinking he might be of service to him in
interceding with his father did not hesitate to tell him the cause, nor did he
conceal in the least the purport of his last conversation with Selima. "Sir,"
said his tutor, "you have, I fear, engaged in an affair that will be the cause
of lasting unhappiness to you, and that amiable young lady. Not that love
itself is to be condemned; no! far from it; it is the surest mark of a great
and noble soul; but you should not indulge yourself in it too precipitately --
for, continued he, no one can tell but that your father may have fixed on a
lady for your wife, and, nevertheless whatever we may think, parents know, or
at least ought to know better what is to the advantage of their children, than
they themselves. Your father gave me particular orders not to suffer you to
make any engagement without his knowledge; and should I fulfill my trust, did I
not give him the earliest account of this transaction? which, excuse me if I
say I know it will be contrary to his inclination."

His tutor was right, and when he found all his advice was to no purpose, he
desisted, and immediately wrote to Morosus, to acquaint him of the connection
his son had formed; advising to send for him home, absence might cure him of
this passion, and restore him to his senses.

In a few days Eugenius received a letter from his father, containing an order
to return home; this was sufficient to render him unhappy; the idea of leaving
Selima was death; but his father's commands were absolute, and must be obeyed.
The same evening he went to take his farewell of his beloved Selima; they
parted with tears, after having sworn fidelity to each other. Mrs. R --
sympathised in their unhappiness, by giving them all the consolation friendly
advice could afford. Eugenius begged her to permit him to write to her from
London, to acknowledge the obligations he had already experienced; of which he
should always retain the most lively sense of gratitude. She readily granted
his request, and it was a consolation to him that by this means he could enjoy
the pleasure of hearing some news of his dear Selima.

When Eugenius arrived in London, his father's cool behavior hurt him not a
little. The morning after his arrival, his father sent for him into his closet;
he obeyed his command and went trembling, but fully resolved to discover his
sentiments. On his entrance, Morosus addressed him thus: "Sir," said he, "pray
how have you employed your time since you left home." The youth instantly, and
without any reserve confessed his love for Selima, and in the tenderest
expressions and persuasive eloquence exaggerated her merit and beauty -- nor
did he forget to mention her ample fortune, beseeching him at the same time not
to disapprove his passion by a denial of their union. "I am surprised, (replied
the father) you should have formed such an attachment without my consent, and
more so at your boldness in avowing it. But, young man, continued he, remember,
I command you to think no more of this ridiculous passion, unless you would
incur my utter displeasure, and oblige me to a severity I willingly would
avoid." In vain he remonstrated he had plighted his honor in the most sacred
oaths to marry her. Morosus broke from him, and would hear no more.

His tutor, who was accessory to what had passed, came to give him all the
comfort in his power, but he was incapable of receiving any. -- He abandoned
himself to despair, and would scarcely receive nourishment for several days;
nor could all the remonstrances of his tutor bring him out of his chamber.

The first opportunity he could take, without being observed, he wrote to Mrs.
R --, informing her how averse his father was to his marriage and begging her
to acquaint Selima of his eternal constancy to her, and if possible to send him
some intelligence concerning her.

Having thus unburthened his mind, he now felt more happy than he had done some
time. He began to eat his meals with cheerfulness, hoping soon to receive an
answer to his letter, which arrived in a few days wherein she condoled with him
on the unhappy situation to which he was reduced by his father's barbarity; and
telling him that Selima could not restain a tear on reading his letter; but
that young lady had considered it as improper to show it her mother, left,
piqued by his father's refusal, and influenced by pride, she might be induced
to use her daughter in the same manner -- but what pleased him above all, was
the following postscript in Selima's own hand: I partake in the uneasiness your
father's cruel behavior has occasioned; but if my love can afford any
consolation, you possess it: -- Make yourself as easy as possible, and be
assured my affection shall only cease with death.

"Adieu: Remember "SELIMA."




These few lines operated like an elixer on his distracted mind, and restored
him to his wonted tranquillity. The family judged from the cheerfulness of his
countenance, that he had got the better of this foolish passion, as they called
it. -- His father and tutor were also inclined to believe the same; and their
suspicions being lulled asleep, he carried on his correspondence with Mrs. R --
and Selima for some time, without interruption, till at length an incident
happened which gave rise to a discovery, which involved the ill-fated Eugenius
in fresh troubles, and reduced him, if possible, to a more pitiable situation
than before.

Morosus unfortunately observed a servant deliver his son a letter, and though
he imagined it was concerning his amor he took no notice of it at present.

A short time after, he sent the tutor to Eugenius, in order to discover if
possible the present state of his mind concerning Selima, who artfully
insinuated he was glad to find he had forgotten that young lady: But Eugenius,
with more sincerity than prudence, answered, "No, sir, I have not forgotten
her, and though I may appear tranquil in this long and cruel absence from her,
yet her lovely image is too deeply engraven on my heart ever to be erased,
either by time or misfortune." "So much the worse, (replied the tutor) I pity
you; for your father this moment sent me to tell you, he intends disposing of
you in marriage, as also to prepare you for that event, and you know his
disposition will not brook a denial." "Impossible, (cried Eugenius) by obeying
my father, I forfeit my honor -- What then can I do."

His father had in reality no intentions to marry him, but tried this
experiment to see if it were possible to make him forget Selima; and finding
this fail, he had recourse to other expedients, which proved equally
ineffectual. He sent for the servant he had seen give him the letter, who by
threats and persuasions discovered the correspondence that had subsisted
between his son and Selima. However, Morosus ordered for the future to bring
him all the letters that came for his son: And what was his astonishment when
he found, in the first letter he intercepted, to what length the young lovers
had gone; but he did not fail answering this himself, and accordingly informed
Mrs. R -- that he was determined to marry his son to a lady he had fixed upon,
and begged her, in order to wean his affections from Selima, to write him word
she was on the point of marriage.

Mrs. R --, knowing the rank of Morosus, complied with his request; and the
next letter Eugenius received, brought him the disagreeable news of a supposed
match that was on foot between Selima and a gentleman of her parent's choice,
whom the former had consented to marry.

His father expecting this news would drive him to the extremity of
deseperation, ordered the tutor to be present when he knew the letter would
arrive; and the precaution was very wisely taken, for, without doubt, had he
been alone he would put a period to his existence.

He raved with the madness of a man bereft of his senses, and his father coming
in at the disturbance, relaxing his former severity of look, endeavored by
gentleness to bring him to reason, pretending ignorance of the cause from
whence this sudden phrenzy proceeded. "Leave me, (cried the afflicted Eugenius)
to my fate; ask me not whence my sorrow arises; as well you know you yourself
have caused it, by refusing to give your consent to my union with Selima, who,
alas! is now insupportable; deprive me of it, O barbarous father, at once*"

He uttered these words with such vehemence, that his father feared this affair
would end in some dismal catastrophe. He therefore thought it necessary not to
leave him to himself, till he had endeavored by every argument in his power to
convince him how despicable it was for a man of spirit and understanding to be
subdued by such a weakness. In the interval, when reason triumphed over
madness, he seemed to comply with his father's advice, as he thought that would
be the only and surest means to gain more liberty and obtain an opportunity of
going to Oxford, to satiate his revenge upon his supposed happy rival, and
punish the perfidy of Selima. (...) so credulous was he, that though the letter
was sufficient to give him sufficient proof of his mistress's infidelity, yet
he imputed it to her parents having heard of the difficulties his father had
made to their union, and that they in revenge had forced their daughter to
marry, contrary to her inclination, for he still thought Selima incapable of
deceit.

Fortune seemed to favor the unfortunate Eugenius; for a few weeks after, his
father was obliged to go to Oxford on Business of importance. This gave him an
opportunity to carry his intended project into execution. His father was not
the least suspicious of his son, but imagined that by the indifference he
feigned, he had forgot every thing relating to Selima, so accordingly took him
with him.

Eugenius, however, went as soon as possible after his arrival in the country
to Mrs. R -- 's, who was much surprised to see him. At his earnest solicitation
to be informed who the happy rival was, that Selima had preferred to him, (...)
she confessed the deceit that had been put upon him at his father's request.
This intelligence brought a composure to his troubled mind, which for a long
time it had been unacquainted with; he now with eagerness demanded, if Selima
lived where she did formerly? and was told she did not; that she had been ill
some time, and that her disorder was now grown to such a height, that her life
was despaired off. This was a new cause of unhappiness; but he determined to
see her.

Mrs. R --, who saw her every day, promised to acquaint her mother of his
arrival, and to beg the favor that he might be permitted to see this young
Lady. But after the deceit he had already experienced, he paid no regard to
promises, but endeavored to find out an expedient to introduce himself. Although
he was fearful his presence might occasion an emotion that might increase her
illness, yet he could not help thinking it would have (...) her pleasure.

Flushed with these hopes he made it his business to find out the physician
that attended, who happened fortunately to be one who had visited him* in a fit
of illness a few years back; and making himself known, begged the favor of him:
^et him accompany him in the next visit he should make to Selima. The physician
complied, and he accompanied him that evening to Mrs. C -- 's.

Eugenius not being personally known to any of the domestics, gained admittance
as a friend of the physician. When he entered Selima's chamber, he saw her
mother kneeling by the bedside drowned in tears. In despite of his efforts to
the contrary, he could not help shedding tears of latent tenderness on
beholding this melancholy scene; which plainly discovered the interesting part
he bore in her disorder. As she was raised up to receive some nourishment, he
beheld her face, once the glowing seat of florid health and yield bloom, all
wan and covered with deadly paleness. But her eyes, notwithstanding her
disorder, still maintained their usual vivacity. Her attendants (...) Eugenius,
who was quite a stranger to them, turned their eyes (...), and Selima observing
their attention, made her cast a look that (...). She immediately knew him, and
her extraordinary emotion (...) seeing him, testified her surprise and
pleasure; and stretching out (...) hand, made a sign that he should advance
nearer; which he did, (...) as he gently clasped her hand between his -- "Have
I ved," said ^he, "once more to behold my dear Eugenius! Yes! indulgent Heaven
has heard my prayer, and granted me my only wish." -- "But my dear Selima,
(replied he) to what an unhappy situation do I see you reduced." -- "Hush,
(said she) it is the will of Heaven; but if you maintain the same affection for
me you formerly did, I bear it contentedly." "If I still love you! (returned
he) Ah! my dear Selima, when I cease to love you, I must cease to exist."
"Enough, (answered she) I am satisfied; I feel my last moments approach; bear
my death with resignation -- farewell -- love me forever -- preserve the same
affection you have always professed, and live content." She could utter no
more; but falling into her lover's arms, heaved a last sigh, and expired
without a groan.

Unhappy youth! this was (...) much, his fortitude could not withstand it; he
remained senseless for some time. The physician attended him home, he
endeavored to console himself for his loss, and forget; -- but ah! the effort
was fruitless. His grief threw him into a fever, which alas! terminated his
life, and he died a melancholy victim to despair.

Morosus, ^^stracted at the loss of his son and only child, and overwhelmed
with a sense of his own barbarity being the cause of his death, remains the
miserable prey of sorrow.

Such are the fatal effects of Parental Tyranny, when parents biassed by
interest, study their children's imaginary advantage more than their real good
and happiness.

FINIS.

