President Dwight's Discourse, On the 4th. of July, 1798.

TO THE CITIZENS OF NEW HAVEN, AT WHOSE REQUEST THIS DISCOURSE WAS PREACHED AND
PUBLISHED,

It is respectfully inscribed, by their friend, and fellow citizen, TIMOTHY
DWIGHT.

THE DUTY OF AMERICANS, AT THE PRESENT CRISIS, ILLUSTRATED IN A DISCOURSE,
PREACHED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798; BY THE REVEREND TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D.
PRESIDENT OF YALE-COLLEGE; AT THE REQUEST OF THE Citizens of New Haven.

NEW HAVEN; PRINTED BY THOMAS AND SAMUEL GREEN, 1798.

THE reader is requested to remember that the prophecy, discussed in this
discourse, consists of two great parts, and that both are fulfilled in the same
period. If he sees one of them fulfilled, he cannot be at a loss concerning the
other. Of the interpretation here given the writer has nothing to say, but that
it has been the result of some study and reflection, accompanied with a careful
examination of several celebrated expositions heretofore published. He believes
the following interpretation to be just; but he is far from expecting, and as
far from desiring, that others will of course adopt his opinions. As he claims
no peculiar skill in commenting, so he is wholly unwilling to be the instrument
of error to his countrymen. The more they exercise their own right and duty of
judging for themselves, the more, if he mistakes not, will his wishes be
gratified.

New Haven, July 30th, 1798.
REVELATION XVI.XV. "Behold I come as a thief: Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame."
THIS passage is inserted as a parenthesis in the account of the sixth vial. To
feel its whole force it will be necessary to recur to that account, and to
examine it with some attention. It is given in these words.

V. 12. "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the king of the
east might be prepared."

13. "And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the
dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet.

14. "For they are the spirits of ^r. Demons.
devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of
the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty."

15. "Behold I come as a thief: Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame."

16. "And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon."

TO this account is subjoined that of the seventh vial; at the effusion of
which is accomplished a wonderful and most affecting convulsion of this guilty
world, and the final ruin of the Antichristian empire. The circumstances of
this amazing event are exhibited at large in the remainder of this, and in the
three succeeding chapters.

INSTEAD of employing the time, allowed by the present occasion, in stating the
several opinions of commentators concerning this remarkable prophecy, opinions
which you can examine at your leisure, I shall, as briefly as may be, state to
you that, which appears to me to be its true meaning. This is necessary to be
done, to prepare you for the use of it, which is now intended to be made.

IN the 12th verse, under a natural allusion to the manner in which the ancient
Babylon was destroyed, a description is given us of the measures, used by the
Most High to prepare the way for the destruction of the spiritual Babylon. The
river Euphrates surrounded the walls, and ran through the middle, of the
ancient Babylon, and thus became the means of its wealth, strength and safety.
When Cyrus and Cyaxares, The Darius of Daniel.
the kings of Persia and Media, or, in the Jewish phraseology, of the east,
took this celebrated city, they dried up, or emptied, the waters of the
Euphrates, out of its proper channel, by turning them into a lake, or more
probably a sunken region of the country, above the city. They then entered by
the channel which passed through the city, made themselves masters of it, and
overturned the empire. The emptying, or drying up, of the waters of the real
Euphrates thus prepared the way of the real kings of the east for the
destruction of the city and empire of the real Babylon. The drying up of the
waters of the figurative Euphrates in the like manner prepares the way of the
figurative kings of the east for the destruction of the city and empire of the
figurative Babylon. The terms waters, Euphrates, kings, east, Babylon, are all
figurative or symbolical; and are not to be understood as denoting real kings,
or a real east, any more than a real Euphrates, or a real Babylon. The whole
meaning of the prophet is, I apprehend, that God will, under this vial, so
diminish the wealth, strength, and safety, of the spiritual or figurative
Babylon, as effectually to prepare the way for its destroyers.

IN the remaining verses an event is predicted, of a totally different kind;
which is also to take place in the same period. Three unclean spirits; like
frogs, are exhibited as proceeding out of the mouth of the Dragon or Devil, of
the Beast or Romish Government, and of the False Prophet, or, as I apprehend,
of the regular Clergy of that Hierarchy. These spirits are represented as
working miracles, as going forth to the kings, of the whole world, to gather
them; and as actually gathering them together to the battle of that great day
of God Almighty, described in the remainder of this chapter, and in the three
succeeding ones. Of this vast enterprise the miserable end is strongly marked,
in the name of the place, into which they are said to be gathered -- Armageddon
-- the mountain of destruction and mourning.

THE writer of this book will himself explain to us what he intended by the
word spirits in this passage. In his 1st Epistle, chapter iv. v. 1. he says,
Beloved, believe not every spirit; but try the spirits, whether they be of God;
because many false prophets are gone out into the world See also v. 2, 3, 6.
.

I. E. Believe not every teacher, or doctrine, professing to come from God; but
examine all carefully, that ye may know whether they come from God, or not; for
many false prophets, or teachers passing themselves upon the Church for
teachers of truth, but in reality teachers of false doctrines, are gone out
into the world.

IN the same sense, if I am not deceived, is the word used in the passage under
consideration. One great characteristic and calamity of this period is,
therefore, that unclean teachers, or teachers of unclean doctrines, will spread
through the world, to unite mankind against God. They are said to be three; i.
e. several; a definite number being used here, as in many other passages of
this book, for an indefinite one; to come out of the mouths of the three evil
agents abovementioned; i. e. to originate in those countries, where they have
principally co-operated against the kingdom of God; to be unclean; to resemble
fr^gs; i. e. to be lothesome, clamorous, impudent, and pertinacious; to be the
spirits of demons, i. e. to be impious, malicious, proud, deceitful, and cruel;
to work miracles, or wonders; and to gather great multitudes of men to battle,
i. e. to embark them in an open, professed enterprise, against God Almighty.

HAVING thus summarily explained my views of this prophecy, I shall now for the
purpose of presenting it in a more distinct and comprehensive view draw
together the several parts of it in a paraphrase.

IN the sixth great division of the period of providence, denoted by the vials
filled with divine judgments and emptied on the world, the wealth, strength and
safety of the Antichristian empire will be greatly lessened, and thus effectual
preparation will be made for its final overthrow.

IN the meantime several teachers of false and immoral doctrines will arise in
those countries, where the Powers of the Antichristian empire have especially
distinguished themselves, by corrupting the truth, and persecuting the
followers, of Christ; the character of which teachers and their doctrines will
be impure, lothesome, impudent, pertinacious, proud, deceitful, impious,
malicious, and cruel.

THESE teachers will, by their doctrines and labors, openly, professedly, and
in an unusual manner, contend against God, and against his kingdom in this
world, and will strive to unite mankind in this opposition.

NOR will they fail of astonishing success; for they will actually unite a
large part of the human race, particularly in Christendom, in this impious
undertaking.

BUT they will only unite them to their destruction; a destruction most awfully
accomplished at the effusion of the seventh vial.

FROM this explanation it is manifest, that the prediction consists of two
great and distinct parts; the preparation for the overthrow of the
Antichristian empire; and the embarkation of men in a professed and unusual
opposition to God, and to his kingdom, accomplished by means of false
doctrines, and impious teachers.

BY the ablest Commentators the fifth vial is considered as having been poured
out at the time of the Reformation. The first is supposed, and with almost
absolute certainty, to have begun to operate not long after the year 800. If we
calculate from that period to the year 1517, the year in which the Reformation
began in Germany, the four first vials will be found to have occupied about
four times 180 years. 180 years may therefore be estimated as the greatest, and
170 years as the least duration of a single vial. From the year 1517 to the
year 1798 there are 281 years. If the fifth vial be supposed to have continued
180 years, its termination was in the year 1697; if 170, in 1687. Of course the
sixth vial may be viewed as having been in operation more than 100 years.

YOU will now naturally ask, What events in the Providence of God, found in
this period, verify the prediction?

TO this question I answer, generally, that the whole complexion of things
appears to me to have, in a manner surprisingly exact, corresponded with the
prediction. The following particulars will evince with what propriety this
answer is returned.

WITHIN this period the Jesuits, who constituted the strongest branch, and the
most formidable internal support, of the Romish hierarchy, have been suppressed.

WITHIN this period various other orders of the regular Romish Clergy have in
some countries been suppressed, and in others greatly reduced. Their permanent
possessions have been confiscated, and their wealth and power greatly lessened.

WITHIN this period the Antichristian secular powers have been in most
instances exceedingly weakened. Poland as a body politic is nearly annihilated.
Austria has deeply suffered. Venice and the popish part of Switzerland as
bodies politic have vanished. The Sardinian monarchy is on the eve of
dissolution. Spain, Naples, Tuscany, and Genoa, are sorely wounded; and
Portugal totters to its fall. By the treaty, now on the tapis in Germany, the
Romish Archbishoprics and Bishoprics, in that empire, are proposed to be
secularized, and as distinct governments to be destroyed. As the strength of
these powers was the foundation, on which the Hierarchy rested; so their
destruction, or diminution, is a final preparation for its ruin.

IN France, Belgium, the Italian, and Cis-rhenane republics, a new form of
government has been instituted, the effect of which, whether it shall prove
permanent, or not, must be greatly and finally to diminish the strength of the
Hierarchy.

IN France, and in Belgium, the whole power and influence of the Clergy of all
descriptions have, in a sense, been destroyed; and their immense wealth has
been diverted into new channels. In France, also, an open, violent, and
inveterate war has been made upon the Hierarchy, and carried on with unexampled
bitterness and cruelty. In the mention of all these evils brought on the Romish
Hierarchy, I beg it may be remembered, that I am far from justifying the
iniquitous conduct of their persecutors. I know not that any person holds it,
and all other persecution, more in abhorence. Neither have I a doubt of the
integrity and piety of multitudes of the unhappy sufferers. In my view they
claim, and I trust will receive, the commiseration, and, as occasion offers,
the kind offices of all men possessed even of common humanity.


WITHIN this period, also, the revenues of the Pope have been greatly
curtailed; the territory of Avignon has been taken out of his hands; and his
general weight and authority have exceedingly declined.

WITHIN the present year his person has been seized, his secular government
overturned, a republic formed out of his dominions, and an apparent and at
least temporary end put to his dominion.

TO all these mighty preparations for the ruin of the Antichristian empire may
be added, as of the highest efficacy, that great change of character, of views,
feelings, and habits, throughout many Antichristian countries, which assures us
completely, that its former strength can never return.

THUS has the first part of this remarkable prophecy been accomplished. Not
less remarkable has been the fulfillment of the second.

ABOUT the year 1728, Voltaire, so celebrated for his wit and brilliancy, and
not less distinguished for his hatred of christianity and his abandonment of
principle, formed a systematical design to destroy christianity, and to
introduce in its stead a general diffusion of irreligion and atheism. For this
purpose he associated with himself Frederic the II, king of Prussia, and Mess.
D'Alembert and Diderot, the principal compilers of the Encyclopedie; all men of
talents, atheists, and in the like manner abandoned. The principal parts of
this system were, 1st. The compilation of the Encyclopedie The celebrated
French Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, in which articles of Theology were
speciously and decently written, but, by references artfully made to other
articles, all the truth of the former was entirely and insidiously overthrown
to most readers, by the sophistry of the (...).
; in which with great art and insidiousness the doctrines of Natural as well as
Christian Theology were rendered absurd and ridiculous; and the mind of the
reader was insensibly steeled against conviction and duty. 2. The overthrow of
the religious orders in Catholic countries; a step essentially necessary to the
destruction of the religion professed in those countries. 3. The establishment
of a sect of philosophists to serve, it is presumed, as a conclave, a rallying
(...), for all their followers. 4. The appropriation to themselves, and their
disciples, of the places and honors of members of the French Academy, the most
respectable literary society in France, and always considered as containing
none but men of prime learning and talents. In this way they designed to hold
out themselves, and their friends, as the only persons of great literary and
intellectual distinction in (...) country, and to dictate all literary opinions
to the nation So far was this carried, that a Mr. Beauzet, a layman, but a
sincere christian, who was one of the forty members* once asked D'Alembert how
they came to admit him among them? D'Alembert answered, without hesitation, "I
am sensible, this must seem astonishing to you; but we (...) a skilful
grammarian, and among our party, not one had acquired a reputation in this
line. We know that you believe in God, but, being a (...) sort of man, we cast
our eyes upon you, for want of a philosopher to supply your place." Brit. Crit.
Art. Barrue^'s Memoirs of the History of Jacobinism. August 17^7.
. 5. The fabrication of Books of all kinds against christianity, especially
such as excite doubt, and generate contempt and derision. Of these they issued,
by themselves and their friends, who early became numerous, an immense number;
so printed, as to be purchased for little or nothing, and so written, as to
catch the feelings, and steal upon the approbation, of every class of men. 6.
The formation of a secret Academy, of which Voltaire was the standing
president, and in which books were formed, altered, forged, imputed as
post-humous to deceased writers of reputation, and sent abroad with the weight
of their names. These were printed and circulated, at the lowest price, through
all classes of men, in an uninterrupted succession, and through every part of
the kingdom.

NOR were the labors of this Academy confined to religion. They attacked also
morality and government, unhinged gradually the minds of men, and destroyed
their reverence for every thing heretofore esteemed sacred.

IN the mean time, the Masonic Societies, which had been originally instituted
for convivial and friendly purposes only, were, especially in France and
Germany, made the professed scenes of debate concerning religion, morality, and
government, by these philosophists The words Philosophism and Philosophists may
in our opinion, be happily adopted, from this work, to designate the doctrines
of the Deistical (...); and thus to rescue the honorable terms of Philosophy
and Philosopher from the abuse, into which they have fallen. Philosophism is
the love of Sophisms and thus completely describes the sect of Voltaire: A
Philosophist is a lover of Sophists. Brit. C^it. Ibid.
, who had in great numbers become Masons. For such debate the legalized
existence of Masonry, its profound secresy, its solemn and mystic rites and
symbols, its mutual correspondence, and its extension through most civilized
countries, furnished the greatest advantages. All here was free, safe, and
calculated to encourage the boldest excursions of restless opinion and
impatient ardour, and to make and fix the deepest impressions. Here, and in no
other place, under such arbitrary governments, could every innovator in these
important subjects utter every sentiment, however daring, and attack every
doctrine and institution, however guarded by law or sanctity. In the secure and
unrestrained debates of the lodge, every novel, licentious, and alarming
opinion was resolutely advanced. Minds, already tinged with philosophism, were
here speedily blackened with a deep and deadly die; and those, which came fresh
and innocent to the scene of contamination, became early and irremediably
corrupted. A stubborn incapacity of conviction, and a flinty insensibility to
every moral and natural^^e, grew of course out of this combination of causes;
and men were surely prepared, before themselves were aware, for every plot and
perpetration. In these hot beds were sown the seeds of that astonishing
Revolution, and all its dreadful appendages, which now spreads dismay and
horror throughout half the globe.

WHILE these measures were advancing the great design with a regular and rapid
progress, Doctor Adam Weishaupt, professor of the Canon law in the University
of Ingolstadt, a city of Bavaria (in Germany) formed, about the year 177^, the
order of Illuminati. This order is professedly a higher order of Masons,
originated by himself, and grafted on ancient Masonic Institutions. The
secresy, solemnity, mysticism, and correspondence of Masonry, were in this new
order preserved and enhanced; while the ardour of innovation, the impatience of
civil and moral restraints, and the aims against government, morals, and
religion, were elevated, expanded, and rendered more systematical, malignant,
and daring.

IN the societies of Illuminati doctrines were taught, which strike at the root
of all human happiness and virtue; and every such doctrine was either expressly
or implicitly involved in their system.

THE being of God was denied and ridiculed.

GOVERNMENT was asserted to be a curse, and authority a mere usurpation.

CIVIL society was declared to be the only apostasy of man.

THE possession of property was pronounced to be robbery.

CHASTITY and natural affection were declared to be nothing more than
groundless prejudices.

ADULTERY, assassination, poisoning, and other crimes of the like infernal
nature, were taught as lawful, and even as virtuous actions.

TO crown such a system of falsehood and horror all means were declared to be
lawful, provided the end was good.

IN this last doctrine men are not only loosed from every bond, and from every
duty; but from every inducement to perform any thing which is good, and,
abstain from any thing which is evil; and are set upon each other, like a
company of hellhounds to worry, rend, and destroy. Of the goodness of the end
every man is to judge for himself; and most men, and all men who resemble the
Illuminati, will pronounce every end to be good, which will gratify their
inclinations. The great and good ends proposed by the Illuminati, as the
ultimate objects of their union, are the overthrow of religion, government, and
human society civil and domestic. These they pronounce to be so good, that
murder, butchery, and war, however extended and dreadful, are declared by them
to be completely justifiable, if necessary for these great purposes. With such
an example in view, it will be in vain to hunt for ends, which can be evil.

CORRESPONDENT with this summary was the whole system. No villainy, no impiety,
no cruelty, can be named, which was not vindicated; and no virtue, which was
not covered with contempt.

THE names by which this society was enlarged, and its doctrines spread, were
of every promising kind. With unremitted ardour and diligence the members
insinuated themselves into every place of power and trust, and into every
literary, political and friendly society; engrossed as much as possible the
education of youth, especially of distinction; became licensers of the press,
and directors of every literary journal; waylaid every foolish prince, every
unprincipled civil officer, and every abandoned clergyman; entered boldly into
the desk, and with unhallowed hands, and satanic lips, polluted the pages of
God; inlisted in their service almost all the booksellers, and of course the
printers, of Germany; inundated the country with books, replete with
infidelity, irreligion, immorality, and obscenity; prohibited the printing, and
prevented the sale, of books of the contrary character; decried and ridiculed
them when published in spite of their efforts; panegyrized and trumpeted those
of themselves and their coadjutors; and in a word made more numerous, more
diversified, and more strenuous exertions, than an active imagination would
have preconceived.

TO these exertions their success has been proportioned. Multitudes of the
Germans, notwithstanding the gravity, steadiness, and sobriety of their
national character, have become either partial or entire converts to th^se
wretched doctrines; numerous societies have been established among them; the
public faith and morals have been unhinged; and the political and religious
affairs of that empire have assumed an aspect, which forebodes its total ruin.
In France, also, Illuminatism has been eagerly and extensively adopted; and
those men, who have had, successively, the chief direction of the public
affairs of that country, have been members of this society. Societies have also
been erected in Switzerland and Italy, and have contributed probably to the
success of the French, and to the overthrow of religion and government, in
those countries. Mentz was delivered up to Custine by the Illuminati; and that
General appears to have been guillotined, because he declined to encourage the
same treachery with respect to Manheim.

NOR have England and Scotland escaped the contagion. Several societies have
been erected in boch of those countries. Nay in the private papers, seized in
the custody of the leading members in Germany, several such societies are
recorded as having been erected in America, before the year 1786 See Robison's
Conspiracy and the Abbe Barruel's Memoi^^ of the history of Jacobinism.
.

IT is a remarkable fact, that a large proportion of the sentiments, here
stated, have been publicly avowed and applauded in the French legislature. The
being and providence of God have been repeatedly denied and ridiculed. Christ
has been mocked with the grossest insult. Death, by a solemn legislative decree
has been declared to be an eternal sleep. Marriage has been degraded to a
farce, and the community, by the law of divorce, invited to universal
prostitution In the school of public instruction atheism is professedly taught;
and at an audience before the legislature, Nov. 30, 1793, the head scholar
declared, that he and his schoolfellows detested a God; a declaration received
by the members with unbounded applause, and rewarded with the fraternal kiss of
the president, and with the honors of the sitting See Gifford's Letter to
E^s^ine.
.

I presume I have sufficiently proved the fulfillment of the second part of this
remarkable prophesy; and shown, that doctrines and teachers, answering to the
description, have arisen in the very countries specified, and that they are
rapidly spreading through the world, to engage mankind in an open and professed
war against God. I shall only add, that the titles of these philosophistical
books have, in various instances, been too obscene to admit of a translation by
a virtuous man, and in a decent state of society. So fully are these teachers
entitled to the epithet unclean.

ASSUMING now as just, for the purposes of this discourse, the explanation,
which has been given, I shall proceed to consider the import of the Text.

THE Text is an affectionate address of the Redeemer to his children, teaching
them that conduct, which he wills them especially to pursue in this alarming
season. It is the great practical remark, drawn by infinite Wisdom and Goodness
from a most solemn sermon, and cannot fail therefore to merit our highest
attention. Had he not, while recounting the extensive and dreadful convulsion,
described in the context, made a declaration of this nature, there would have
been little room for the exercise of any emotions, beside those of terror and
despair. The gloom would have been universal and entire; a blank midnight
without a star to cheer the solitary darkness. But here a hope, a promise, is
furnished to such as obey the injunction, by which it is followed; a luminary
like that, which shone to the wise men of the east, is lighted up to guide our
steps to the Author of peace and salvation.

BLESSED, even in this calamitous season, says the Savior of men, is he that
watches, and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked and they see his shame.

SIN is the nakedness and shame of the scriptures, and righteousness the
garment which covers it. To watch and keep the garments is, of course, so to
observe the heart and the life, so carefully to resist temptation and abstain
from sin, and so faithfully to cultivate holiness and perform duty, that the
heart and the life shall be adorned with the white robes of evangelical virtue,
the unspotted attire of spiritual beauty.

THE cautionary precept given to us by our Lord is, therefore,

THAT WE SHOULD BE EMINENTLY WATCHFUL TO PERFORM OUR DUTY FAITHFULLY, IN THE
TRYING PERIOD, IN WHICH OUR LOT IS CAST.

TO those, who obey, a certain blessing is secured by the promise of the
Redeemer.

THE great and general object, aimed at by this command, and by every other, is
private, personal obedience and reformation of life; personal piety,
righteousness, and temperance.

TO every man is by his Creator especially committed the care of himself; of
his time, his talents, and his soul. He knows, or may know, better than any
other man, his wants, his sins, and his dangers, and of course the means of
relief, reformation, and escape. No one, so well as he, can watch the approach
of temptation, so feelingly pray for divine assistance, or so profitably
resolve on future obedience. In truth no resolutions, no prayers, no
watchfulness of others, will profit him at all, unless seconded by his own. No
other person can make any useful impressions on our hearts, or our lives,
unless by rousing in us the necessary exertions. All extraneous labors
terminate in this single point: it is the end of every doctrine, exhortation,
and reproof, of every moral and religious institution.

THE manner, in which such obedience is to be performed, and such reformation
accomplished, is described to you weekly in the desk, and daily in the
scriptures. A detail of it, therefore, will not be necessary, nor expected, on
the present occasion. You already know what is to be done, and the manner in
which it is to be done. You need not be told, that you are to use all efforts
of your own, and to look humbly and continually to God to render those efforts
successful; that you are to resist carefully and faithfully every approaching
temptation, and every rising sin; that you are to resolve on newness of life,
and to seize every occasion, as it presents itself, to honor God, and to bless
your fellow men; that you are strenuously to contend against evil habits, and
watchfully to cherish good ones; and that you are constantly to aim at
uniformity and eminency in a holy life, and to "adorn the doctrine of God our
Savior in all things."

BUT it may be necessary to remind you, that personal obedience and reformation
is the foundation, and the sum, of all national worth and prosperity. If each
man conducts himself aright, the community cannot be conducted wrong. If the
private life be unblamable, the public state must be commendable and happy.

INDIVIDUALS are often apt to consider their own private conduct as of small
importance to the public welfare. This opinion is wholly erroneous and highly
mischievous. No man can adopt it, who believes, and remembers, the declarations
of God. If "one sinner destroys much good," if "the effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man avails much," if ten righteous persons, found in the
polluted cities of the vale of Siddim, would have saved them from destruction,
the personal conduct of no individual can be insignificant to the safety and
happiness of a nation. On the contrary, the advantages to the public of private
virtue, faithful prayer and edifying example, cannot be calculated. No one can
conjecture how many will be made better, safer, and happier, by the virtue of
one.

WHEREVER wealth, politeness, talents, and office, lend their aid to the
inherent efficacy of virtue, its influence is proportionally greater. In this
case the example is seen by greater numbers, is regarded with more respectful
attention, and felt with greater force. The piety of Hezekiah reformed and
saved a nation. Men far inferior in station to kings, and possessed of far
humbler means of doing good, may still easily circulate through multitudes both
virtue and happiness. The beggar on the dunghill may become a public blessing.
Every parent, if a faithful one, is a public blessing of course. How delightful
a path of patriotism is this?

IT is also to be remembered, that this is the way, in which the chief good,
ever placed in the power of most persons, is to be done. If this opportunity of
serving God, and befriending mankind, be lost, no other will by the great body
of men ever be found. Few persons can be concerned in settling systems of
faith, moulding forms of government, regulating nations, or establishing
empires. But almost all can train up a family for God, instill piety, justice,
kindness and truth, distribute peace and comfort around a neighborhood,
receive the poor and the outcast into their houses, tend the bed of sickness,
pour balm into the wounds of pain, and awaken a smile in the aspect of sorrow.
In the secret and lowly vale of life, virtue in its most lovely attire delights
to dwell. There God, with peculiar complacency, most frequently finds the
inestimable ornament of a meek and quiet spirit; and there the morning and the
evening incense ascends with peculiar fragrance to heaven. When angels became
the visitors, and the guests, of Abraham, he was a simple husbandman.

BESIDES, this is the great mean of personal safety and happiness. No good man
was ever forgotten, or neglected, of God. To him duty is always safety. Around
the tabernacle of every one, that fears God, the angel of protection will
encamp, and save him from the impending evil.

II. AMONG the particular duties required by this precept, and at the present
time, none holds a higher place than the observation of the Sabbath.

THE Sabbath and its ordinances have ever been the great means of all moral
good to mankind. The faithful observation of the sabbath is, therefore, one of
the chief duties and interests of men; but the present time furnishes reasons,
peculiar, at least in degree, for exemplary regard to this divine institution.
The enemies of God have by private argument, ridicule, and influence, and by
public decrees, pointed their especial malignity against the Sabbath; and have
expected, and not without reason, that, if they could annihilate it, they
should overthrow christianity. From them we cannot but learn its importance.
Enemies usually discern, with more sagacity, the most promising point of
attack, than those who are to be attacked. In this point are they to be
peculiarly opposed. Here, peculiarly, are their designs to be baffled. If they
fail here, they will finally fail. Christianity cannot fall, but by the neglect
of the Sabbath.

I HAVE been credibly informed, that, some years before the Revolution, an
eminent philosopher of this country, now deceased, declared to David Hume, that
Christianity would be exterminated from the American colonies within a century
from that time. The opinion has doubtless been often declared and extensively
imbibed; and has probably furnished our enemies their chief hopes of success.
Where religion prevails, their system cannot succeed. Where religion prevails,
Illuminatism cannot make disciples, a French directory cannot govern, a nation
cannot be made slaves, nor villains, nor atheists, nor beasts. To destroy us,
therefore, in this dreadful sense, our enemies must first destroy our Sabbath,
and seduce us from the house of God.

RELIGION and Liberty are the two great objects of defensive war. Conjoined,
they unite all the feelings, and call forth all the energies, of man. In
defense of them, nations contend with the spirit of the Maccabees; "one will
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight." The Dutch, in defense of
them, few and feeble as they were in their infancy, assumed a gigantic courage,
and grew like the fabled sons of Alous to an instantaneous and gigantic
strength, broke the arms of the Spanish empire, swept its fleets from the
ocean, pulled down its pride, plundered its treasures, captivated its
dependencies, and forced its haughty monarch to a peace on their own terms.
Religion and liberty are the meat and the drink of the body politic. Withdraw
one of them, and it languishes, consumes, and dies. If indifference to either
at any time becomes the prevailing character of a people, one half of their
motives to vigorous defense is lost, and the hopes of their enemies are
proportionally increased. Here, eminently, they are inseparable. Without
religion we may possibly retain the freedom of savages, bears, and wolves; but
not the freedom of New England. If our religion were gone, our state of society
would perish with it; and nothing would be left, which would be worth
defending. Our children of course, if not ourselves, would be prepared, as the
ox for the slaughter, to become the victims of conquest, tyranny, and atheism.

THE Sabbath, with its ordinances, constitutes the bond of union to christians;
the badge by which they know each other; their rallying point; the standard of
their host. Beside public worship they have no means of effectual
descrimination. To preserve this is to us a prime interest and duty. In no way
can we so preserve, or so announce to others, our character as christians; or
so effectually prevent our nakedness and shame from being seen by our enemies.
Now, more than ever, we are "not to be ashamed of the gospel of Christ." Now,
more than ever, are we to stand forth to the eye of our enemies, and of the
world, as open, determined christians; as the followers of Christ; as the
friends of God. Every man, therefore, who loves his country, or his religion,
ought to feel, that he serves, or injures, both, as he celebrates, or neglects,
the Sabbath. By the devout observation of this holy day he will reform himself,
increase his piety, heighten his love to his country, and confirm his
determination to defend all that merits his regard. He will become a better
man, and a better citizen.

THE house of God is also the house of social prayer. Here nations meet with
God to ask, and to receive, national blessings. On the Sabbath, and in the
sanctuary, the children of the Redeemer will, to the end of the world, assemble
for this glorious end. Here he is ever present to give more than they can ask.
If we faithfully unite, here, in seeking his protection, "no weapon formed
against us will prosper."

3. ANOTHER duty, to which we are also eminently called, is an entire
separation from our enemies. Among the moral duties of man none hold a higher
rank than political ones, and among our own political duties none is more
plain, or more absolute, than that which I have now mentioned.

IN the eighteenth chapter of this prophecy, in which the dreadful effects of
the seventh vial are particularly described, this duty is expressly enjoined on
christians by a voice from Heaven. "And I heard another voice from heaven,
saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues." Under the evils and dangers of the sixth
vial, the command in the Text was given; under those of the seventh, the
command which we are now considering. The world is already far advanced in the
period of the sixth. In the Text we are informed, that the Redeemer will hasten
the progress of his vengeance on the enemies of his church, during the effusion
of the two last vials. If, therefore, the judgments of the seventh are not
already begun, a fact of which I am doubtful, they certainly cannot be distant.
The present time is, of course, the very period for which this command was
given.

THE two great reasons for the command are subjoined to it by the Savior --
"that ye be not partakers of her sins; and that ye receive not of her plagues;"
and each is a reason of incomprehensible magnitude.

THE sins of these enemies of Christ, and Christians, are of numbers and
degrees, which mock account and description. All that the malice and atheism of
the Dragon, the cruelty and rapacity of the Beast, and the fraud and deceit of
the false Prophet, can generate, or accomplish, swell the list. No personal, or
national interest of man has been uninvaded; no impious sentiment, or action,
against God has been spared; no malignant hostility against Christ, and his
religion, has been unattempted. Justice, truth, kindness, piety, and moral
obligation universally, have been, not merely trodden under foot; this might
have resulted from vehemence and passion; but ridiculed, spurned, and insulted,
as the childish bugbears of drivelling idiocy. Chastity and decency have been
alike turned out of doors; and shame and pollution called out of their dens to
the hall of distinction, and the chair of state. Nor has any art, violence, or
means, been unemployed to accomplish these evils.

FOR what end shall we be connected with men, of whom this is the character and
conduct? Is it that we may assume the same character, and pursue the same
conduct? Is it, that our churches may become temples of reason, our Sabbath a
decade, and our psalms of praise Marseillois hymns? Is it, that we may change
our holy worship into a dance of Jacobin phrenzy, and that we may behold a
strumpet personating a Goddess on the altars of JEHOVAH? Is it that we may see
the Bible cast into a bonfire, the vessels of the sacramental supper borne by
an ass in public procession, and our children, either wheedled or terrified,
uniting in the mob, chanting mockeries against God, and hailing in the sounds
of Ca^ira the ruin of their religion, and the loss of their souls? Is it, that
we may see our wives and daughters the victims of legal prostitution; soberly
dishonored; speciously polluted; the outcasts of delicacy and virtue, and the
lothing of God and man? Is it, that we may see, in our public papers, a solemn
comparison drawn by an American Mother club between the Lord Jesus Christ and a
new Marat; and the fiend of malice and fraud exalted above the glorious
Redeemer?

SHALL we, my brethren, become partakers of these sins? Shall we introduce them
into our government, our schools, our families? Shall our sons become the
disciples of Voltaire, and the dragoons of Marat See a four years Residence in
France, lately published by Mr. Cornelius Davis of New York. This is a most
valuable and interesting work, and exhibits the French Revolution in a far more
perfect sight than any book I have seen. -- It ought to be read by every (...).
; or our daughters the concubines of the Illuminati?

SOME of my audience may perhaps say, "We do not believe such crimes to have
existed." The people of Jerusalem did not believe, that they were in danger,
until the Chaldeans surrounded their walls. The people of Laish were secure,
when the children of Dan lay in ambush around their city. There are in every
place, and in every age, persons "who are settled upon their lees," who take
pride in disbelief, and "who say in their heart, the Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil." Some persons disbelieve through ignorance; some
choose not to be informed; and some determine not to be convinced. The two last
classes cannot be persuaded. The first may, perhaps, be at least alarmed, when
they are told, that the evidence of all this, and much more, is complete, that
it has been produced to the public, and may with a little pains-taking be known
by themselves.

THERE are others, who, admitting the fact, deny the danger. "If others," say
they, "are ever so abandoned, we need not adopt either their principles, or
their practices." Common sense has however declared, two thousand years ago,
and God has sanctioned the declaration, that "Evil communications corrupt good
manners." Of this truth all human experience is one continued and melancholy
proof. I need only add, that these persons are prepared to become the first
victims of the corruption by this very selfconfidence and security.

SHOULD we, however, in a forbidden connection with these enemies of God,
escape, against all hope, from moral ruin, we shall still receive our share of
their plagues. This is the certain dictate of the prophetical injunction; and
our own experience, and that of nations more intimately connected with them,
has already proved its truth.

LOOK for conviction to Belgium; sunk into the dust of insignificance and
meanness, plundered, insulted, forgotten, never to rise more. See Batavia
wallowing in the same dust; the butt of fraud, rapacity, and derision,
struggling in the last stages of life, and searching anxiously to find a quiet
grave. See Venice sold in the shambles, and made the small change of a
political bargain. Turn your eyes to Switzerland, and behold its happiness, and
its hopes, cut off at a single stroke: happiness, erected with the labor and
the wisdom of three centuries; hopes, that not long since hailed the blessings
of centuries yet to come. What have they spread, but crimes and miseries; Where
have they trodden, but to waste, to pollute, and to destroy?

ALL connection with them has been pestilential. Among ourselves it has
generated nothing but infidelity, irreligion, faction, rebellion, the ruin of
peace, and the loss of property. In Spain, in the Sardinian monarchy, in Genoa,
it has sunk the national character, blasted national independence, rooted out
confidence, and forerun destruction.

BUT France itself has been the chief seat of the evils, wrought by these men.
The unhappy and ever to be pitied inhabitants of that country, a great part of
whom are doubtless of a character similar to that of the peaceable citizens of
other countries, and have probably no voluntary concern in accomplishing these
evils, have themselves suffered far more from the hands of philosophists, and
their followers, than the inhabitants of any other country. General Danican, a
French officer, asserts in his memoirs, lately published, that three millions
of Frenchmen have perished in the Revolution. Of this amazing destruction the
causes by which it was produced, the principles on which it was founded, and
the modes in which it was conducted, are an aggravation, that admits no bound.
The butchery of the stall, and the slaughter of the stye, are scenes of deeper
remorse, and softened with more sensibility. The siege of Lions, and the
judicial massacres at Nantes, stand, since the crucifixion, alone in the volume
of human crimes. The misery of man never before reached the extreme of agony,
nor the infamy of man its consummation. Collot D. H^rbois and his satellites,
Carrier and his associates, would claim eminence in a world of fiends, and will
be marked with distinction in the future hissings of the universe. No guilt so
deeply died in blood, since the phrenzied malice of Calvary, will probably so
amaze the assembly of the final day; and Nantes and Lions may, without a
hyperbole, obtain a literal immortality in a remembrance revived beyond the
grave.

IN which of these plagues, my brethren, are you willing to share? Which of
them will you transmit as a legacy to your children?

WOULD you escape, you must separate yourselves. Would you wholly escape, you
must be wholly separated. I do not intend, that you must not buy and sell, or
exhibit the common offices of justice and good will; but you are bound by the
voice of reason, of duty, of safety, and of God, to shun all such connection
with them, as will interweave your sentiments or your friendship, your religion
or your policy, with theirs. You cannot otherwise fail of partaking in their
guilt, and receiving of their plagues.

4thly. ANOTHER duty, to which we are no less forcibly called, is union among
ourselves.

THE same divine Person, who spoke in the Text, has also said, "A house, a
kingdom, divided against itself cannot stand." A divided family will destroy
itself. A divided nation will anticipate ruin, prepared by its enemies.
Switzerland, Geneva, Genoa, Venice, the Sardinian territories, Belgium, and
Batavia, are melancholy examples of the truth of this declaration of our
Savior; beacons, which warn, with a gloomy and dreadful light, the nations who
survive their ruin.

THE great bond of union to every people is its government. This destroyed, or
distrusted, there is no center left of intelligence, counsel, or action; no
system of purposes, or measures; no point of rallying, or confidence. When a
nation is ready to say, "What part have we in David, or what inheritance in the
son of Jesse?" it will naturally subjoin, "Every man to his tent, O Israel!"

THE candor and uprightness, with which our own government has acted in the
progress of the present controversy, have forced encomiums even from its most
bitter opposers, and excited the warmest approbation and applause of all its
friends. Few objects could be more important, auspicious, or gratifying to
christians, than to see the conduct of their rulers such, as they can, with
boldness of access, bring before their God, and fearlessly commend to his
favor and protection.

IN men, possessed of similar candor, adherence to our government, in the
present crisis, may be regarded as a thing of course. They need not be
informed, that the existing rulers must be the directors of our public affairs,
and the only directors; that their views and measures will not and cannot
always accord with the judgment of individuals, as the opinions of individuals
accord no better with each other; that the officers of government are possessed
of better information than private persons can be; that, if they had the same
information, they would probably coincide with the opinions of their rulers;
that confidence must be placed in men, imperfect as they are, in all human
affairs, or no important business can be done; and that men of known and tried
probity are fully deserving of that confidence.

AT the present time this adherence ought to be unequivocally manifested. In a
land of universal suffrage, where every individual is possessed of much
personal consequence as in ours, the government ought, especially in great
measures, to be as secure, as may be, of the harmonious and cheerful
cooperation of the citizens. All success, here, depends on the hearty
concurrence of the community; and no occasion ever called for it more.

BUT there are, even in this State, persons, who are opposed to the government.
To them I observe, That the government of France has destroyed the independence
of every nation, which has confided in it.

THAT every such nation has been ruined by its internal divisions, especially
by the separation of the people from their government.

THAT they have attempted to accomplish our ruin by the same means, and will
certainly accomplish it, if they can;

THAT the miseries suffered by the subjugated nations have been numberless and
extreme, involving the loss of national honor, the immense plunder of public
and private property, the conflagration of churches and dwellings, the total
ruin of families, the butchery of great multitudes of fathers and sons, and the
most deplorable dishonor of wives and daughters;

THAT the same miseries will be repeated here, if in their power.

THAT there is, under God, no mean of escaping this ruin, but union among
ourselves, and unshaken adherence to the existing government;

THAT themselves have an infinitely higher interest in preserving the
independence of their country, than in any thing, which can exist, should it be
conquered;

THAT they must stand, or fall, with their country; since the French, like all
other conquerors, though they may for a little time regard them, as aids and
friends, with a seeming partiality, will soon lose that partiality in a general
contempt and hatred for them, as Americans. That should they, contrary to all
experience, escape these evils, their children will suffer them as extensively
as those of their neighbors; and

THAT to oppose, or neglect, the defense of their country, is to stab the
breast, from which they have drawn their life.

I KNOW not that even these considerations will prevail: if they do not,
nothing can be suggested by me, which will have efficacy. I must leave them,
therefore, to their consciences, and their God.

IN the mean time, since the great facts, of which this controversy has
consisted, have not, during the preceding periods, been thoroughly known, or
believed, by all; and since all questions of expediency will be viewed
differently by different eyes; I cannot but urge a general spirit of
conciliation. To men laboring under mere mistakes, and prejudices void of
malignity, hard names are in most cases unhappily applied, and unkindness is
unwisely exhibited. Multitudes, heretofore attached to France with great
ardour, have, from full conviction of the necessity of changing their
sentiments and their conduct, come forth in the most decisive language, and
determined conduct, of defenders of their country. More are daily exhibiting
the same spirit and measures. Almost all native Americans will, I doubt not,
speedily appear in the same ranks; and none should, in my opinion, be
discouraged by useless obloquy.

5. ANOTHER duty, injoined in the text, and highly incumbent on us at this
time, is unshaken firmness in our opposition.

A STEADY and invincible firmness is the chief instrument of great
achievements. It is the prime mean of great wealth, learning, wisdom, power
and virtue; and without it nothing noble or useful is usually accomplished.
Without it our separation from our enemies, and our union among ourselves, will
avail to no end. The cause is too complex, the object too important, to be
determined by a single effort. It is infinitely too important to be given up,
let the consequence be what it may. No evils, which can flow from resistance,
can be so great as those, which must flow from submission. Great sacrifices of
property, of peace, and of life, we may be called to make, but they will fall
short of complete ruin. If they should not, it will be more desirable, beyond
computation, to fall in the honorable and faithful defense of our families,
our country, and our religion, than to survive, the melancholy, debased, and
guilty spectators of the ruin of all. We contend for all that is, or ought to
be, dear to man. Our cause is eminently that, in which "he who seeks to save
his life shall lose it, and he who loses it," in obedience to the command of
his Master, "shall find it" beyond the grave. To our enemies we have done no
wrong. Unspotted justice looks down on all our public measures with a smile. We
fight for that, for which we can pray. We fight for the lives, the honor, the
safety, of our wives and children, for the religion of our fathers, and for the
liberty, "with which Christ has made us free." "We jeopard our lives," that
our children may inherit these glorious blessings, be rescued from the grinding
insolence of foreign despotism, and saved from the corruption and perdition of
foreign atheism. I am a father. I feel the usual parental tenderness for my
children. I have long soothed the approach of declining years with the fond
hope of seeing my sons serving God and their generation around me. But from
cool conviction I declare in this solemn place, I would far rather follow them
one by one to an untimely grave, than to behold them, however prosperous, the
victims of philosophism. What could I then believe, but that they were "nigh
unto cursing, and that their end was to be burned."

FROM two sources only are we in danger of irresolution; Avarice, and a
reliance on those fair professions, which our enemies have begun to make, and
which they will doubtless continue to make, in degrees, and with insidiousness,
still greater.

ON the first of these sources I observe, that, if we grudge a part of our
property in the defense of our country, we lose the whole; and not only the
whole of our property, but all our comforts, and all our hopes. Every enjoyment
of life, every solace of sorrow, will be offered up in one vast hecatomb at the
shrine of pride, plunder, impurity, and atheism. Those "who fear not God,
regard not man." All interests, beside their own, are in the view of such men
the sport of wantonness, of insolence, and of a heart of millstone. They and
their engines will soon tell you, if you do not put it out of their power, as
one of the same engines told the miserable inhabitants of Neuwied (in Germany)
unhappily placing confidence in their professions. Hear the story, in the words
of Professor Robison, "If ever there was a spot upon earth, where men may be
happy in a state of cultivated society, it was the little principality of
Neuwied. I saw it in 1770. The town was neat, and the palace handsome and in
good state. But the country was beyond conception delightful; not a cottage
that was out of repair; not a hedge out of order. It had been the hobby of the
Prince (pardon me the word) who made it his daily employment to go through his
principality, and assist every householder, of whatever condition, with his
advice and with his purse; and when a freeholder could not of himself put
things into a thriving condition, the Prince sent his workmen and did it for
him. He endowed schools for the common people and two academies for the gentry
and the people of business. He gave little portions to the daughters, and
prizes to the well-behaving sons of the laboring people. His own household was
a pattern of elegance and economy; his sons were sent to Paris, to learn
elegance, and to England, to learn science and agriculture. In short the whole
was like a romance, and was indeed romantic. I heard it spoken of with a smile
at the table of the Bishop of Treves, and was induced to see it the next day as
a curiosity. Yet even here the fanaticism of Knigge (one of the founders of the
Illuminati) would distribute his poison, and tell the blinded people that they
were in a state of sin and misery, that their Prince was a despot, and that
they would never be happy 'till he was made to fly, and 'till they were made
all equal."

"THEY got their wish. The swarm of French locusts sat down at Neuwied's
beautiful fields, in 1793, and entrenched themselves; and in three months
Prince's and Farmers' houses, and cottages, and schools, and academies, all
vanished. When they complained of their miseries to the French General, Rene le
Grand, he replied, with a contemptuous and cutting laugh, "All is ours. We have
left you your eyes to cry."

WILL you trust such professions? Have not your enemies made them to every
country, which they have subjugated? Have they fulfilled them to one? Will they
prove more sincere to you? Have they not deceived you in every expectation
hitherto? On what grounds can you rely on them hereafter?

WILL you grudge your property for the defense of itself, of your families, of
yourselves. Will you preserve it to pay the price of a Dutch loan? to have it
pu^ in ^^quisition by the French Directory? to label it on your doors, that
they may, without trouble and without a tax bill, send their soldiers and take
it for the use of the Republic? Will you keep it to assist them to pay their
fleets and armies for subduing you? and to maintain their forts and garrisons
for keeping you in subjection? Shall it become the purchase of a French fete,
holden to commemorate the massacres of the 10th of August, the butcheries of
the 3d of September, or the murder of Louis the 16th, your former benefactor?
Shall it furnish the means for Representatives of the people to roll through
your streets on the wheels of splendor, to imprison your sons and fathers; to
seize on all the comforts, which you have earned with toil, and laid up with
care; and to gather your wives, sisters, and daughters, into their brutal
seraglios? Shall it become the price of the guillotine, and pay the expense of
cleansing your streets from brooks of human blood?

WILL you rely on men whose principles justify falsehood, injustice, and
cruelty? Will you trust philosophists? men who set truth at naught, who make
justice a butt of mockery, who deny the being and providence of God, and laugh
at the interests and sufferings of men? Think not that such men can change.
They can scarcely be worse. There is not a hope that they will become better.

BUT perhaps you may be alarmed by the power, and the successes, of your
enemies. I am warranted to declare, that the ablest judge of this subject in
America has said, that, if we are united, firm, and faithful to ourselves,
neither France, nor all Europe, can subdue these States. Against other nations
they contended with great and decisive advantages. Those nations were near to
them, were divided, feeble, corrupted, seduced by philosophists, slaves of
despotism, and separated from their government. None of these characters can be
applied to us, unless we voluntarily retain those, which depend on ourselves.
Three thousand miles of ocean spread between us and our enemies, to enfeeble
and disappoint their efforts. They will not here contend with silken Italians,
with divided Swissers, nor with self-surrendered Belgians and Batavians. They
will find a hardy race of freemen, uncorrupted by luxury, unbroken by
despotism; enlightened to understand their privileges, glowing with
independence, and determined to be free, or to die: men who love, and who will
defend, their familes, their country, and their religion: men fresh from
triumph, and strong in a recent and victorious Revolution. Doubled, since that
Revolution began, in their numbers, and quadrupled in their resources and
advantages, at home, in a country formed to disappoint invasion, and to prosper
defense, under leaders skilled in all the arts and duties of war, and trained
in the path of success, they have, if united, firm, and faithful, every thing
to hope, and, beside the common evils of war, nothing to fear.

THINK not that I trust in chariots and in horses. My own reliance is, I hope,
I ardently hope yours is, also, on the Lord our God. All these are his most
merciful blessings, and, as such, most supporting consolations to us. They are
the very means, which he has provided for our safety, and our hope. Stupidity,
sloth, and ingratitude, can alone be blind to them as tokens for good. We are
not, my brethren, to look for miracles, nor to expect God to accomplish them.
We are to trust in him for the blessings of a regular and merciful providence.
Such a providence is over us for good. I have recited abundant proofs, and
could easily recite many more. All these are means, with which we are to plant,
and to water, and in answer to our prayers God will certainly give the increase.

BUT I am peculiarly confident in the promised blessing of the Text. Our
contention is a plain duty to God. The same glorious Person, who has commanded
it, has promised to crown our obedience with his blessing; and has thus
illumined this gloomy prediction, and shed the dawn of hope and comfort over
this melancholy period.

TO you the promise is eminently supporting. He has won your faith by the great
things he has already done for your fathers, and for you. The same Almighty
Hand, which destroyed the fleet of Chebucto by the storm, and whelmed it in the
deep; which conducted into the arms of Manly, and of Mugford, those means of
war, which for the time saved your country; which raised up your Washington to
guide your armies and your councils; which united you with your brethren
against every expectation and hope; which disappointed the devices of enemies
without, and traitors within; which bade the winds and the waves fight for you
at Yorktown; which has, in later periods, repeatedly disclosed the machinations
of your enemies, and which has now roused a noble spirit of resistance to
intrigue and to terror; will accomplish for you a final deliverance from the
hand of those, "who seek your hurt." He has been your fathers' God, and he will
be yours.

LOOK through the history of your country. You will find scarcely less glorious
and wonderful proofs of divine protection and deliverance, uniformly
administered through every period of our existence as a people, than shone to
the people of Israel in Egypt, in the wilderness, and in Canaan. Can it be
believed, can it be, that Christianity has been so planted here, the Church of
God so established, so happy a Government constituted, and so desirable a state
of Society begun, merely to show them to the world, and then destroy them? No
instance can be found in the providence of God, in which a nation so
wonderfully established, and preserved, has been overthrown, until it had
progressed farther in corruption. We may be cast down; but experience only will
prove to me, that we shall be destroyed.

BUT the consideration, which ought of itself to decide your opinions and your
conduct, and which adds immense weight to all the others, is that the
alternative, as exhibited in the prediction, and in providence, is beyond
measure dreadful, and is at hand. "Behold," says the Savior, "I come as a
thief" -- suddenly, unexpectedly, alarmingly -- as that wasting enemy, the
burglar, breaks up the house in the hour of darkness, when all the inhabitants
are lost in sleep and security. How strongly do the great events of the present
day show this awful advent of the King of Kings to be at the doors?

TURN your eyes, for a moment, to the face of providence, and mark its new and
surprising appearance. The Jews, for the first time since the destruction of
Jerusalem by Adrian, have, in these States, been admitted to the rights of
citizenship; and have since been admitted to the same rights in Prussia. They
have also, as we are informed, appointed a solemn delegation to examine the
evidences of Christianity. In the Austrian dominions, it is asserted, they have
agreed to observe the Christian Sabbath; and in England, have in considerable
numbers embraced the Christian religion. New and unprecedented efforts have
been made, and are fast increasing, in England, Scotland, Germany, and the
United States, for the conversion of the Heathen. Measures have, in Europe, and
in America, been adopted, and are still enlarging, for putting an end to the
African slavery, which will within a moderate period bring it to an end.
Mohammedism is nearly extinct in Persia, one of the chief supports of that
imposture. In Turkey, its other great support, the throne totters to its fall.
The great Calamities of the present period have fallen, also, almost
exclusively upon the Antichristian empire; and almost every part of that empire
has drunk deeply of the cup. France, Belgium, Spain, Ireland, the Sardinian
monarchy, the Austrian dominions, Venice, Genoa, popish Switzerland, the
Ecclesiastical State, popish Germany, Poland, and the French West Indies, have
all been visited with judgments wonderful and terrible; and in exact accordance
with prophecy have furthered their own ruin. The Kings, or states, of this
empire are now plainly "hating the whore, eating her flesh, and burning her
with fire." Batavia, Protestant Switzerland, some parts of protestant Germany,
and Geneva, have most unwisely, not to say wickedly, refused "to come out" and
have therefore "partaken of the sins, and received of the plagues," of their
enemies. To the same unhappy cause our own smartings may all be traced; but
blessed be God, there is reason to hope, that "we are escaping from the snare
of the fowler."

SO sudden, so unexpected, so alarming a state of things has not existed since
the deluge. Every mouth proclaims, every eye looks its astonishment. Wonders
daily succeed wonders, and are beginning to be regarded as the standing course
of things. As they are of so many kinds, exist in so many places, and respect
so many objects; kinds, places and objects, all marked out in prophecy,
exhibited as parts of one closely united system, and to be expected at the
present time; they show that this affecting declaration is even now fulfilling
in a surprising manner, and that the advent of Christ is at least at our doors.
Think how awful this period is. Think what convulsions, what calamities, are
portended by that great Voice out of the temple of Heaven from the Throne. --
"It is done!" by the voices and thunderings and lightnings, by the
unprecedented shaking of the earth, the unexampled plague of hailstones, the
fleeing of the islands, the vanishing of the mountains, the rending asunder of
the Antichristian empire, the united ascent of all its sins before God, the
falling of the cities of the nations, the general embattling of mankind against
their Maker, and their final overthrow, in such immense numbers, that "all the
fowls shall be filled with their flesh."

"GOD is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; the Lord revengeth and is furious;
the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, he reserveth wrath for his
enemies. The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
acquit the wicked. The Lord has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm,
and the clouds are the dust of his feet. The mountains quake at him, and the
hills melt; and the earth is burnt at his presence, yea the world, and all that
dwell therein. Who can stand before his indignation? Who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger?"

IN this amazing conflict, amidst this stupendous and immeasurable ruin, how
transporting the thought, that safety and peace may be certainly found. O thou
God of our fathers! our own God! and the God of our children! enable us so to
watch, and keep our garments, in this solemn day, that our shame appear not,
and that both we and our posterity may be entitled to the blessing which thou
have promised. AMEN.

Since this discourse was sent to the press, I have been informed, that the
Work of Professor Robison has given offense to the Free Masons in the
neighborhood of Boston. In consequence of an apprehension, that the character
of their institution is attacked, or endangered, some of the members have
undertaken to impeach his character, and to treat the proofs, which he has
produced, with contempt and ridicule. A moment's reflection would, I should
imagine, convince any man of information, that Professor Robison's character is
incapable of being successfully impeached. The doctrines of any man ought
always to be regarded as open to disbelief, and free discussion; but the
general character of this man ought not to be treated with contempt by persons,
who do not in some good measure approximate to the same talents, learning, and
respectability. Contempt comes with an ill grace from those, who are
confessedly and greatly inferior in their whole character to those whom they
contemn; and ridicule, powerful as it may be thought for a season, never
decided, and never will decide, a serious question.

I set not that those Free Masons, who hold their ancient character and
institutions, are in the least degree implicated in any charge, brought forward
by the Professor. He is himself a Free Mason of this description; and probably
was not disposed to injure either his own character, or that of his friends. On
my mind no impression, disadvantageous to the ancient Free Masonry, was made by
reading the book. I am well assured, that such is the sentiment of several very
respectable Free Masons in this country, and am persuaded, that it is the
general sentiment. But Illuminatism exists in this country; and the impious
mockery of the Sacramental Supper, described by Mr. Robison, has been acted
here.

If I mistake not, all the Reviews, of England, the British Critic excepted,
are direct supporters of Jacobinism and Socinianism. Four of them are certainly
of this character. Of course their political and religious opinions will have
little weight with the great body of the people of this country. In the mind of
a person who reads them, and who observes the manner in which they handle
political and religious subjects, I should believe they would have none.

Within a short period of time the question concerning Illuminatism will be
settled. When the Abbe Barruel's Memoirs of Jacobinism come to be generally
read, all American controversies on this subject will probably die of course. I
am persuaded, that the great body of Free Masons in this country are no more
friendly to the designs of these Philosophists than the rest of their
countrymen; and that they will, on the one hand, be pleased to see them fully
exposed, and, on the other, regret that they found, here, even the shadow of a
defense.


[COPY RIGHT SECURED.]


