AN ORATION, PREPARED, TO BE DELIVERED IN ST. PHILLIP'S CHURCH, BEFORE THE
INHABITANTS OF CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798.

IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY APPOINTMENT OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION SOCIETY.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THAT SOCIETY, AND ALSO OF THE South Carolina State
Society of Cincinnati.

BY HENRY WILLIAM DESAUSSURE, A MEMBER OF THE REVOLUTION SOCIETY, AND INTENDANT
OF THE CITY OF CHARLESTON.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY ^. P. YOUNG, No. 4^, (...) 1798.

Extract from the Minutes of the REVOLUTION SOCIETY, at their Anniversary
Meeting, at Williams's Coffee-House, on Wednesday, 4 th of July, 1798.
"THE society having met and formed a quorum, Judge Be, the Rev. Mr. Furman,
and Edward Rutledge, jun. esquire, were appointed a committee to wait upon
HENRY WILLIAM DESAUSSURE, esquire, (who was nominated last year by the society,
to deliver an oration on this day) to assure him of the condolence of the
society, on the great loss he has lately sustained, by the death of a worthy
parent; and to request that he would deliver the oration, which he had prepared
in commemoration of this day, if, in his present distress of mind, he could do
so.

"The committee, having accordingly waited on Mr. DESAUSSURE, returned, and
informed the society, that they found him, as was to be expected, greatly
distressed at the late unhappy event which had taken place in his family: that
he received their condolence with gratitude, as it manifested the interest the
society were pleased to take in his great misfortune: that he felt a reluctance
to disappoint the society, in their expectation of his delivering the oration,
more especially at this critical moment* and in the dangerous situation of the
country; that painful as the task would be to him, he would consent, as far as
depended on himself, to make a sacrifice of his feelings to the wishes of the
society: but that he felt it a duty to consult his nearest relatives; whose
feelings* upon being consulted, were so repugnant to his appearing in public,
immediately after the severe loss his family had sustained, that he must beg
the indulgence of the society, and be excused.

"The society then, after transacting some other business, elected the
following officers, viz. AR^^L^US VANDER^ORS^, esquire. President. THOMAS BE, esquire.
Vice President, And THOMAS W. BACOT, Secretary and Treasurer.


"The society having requested, and procured the manuscript of the oration from
Mr. DESAUSSURE, and the Cincinnati, by invitation, attending, it was read
before the two societies by Judge BE.

"On motion, resolved, that the thanks of the society, with those of the
Cincinnati, by their desire, be presented to HENRY WILLIAM DESAUSSURE, esquire. for
his excellent oration; and that he be requested to permit the same to be
printed at the expense of the society. Judge Be, Mr. Robert Hazlehurst, and
Mr. Thomas R. Smith, were appointed to execute the foregoing resolve."

ORATION.
Friends and Fellow-Citizens,
IT has been a custom peculiar to republics to celebrate the glories of their
country by public orations. Greece and Rome furnished the example, and our
infant commonwealth had scarcely assumed its character, before it adopted this
method of commemorating the great events, which, growing out of the revolution,
gave dignity to that event, and rendered it deeply interesting to future ages,
as well as to present times. Pericles, the Athenian, whose sublime eloquence
and wonderful energy, procured him the surname of the Olympian, and whose
mighty genius ruled above forty years, with irresistible authority, the
turbulent democracy of Athens, did not disdain to celebrate in the public
assemblies of the people, the glory of those who died in defense of their
country, and to depict the free constitution of the republic in glowing and
captivating colors. Several of the most distinguished actors in our own
revolution, have followed his example, and have given celebrity, by their
eloquence, to the great events which they had witnessed, or to which they had
contributed. With equal zeal, but with inferior powers, I come, in pursuance of
this custom of our country, and in obedience to the injunction of a portion of
my fellow-citizens, who had a right to impose the duty, to celebrate the
anniversary of the auspicious day, on which the representatives of our nation,
assembled in awful council, announced the glorious declaration, which broke a
foreign yoke, and created an independent empire.

By this immortal act the United States of America were declared to be free and
independent, with full power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances,
establish commerce, and to do all other acts and things which independent
states may of right do: And for the support of this declaration, the patriots
and the statesmen who then guided our councils, with a firm reliance on the
protection of Divine Providence, mutually pledged to each other their lives,
their fortunes, and their sacred honor. America accepted the declaration as a
boon of high value, and the representatives of the people of this state,
solemnly pronounced that they thankfully received the notification, and
rejoiced at it; and were determined, at every hazard, to endeavor to maintain
it, that so, after they had departed, their children, and their latest
posterity, might have cause to bless their memory. How gloriously this noble
declaration was supported, and by what efforts of heroic valor it was
maintained! How much was greatly done, and how much was patiently suffered, is
for the historians of the revolution; and the relation will brighten their
pages with unfading splendour to the latest ages.

The intimate knowledge which you all possess of these scenes, in which so
many, who now hear me, were great and virtuous actors, dispenses with the duty
of entering into long details of the causes, which impelled America to separate
herself from Great Britain, and to hold her, as we hold the rest of mankind,
enemies in war; in peace, friends. Still less is it necessary to swell the
account of the revolutionary struggle. A brief review of those causes, and of
these scenes, will bring them glowing to the mind of every American.

The parent state, after having cherished its American colonies with fond
affection in their infancy, became jealous of their growing importance in their
riper age. She dreaded a rival, where she should have seen only a friend. Under
the unhappy influence of an ill-judged policy, she determined to check the
growth of her children, advancing rapidly to maturity. To effect this purpose,
she limited their commerce, restricted their manufactures, shackled their
spirit of enterprise, obstructed the administration of justice, destroyed their
charters, suspended their legislatures, and manifested, by a thousand injurious
acts, that spirit of domination, which finally issued in the assertion of an
unqualified right in the British parliament, to bind in all cases whatever,
unrepresented America. The colonies, filled with affection and kindness toward
a nation, which they fondly and truly esteemed their parent, and kindling into
anger, slowly and with regret, resorted to every means of conciliation. They
supplicated the monarch for a remedy to their evils, and they solicited the
parliament for redress of their grievances. Their supplications were treated
with scorn, and their solicitations were rejected with contempt. Their
patience* under suffering, and their forbearance, under wrongs, were construed
into timidity, and the bearers of their petitions were refused an audience.
Great Britain had come out of her last war, which had been conducted by the
vast and fervid genius of Chatham, flushed with unparalelled success. Encircled
with her victories, and strong in her immense resources, she could not
condescend, after she had given law to the most powerful nations in Europe, to
treat with indulgence, or respect, a handful of people, whom she called
rebellious subjects. In a dark hour, when her evil genius presided, she spurned
her suppliant children from her feet, and declaring them out of the protection
of her laws, waged cruel war upon them. America receding slowly and reluctantly
from her fond attachment, and from her earnest hope of conciliation, was
gradually forced to take up arms in self-defence. Unskilled in the art, and
unprovided with the munition of war, she suffered every calamity, which
superior force, directed by experience, and sharpened by resentment, could
inflict. Her provinces were overrun -- her towns were pillaged and burnt -- her
citizens were exiled, or immured in dungeons -- her undisciplined armies were
dissipated, and a dark cloud hung over her fortunes, and threatened their ruin.
But that characteristic temper of Americans, which, in times of peace, is
forbearance and gentleness, rose under the pressure of the war into invincible
fortitude. Like the founder of the Russian grandeur* they learned to draw
victory out of defeat; and they acquired the art of war from their enemy. The
gallant defense of Bunker's hill by undisciplined provincials, taught the
British troops the vanity of their hopes of a speedy conquest. The vigorous
invasion of Canada, by new troops, penetrating through a wilderness, never
before trodden by civilized man, displayed a hardihood of enterprise, not
equalled by the great Wolf, in his more fortunate attack on Quebec: and was
likened, at the time of its execution, to Hannibal's famed passage of the Alps.
The skilful retreat through the Jersies, and the decisive blow at Trenton,
displayed combinations of patience, judgment, and active valor; which evinced,
that America, though "in the gristle, and not yet hardened into the bone of
manhood," could not be subdued by foreign invasion. The gallant and unceasing
attacks at Bennington, Saratoga, and Stillwater, which compelled the haughty
Burgoyne to lay down his arms, were pledges of ultimate success. The glorious
defense of Fort Moultrie, the brilliant achievement at Stoney Point, the
decisive blow at King's Mountain, the fortune-changing victory at the Cowpens,
and the hard fought battles of Guilford and the Eutaws, were the great
harbingers of that glorious day, when the surrender of Cornwallis put the seal
to the American independence.

The pressure of the times brought out those great minds which exist in every
society of man, and which, laying dormant in tranquil seasons, remain in the
shade of privacy, till some fit occasion arises, and demands them to ride in
the whirlwind and direct the storm. The Sidneys, and the Hampdens, who would
else have remained mute, inert, and inglorious, came forth at their country's
call; and guiding the councils, or conducting the armies of America, led her to
victory and independence. Great Warren, skilled in the arts which adorn and
dignify life, in the gilded scenes of peace, arose at the harsh notes of war,
and gave, in the noble defense of Bunker's-Hill, a great example, in a glorious
death, to his grieving countrymen. Montgomery, than whom a nobler spirit never
was clothed in human form, offered up his life, a sacrifice, for that cause
which he had ardently adopted; carrying with him, into immortality, the
affections of his compatriots, and the admiration of his adversaries. By his
side, at the gates of Quebec, perished in the moment, when the fate of the
embattled legions seemed suspended upon their lives or their deaths, M'Pherson
and a host of gallant youths, who scorned to survive their chief. Were I to
indulge in the theme, and enumerate the multitudes, who sought honor in the
field of glory, and who died a willing sacrifice for their country, I should
swell the catalogue to an immeasurable size; and I should awaken too many sad
recollections of the losses we have sustained. Yet some recollections press too
strongly to be eluded, and force an unwilling, because a painful, remembrance.
The gallant Mercer was slain in the vigor of his years, and in the arms of
victory. The veteran Wooster fell covered with glory in the defense of his own
immediate country. Nash, Scammel, Perry, Campbell, were the victims of their
courage, and of their country.

It would be ingratitude to refuse a place in the roll of fame, to the ardent
valor of Pu^^^^i, the noble Pole, who, despairing of freedom in his own
country, sought to win it in America, and freely gave his blood as the price.
Nor less unjust would it be to withhold the eulogium of the great de Kaalb,
who, covered with wounds in a cause, not his own, spent the last hours of his
glorious life, in attesting the courage of the troops he had commanded.

Nor were there found wanting able and gallant men in our southern region, to
vindicate their country's quarrel. The veteran Roberts, who first taught our
Carolina youth the discipline necessary to regulate their valor, died
gloriously in its defense, pointing out the road of honor to his son. The high
spirited Huger, with the gallant Neyle and Moultrie, who left wealthy ease, for
the hardships of camps, fell in the defense of our city. The wise and resolute
Hyrne became the victim of an incurable wound, received in the ardent conflict.
The brave Shepherd, Wilkins, Hume, and many other patriotic soldiers, freely
shed their blood in the varied warfare. Wise, Motte, Rutherford, Joor, Simmons,
Donnom, De Saussure, and a thousand other heroic officers, left "the warm
precincts of the cheerful day" for the cold chambers of death, in the inspiring
cause of independence. Laurens, proud name! thy heroic spirit seemed born for
other times, when high deeds of chivalry, surpassing human powers, gave a
gigantic form to military enterprise. Even thee we were compelled to yield to
the scythed tyrant, who sweeps the warlike hero and the peaceful citizen,
indiscriminately before him.

High above all, towers the beloved name of Green; who, yielding to fate,
since the accomplishment of the revolution, could scarcely be admitted into
this enumeration, if his pre-eminence in merit, as in station, did not dispense
with the rule of confining our eulogium to those who died in the revolution.
This great officer was in the South, what his illustrious chief was in the
North, the savior of his country. The Romans were proud of possessing chiefs,
one of whom merited the title of the shield, and the other, the sword, of his
country. Green was at once the sword and the shield of the southern states;
and their gratitude will be as eternal as his fame.

His unceasing activity never allowed the enemy to be at rest. His daring
valor kept the foe in continual apprehension. His extraordinary resources of
mind, amply compensated him for the almost total defect of military supplies.
His campaign of 1781, is one of the finest models of military skill which can
be exhibited. He eluded the enemy when too powerful to be attacked, and kept
possession of the country with inferior forces. He beat them by detail when
they ventured to detach; he carried almost all their fortified posts; and he
reaped all the fruits of success from the hard fought and doubtful battles of
Guilford, Camden, and Eutaw; enjoying the substance without the name of
victory. Supported by many great men, he recovered the southern states and gave
them peace.

By these, and such as these, was the revolution achieved. Ever honored be
their memory! may they, in immortal bliss, enjoy the rich rewards of their
toils and of their sacrifices! may they, if just spirits are permitted to look
down on the scenes of this lower world, receive some increase of their
ineffable joys from the gratitude of their countrymen, who have reposed in the
lap of peace, and enjoyed the blessings of independence, purchased with their
blood. May their noble example inspire an invincible resolution in the mind of
Americans, to call forth the whole energies of their souls, and to endure all
sorts of calamities, rather than yield up that independence which they acquired
so gloriously, and transmitted to us as our best inheritance.

Yes, great spirits! be persuaded that you did not bleed in vain! your
countrymen, fired by the recollection of your deeds, will guard, as their most
valuable treasure, the sacred deposit you have left them; and if the storm of
war comes upon them in its fury, they will follow your glorious example, even
to death, in the defense of the country you so gloriously defended, and of the
independence, you so dearly earned.

The services of the heroes who sleep with their fathers, were not unrivalled.
In the career of glory, they were emulated by many gallant men, who, by the
blessing of heaven, yet remain to us, to guide us, by their experienced wisdom,
and to protect us by their tried valor. They repose under the shade of their
laurels, enjoying the reward of their toils in the solid affections and respect
of their fellow citizens. They also merit our eulogiums. But who shall venture
to praise the living? Truth and delicacy are at war with each other. The former
urges the full delineation of their deeds in glowing colors. The latter
restrains the hand of the artist, and casts a veil over the picture. Yet I
shall be indulged in drawing your attention to the immortal man, from whom the
mind can never wander when reflecting on the revolution. His final retreat from
public life, sanctifies, like death, the celebration of his glorious deeds.

This extraordinary man seems to have been born to public utility. In the dawn
of manhood, we find him commencing his career, and braving the savage foe who
desolated the frontiers. Equally formed for council and for action, his
vigorous exertions saved the remnant of that army, which his counsels would
have preserved entire, and led to victory. Braddock's defeat, and Col.
Washington's retreat, attested the rashness of the former and the skill of the
latter. When the hatchet was buried, and the sword was turned into the
ploughshare, we find him in private life, discharging all its duties with
honor. In the enjoyment of an easy fortune, he possesed that independence which
placed him above every want; and that regulated philosophic mind which elevated
him above the tempest of the passions. Yet soon as Great Britain drew the
sword, to enforce her imperious claims, he relinquished the sweets of ease and
retirement* and came forth, among the foremost, in asserting the rights of his
country. His virtues, and his talents, gave him, unsolicited, the first place
in rank, as the first in danger and responsibility. Entering on his command, he
found himself opposed to the disciplined troops of Great Britain, abounding in
numbers, commanded by experienced officers, furnished abundantly with the means
of war, and supported by a powerful navy. To resist these he was placed at the
head of troops inferior in number, undisciplined, led by officers full of ardor
indeed, but unskilled in the very elements of their profession; without any
regular or competent supply of military stores. At one delicate crisis, he had
neither pay, clothing, or food for his troops; and revolt was added to the
calamities which assailed him. At one awful moment, scarcely three thousand men
remained with him to maintain the arduous struggle: With this glorious band, in
the midst of the storms and tempests of winter, he crossed a freezing river, in
the night, under multiplied difficulties; stopped the career of the victorious
enemy; turned the tide of war; and taught his enemy to dread him, when most
depressed. Trenton and Princeton witnessed his skill and his prowess, when the
fate of his country was suspended on his sword. It would be unnecessary to
follow his footsteps through the varied warfare which led him from the frozen
regions of the north, to the plains warmed by the southern sun. He arose from
defeat and disaster, with renewed force and courage; and retorted defeat and
disaster on his adversaries, when most highly flushed with success. His
magnanimous spirit never despaired of the republic, in the gloomiest hour of
the struggle: and he persevered with his brave compatriots in arms, under
complicated embarrassments, until the capture of Lord Cornwallis and his army,
by extraordinary combinations of valor and military skill, achieved the
independence of his country. It was his spirit which roused the indolent,
invigorated the timid, confirmed the resolute, and sustained the fortunes of
his country, seconded by the great men whom his renown drew around him, and
whom his discernment selected for the most perilous services.

The moment of the discharge of a victorious, unpaid, and dissatisfied army,
had been an eventful period in many a revolution. More than one Cromwell had
availed himself of the discontents of the soldiery, to elevate himself to
royalty. Washington's unshaken integrity resisted the temptation. His
determined prudence stopped the beginning of mischief on a portentous day,
boding mischief, if not ruin, to the American republic. A spark which was
fanning into flame, by a daring spirit, was extinguished by his vigilance.
Under his auspices, and by his skilful management, an army covered with glory,
highly disciplined, irresistible, devoted to him, discontented with its
country, was quietly disbanded without pay, and without serious tumult. Richly
rewarded in the pure and grateful attachment of his countrymen, but without any
other compensation, he gladly retired into the walks of private life; and he
was not distinguished from the poorest citizen, but by his implicit submission
to the laws, and by his unassuming deportment. A few years of tranquillity were
allowed him in his beloved retirement. These he rendered useful to his country,
by exciting that spirit of improvement in canals, and in agriculture, so
beneficial to the husbandman and the merchant. This tranquil state was not
destined to be durable. His country had occasion for his services in more
important affairs. The confederation of the states had been formed in haste, in
times of adversity and trouble, without much skill or compactness; and the ship
of state was kept together, chiefly by the pressure of the surrounding waters.
In times of peace it was found inadequate to the purposes of its creation. It
was a government in name, and not in substance. The slender ties by which the
states were bound together, were fast dissolving. No common interest was
pursued. No common policy governed the American councils. Each state did what
seemed good in its own eyes, and too frequently mistook evil for good.
Dangerous remedies were resorted to for the evils produced by the war; and the
diseases of the body politic were sharpened by the malignity of the poisons,
which were administered as palliatives.

The debt of the United States, the price of their independence, remained
unpaid, and even unliquidated. Public faith was scoffed at, and private
confidence destroyed. America had neither union at home, nor respect abroad. --
Anarchy and civil war seemed to threaten to fill up the measure of her
calamities; whilst foreign nations scorning her imbecility, restricted her
commerce at their pleasure; and disdained to meet her fairly in treaties,
founded on the broad basis of mutual concession and reciprocity.

Urged by these imperious circumstances, to new model her constitution, and to
infuse new energies into her government, America, in whose councils rational
improvement is an inherent principle, called together her wise men; and
committed to them the arduous task of forming a new constitution, and
government, adapted to the interests and the wants of the nation. These
enlightened patriots framed a constitution, not less distinguished for its
happy combination of the national wisdom, with the public force, than for the
security it extends to the rights of individuals. It professes to be framed in
order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic
tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and
secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity. The history of
the last ten years will best prove, how greatly, beyond even hope, this
government has answered the expectations of its framers. The states have been
cordially united under its salutary influences; never to be severed. Justice
has been administered, unimpeded by passionate or interested legislation.
Domestic tranquillity has been secured in the most wonderful manner, under a
police mild beyond example. A flood of prosperity, bursting upon the country,
on the revival of confidence, has flowed into every quarter of the union, and
fertilized almost every hamlet with its salubrious streams. The blessings of
liberty have been enjoyed by us, in as eminent a degree, at as small a price,
as the frailty of man will permit. Agriculture has been improved, and yields to
the peaceful cultivator of the earth a superabundance of the necessaries and
comforts of human life. Commerce has expanded her wings to every quarter of
the globe, and exchanging the productions of our country for the manufactures
and elegancies of others, multiplies the enjoyments of man. Smiling Plenty
crowns the land, and the patriot heart could scarcely form a wish but for the
continuance of these blessings.

How large a share the illustrious Washington had in the formation of that wise
constitution, and how faithfully he administered the government, confided to
him by the unanimous voice of his country, is too well known, and too deeply
impressed on the minds of his fellow-citizens, to require a recapitulation. In
the language of a sensible legislator, who knew him well, discretion seemed to
cover him with her mantle, and to regulate all his actions. In the internal
affairs of our complicated government, order and economy were introduced and
systematized.

In the foreign relations of our country, it was his fixed policy to maintain
the neutrality which the natural position of America demanded, as impartially
as the then enthusiastic attachment of all America to France, would permit.
Through what difficulties, and under what embarrassing circumstances, he
retained white robed Peace a guest in our land, is known to every well-informed
man. Nor could even he have retained her, if the constitution of the United
States had not been adopted at the critical moment it was formed. For it is
hazarding no violent assertion to pronounce, that, had the stormy revolution of
France, found the United States, under their feeble confederation, without a
national government, disunited, weak, without resources, and without a common
policy, they would, long since, have formed provinces of France. Her diplomatic
skill would have availed itself of our situation, and some proconsul of the
French republic, would have governed America, and united her fortunes,
indissolubly, with France, in her dark and bloody career. By the especial care
of a superintending Providence, the new government of the United States, was
completely organized, and firmly established, at the moment of the bursting out
of the whirlwind which has desolated the greatest part of Europe. Happily
Washington presided over the government, and used, with wisdom and firmness,
the means placed in his hands by the constitution to avert the storm.

He has at length retired, full of years, and covered with glory. The love and
the blessings of his country accompanied him in his last retreat. He carried
with him the consolation of having deserved well of his country. He enjoys the
sweet consolation which comforted the great Athenian, who, in the last hours of
ebbing life, after a long administration in tempestuous times, deemed it his
highest glory, that none of his fellow-citizens had ever been obliged to put on
mourning through him. It was the peculiar felicity of our great chief, to
extinguish, even a rebellion, without shedding the blood of a single citizen.
Reposing in the groves of Mount Vernon, he presents the most august spectacle
among men. Long, very long, may he remain, honored, beloved, and tranquil; the
pride and ornament of his country; the model of its chiefs!

When America threw off the yoke of Great Britain, and assumed her station
among the nations of the earth, she fondly expected, that at the conclusion of
the revolutionary war, she should enjoy, undisturbed, the right of modeling her
institutions according to her own ideas of sound policy, adapted to the
condition of her people. She earnestly hoped, that her distance would exempt
her from taking any share in the European quarrels. Until recently, she has
enjoyed these promised fruits of the revolution, unquestioned. She has had time
to form her constitutions, and to mould her institutions, to the forms of her
own choice; and she has presented to the world a spectacle of civil liberty,
enjoyed in tranquillity, tempered and protected by laws, willed by the people,
through their select representatives, as had been long desired, in vain, by the
wisest men in all ages. Indulge me, whilst I slightly sketch the civil and
political institutions, the moral and physical causes, which have produced
these wonderful effects.

It was considered that in the formation of a government for a numerous people,
doubling their population in less than twenty years, from the facility of
acquiring a certain subsistence -- inhabiting a vast extent of country, jealous
of their liberties, yet wisely sensible of the necessity of energy in the laws,
a peculiar organization was required. Accordingly, a system was adopted,
essentially different from any other with which we are acquainted, yet
particularly fitted to answer our purposes.

Each of the states has established a provincial government of its own, which
regulates its internal affairs, legislates within its own limits, administers
civil and criminal justice, among the citizens of its own territory, and
superintends the police of the country. It is independent within its own
sphere, but it is connected, and moves in harmonious concert, with its sister
states, revolving around the general government; which, like the sun of the
solar system, attracts, combines, animates, and superintends, the whole
machinery, keeping all the revolving planets in their respective and
appropriate orbits.

The United States have established a general government, framed by the consent
of all, to which is confided the general interests of the nation. It exercises,
exclusively, the powers of regulating commerce, raising and supporting armies
and navies, calling out and governing the militia, declaring war and making
peace, suppressing insurrections and repelling invasions; and it administers
justice among all descriptions of persons, within the United States, not
citizens of the same state. It lays taxes for the public service, exclusively
on commerce, and concurrently on other objects of taxation. The produce of the
country is exempt from all taxation, on its exportation. Direct taxation on the
states, is proportioned to their representation in the legislature of the
United States, in its most numerous branch; and their representation depends on
their population. The forms of government are essentially the same in most of
the states. They must be republican, and they are so, substantially. They are
the reflected images of the general government, in some instances, clear and
bright as the original, in other instances, a little weakened or obscured.

In all the states, the legislature is composed of two distinct bodies of men.
A senate of fewer numbers, and of elder and more experienced men, supposed to
represent the wisdom and the property of the country: A house of
representatives, more numerous, expected to represent the feelings of the
citizens, and therefore returning more frequently to the mass of their
constituents.

In all, the chief magistrate, chosen for a short term, superintends the
execution of the laws. In some, he is aided by a council; in others, he is left
to his own discretion and responsibility: In some, he has a suspensive negative
on the laws; in most, he is not so armed. In all, the judiciary power is
exercised by independent bodies of magistrates, generally chosen by the
legislature, sometimes by the executive. In most of the states, these hold
their commissions during good behavior, at an immutable salary. In some, for a
term of years with a mutable compensation.

In the government of the United States, the legislative power is exercised by
two distinct bodies of men: a senate composed of two members from each of the
states, elected by each in its national capacity, to serve for six years: a
house of representatives, elected biennially by the people at large, qualified
to vote, in their several states, in proportion to their numbers.

The executive of the United States, participates in the legislative power, by
the exercise of a suspensive negative, controlable by two thirds of both houses.

The executive power of the United States is entrusted to a president, chose
quadrennially by certain electors, who are themselves appointed, for the
special occasion, at the discretion of the several states, by the legislatures,
or by the people at large. He watches over the execution of the laws, and
wields the energies of the nation, as commander in chief of the army and navy
of the United States, and of the militia when in actual service. He exercises
the godlike power of pardon.

The senate shares with the executive in the appointment to offices, and in the
formation of treaties.

The senate and house of representatives share with the executive in the power
of declaring war.

The judiciary, named by the president, and approved by the senate, hold their
offices during good behavior, with an immutable salary.

It administers justice, exclusively, in all national questions, growing out of
the constitution and laws of the United States, and treaties -- in all cases
relative to foreign ministers and consuls -- in all maritime cases, civil and
criminal -- concurrently, with the judiciary of the several states, in all
cases of alien suitors, or citizens of different states.

The vital principle of these free forms of government we have adopted, is the
principle of representation. The people, in their various subdivisions, elect
the men whom they prefer, to represent their interests, and their feelings, in
the legislature composed of two branches. These elections are frequent. In most
of the states, the representatives, in one branch, are elected for one year. In
the general government, and in one of the states, for two years. In the other
branch for three, four, or six years. At the expiration of his term of service,
the legislator returns to the mass of his fellow-citizens, undistinguished,
unprivileged, and subject, in common with them, to the full operation of the
laws he has enacted.

This close connection between the constituent and the legislator, secures the
people from rash or wicked laws, subversive of the public liberty, or
destructive of the public interest.

Before this principle was discovered, or applied to the purposes of
government, the republican form had but a small chance of utility or duration.
In the diminutive Grecian democracies, where the people exercised the sovereign
power, in person, in their public assemblies, factions and tumults eternally
existed. Passion governed, and not reason. -- And he who was defeated in the
argument, became the victor in the tumult. The wise, and the good, fled from
the discordant scene, and left the deep mouthed demagogue to guide assemblies,
where the voice of reason could not be heard. They detested a government so
illy calculated to procure the great objects of civil society, the tranquil and
secure enjoyment of the rights of person and property. Licentiousness was
substituted for liberty; and the venal demagogues, who had seduced and misled
their countrymen, sold them for Macedonian gold, to the yoke of Philip and
Alexander.

The Roman people, exercising the sovereign power in the public assemblies,
succeeded no better. Whilst the rights of citizenship were confined to the
inhabitants of their city, they were afflicted by frequent factions and tumults
in the discussion of the public affairs; and the misery of the mass of the
citizens formed a singular and striking contrast to the splendour of their
military successes. And when they were obliged to admit all their Italian
allies to the rights of citizenship, and to a share of the sovereign power, the
forum became a field of battle, where force alone decided. -- More than ten
thousand men have been slain on the discussion of one public question, or at
one election. These evils were too great to be borne -- mankind prefer the
torpid stillness of despotism, to such extreme democratic licentiousness. --
Rome quickly sunk into a monarchy.

Had the representative principle been understood, and practiced, by the
Grecian and Roman republics, they might have long enjoyed, in tranquillity,
that freedom they so ardently loved, and so dreadfully abused.

America, by the wise application of the representative principle, enjoys
advantages of immense importance to her peace within, and to her security
without.

It was formerly contended, that a republic could not exist on an extensive
scale, or comprehend a numerous body of citizens. This was true, as it related
to the democracies, where the sovereign power is exercised by the people in
person. All beyond the seat of government must, in such a simple democracy, be
subjects, and this happened wherever that form of government prevailed. But on
the American model, a republic may exist on as large a scale as any empire; and
the most distant inhabitants of the republic may participate in the government,
as strongly, through their representatives, as those who reside in the capital.

Ambitious demagogues cannot so easily corrupt the people, and overturn the
republic. The Pompeys, and the Caesar's, easily found means to corrupt and
seduce the numerous populace of a single city, and acquired an ascendancy by
their gold, and their dependents, which led to their elevation to supreme
power, on the ruins of the republic. No similar event can happen in America: No
single citizen can, by any insiduous arts, acquire a dangerous ascendancy over
a nation, inhabiting such an immense extent of country, with such a form of
government, as has been described. -- Reason, or force, may govern such a
people; but art, corruption and intrigue, never can. It is of no advantage to a
demagogue to excite a tumult, or stir up a sedition, in a single spot, as he
cannot thereby rule the state. -- These, therefore, are less frequent in the
American republic, than in others. The capacity of being extended beyond the
size of the ancient free republics, secures the United States from the fate of
those small states, which were easily struck down by a single blow from nations
of superior force. -- They may be pressed by an invader, and some of them may
be desolated, but they cannot be subdued.

The policy of America is different from that of all other nations; it is of a
milder temper, and promises fairer fruit than a harsher system. She has not
bolstered up her government by a religious establishment, exacting conformity.
She leaves religion, as a matter between God and every man's conscience,
without any state regulation. All men are protected in the worship of God, in
the manner congenial to their minds; and a citizens faith is never enquired
into by the government, whilst he demeans himself peaceably. The citizen is
neither excluded, nor advanced, by his profession of any particular creed. The
fruit already produced, is, that bigotry does not exist, and superstition is
not known.

We have no privileged casts, or orders, of citizens, to monopolize the public
employments, and to elude the public burdens. Talents combined with virtues,
are the passports to public favor and to public appointments -- all enjoy equal
rights and equal protection under the laws. The conditions of men are various,
because they are endowed with various degrees of intelligence, industry,
economy and virtue; but they are equally under the sanction of the laws, in
their various pursuits and conditions. A system of republicanism so tempered,
furnishes no grounds for those jealousies, and apprehensions, which distracted
the republics of ancient times, which were of a more democratic cast. On the
one hand, the people are under no necessity of harboring that jealousy, which
anticipating tyranny, construed talents into criminality, and banished eminent
men without offense, and without trial. The ostracism is not requisite to the
security of the public liberty -- On the other hand, there is no pretense for
the exercise of those severe maxims, which rendered the aristocracies of modern
Europe, more intolerable than the monarchies. No secret accusations are
received, no private tribunals are established to decide on suspicion, and to
condemn unheard. No council of ten, disposes of the lives, liberties, or
properties, of the citizens at pleasure. The mild tenor of the government
produces a correspondent mildness in the citizens -- the peace of the community
is preserved, and the laws are enforced without the aid of a single soldier --
no furious parties are formed in the state, exhibiting hostile armies in the
same community. Political questions are discussed with animation, but without
any durable animosity. The government itself was new modelled, and essentially
altered, without any bloodshed, and without any permanent resentments. Even the
readmission of many of the exiles, of the revolutionary contest, has produced
no inconveniences, or serious discontents.

I should furnish a very incomplete representation of the condition of our
country, if I omitted to state the character and influence of the fair sex. In
all the various modifications of human society, the gentle sex partakes and
increases our good, shares and diminishes our evil. It is a truth, highly
honorable to the female sex, that in proportion to the existence of virtue,
combined with suavity of manners, in any nation, the ladies have maintained
their natural equality, and have even acquired an ascendancy over the heart of
man. When the human race is found in a barbarous state, without the arts which
embellish life; and man is ferocious as the tiger of the forest, unhappy woman
partakes of his misery, and is the slave of his barbarity. When man carries
refinement to extremes, and is corrupted by luxury, and sunk into every
debasing vice, woman still shares in his condition, and is the victim of his
vices. But when wise institutions, and sound morals, have rendered a nation
virtuous, then the gentle sex resumes its empire over the heart of man, and
charms and soothes him into a willing obedience to her dominion. Were it not
too flattering to our nation, I would freely descant on the condition of the
fair sex in our country, and I would easily prove their possession of that
gentle authority, founded on the mild qualities, by which, they sooth and
tranquilize the rougher temper of man. And I would thence infer, that the
morals of our community, are in that sound state which is essential to the
dominion of the sex. It would be highly unjust not to add, that to this
gentleness of character, the ladies of this country united the most
distinguished patriotism. They sustained the calamities of war with invincible
fortitude, and submitted to the privation of the comforts of life, with the
most exemplary patience. Did the public service require the sacrifice of
private property, the arrows and the fire were furnished by the patriotic and
amiable owner, to destroy the buildings, which sheltered the enemy. Did the
enemy violate a sacred capitulation, and doom those to prison-ships, who were
entitled to their parole, the matrons, whose sons were exposed to this
calamity, became their encouragers and supporters. When the allurements of
amusement were held out, to induce the fair sex to grace the gay assemblies of
the conqueror, these were rejected, with scorn, and the abodes of misery,
filled with captive Americans, were honored and cheered by the lovely guests.
These are their claims to our best affections and tenderest regards.

Such is the state of our country, and such the multiplied blessings we enjoy,
and it was the earnest hope of every good citizen, that our distance would
exempt us from taking any share in the European quarrels, and that we should be
long allowed the tranquil possession of these advantages. Unambitious
ourselves, we did not desire to interfere with the rights or possessions of
others. The nature of our government, forbids personal ambition. The vast
extent of our country left no room for any inclination to extend our territory.
It was our peaceable ambition, our wise policy, to fill this immense extent of
country, with as great a population, and as large a share of happiness as human
life is capable of; and we trusted that a policy, void of offense, to all
nations, would have left us at leisure, to pursue, and to extend this pacific
glory.

But these were Eutopian dreams, which the first rude blast of conflicting
nations dissipated in empty air. No sooner had the first shocks of the French
revolution agitated the world, than America found herself involved in the
storm. Her affections to France, and her attachment to the principles which
seemed to develope themselves in her early career, rendered her sincerely
attached to the French revolution. She rejoiced that a great nation, to whom
she was intimately allied, was preparing to modify her government, and infuse
such portions of civil and political liberty into the system, as would
substantially form a free government. America had no hesitation in expressing
her joy at this regeneration of her ally -- so cordial was her satisfaction,
and so frank her avowal of it, that she incurred the resentment of the combined
European powers. Their anger was kindled, and they threatened vengeance on the
unoffending American republic, whose policy was peace, and whose partiality was
chiefly in the mind, and not greatly in the act.

A firm, stout, and a resolute tone, saved America from this calamity. Her
enemies were made to understand that she regretted war and wished to avoid it,
but would defend herself against the invaders of her independence, and the
plunderers of her commerce. They preferred her neutrality to her resentment,
and secured most of the points on which she insisted, by treaty. Great Britain
restored her long detained posts, placed her pecuniary claims, in an equitable
train of settlement, and disavowed her own most injurious acts. Notwithstanding
the animated interest which the United States took in the revolution of France,
their obvious policy led to the maintenance of a fair neutrality. Her own great
interests demanded this; nor did the well considered interests of France, seem
to require a deviation from it. It appeared beneficial to her, that her only
sincere ally, should be able, by a neutral position, to supply her with the
provisions and stores, which her imperious necessities required. It may be
added, emphatically, that France owes the possession of the colonies, which
remain to her, to the neutrality of the United States. But a just and moderate
policy has formed no part of the French revolution. Her arbitrary rulers,
construed neutrality into enmity, and charged the United States with
ingratitude and desertion. From reproaches they proceeded to acts of
aggression, and their progress in deeds of hostility, has been so persevering
and oppressive, that the patience of America, is, at length worn out, and she
prepares to vindicate herself, by a just and necessary defense.

If the contest must be decided by the sword, it is of prime importance that we
should be convinced that the sword is drawn in a just cause. The consciousness
of this truth, will unite the hearts of our citizens, and will nerve the arm of
the patriot soldier in the defense of his country. A short review of the
relative conduct of France and America, to each other, will demonstrate the
justice of the American cause.

The United States deeply affected with a sense of the benefits derived from
the French government, in the revolutionary war, did not stoop to enquire into
the motives for the assistance furnished by France. Filled with sentiments of
affection and kindness, the government sought every occasion of expressing its
attachment, and the people sometimes transcended the bounds of prudence, in the
warmth of their zeal. The French had a decided weight in the councils of the
United States, and to be a Frenchman was a passport to all the civilities of
the citizens. In this temper, the revolution commenced. When in its progress
the throne was subverted, all the powers of Europe withdrew their ministers
from France, and prepared themselves to inflict, and to endure the calamities
of war. The United States, faithful in their attachment, directed their
minister to remain, and he was long the solitary diplomatic character at Paris.

When republican France deemed it essential to her interests to dispatch a new
minister to America, he was received every where with kindness, and the
continent resounded with congratulations. The government received him with
cordiality, and the people with enthusiasm. These proofs of attachment were
given, when the fortunes of the republic were at a low ebb. Great part of
Europe was in arms against her -- the short lived conquests of Dumourier had
vanished; her own territory was invaded; her armies were defeated and
disorganized, and dangers pressed her on every side. Aware of these dangers,
America dared to avow her attachment, and to hazard the consequences.

When the march of this all destroying revolution, had ruined the internal
resources of France, and every pecuniary claim became important to her, she
solicited from the United States the prompt re-imbursement of the debt due to
her, which had been promised at stipulated periods. The government of the
United States, without regarding the imputation of a partiality strongly
attributed to her; without calculating the consequences of a counter
revolution, listening only to her affections, condensed seven years
installments into two, and discharged them.

When the explosion of principles, subversive of social order, had overwhelmed
the great colony of St. Domingo, and deluged the island with the blood of the
inhabitants, many of them took refuge in America with the little remnant of
their property. I forbear to describe how kindly they were received, how
largely they were relieved. You enjoy the sweet reward of having contributed
greatly to the relief of human beings, and of Frenchmen, afflicted with many
sorrows. Be contented with the delightful consciousness of having done your
duty. The recollection will wear well, and will comfort you in the hour of your
own calamity. To the disgrace of the French government, these acts of kindness
have been misconstrued, and made a subject of complaint.

Wherever a construction, favorable to France, could be put on the law of
nations, or on our treaty, it was done; and so notorious were the friendly
dispositions of the United States to the French, that the belligerent powers
scarcely held them to be neutral, and threatened them with war for that cause
alone.

America rejoiced in the successes of France; she lamented her defeats; and
above all, she grieved for her aberrations from the great principles of
republicanism and justice; for her bloody proscriptions, and her inhuman
confiscations. She wept for her crimes, and would have drawn an eternal veil
over them.

So sensible was France of the sincere affections of America, and of the proofs
she gave of them, that she frequently expressed her gratitude, and her deep
sense of the attachment displayed for her cause, and of the importance of the
indirect aid she derived from her friendship.

Mr. Adet, so late as in 1795, pronounced a confidential communication, made to
him, a sure guarantee of the friendship of the American government toward
France, and of the fidelity with which it always marks its conduct toward a
faithful ally.

But this fidelity was not sufficient for the purposes of France. -- Her eager
policy demanded that we should be made a party in the war, and she moved heaven
and earth to drag us into the conflict. With this view she sent a minister to
represent her, who with the Circaen song of peace and neutrality in his mouth,
exercised infinite art and boldness to seduce, or force us into the war.

This daring man endeavored to usurp the sovereignty of our country. -- He
issued commissions to our citizens, and tempted them with the hopes of plunder,
to fit out privateers, to cruize on the commerce of nations with whom we were
at peace. -- He granted commissions to our citizens, and excited them to enlist
troops, subject to his disposition. Fearful that the firm measures of the
government would defeat his machinations, he calumniated the constituted
authorities, misrepresented their acts, and threatened to appeal to the people.

The government of the United States bore with this minister for a long time,
and did not attribute to his nation his extraordinary conduct, until the
publication of his instructions forced reluctant belief. He was recalled, and
on the downfall of his party, demanded for punishment. The government which he
had insulted had the magnanimity to refuse to deliver him up. His successors
pursued the same march steadily, but more covertly.

The conduct of the French government has been no less unfriendly than that of
its agents. At the very outset of her war with Great Britain, the convention
decreed, that all neutral vessels, bound for the ports of Great Britain, should
be carried into France: Thus taking upon itself to prohibit the commerce of the
neutrals, without a single pretense of wrong, or impropriety, being committed
by them. This decree was issued in May, 1793, at the very moment when their
minister landed in America, and declared, solemnly, that his nation respected
our neutrality. This decree has been followed by a long succession of others,
each more severe and injurious than the preceding, which have been carried into
effect with equal rapacity and atrocity. And it is an unquestionable truth,
that by arbitrary seizures, in her own ports, by unjust captures on the open
seas, on various false pretenses, by forced loans, by unperformed contracts,
and by open confiscation; France has wrested from the citizens of the United
States of America, a larger sum than they would have lost in a state of actual
war. This is the deliberate opinion of our envoys, delivered to France,
herself, in their memorials, demanding reparation. In the West Indies, these
decrees, and others, issued by the French agents, have been executed, with a
rigor, ruinous to commerce; injustice was systematized, and robbery and
confiscation were organized. How many of our respectable citizens are now
embarrassed by the cruel privation of their means, employed in feeding this
unjust ally? Too many of you my friends have been sufferers, and feel the
injuries, too sensibly for me to dwell on this ungrateful theme. To these
injuries have been added, personal wrongs -- our citizens, after being
plundered, have been imprisoned, and cast on shore, penniless, in strange
countries; they have been forced to submit to the rod of the oppressor, and
have been offered in exchange as prisoners of war.

This accumulation of wrongs and injuries, have been borne by the United
States, with the most unexampled patience. For a long time they forebore even
reproaches. They confided, that the justness of the ally and friend, would bind
up the wounds inflicted in the fury of the revolutionary storm. Perseverance in
a long course of oppressions, at length excited the sensibilities of America,
and she instructed her ministers to expostulate mildly with France, in the
terms of wounded friendship. She humbled herself before an unreasonable ally:
in a manner, she would have scorned to submit to in any other instance. She
appointed some of her most distinguished citizens, to go and seek peace,
accommodation, and justice from France, even by the sacrifice of secondary
interests. These great men, in representing the injuries, and urging the claims
of their country, have stated truly, That America avoided even defensive
measures, and has sought unremittingly and assiduously, for such peaceful and
amicable explanations, as might do away existing animosities, and restore,
between the two republics, the harmony which America so truly desires. That
America accustomed herself to perceive, in France, only the friend and ally.
Consulting the feelings of her own bosom, she has believed that between
republics, an elevated and refined friendship could exist, and that free
nations were capable of maintaining for each other, a real and permanent
affection. That America resists the opinion, that the present state of things
grew out of a digested system, to which, Franco means to adhere. And, that she
recedes, even under the pressure of these aggressions, slowly and with
difficulty, from the attachments she has formed. So entertwined with every
ligament of her heart, have been the chords of affection, which bound her to
France, that only repeated and continued acts of aggression, could tear them
asunder.

To these pathetic and just representations, France has not deigned to return
any official answer. She has disdained to receive, or acknowledge, the
ministers of peace. She has exposed them to all sorts of vexations and
contumely. These great and virtuous men, regardless of their personal feelings,
have persevered, under the most discouraging embarrassments, in their endeavors
to remove the obstacles to an accommodation, and to obtain the great objects of
their mission, the maintenance of the national independence, and the reasonable
reparation of the wrongs done to their injured country. But in vain.

You are too well acquainted with the humiliating demands which have been made
upon our country, through these ministers. The relinquishment of the claims of
our injured citizens -- the payment of a large tribute, and the virtual
surrender of the national independence. Your hearts have beat high with
indignation at the degrading propositions. An electric shock has awakened the
American mind to an ardent sense of her injuries and oppressions. It is felt
and understood, that the national independence, and all its concomitant
blessings are at stake. That to yield to the demands of France, would be a base
surrender of that pearl, of so much price, purchased with the treasures of our
industry, and with the lives of our citizens. A high national spirit has arisen
to vindicate our country, and to maintain her independence at every peril, and
through every calamity. America remembers her patience, and long suffering,
under the injuries of Great Britain; she remembers her petitions rejected, and
her messengers of peace contemned. She recollects how gradually she was kindled
into anger, and how firmly, and successfully, she resisted oppression. Pressed
to the same issue by an ally, in whose disposition she was deceived; she has
acted the same prudent and mild part; it only remains for her to re-act the
heroic part she performed in her revolutionary struggle, and under the
protection of God, the same result will follow. Nor can a question be made of
what part America will take. It is brought by the arrogance of our adversary to
this alternative, submit basely, or resist in arms. Nor can we long debate
which of the two to choose. If we submit, we sink into the degraded condition
of a colony, without self government: nay worse, of a conquered country. The
fruits of our industry will be torn from us, to gratify the cravings, and
endless wants of a nation, which in creating an universal dominion, has
abandoned industry, and the arts, to riot on the spoils of others. Our citizens
would be exiled, and their estates would be confiscated. Our constitution and
government would be overthrown. France would mould our government to her
pleasure, and place her dependents in the administration of it. Our country
would be bound to the chariot wheels of the oppressor, would be loaded with
tributes, and would be permanently yoked to the system of European politics and
dissensions. We should be governed by proud pro consuls, and a fierce soldiery,
who would answer our complaints with scoffs, and our tears with taunting
declarations, that we were too happy that they left us our eyes to weep.
Believe me, my friends, this picture is not overcharged. The fate of so many
nations, who have been beguiled, betrayed or forced into submission, serves as
a warning and a beacon to us.

The unhappy Belgians, stripped of their wealth and of their liberties, bid us
avoid their fate by a firm resistance. The cruelly oppressed Batavians warn us
of their divisions, which delivered up their country, a prey to the invader,
and teach us the importance of union. The flattered, betrayed, and ruined
Venetians, beckon to us, in mournful silence, to prepare ourselves to make
every sacrifice in a manly struggle, rather than tamely yield up our
independence. The Swiss, in the deepest tones of agony and distress, cry aloud
to us, to unite, like a band of brothers, in the defense of our country. Even
the docile Spaniards, and the half subject Cisalpines, teach us, that the
miseries and degradations of a tame submission, are more galling, than the
calamities of war, open and declared.

If we take these warnings, and firmly resolve to maintain our independence, or
perish in the struggle, we shall escape the calamities, which have invariably
attended submission. France may, indeed, ravage our coasts. She may lay waste
the exposed parts of our country; she may cripple our commerce, and inflict a
thousand evils upon us. Nay, she may, and if we are torpid and cold in our own
cause, she will light up a flame in the southern states, which may consume
them. But America never can be subdued, if she be true to herself. Four
millions of freemen, with arms in their hands, determined to be free, united,
and inhabiting a great and fruitful country, can never be subjected by any
enemy, however powerful, residing at the distance of three thousand miles.

We are called upon by every consideration, which ought to influence the human
heart, to prepare ourselves, to make this manly struggle. The blood of our
friends, shed in the acquisition of independence, cries to us, to maintain,
firmly, what they bravely acquired. Millions, unborn, have a right to demand,
that we should transmit, unimpaired, to them, the noble inheritance we derived
from our fathers. I would alarm the man who sets a high value on the goods of
fortune, by showing him that his gold is exposed to hazard. I would arouse the
patriotism of those, who attach adequate importance to civil and political
liberty, by demonstrating that their ruin is involved in a base submission. I
would arouse the piety of religious men, by pointing to their altars, in danger
of demolition or pollution. I would call upon the honor of the citizen soldier,
and point out the road to the temple of fame, up the mount of independence. And
I would appeal to the tender affections of all who possess and who love
parents, wives, children, brothers, and friends.

Yet why should I make these appeals? Do I not hear the loud tones of a high
national spirit, resound from every part of the continent? Is not, the love of
country alive in every heart? Are not the old men busied in planning, and
advising the best means of defense? Are not the young men sharpening their
swords and buckling on their armor, in the glorious cause of national
independence? Every mind and every hand are employed. The rich give out of the
abundance of their substance, bountifully, for the public defense. Those of
moderate circumstances, give their labor. All unite in a firm resolution, never
to bow the neck to a foreign yoke. All are deeply sensible that they have to
contend with a daring, active, artful enemy, who never sleeps; to whom all
means are lawful, and who practices, with wonderful skill, the maxim of
dividing, in order to subdue. All therefore resolve to repel so insidious a
foe, by firm decision, instant and vigorous preparation; and above all things
by a determination to be united in heart and in action, and to endure every
calamity, rather than yield up the national character and independence.

Yes, my friends and fellow-citizens, I swear in the awful name of that great
and beneficent Being, in whose presence, and in whose temple we are now
assembled, in whose hands is the fate of nations, and under whose divine
protection we achieved our independence, that we will never basely surrender
the precious acquisition, without a manly struggle to maintain it. It is for
you, my friends, to ratify and preserve inviolate the oath I have taken in your
name, and on your behalf -- and may the God of our fathers sustain, protect and
bless us in the defense of our rights and of our country; and may her liberties
and independence be immortal.

FINIS.

