CYNTHIA, WITH THE TRAGICAL ACCOUNT OF THE UNFORTUNATE LOVES OF ALMERIN and
DESDEMONA: BEING A NOVEL.

Illustrated with a variety of the chances of fortune; moralized with many
useful observations, whereby the reader may reap both pleasure and profit.

Printed AT NORTHAMPTON, MASSACHUSETTS, BY WILLIAM BUTLER; M,DCC,XCVIII.

CYNTHIA. A NOVEL.
FORTH from a desert and unfrequented wood in the east parts of Albion,
abutting to the sea, issued out a woman; and seated herself upon a carpet of
sweet flowers, embroidered by the hand of nature; she resembled Diana, the
beautiful huntress of the woods; or more fair, if possible: one would have
taken her for a celestial deity, if the succeeding vicissitudes of fortune had
not strongly persuaded she was a mortal beauty. Indeed the purity of her
complexion seemed to excel the new fallen snow, but sorrow gathered the
carnation off her cheeks. All the features of her face had so near a kindred,
and formed to so rare a proportion, that she seemed nature's masterpiece; or
rather sympathised something of that divinity which name she bore. From her
eyes darted a luster, mingled with a vivacity so penetrating, that it was
impossible for the most confident soul to make resistance. This prodigious
creature, after, she had searched every vacant place with her eye, fearing to
be overheard, with a troubled and low voice she began as follows:

"O my dear, though absent, Orsamus! To whose merits I never yet gave any
reward, whose complaints I could never be induced to pity! When Neptune
shipwrecked thee upon the shore, I little thought thy presence would beget me
such disquiet; O duty! O love! To what extremes do you hurry me? And what
enemies are you to my rest? The birds that live in these unfrequented woods are
happier than I; for they may choose their mates, and carol their sweet pleasures
to the spring; but by the cruel commands of a father I am forced to neglect the
person I love; and disesteem the services of one with disdain, whose welfare I
prize above my life; who once left, I would not bid a welcome to the dearest
good the world can afford me. But alas! The time draws near that will make a
perpetual divorce. Unfortunate Orsamus, by thy absence; miserable Cynthia, by
thy folly."

Scarce had these words took a farewell from her mouth, when from an adjacent
part of the wood issued out a man richly appareled, and bent his steps directly
to the place where she sat. Her eyes had no sooner found him out, but with
excess of grief she uttered these complaints, "O cruel Heavens! Do you take a
pleasure in tormenting submitting innocence, that you conduct this monster, the
enemy of my content, and fatal disturber of my quiet, so unfortunately to the
place of my concealment; now farewell my poor Orsamus; I shall only stay here
amongst the living to consecrate the relicts of a languishing life to thy dear
memory."

By this time the unknown person came up; and seating himself by her side, he
accosted her with this discourse: "Madam, said he, your father expects you with
ardency, and is in fearful apprehensions of the certainty of your safety. Why,
madam, continued he, at such a time as this do you seek out solitude, and so
carefully shun the person that adores you? Why these clouds my dear princess,
on a joyful day; wherefore these tears too, too precious to be thus lavishly
cast away; Why are my promising joys overcast with such fearful omens, and my
sweetest hopes vanished? Tell me, O tell me! joy of my bliss, what may occasion
your disquiet, that with the peril of my life I may procure a remedy."

This fair unknown was preparing, for a reply, when they were disturbed with a
noise from the neighboring thickets; and casting their eyes about to
understand the cause of that surprizal, when behold there rushed out a man,
whose unexpected appearance was quickly become their astonishment: his visage
was pale and clouded over with grief; in all regards and lineaments of his face
appeared a natural fierceness; his whole composure showed the evidence of
something so great and noble that spoke him to command others, born to
disesteem the whole world, and think it held none fit to be his rival.

He set his face and directed his hasty steps to the place where they sat; but
his presence put them both in confusion. He no sooner presented himself to
their sight, but fixing his eyes wholly on this fair unknown, as the load stone
of his will, and center of his happiness, with a rapture of joy he suddenly
cast himself at her feet. "O my divine princess, said he, beautiful cause of my
misfortunes, and cruel origin of all my miseries? How careful has fortune been
to make me happy, when I have intended to sacrifice the fragment of this
wretched life to your severity? I have yet this comfort left me in death, to
complain to you of your injustice."

All this time a wavering color often went and came in her cheeks, that she
became stiffned with astonishment, as if she had been planet struck; but at
last calling back that assurance her sudden surprizal had sequestered, "Gods,
said she, is this Orsamus himself I see before me? Yes, replied he; it is
Orsamus, if you have not cast the memory of so poor a wretch into oblivion."
This said, he dissembled himself from her knees, and with a look full of
terror, he drew his sword to pierce his breast with that fatal weapon. But
Cynthia no sooner saw that glittering minister of death unsheathed, but giving
a grievious shriek, she fell into a deadly swoon; when suddenly casting his
eyes about, he saw this first gallant sitting like one metamorphosed, or a
statue without life; and suddenly calling him to remembrance, "Oh (cried he)
have I found you, the only opposer of my bliss? Can you think to go safely away
with that prize, which is only due to my services; If you know how to own a
good, maintain the interest you would challenge in this divine creature with
your sword." Saying this, he presented his sword against his breast, but he
never moved from the place where he sat, neither did he endeavor to make any
motion of defense.

In this interim of time, his friends who had been in quest of him in the most
secret parts of the wood, hearing of a disturbance, came up unto him, and
seeing Cordello in danger, at that moment they made in, and rescued him out of
his hands, when no doubt he had acted the last catastrophe and scene of his
life. They all assaulted him at once; but he, without spending a thought upon
the number, rushed upon them like lightning, with a swiftness, and looks so
terrible and dreadful, that he made the forwardest repent their rashness. Six
lay stain by his hands: and they had encompassed him about, so that it seemed
impossible he could make any longer resistance against such numbers as
surrounded him.

When lo! fortune provided a remedy for this disaster; yet one that seemed
worse than the disease. Behold from an adjoining creek of the sea, shaded by a
little hill, issued about sixteen pirates led on by their captain. They came
not to assist either side, but to make their utmost advantage of both. No
sooner had the assailants of this brave cavalier beheld them coming, but they
all ran away; only he alone set him in a posture of defense to preserve the
lady; but, overpowered by their numbers, they forced him to submit to their
will; yet not before he had received four desperate wounds in the body; in
revenge of which he had slain four of the best men belonging to their vessel.
They conveyed Cynthia, with Orsamus, on board the boat, intending to satisfy
the death of their companions with the author who had occasioned it. They put
off from shore, and began to prepare for his execution; mean while the fair
Cynthia, whose spirits were newly returned to execute their proper functions,
sat almost dissolved in tears, beholding these preparations for Orsamus's
death, fearfully apprehending what she could not as yet know the cause of;
going unto him that seemed commander of the rest, she demanded "to what use
those weapons, and preparations of death were made?" He returned answer, "for
that cavalier who in her defense had slain four of the best men belonging unto
his ship." "Sir, replied Cynthia, that young man is my brother; and ye cannot
well blame him in what he did in the defense of a dear sister: and sure the
course you would take is indirect, since if you fulfill your resolutions, you
can gain nothing by his death, but preserving his life, you may receive a great
ransom.

The sweet thought of gain, delivered from such a lovely creature, set both his
love and covetousness on the rack. In fine, the hope of gain turned the current
of their revenge, in execution of which their choler abated, and they rested
satisfied. But it was not so with their commander, for the eyes of his fair
prisoner had opened themselves a passage, and darted their resplendant rays
into the soul of this fierce pirate. He found such charms as it seemed
impossible, and mere folly, to stand in opposition against them. Here was a
metamorphose wrought by the force of love and beauty, a barbarian civilized to
a milder temper; for, accosting his fair prey, he composed all that was fierce
and rude to respect and duty. "Madam, replied he, it is enough that you desire
your brother should live; rest satisfied, he shall live only for your sake; not
so much for our interest as for your content; for we could well have dispensed
with our gain to give our revenge precedence: but your desires have put a
period to our resentment; thus you reign triumphant while you esteem yourself a
captive. O madam, continued he, cease those showers: clear up those bright
stars, have you any desire? Give them a name; for I find it irresistible to
give you a denial. Retire to yonder cabin, which shall be wholly at your
disposal. Your menial servants shall not be more officious, than these my men
that seem so barbarous shall be dutiful at your commands. For myself I Will pay
my respects with as much chaste zeal as we pay our devotion to the offended
deities, at such a time only when my visits will not incommode you: for I am
not so much a pirate but I know what civilities ought to be paid to ladies of
your quality; which, as you appear to me, is not mean. -- Rest firm in the
assurance of my promise, whilst I take care for the speedy dressing of your
brother's wounds, and for his accommodation in the ship." Saying this, he left
her in profound respect.

Orsamus, who was an auditor and spectator of the discourse that passed betwixt
the pirate and Cynthia, was transported with ravishment when he understood that
she was his preserver. "Nay, said he, since my life is not indifferent to my
fair divinity, I Will live to free her from this captivity, or perish in the
attempt; since she seems to have an esteem for my life, I Will endeavor to
preserve it, for I cannot but prize what she esteems." These words were
overheard by those that guarded him: but being spoken in English were not
understood. By their captain's command he was carefully conducted into the
hold, where he had a lodging assigned him, and surgeons sent him that searched
his wounds, which they found dangerous, but not mortal: they carefully dressed
them and left him unto his rest.

While things were thus stated, they would have tacked about again for the
shore, to have received their expected ransom for Orsamus; but there arose a
cruel tempest, which conveyed them many leagues from thence into the main
ocean. The captain was not so sorry for disappointing his men of their hopes,
because he had an opportunity to oblige Cynthia with the stayance of her
supposed brother; as also to benefit himself in making him the solicitor of his
love.

Three days had passed since the last disaster befell Cynthia; mean time Orsamus
was carefully dressed, and officiously attended, and Cynthia served with
caution, the pirate never visiting her without permission. On the fourth day he
invited her to take a walk on the deck. It was about the time Sol left watery
Neptune's bed and newly darted his rays upon the face of the water.

Cynthia accorded with his desire; and kindly presenting him her hand, they
went both forth the cabin. But oh! what a mine of beauties did the LIGHT
present, which grief, and that dismal place had detained from his eyes; for the
pain and fear she suffered for Orsamus, by the assurance of his safety, was
partly vanished away, so that the beauty they had put to flight, was almost
returned back again to its usual luster, which this pirate took some time to
contemplate and admire. -- The increase of her beauty augmented his passion;
and sparks of love and pity that lay hid before, began to blaze into a flame,
as by the sequel will appear; for after she had sweetly complained unto him of
the detaining of her freedom, and, that according to his promise, he had not
put her brother to his ransom, taking a hint from these words he began as
follows:

"Madam, said he, would I set your freedom to sale, a kingdom were too little
to buy the ransom. If your brother's liberty has been deferred, perhaps your
interest was the chief occasion, when in some sort to oblige you, I have
neglected so great a gain. For should I accord with you in this one thing,
touching your freedom, possibly I should divorce my eyes from the dearest
object forever. Madam, I love you, because it is impossible to see you and be
insensible. I have a passion for you that nothing can extinguish but death; but
it is legitimate, and may be owned by you without a scruple, were your
condition equal to the degrees of a princess. My birth is not ignoble, although
the disasters of my life have been uncommon; nor because I seem rustic, is my
condition so mean, since the king of Norway, a few days since, proffered me his
neice to wife, which upon my return to Norway, I did intend to accomplish; and
had certainly effected it, had not your prodigious beauty disappointed my
designs. And for your liberty, how can you account it a restraint when your
jailer has become your slave? Abate but the thoughts of separation, and your
desire cannot name another thing should meet my refusal. If once I be so happy
to attain the shore of Norway, whither I intended in a few days to go, I will
spend the residue of this wretched life at your feet." Here he continued
silent, leaving Cynthia in amaze at the discovery of his passion; yet being
obliged to reply, she returned the following answer.

Sir, your respective usage could not give me more satisfaction then your
unpleasant discourse gives me discontent, since you take away the hopes of my
liberty in denying my ransom. Never think by constraint to gain my affection,
nor by detaining my liberty to make me become kind. Would I accord to your
will, I am at my brother's disposal, whom you disable in denying him freedom,
but never think by such rude ways, to force love; for your hopes will all fail
you; for my soul is free, although my body be your prisoner; and you shall find
I can die when I cannot live. Saying this, she left him and returned to her
cabin.

Mean while the pirate stood like one transformed: yet, not minding to despair
of the first repulse, when he had the person in his power; so that recollecting
his spirits, he went immediately to give Orsamus a visit, whose wounds by this
time were fast recovering.

After salutations past, he desired him to be his assistant to his sister, who
protested never to dispose of herself without his consent: promising him in
recompense to give him his freedom: or if he would go with him to Norway he
should have ample revenues to subsist during life. Orsamus thanked him, and
said, if he would allow him the freedom to visit his sister, he would perform
the utmost of his endeavors to procure her consent; that if his felicity
depended upon his disposal, he would be no obstruction to defer it; that seeing
he had put him to choice, he had rather go to Norway with his sister, than to
return without her into his own country. Thus he was forced to delude him with
hopes, so to detain him within the bounds of reason.

The pirate was satisfied at the freedom of his discourse, giving the physician
orders, when his wounds would permit him, to let him have free access to his
sister's chamber, and liberty of conversation, at such times as he best pleased.

This past he left him to his rest; but this transport was too great to let him
mind that necessary minister of his health: that which Cynthia had done for him
in preserving his life, by adopting him with that happy title of brother, and
lastly, not to dispose of herself without his consent, was a fit subject to
exercise his thoughts upon. Now her former rigours were all vanished to his
memory, and he considered her only as his benefactor, and original of his
felicity.

He past away his time in such pleasing transports, ever fancing the idea of
his fairest Cynthia before his eyes, that all other thoughts were hushed in
silence; his contentment seemed perfect, and his wounds received an additional
cure, from the temperature and quietness of his mind, so that in two days time
he found himself in a capacity to visit his dearest physician; which being made
known to the pirate, the more to oblige Cynthia, he intended to present him
unto her himself.

'Twas about the time that Phoebus had climed into his midday height, and
began to drive his chariot to the western seas, when Orsamus accompanied him to
Cynthia's cabin. They found her sitting in the most dismal part of the room,
very disconsolate, accompanied only with a mournful silence. At their first
entrance, the pirate saluted her in this manner: Madam, since the disconcealing
of my love has begotton your disquiet, I have courted all opportunities to
dissipate your resentment, yet I fear you will not welcome the happness,
because I bring it. This said with great respect, he departed out of the Cabin.

Scarce had he given an exit, shutting the door after him, but Orsamus in a
transport cast himself at her feet so hastily, as she had neither time nor
power to prevent him. But she, unwilling to let him remain in that condition,
presented him her hand, Rise Orsamus (said she) this prostrate action can
scarce obtain its pardon; your presence at this time is not unwelcome, since it
has quietted me of some fears that prepossessed me in your absence, concerning
your welfare, and the wounds you received in my defense.

These wounds (replied Orsamus) have been less cruel than those I received from
your fair eyes; they would admit of a cure, but these daily augment, without
hope of remedy. Oh! my dearest princess! I die daily, and every moment begets a
new death. If your anger has prepared me a condemnation, I will receive the
fatal doom from your mouth with a perfect and entire obedience. Believe it,
Orsamus, (replied she) you will not obtain it so easily as your imagination
flatters you; neither prehaps has my severity proceeded from the cause your
opinion has taken it. No, no; I have not been insensible of your love, nor
regardless of your merits, but have prized them both at their true value in my
breast.

Orsamus bowing his head at this discourse with a profound respect; Then,
Madam, replied he, I am not utterly lost, for if my princess vote me happy, I
will bid defiance to fortune's malice; since she cannot with all her stock of
misfortunes make me miserable. But, Madam, what shall this happy wretch do,
whose life you have preserved with such excess of generosity? what price shall
he add for the least of these divine bounties: by a fidelity, replied Cynthia,
which I value above my father's crown; and, by which till death you may
preserve that affection, whereon you establish your happiness. If that be the
means, replied Orsamus, I will be happy to my tomb, and all human
considerations shall not make me waver one moment in my inviolable loyalty.
But, Madam, continued he, after a small pause, if I may have license to ask it,
how shall we dispose of our affairs in this condition, whereinto fortune has
blindly brought us? The happy title of brother you have conferred on me, has
preserved my life and by your bounty I begin to prize it at its true value, so
that I can dare the effects of fate. But for you, my dear princess, that you
should be brought to such extremes, is that which galls my heart with
unexpressible grief. My misfortunes are become my chief felicity, but I am too
miserable in yours; you have raised me to the height of human happiness, then
gratitude calls that I should purchase your content. Fortune, spite of
herself, shall shortly give you ease, or put a period to the cause; since to
expect her to be kind, is to involve ourselves in greater dangers. Desperate
wounds must have desperate cures; extremes must be thus served, when bliss and
happiness be in danger of a wreck, boldly to dare it, bravely to preserve it.
Thou wretched rival, obstructor of my bliss, continued he with a tone somewhat
elevated, I Will give an exit to thy love and life; though guarded by a thousand
swords, nothing shall secure thee from my arms; if I fail in the attempt, I
shall have the satisfaction, that I did endeavor your quiet, though I could
not effect it.

O Sir! said Cynthia, with a timorous agitation of spirit, do not with such
rash resolution cast away your life, but consider that stroke that ends your
days gives a period to mine. -- Oh! think in the custody of what villains I
shall be left, acquainted with nothing but what is ill! Then death may fly me;
and that may be taken from me I esteem far above my life. I shall have none
then to participate in my sorrows, or revenge my quarrels, when you are gone.
Death, when all hope is past, will not fail to relieve us; fortune is full of
vicissitudes; and being unkind so long, must at last be just: that valor is
unconquerable to which discretion is joined, when wisdom directs it for the
most advantage. The caution will be pardonable, when you remember I interceded
for Cynthia's safety in the welfare of Orsamus. As yet respect seems to have
the upper hand in his thoughts, let us not abuse it to our utter destruction:
In the mean time, seek to attempt nothing but upon good mature consideration in
each others life. We may continue safe, and be good companions in adversity:
Let your carriage be circumspect, that he may not suspect you for any other
than what you seem; so you may remain secure, whilst I rest firm guarded with
my innocence. Because he has made you the agent of his love, you may feed him
with hope; for it will be dangerous to lose those advantages he hopes from you:
My carriage unto him shall be followed by your advice; and you may tell him
what your reason and wisdom accords to, is convenient; always reserving my
honor entire. And seeing Orsamus, I repose my honor in your trust, look you do
not fail my confidence. O, Madam! replied Orsamus, that life which you set so
high a prize on is not worth the care you take to preserve it; but it were no
life were it not wholly at your devotion; and being only yours, I shall be
careful not to cast that life useless away, which is reserved wholly and entire
for your interest. Your commands shall lead me by the hand, which I will
execute as far as weary life will go. 'Twere a sin, replied Cynthia, to doubt
your fidelity and the continuance may not go unrewarded. But let us leave this
discourse for some time more agreeable, and consider how to treat the pirate at
his return, which will not be long. I Will show myself somewhat kinder, that he
may conceive you have prevailed something in his behalf; and, this kindness, if
my expectation fail me not, shall purchase a relation of his life* which will
for a small time free me from his importunities, and in some sort dissipate my
misfortunes by the history of his disasters, since we naturally find a pleasure
in the rehearsal of past miseries. His respect and behavior toward us shows him
to be more than what he seems; yet this odious course makes him seem less than
what he is. His life in my apprehension, must be monstrous that walks in a
way so uncommon.

In such discourses they passed away the small time of the pirate's absence;
but fortune soon took care they should not surfeit their joys, by hastening his
return to the cabin. And having saluted Cynthia with much respect as his
mistress, and caressed Orsamus as her brother, he seated himself to participate
of their discourse, which he apprehended did tend to his advantage.

He was opening his mouth to speak, when the fair princess prevented him; and
taking the word with an air, replied, with a grace and behavior only peculiar
to herself, she began her discourse thus. "Sir, your kindness used to my
brother is no small obligation that I owe you, nor have you failed in your
purpose when you made him your solicitor; since none can more persuade my
inclination or more freely dispose of me than he; yet he, I think, will not
agree to force my will to what is repugnant. If I must love, I would have a
subject worth my affection. Such you may be if your life has been regulated and
guided by that rule formerly, as in this time since we have been your
prisoners. But the fairest fruit is not always pleasant to the taste; nor will
a wise merchant purchase commodities without a trial. We may paint the sun, but
not his warm influence; and the fire, but not its heat. -- With small trouble
you may ease me of this doubt, in relating your extraction and birth, and the
past adventures of your life."

This bold language of Cynthia put the pirate to his dumps, knowing the
relation of his life would diminish the esteem they had of him; and should he
give her a denial, he began to fear her first resolution; so that for a small
time his thoughts were upon the rack, and he sat possessed with a deep silence;
but at last recollecting himself, he made this reply.

"Madam, cease these horrible resolutions, for I find it impossible to disobey
you; you shall be satisfied with the true narration of the disasters of a
miserable wretch, injured by fortune, and pursued by fate, the relations of
which will set my wounds bleeding afresh, yet Madam, you shall be obeyed. Then
prepare yourselves with attention to receive the satisfaction you desire,
whilst I entertain you with the tragic story of my life, which if it cannot
beget love, it may produce pity.

When Orsamus and Cynthia had seated themselves with regard, in expectations of
his discourse, after he had satisfied himself in some particular niceties and
scruples of his discourse, with sadness in his looks and actions he began as
follows.

THE TRAGICAL ACCOUNT OF THE UNFORTUNATE LOVES OF ALMERIN AND DESDEMONA:
IN the Mediterranean sea is situated an island called Sicilia, renowned over
the world for the sweet wholesomness of the air, and fertility of the soil;
extolled highly by fame for the wonderful mountain Etna, there fixed; which
being always on the outside covered with snow, yet by a sulpherous or brimstone
matter does continually burn within. Oftentimes the flame mounting upwards is
so strong it brings up with it burnt and scorching stones, and pieces of hard
substances, which seem to be rent out of some rocks, to the great terror and
danger of the beholder. Report has not been idle in proclaiming the known
rarities of this isle; but above all, that so much famed city of Syracuse,
twenty-two miles in compass, walled about with three strong walls, for strength
and security; watered with many sweet springs adorned with many gardens, and
pleasant arbours; the noble buildings added to its grandeur, whose lofty towers
and turrets seemed to support the skies, retaining a majesty, and yielding a
glorious show to the eyes of the beholders. It was the mart town of the island
where ships go out, and resort thither, to and from all parts of the world,
which enriches the inhabitants.

It was this city that gave me birth; although my father had his original out
of Norway, a kingdom far hence distant, toward the frozen north, his
inclinations being more to travel strange countries than live a quiet life in
his own; when the one begets nothing but effeminateness and sloth, and the
other produces experience and valor. So that with his father's consent he took
his journey, having well stored himself with jewels and money, necessaries very
needful for such a voyage; in a few years he ranged over the greatest part of
Africa and Asia, where he saw the famous cities of Grand Cairo in Egypt, the
city ot Jerusalem in Palestina; where he did behold many rare monuments, with
the lofty pyramids. Having passed through many large dominions, at last he
arrived at Constantinople, the imperial city of the Grecian empire. Here he
spent some time, and at last took shipping there to visit the isles of the
Mediterranean sea; so that he came at last to the famous island of Sicilia,
where the pleasantness both invited and incited his longer stay and abode.

Where, by strange fortunes and unheard of chances, he was made known unto King
Sancredus, who at that time had his residence in Syracuse, in whose affection
he gained so great an esteem, as he gave his own kinswoman in marriage,
enriched him with several lordships, made him one of his council, and Governor
of the famous city of Syracuse.

I was his only son, and in this city I received my life and education. I lived
with my father in a garb befitting a prince rather than a Governor's son. All
their hope and comfort they seemed to treasure up in me. Thus I continued until
I arrived at the age of sixteen years, and became capable to receive the
impression of love.

Small time had passed away afterward before fortune presented me an object to
beget it. -- For fate had so decreed, that in a pleasant garden belonging to
the city, garnished with many private walks, among which I had chosen out one
for privacy, to retire from the scorching heat of the sun, here it was I went
to seek rest, and found eternal disquiet; for by the bank of a little rivulet,
which had a thoroughfare, and many turnings in the garden, sat a most beautiful
damsel, who had seated herself as it were to observe the secret gliding of the
murmuring stream. The place where I had retired was so ordered by nature, that
I could see, yet remain unseen. Her years might be about fourteen; her stature
tall, and comely; her face the perfect map of beauty, where the lillies and the
roses did seem to surpass in glory what nature had ever framed, or art ever
perfected; I beheld her with amazement; for never before did my eyes behold any
thing so lovely.

Thus unperceived was I conquered by this unknown beauty; and at that fatal
hour, without resistance, I became her slave, and resolved to wear her chains.

Yet how to make my addresses unto one that till then I never saw, or to talk
of love to her, both seemed gross* the first seemed too full of confidence, and
the other seemed to favor much of impudence.

But here fortune supplied this want, and at first seemed to court me; but it
was only to drill me into greater miseries; for no sooner I saw her rise from
the place where she sat, but I made toward her, from the place where I lay
concealed, when behold this charming beauty was surprised by an unknown
stranger, who with expressions of joy uttered these words; "Fortune, I defy thy
further malice, and dare my fate to make a second relapse in my desires" -- So
that by force, in spite of her resistance, taking her delicate body rudely in
his arms, he began with a more than ordinary pace to convey her to a
neighboring thicket. My eyes had never left her, but were wholly employed and
fixed on this insolent action, performed on so lovely a creature. I needed no
solicitors but her cries to prepare me for a revenge; and it was but a few
moments betwixt the resolution and the execution; for with the utmost
diligence I pursued him by the same track I saw him pass. Such expedition I
made that my haste outwent his speed, and my fury overtook him before I had
time to consult with reason; so that without demanding any questions, I run him
through the body, and he not having disburthened himself of his fair prey, fell
down, clasping her in his deadly arms.

The first thing I did was to free her from him, which with some trouble I
performed. -- After I had set her at liberty from that danger, and her frighted
spirits returned to her again, she fell down at my feet, and embracing my knee,
Sir, said she, this sudden assistance persuades me to esteem you as the genius
of my better fortune, since you have by timely redemption preserved what is
more precious to me than that we prize most dear.

Her tears and sweet speeches transformed me from my usual temper; and I could
not behold her in that mournful posture without participating in her sorrows;
so that taking her in my arms, I returned her this answer: Madam, I rejoice in
being made the happy cause of preserving you, if I have obliged you in this
action, I have a satisfaction above what I could hope, and fortune has been
kind above my hopes, in affording an opportunity to manifest my affection. O
Madam! blame me not when I reveal I love you. If you think I have obliged you,
Oh! pay it in love, and I shall soon become the debtor; and talk not of death,
when the gods detest thy propositions; but think lovely creature, if so much
beauty can be without pity, and yield no redress to my love, death will be
kinder than you, and yield a remedy when you deny it.

This said, I set my sword against my breast, saying, here Madam, is that, that
will yield relief in necessity; and seeing I cannot live without love, I will
endeavor in death to gain your pity; and if my love is become an offense, this
very sword shall make satisfaction, and destroy that life that gave it birth.
She no sooner saw this desperate offer at my life, but casting an eye of pity
on my rashness. Oh! hold, says she, that fatal weapon, the cruel disturber of
my quiet! and think, whoever you be, what an error I must commit in yielding to
love one who till this moment I never saw: and how shall I forget paternal duty
to give myself away without their knowledge. Consider what an obligation will
lie on you, when I rely upon your promise of fidelity to preserve my honor
entire; and how the gods will punish you if you prove purjur'd.

Virtuous lady, replied I, you wrong my love to think it base, and my integrity
to imagine I may prove unconstant. No, no Madam, your charms are too strong to
be rivalled by any other objects, and affection too entire to be deceived by
any other beauty. Because you shall not be obliged to love one you know not,
and to esteem one that till this moment you never saw; to disperse those
doubts, know my name is Almerin, the only son of Artmedorus governor of this
famous city of Syracuse; never before unfortunate, if you prove pitiless; never
before happy, if you become kind. If ever I endeavor to violate your honor, or
think to commit so great a sacrilege on your virtue, let all the gods rain down
vengeance on my head for my disloyalty, and let the heavens be witness to what
I promise.

Oh hold! said she, swear not by that; cankers may eat a flower on the stalk:
and when in these cheeks and lips which you extol so high, shall not be left
red enough to blush at perjury, when you shall make it, what will become of me
then?

O Madam! replied I, cease those doubts* and dissipate such needless fear; the
sun shall as soon faulter in his career, the stars drop from their places,
where they have of old been fixed; the earth shall remove, nature shall alter
her course, and all impossibilities shall be performed, when I prove disloyal.

These protestations did give her some satisfaction; and prevailed so far with
her, that she suffered me to enjoy the privilege to accompany her to her
parent's house, which was within the city. When we came thither she gave her
friends to understand the timely assistance I gave her, as also my birth and
quality, and authority in the city. They no sooner received this relation from
their daughter, but they bade me welcome, and caressed me with the greatest
endearments. My entertainment was extraordinary: but the kindness that was
bestowed on me was not after the lofty court mode, but most familiarly, as if I
had been a near relation to them, and gave me thanks in the most obliging terms
for the kindness conferred on their daughter, which I could receive without a
blush. Here it was I learned his name was Philaster, an aged knight, that lived
there many years; that his fair daughter was his only child, whose name was
Desdemona.

In several discourses we passed away the time while supper lasted, where the
chiefest delicacies I fed on was Desdemona's beauty; and indeed it was she
alone made all things seem pleasant.

Supper being ended; and the evening far spent I began to prepare for my
departure. After I had bade farewell to the old knight and his lady, I began to
order myself to take leave of the fair Desdemona, and in this manner I accosted
her, "Fairest of creatures, let not absence beget a neglect in my love, but
think of the torments I endure; and though necessity enforces me to leave you,
yet think how all places will seem a hell when you are absent; and that you
bring a heaven of felicities, whenever your fair self does appear. O Desdemona!
I must leave you; yet shall I tell you, a poor criminal never went to execution
with more reluctance than this cruel parting seems to me, since I must leave
all my happiness with you, and go away accompanied only with my torments and
miseries." I had proceeded farther, but I saw some attentive to understand what
I said.

Desdemona returned me no answer, but a blush. And after I had with an extacy
sealed a kiss on her fair hand, I took my leave; yet not before the old knight
and his lady desired me that I would honor them so much as to further oblige
them with a visit. This compliment over, I was conducted, and accompanied by
them all to the door where stood a chariot richly adorned to convey me to my
father's house. Here it was I parted from them, and bid the first farewell to
myself. I was no sooner arrived at my father's house, but was welcomed by the
greatest kindnesses that might be, my presence diverting the fear of any
dangers that might befall me. They began to enquire how I passed the evening so
late; but I had a story ready that gave them satisfaction. After a while I gave
them good night, and betook myself to rest.

But small rest, heaven knows, it was I could take: my fancy formed the idea of
fair Desdemona; and it was only these thoughts that did give a small cessation
to my torments.

In this sort I passed away the time, thinking the night exceeded its usual
length, exclaiming against Phoebus for his sluggish approach; and yet when he
did appear, how often have I wished his absence! so that night seemed a
vexation, and day a torment. Some few days passed, and what for want of
sustenance in the day, and for want of rest in the night, my spirits began to
decay, and my body fore-weakened; my color faded away, and my youthful vigor
abated, so that I was but an emblem of what I had been. My careful parents
wondered at this sudden alteration and change; the physicians were sent for,
but their conjectures came far short of the disease; every one gave his
judgment as fancy and opinion gave them birth, but all came short of the
symptoms of my disease. My careful parents never forsook my pillow, seeking to
search out the cause of this distemper, that so they might provide a remedy.

Perhaps you wonder I did not reveal my love to them at such a time when there
was a possibility of having my desires granted.

Fairest lady, said he looking upon Cynthia, you will not marvel, nor have
occasion to blame me, when you understand that about six weeks before I was
betrothed, by my parents consent, to a fair damsel named Artemesia, second
daughter to the earl of Palermo. Indeed I think she was more noble than fair,
yet her beauty was not so mean but it might have satisfied my nicety, had I
never beheld the bewitching charms of fair Desdemona. -- 'Twas on this fatal
marriage I was destinated a victim to my parents will, not my desires. I knew
my father to be a man too passionate, and not to be altered by persuasions in
his proceedings. Besides, this marriage seemed to augment and agree with his
ambition; and his being allied to so great a lord, no mean honor. He was
obstinate in his humors, nor could reason make him reverse what he had
decreed; but especially those he imagined did tend to further and advance his
aspiring ambition. These were the unhappy causes that I did not reveal to them
the affection I had for the fair Desdemona.

As nothing continues always in one state and condition, so my distemper began
to abate, and my weakened body began to recover a little strength; yet in my
mind I received no comfort, since my dearest physician was absent. -- Phoebus
had scarce run his career thrice in this upper world, and lodged himself in the
western ocean, but I left my bed: and though I was extremely feeble, yet I did
endeavor to walk, and the first small journey I made, was secretly to
Desdemona. I had no sooner set my face toward that part of the city, but mark
the wonderful effects! although my body was weak, yet methought in every step I
went toward her I received new strength; when I arrived, and entered the
house, my body became as if it had been inspired with a new soul; and well it
might, since it was there alone the felicity and content, which was the extacy
and rapture of my soul, did reside.

Such unthought of alteration had my small time of sickness begotten on me,
that none in the house could hardly discern who I might be; but these thoughts
were silenced when I revealed myself; so that they seemed to be possessed with
amazement rather than unbelief. In a few moments all their suspicions were
vanished, so that I was entertained with their accustomed kindnesses. In a few
moments fair Desdemona did appear; and although she was forewarned by some in
the house, yet in her first approach she could not contain from wonder. She
bade me welcome as her deliverer, not as lover; yet did her eyes speak pity to
my disasters; and then her looks seemed a sovereign balsam to expel the worst
of miseries: what shall I say, it was here my sickness took its birth, and it
was here I had the only remedy to expel it.

After dinner the old knight and his lady, with fair Desdemona, invited me to
take a walk into a fair garden adjoining their house, beautified with shady
arbours, where nature was helped by art to make the work more exquisite, and
was adorned with many pleasant walks.

But in the midst of the garden was a house of pleasure, the fairest for
workmanship that ever I beheld; so that nature grew envious that art should
excel her, endeavoring with fine shady trees, and what sweet summer's livery
wears, to conceal it from the eyes of the spectators, when the pretty birds
that harbor in those boughs seem to cross her intents with their melodious
notes, inviting the eyes of the beholder not to leave so rare a work unseen.

Into this garden I accompanied them, where we had some discourse on different
subjects, which I think impertinent, and nothing relating to the story of my
life. Thus having passed away some time, Philaster and his lady retired
themselves into the house of pleasure before related, and left Desdemona only
to entertain me. This opportunity fell out above my thoughts; and being
unwilling to lose so fair a time, as we walked along the alleys I began this
discourse.

Fairest Desdemona, I cannot tell whether I should say you are more kind than
cruel, or whether you are more fair than I am miserable. See, my divine lady,
behold I die alive; and what is more cruel than living death? cannot you pity
one that dies for love? O, pierce my heart! It is the nobler way, and let me
not live in such torments.

Sir, said she, I am not insensible of your love, nor do I take any pleasure in
your torments; I would I could perform the one as willingly as I can the other,
you should not languish for a remedy. If a return of love and compassion can
give you ease, I can pity; if that be too low, I can grieve; if this will not
do, O think, sir, in what bands you are bound not to violate my honor. Oh! seek
not to ruin this, and command all things besides I am able to perform.

O Madam, replied I, heaven send those punishments on my head I so lately did
invocate, if I intend dishonor to you person. No, Madam, it is lawful marriage I
desire; and what is more honorable? This way you may securely give cessation to
my torments, and not injure your chastity. Oh! think if you can pity, as you
give me to understand you can; be not cruel to let me pine away with sorrow,
when you are the only physician that can give me a remedy.

I had scarce finished these last words but old Philaster, and his lady, left
the place where they had remained during our discourse; and their too sudden
approach robbed me of Desdemona's answer. So that we made toward them; and
joining our company and discourse with theirs, we passed away the residue of
that time, fortune not offering me that day another opportunity where I might
with secrecy renew our discourse. After a while we left our diversion,
Philaster forsook the garden, and we attended him in, where we spent the
remainder of the day. I then took my leave of my charmer. And although my desires
were frustrated, and my intentions prevented of speaking unto her, by reason of
her parents being present; yet my eyes and countenance severely spoke the
language of my heart. And as far as I could perceive I did not find she had any
aversion for my love.

With this hope of good fortune I gave Philaster the goodnight, and returned
secretly to my father's, where they all wondered at my long absence, yet glad
to see me recovered so well, wondering from whence the cause of such a sudden
sickness should arise, also at so uncommon a recovery; but leaving them to
conjectures, I went to my chamber, where I passed the night in a different
manner from what I had formerly done, my hopes now having overcome my despair.
In such pleasing thoughts the hours passed away; yet not so swift but I could
number them, and think them slow in going. I arose and attired myself with a
more than ordinary curiosity; building many hopes in expectation of what the
following day might bring forth, and the hour approaching wherein visits are
accustomed to be given, I took my way to Philaster's house. As my visits were
become more common, I was esteemed a less stranger, and my entertainment was
more familiar and friendly: so that after some discourse had passed, I
requested the favor of Philaster that I might take the privilege to pass some
small time away in his fair garden: which request was kindly granted, himself
intending to accompany me; when behold, as we were entering the garden, he was
sent for by a messenger, that informed him that his brother did attend him,
desiring some conferrences with him about earnest occasions that would not
admit of delay; so after pleading necessity for his untimely parting, he left
me.

Half an hour had not passed since I entered the garden, but I saw fair
Desdemona, who was sent by her father to entertain me in his absence. I made
toward her with much respect, and she accosted me with as kind a reception,
with such innocence as might seem to bring in compass the extravagant thoughts
of any but myself.

Here it was we betrothed ourselves to each other and registered our vows in
heaven. -- Here it was I could not bound my joy, and consequently my passion;
so that I could not retain from folding her delicate body in my arms, giving
and receiving many a sweet kiss on her ruby lips. In this rapture of ravishment
we spent the time, till Sol with his scorching beams, forced us to retire into
that house of pleasure beforementioned. This proved a defense against the
heat, and a cover to act our loves more securely. Here we did double our kisses
and embraces, while the pretty birds did seem to participate my happiness. The
favors she then conferred on me could not yield content and satisfaction to my
desires, but served only to beget a confidence to presume to purchase greater,
and aspire to higher felicities. So that from the familiar conversation I began
to request the fruition of that love I then enjoyed: and following my requests
with such entreaties and importunities, with a promise of never failing
fidelity, urged by such strong persuasions, and resisted with such faint
denials, that I came to the yielding up of that fort, which the greatest kings
might envy me the conquest of; in the enjoyment of which imperial monarchs
would have accounted it the highest felicity; all which was wholly prostrated
to my raging passion and lustful desires.

The kisses, embraces and endearments, were almost numberless, our discourse
treating wholly of our loves and servent affections of the day of marriage.
Thus we spent our time in a paradise of pleasure; passing these few minutes we
stayed there in such felicity as might well be termed the chiefest happiness of
lover's bliss.

But to defer your expectation no longer, I Will go forward in my discourse, and
give you to understand, that after I had quitted old Philaster's hospitality
and kindness, with the these of his daughter's honor, and against the vows I
had made, by inticements and deceit, I had forgotten the fairest jewel in
Desdemona's wardrobe, we saw him and his lady enter the garden. With all
expedition we forsook our delights, and descended down a private pair of
stairs, unseen of them, being shaded by the friendly trees, which, in the time
of our delights, seemed to stand as watchmen to defend us, and now a screen to
secure us. This way we passed, left they might suspect what indeed was true,
and so prepared to meet them accidentally. Here we joined company and discourse
with them, and passed away the residue of time till dinner was brought in, upon
which notice was given, we left the garden, and spent the remainder of that day
altogether in diversion, till night began to approach, and urged my departure;
and returning them many thanks for their civilities and kindnesses, I took my
leave of Philaster and his lady; and having saluted Desdemona with a promise of
a sudden return to require her in marriage of her parents, according to my vows
in the garden, I left her, and with her all my joys.

I soon arrived at my father's house, but I found him inquisitive above his
usual manner, to know where I had passed away my time these three days past; my
absence having begot a suspicion in him of what indeed was true; and sudden
sickness, seconded with as quick a recovery, did confirm him: so that seeing me
well recovered, and almost in as good a state of health as when I first fell
sick, he began his discourse to me in this manner.

Son, your sudden health cannot give me more joy than the extraordinary cause
gives me suspicion, lest in your carriage, which has been so reserved to me,
you should act any thing which should fall contrary to my intentions and
desires. You know the time will draw shortly near when you must marry your
contracted bride, fair Artimesia; one which is fortunate as fair, and as wise
as fortunate; one, my son, that will raise thee to a high esteem of high
honors, which is the mistress young gallants court. And by the alliance of so
great a lord, we shall be made shot-free against the strongest batteries of
fortune.

"Sir, (said I) your suspicions are not grounded amiss: if you suspect I love,
and if I be a criminal in making it a secret unto you, forgive and pardon me
when I shall make a real confession. Yes, Sir, I do love, and with that ardour
and affection, with that constancy and fidelity, as death cannot divert my
inclinations: and should you make a separation, or imagine an alteration, know,
Sir, my vows are registered in heaven, which if you once endeavor to violate,
expect the punishment may attend your endeavors. You may command my life,
since you give it me; but my soul, it is the gift of the gods."

This discourse, uttered with as much boldness as confidence, began to raise a
storm in my father's countenance; for the form of his visage began to overcast
with frowns, and all his actions beclouded over with anger. So that casting a
frowning look on me, enough to daunt me, had not my love made me proof against
his fury, and confident to sustain his utmost charge.

Villain, replied he, and shame to thy blood, dare you justify and vindicate
that which is contrary to my intentions? or can your disobedience own what I
have an aversion against? Shall my hopes be thwarted by your extravagant youth,
and my purposes frustrated by your ill-placed love? Curse on your willful
obstinacy, which puts me into this unusual passion; and your boldness, that
durst give me this relation. Ungoverned young man! Can you think this
giddy-headed youth, subject to all passions, and pliable to all impressions,
should better know how to govern his passions and direct his actions, than his
aged sire? Can he better choose for his good, than one who has so often been
acquainted and concerned with the vicissitudes and changes of this nature? No,
no, young man, you yet want that experience, which is always the best
schoolmaster, and the mistress of understanding. Your youth is unruly, and
like a headstrong horse that will run himself on any danger, without he be
surely curbed: so you grow bold and impudent, daring any precipice so you may
possess your unbounded desires; but know I Will curb you from these
extravagancies, and retain you from these wild wandering thoughts; and if I
have been too indulgent, for the future you shall find me as severe: and so
avoid my sight, that by the want of duty art become a grief to my eyes, and a
vexation to my soul, and see that at our next meeting you show not the least
aversion against your marriage with Artimesia; but that you bound your love and
desires in the compass of my will, and that you tread no strange path, but that
you reform and recollect yourself first, by taking your rules from me, and not
resolutely (...) run yourself headlong to ruin, and me dishonor: but if you
have any extravagant love, destroy it whilst it is young in the bud; and learn
to forget it before you come to the knowledge of what it is. Return no answer
to justify what I must condemn; but regulate your ways and life by my
directions, and having so sure a guide, you cannot err or go astray* but if you
continue still obstinate and audacious in your proceedings, you shall find I
will disinherit you both of my love and estate, and make account of you but as
a stranger, and a rebel to my blood.

Having said this, he left me and departed. But alas! how can I describe to you
the grief that did seize on me at that time, when Desdemona came to my
remembrance, and my father's cruelty was fresh in my memory. Oh! how was I torn
between love and duty! now it was love that led me in a maze so difficult and
intricate, that my best endeavors could not keep me from ruin. To go forward
was dangerous; but to return backward did show more perilous.

Such Madam, was my desperate condition: my sweetest hopes began to leave me,
horror, despair began to possess, and fear razed out the expectation of a more
happy change. This confirmed me in the ominous presage that did befall me in my
return homeward from my dearest Desdemona.

After I had well weighed and considered all the difficulties on either side
that might befall me. I resolved at last that my love should reign supreme, and
remain entire to fair Desdemona; but yet withal, that I would show a yielding
consent to my father's will in my marriage with Artimesia; and like a
warterman, that rows one way, and looks another, yet brings the boat to the
desired place: so I endeavored by this policy, seeming to accord with my
father's desires, when my inclinations roved a contrary course; and whilst
openly I did comply with him, inwardly I might procure my own content;
flattering myself, that as fortune had made so sudden a change in my happiness,
in some small time she might beget as great an alteration in my misfortunes,
and at last bring me to the period of my desires: of which, though I had small
cause to hope, yet I did not wholly despair.

I did further resolve not to acquaint Desdemona with my father's resolution,
lest it might beget her discontent. I began to repent of revealing to my father
what I should have kept secret, and resolved to conceal my passion for the
future, since I had only given manifestation of love, and not of the person
beloved, which I did expound as one happy presage of my fortunate proceeding.
This way I had fixed on, since I had no other wherein I might walk with more
security. Nor did my hopes altogether fail me; for by my crasty wiles, the next
time I accosted my father, I had set on so strange a face on my former
proceedings, showing myself so dutiful and pliant to all his intents and
purposes, as begat wonder in him when he did behold it. He questioned of me who
this object might be, to whom I did show so great, and seemed to have so firm
an affection not long since, which now I did seem to slight.

I understood very well the subtleness and craft he used, and how like myself
his actions were working one way, and his desires another, but both agreed to
entrap me in my dearest secret. But Old birds are not caught with chaff; for he
could not closely work his mine to deceive me, but I as privately made my
countermine to blow up, which I performed in this manner.

"Sir, replied I, you were too passionate in you last discourse, and what I
proposed only to try your inclinations, how you would have allowed of a change,
if I could have admitted of an alteration; this you took to be a verity, and
too severely rebuked me for what was only a fiction; and allowing me only one
moment of time, wherein I might disable you in your error, and ask your pardon
for my over confident presumption, in raising so great a tempest from so small
a cause, and that I have not, nor never will, fix my affections without your
approbation.

This compliance to his will, so contrary to his expectations, began to work
wonders in his mind, when my artifice had persuaded him that all my former
discourses and protestations were mere deceit; so that instead of continuing so
fierce in his proceedings he became more mild, his choler abated, he left
accusing me, and began to excuse himself. I soon laid hold of this opportunity,
aggravating his mistake, yet by always wherein any likelihood did appear
exempting myself from blame. And so far did I insinuate myself into his soul,
of my innocence in the cause that he suspected me, that my deceit became
approved verities, and what I could relate in my defense received as undoubted
truths: so that I think he never parted from me with a greater show of love and
satisfaction than at this time.

Whether this occasioned my father's enquiry to cease I cannot tell, but I well
know I deceived him in his own craft, and over-wrought him in his own device.
Neither did I in words alone confirm him in his belief, but manifested the same
in my carriage and actions; so that a week or ten days passed away in this
manner before I did offer in the least to absent myself from my father's house.
After which time I did secretly and privately many times visit and converse
with my Desdemona, but I made my visits much shorter, which was soon perceived
and taken notice of by Desdemona, who urged a consummation of our marriage;
fearing as indeed afterward it happened, that some unhappy obstruction might
defer it. I comforted her amidst these fears with my promise of loyalty, and
with my best endeavors to gain my father's consent; which if I should fail of,
I firmly engaged to perform all the rights of marriage at the end of one month
from thence next ensuing. We agreed, lest my often resort should beget
jealousies of that, which as yet her parents had no mistrust, that by a secret
way into the garden I should have access at certain times, when I might
secretly enter; which to perform we appointed a time at our parting, or else by
a certain token of a handkerchief that gave me assurance that I might securely
pass.

By such secret and unmistrusted paths, I often times visited my dearest lady,
who received me with as kind endearments; where I oftentimes enjoyed, without
control, the happy felicity and fruition of her love.

In these bitter sweets, and stolen pleasures, some three months had passed
since I first saw Desdemona, and almost one since I had made her the last
promise of wedlock. Now the time began to draw near to confirm by marriage,
what I had already performed by contract with Artimesia. And now alas! my
dearest Desdemona found herself conceived and quick with child. In neglecting
the first I was sure to procure my father's displeasure; but in the latter,
before God and man, I could not quit myself of the grievous ingratitude. -- In
the first my ignorance might excuse me; but to the latter I could plead no
excuse, since my vows to Desdemona proceeded from my very soul, and no doubt
had reached the gates of heaven; when my contract with Artimesia proceeded only
of course, and in satisfaction of my father's humor, and not for any
inclination to love on my own part. So I resolved to continue firm and constant
to Desdemona, and procure my own content, in hazarding my father's displeasure
rather than to satisfy his ambition with my own torment.

The time approached in sight wherein I must be married to Artimesia, but not
the least remembrance was given me by my father for a preparation; so that I
began to bury the though it of it in forgetfulness; thinking some difference had
lately happened between my father and Artimesia's parents; so that I began to
account myself secure as to that.

But a change of fortune soon put me out of that mind; for one morning, when I
did little suspect such deceit, my father desired me to array myself in my best
attire, and wait on him to the great temple of the city. This I performed with
great willingless, not mistrusting that any deceit or treachery had lain hid in
his request; and before I could find the plot, I found myself ship-wrecked on a
rock. I was no sooner ready but I attended him to church, only accompanied with
my mother, who was of his confederacy. We soon arrived at the temple, yet with
more haste then good speed: for I was no sooner entered, but to my amazement I
saw the earl of Palermo, with his daughter Artimesia, with all his and my
father's friends attending him, richly attired, and the priest standing ready
to join our hands. They all came to receive and welcome me with much respect;
but my amazement would not let me receive their kind endearments with a
behavior as I ought to have done; for it was such a strange, disagreeable and
unacceptable sight, that I could not suddenly recover from my astonishment;
rather thinking it to be a dream or a fiction, than any thing else. My father
came and roused me from this trance; "Son, said he, wonder not at what you see,
but recollect yourself, and embrace your fortune. Surprises in love make the
enjoyment of greater value. And this business was managed by me, that a
blessing that falls on you unexpected, might be by you more prized and
esteemed. Cease your marvel then and accost those friends with respect that are
ready to receive you."

His discourse being ended, and the company expecting an answer I replied, I
must confess Artimesia is a fortune above my hopes or deserts; yet such a one
as I cannot with safety possess, lest by enjoying such a happiness, I should
enforce heaven to make her wretched and miserable for my sake. For to put you
out of doubt, know I am betrothed already to one that is as virtuous as fair;
with whom I have tied such an inviolable knot, that it is past the art of man
to unloose it without provoking the gods to revenge: there is no promise but I
have made it, no protestation but I have performed it, no ceremony but I have
signed it, nor is there any obligation or vow but I have sealed it. Heaven has
joined our hearts, this can only join our hands. In this, reason will tell you
I have shown no disobedience; since, as I lately told you, heaven gave me a
soul, and it is only that I have disposed of with its consent; my body is yet
free which you gave me: but it may as well survive without a soul as revoke the
vows I have lately made. My affection is so entire, that if all things admit of
charge, it cannot be subject to alteration. And should death itself approach I
should continue firm in the grave.

I had continued my discourse, but my father hastily interrupting me, drew his
sword, and presenting it to my breast, Die thou rebellious villain, said he,
and enjoy the fruits of thy labor in the dust. This action was no sooner taken
notice of by Artimesia, but she freed herself from her father; and casting
herself before my father's weapon, hold, said she, barbarous and unnatural man,
and pierce this breast, it will show less horrid and inhuman. This unexpected
action, with his friends persuasions and entreaties, made him sheath his sword,
whilst a salamander did seem to live in his eyes, which shot forth fire like a
murdering cannon that it lightens ere it smokes. Wicked wretch, said he, I
disown thee from this hour from being my son, and revoke all ties and
privileges that love or nature has given thee; and do not dare from this
minute to assume the confidence to appear in my presence, as thou tenderest thy
life and safety. Having said this, he left me in a rage.

My father was no sooner departed, but poor Artimesia received a check from her
parents for her too much diligence and care in preserving me, who did slight
and neglect her; and that it rather pertained to my friends to have
interceeded, and diverted the blow, than herself.

My mother, with my relations, came and importuned me not to continue so
obstinate, with many entreaties and persuasions, urged the danger I cast myself
into, by bringing on my head my father's displeasure.

I was hitherto miserable, but I was more wretched in being beloved by
Artimesia. If her love and affection had not been so great, there might have
been hopes that my coldness might have begot an aversion in her toward me. But
like a merchant over charged with debt, when he begins to fail, all things
agree to ruin him; so that he only knows then to be wretched, and they from
whom he hopes any relief, most times conspire, and agree to his ruin. And as
the Persians adore the rising sun, and curse it again ere the day be half
spent, so fortune seems to court the man who flourishes in prosperity and
scornfully neglects him when he falls into adversity.

This was the last blow, and I utterly undone. For upon notice of my consent,
my father returned with Artimesia, and the earl of Palermo her father, where,
in the midst of a great throng of people, which this disturbance had brought
together, the priest joined our hands; the usual ceremonies were performed with
great state, which being once ended, I was attended by my father's friends, and
a very great company of citizens to my father's house, where, with, music,
dancing and feasting, they passed away the residue of the day; and the night
approached, when my father, with the earl of Palermo, conducted us to our
lodging, where they left us, as they imagined, to make a new banquet of
pleasures. But they were no sooner departed out of the chamber, taking her by
the hand, "Madam, said I, this body you have so virtuously preserved, is but a
poor recompense in consideration of the danger you underwent for my sake, and I
fear you will soon grow weary of what so lately you had an esteem for, since I
am become a burden and torment to myself, and by consequence in the use may
prove so to you. O Artimesia! thou enjoyest this wretched and miserable part of
me, the body, when my soul is bestowed elsewhere: thou have only the shadow of
what I am, when another enjoys the substance. How, for your sake only, could I
wish love were no mathematic point, but would admit of diversion, that in some
sort I might quit the obligation that I owe you! O cruel parents! you are too
kind to procure my discontent, and give me no medicine to dissipate it.

Poor Artimesia, stood dissolved in tears at my discourse; and, although I
could not love, yet I could not continue insensible of her miseries, nor
refrain participating in griefs which had their original from me.

Oh! how I was wrecked by my conscience that ensuing night, which presented my
ingratitude in lively colors! the day approached, but to no other end but to
renew my miseries, and make my perfidiousness seem the greater. Artimesia, with
her kind and sweet speeches, and lovely behavior, did endeavor to divert the
melancholy discontents; and this seemed another dagger to pierce my breast,
since I could make no return for such a mine of love.

Two days had passed away since my marriage with Artimesia, and the third
approached, wherein I had given my faith to marry Desdemona. The remembrance
wrought so strong on my affections, that I intended to write and excuse myself,
lest she might think, by my neglect, I performed that willingly, that I was
enforced to do by necessity; so that taking pen, I wrote and sent her the
letter by one that did attend me, of whom I had often made trial of his
fidelity; to whom I revealed all the particulars which happened to Desdemona
and myself, and of the continuance of our loves. It is some comfort in our
miseries when we have a partner in our sorrows; one that will participate in
our griefs, and to whom with confidence we may reveal our closest secrets. Such
an one was this man, whose name ought not to be concealed in this story;
Fidelio was his name, and it well suited his nature. I gave him directions to
the garden gate, with charge to remain there till he saw Desdemona enter. Away
he went to execute what I commanded him, whilst I with an earnest expectation
waited an answer. Fidelio, long expected at last returned. I no sooner saw him,
but I endeavored to read my destiny in his looks; but I beheld there a sad
omen to attend me. Yet with an earnest desire, accompanied with timorous
apprehensions, I thus bespoke him. Fidelio, do thou intend to make me linger
away in expectation, and silence with that which being revealed, will kill as
soon as know? What is Desdemona's sentence; be it happiness or misery, joy or
sorrow, life or death, nothing can be bitter or harsh that she commands; but I
shall be all obedience. I am loath to suspect where I love, yet it is not
without pain I expect your answer, I am earnest you should reveal what perhaps
I would not know; yet I would fain know the worst, that I might be freed from
the fear of worse to come.

He returned me no answer; but drawing a letter from his bosom, Sir, said he,
here is that will give a better account of your fortune than myself; peruse it;
after which I will give you a relation of the particulars that happened in this
small time of absence.

I had no leisure for a reply; but taking her letter, hastily opened it, and
read lines, which, while I live, I shall retain and keep in my memory.

Her words, like a dart, wounded my very soul. Her innocent sweetness made my
infidelity appear more notorious. Fidelio, to perfect the grievousness of my
own crimes, at my request related these few particulars.

Sir, said he, according to your order and directions, I staid at the garden
gate some time: but it was not long before I saw Desdemona enter, and with her
presence, like another sun, did dazzle the eyes of the beholders. Her attire
was negligent and careless; her countenance seemed to be clouded with sweet
melancholy sadness, fitly suited to her thoughts; and though all were shadowed
and overcast with a veil of grief, yet she seemed charming, since it did only
serve that we might behold her perfections at a nearer distance, and her
virtues more apparent and plain; so we may face the sun when he is clouded,
which in a clear day we dare not approach with our eyes. Such was her grief, it
would make one in love with sadness; and such her gesture, it would make one
welcome sorrow.

Ravished with this apparition, I knocked at the gate; which I had scarce done,
but like a goddess she appeared, and fixed her eyes upon my face, perhaps
presaging me to be some harbinger of ill news; quickly recollecting herself,
"Sir, said she, are you not mistaken, have you any business with any person
here? this is no common way, and it gives me some cause of wonder how you came
here."

I answered, "Madam, it was not a mistake that bro't me hither, nor by chance
that I appear before you, but expressly and on purpose. I was sent to you by
Almerin, the governor's son of Syracuse, with a letter, with a charge to
deliver it into your hands." With these words I delivered her your letter;
which I had no sooner done, but I perceived she was possessed with an usual
agitation and emotion of spirit; sometimes the roses of her cheeks were
overcast with a lovely red, and suddenly they vanished and gave way to the
lillies to possess their places. She kissed the letter, earnestly enquired of
your health, to which, when I had given her an answer, she entreated me to walk
into the garden; and so shutting the door, she retired herself into a private
arbor, where opening the letter, she began to read, whilst I seated myself to
behold her.

When on a sudden all former signs of joy vanished; her visage was overcast
with a fatal disturbance; her breast began to pant, and a shower of tears began
to fall from her fair eyes, which hung on her cheeks like pearly dew on a sweet
smelling rose; such were her actions, that they would have induced the wild
satyrs and fierce beasts to pity. She showed nothing of rashness in her
carriage; but reserving her complaints mildly, till her spirits being
overcharged with sorrow, forsook her, so that letting your letter fall, she
fell into a deadly trance, without any motion, or hopes of life remaining. I
ran hastily to catch her before she fell, but came too late; so that falling,
she seated herself on a bed of violets, which seemed to close and hang down
their heads at this fatal misfortune.

Then it was I cursed you for your perfidiousness to so sweet a creature. Heaven
only knows the extremes of grief I then endured. I could not go out of the
garden and leave her in that forlorn condition, yet to stay was perilous to my
life; but my pity overcame my fear, so that running to a fountain in the
garden, and taking cold water in my hand, I sprinkled it on her face; and
taking her lovely body in my arms, I softly began to blow her; so that opening
her fair eyes, and sending two or three heartbreaking sighs, as a token of her
soul's return to her body, which was loath, as it seemed, to leave so fair a
habitation.

When her senses began to execute their proper function and duty, casting her
eyes on me, taking notice I had her in my arms, Sir, said she, I perceive I
have been a trouble to you, for which I beg your pardon, and entreat you to
assist me to yonder house (showing me a place situate in the midst of the
garden) so that raising her up, I supported her by the arm; first taking up
your letter, I conducted her to the house, where she wrote the letter I now
delivered you, and sealing it, gave it me in these words, Tell him I wish him
happiness and felicity; for myself, tell him I shall hardly find any but in the
grave. So descending the stairs, I attended her to the gate; and taking my
leave, I left her, bewailing your ingratitude.

Thus Fidelio ended his discourse, and confirmed what he had said to be nothing
but verity. I could not refrain from participating with him, and hate myself,
since she continued still to love me; for all my perjury and infidelity,
betraying and abusing so much innocence, Desdemona sends me word she loves me
still, and shall do so in death; she forgives me too, more than I can forgive
myself; yet this was the same Desdemona whose goodness and kindness I so much
abused, her harmless innocence began to set a higher price on her virtues in my
soul than formerly I had for her beauties. I began to know the worth of the
treasure I had forgone, and found the value to surmount all esteem.

Now all my thoughts and desires became wholly engaged to tender an ample
satisfaction, in recompense of the injuries I had occasioned her, but I found
my desires were all fruitless, and that my best performance would be of no
value, while Artimesia remained as an obstacle to obstruct my intentions. It
was here the agents of hell solicited and assisted me in this tragical design,
so that her death was concluded in a moment; nothing remained but the means how
to effect it.

As formerly I was black with perjury, now I began to plot how to be red with
murder, in taking away the innocent and guiltless life of one that not five
days before had preserved mine; but reason and consideration were banished; no
thoughts remained but how to accomplish what I had so barbarously begun. I had
thought of many ways how to bring it about, but poison at last I resolved on. I
was loath to trust any one with a secret of so great a consequence, whereon my
life depended; so that I went myself to an apothecary in the city, of whom for
a few crowns I purchased the fatal potion, and went to perform my fatal
resolution.

Being come to my father's, I found poor Artimesia indisposed in her bed; and
going to visit her in her chamber, I set down by her, where casting her arms
about my neck, and bestowing many a sweet kiss on me, with endearments so
obliging, that if hell had not conspired her ruin, sure it would have turned
the current of my barbarous design. Much discourse passed till she desired to
take a little rest, so kissing her, I left her to her repose; but taking notice
of a posset that was preparing on the fire, the maid being busy about her
mistress; like a fiend of hell, I hastily and unseen emptied the poison in it,
and so departed away undescried. About half an hour after, this envenomed drink
was administered unto her, which spreading itself by degrees into all parts of
her vital spirits, which, with its force, soon made a separation betwixt the
soul and the body and left her a breathless corpse. The rumor of her sudden
death begat an admiration to whom it was related. Accompanied with father and
mother, I went to see her lifeless trunk, not without tears in my eyes; but I
cannot safely say whether it was in deceit, the better to cover my villainy, or
the woeful object presented to my eyes; but for one, or either, or both
together, many sighs of sorrow I made. Mean while messages were sent to my
father-in-law, the earl of Palermo, with the heavy tidings of his daughter's
untimely death. They arrived at the house about the evening; but the
lamentations and moans they made over the untimely hearse of their dear child
were numberless. They were not without doubts and mistrusts about the sudden
occasion of her death; but having no light whereon they might build or ground a
suspicion, it vanished as soon as it received birth. After nature had paid her
tribute in paternal tears, her body was carefully coffined up, and in two days,
the same company that attended me in my bride nuptials in state and triumph,
this day accompanied the corpse of poor Artimesia to the temple, where the body
was committed to the earth, after the usual ceremonies of the dead were
celebrated.

Four days had passed since the burial of Artimesia, and two since the
departure of her parents when, to pass away the summer's evening, and to
refresh my drooping spirits with the sweet air and pleasant shades. I retired
myself, only accompanied with Fidelio, into the same garden wherein I was first
surprised with my fair Desdemona.

Phoebus now hastened to bathe his sweltry steeds in the foaming ocean, and his
sister Luna began to appear so to expel the usurping shades of night, when
being comforted by the refreshing sweetness of her cold influences, so that the
pleasures I then enjoyed, accompanied with the thoughts of enjoying Desdemona,
made the time seem short, so that the unexpected hour of ten arrived. Fidelio's
entreaties, with the lateness of the evening, could not persuade my return, my
mind being employed on thoughts more agreeable. After the clock had struck
eleven I intended to leave the garden, but first resolving to visit the happy
place where I rescued my dear Desdemona, it was almost on the stroke of twelve
ere I arrived there: the night continued fair and clear, and this was the most
private retiring of any in the garden: where I was no sooner arrived, but, to
my amazement, behold! by the glimmering light of the moon, I saw a beautiful
woman: her countenance was pale and wan, dropping pearly tears from her fair
eyes, which she wiped off with a handkerchief. She sat on the ground, leaning
her head on her fair hand. She seemed wholly a map of sorrow, and gave
demonstrations by her actions that her gesture could not express the torment of
her mind. I had no sooner approached near enough to have spoken to her, but as
one surprised, she hastily takes away her hand, that supported her head; which
she had no sooner done, behold from her breast issued a crimson gore. My
amazement was great, when in her face I beheld the features of Desdemona. Her
countenance seemed to contend with grief and pity, rather than with wrath and
anger.

Frighted with the horror of this sight, I stood like an image of stone, not
able to go forward, or retire back; when this woeful object came nearer unto me
fixing her eyes steadfastly on my face; after a while raising her right hand,
laid it on her wound, which seemed to run in purple flood down her breast,
sprinkling the grass with scarlet dye. My amazement was augmented, when
unfixing her eyes from my face, she lifted them toward Heaven with so pale and
mournful a posture as would have produced pity in the most senseless breast.
This sudden surprisal, did cowardice all my spirits, so that I had not the
confidence nor courage to speak to this pitiful apparition, which once more
lifting up her hands to her wounds, giving me a grievous parting look, suddenly
vanished out my sight. I was amazed after its departure, and jealous whether I
should believe my eyes or no; or whether this was a real apparition, or a
fiction brought forth by fancy, that had figured such dismal ideas in my mind.
But the succeeding incidents soon confirmed the effects to be no illusions; for
before I could recollect and rally together my frighted spirits, behold from
the thicket hard by me issued dismal screeches horrible and fearful moans,
accompanied with uncommon and confused voices: the heavens on a sudden covered
themselves with a sable cover, and the moon hid her face under an eclipse. The
noise became yet more loud and terrible, and the resounding echo of the horrid
clamor drew nearer and nearer, and so became more fearful and dreadful. The
horizon was clothed with thick dark clouds; from whence proceeded a stormy
shower of hail and rain, the wind grew tempestuous and boisterous, fearful
slashes of lightning proceeded: after which followed loud and fearful claps of
thunder. The storm increased, and became more horrible, when from the
neighboring thicket rushed out a woman, who approached me, and whom I soon
knew to be the dead Artimesia. I would have fled from her sight, but could not
fly my destiny: when coming yet nearer unto me, with a weak and feeble voice
she uttered these words.

"Wretched man, now the reward of thy wickedness draws near, and thy punishment
is at hand. Heaven is ready to leave thee, and the earth is prepared to swollow
thee; sentence is pronounced against thee, and a messenger prepared to execute.
My innocent death will not go unrevenged, nor your perjury unpunished. Go,
miserable and wretched! despair: think of nothing but horrors, shrieks, pains,
and torments; let content and felicity henceforth become strangers to thee, and
let thy misfortunes become even worse and worse: let thy sleep be short, and
disturbed with fearful visions. The remainder of your life shall be a living
death: you shall seek for death, but you shall not find it. This is the
commission I had to unfold to thee from the higher powers, which having
revealed, I leave thee to thy fate."

This said, she vanished from my sight, but not my thoughts; for the
remembrance was so fixed in my soul, that I think the feigned fantasm would
hardly yield precedence to the real. My eyes were, yet firmly bent toward that
part of the thicket I saw Artimesia take* And Fidelio, who the time of this
tempest had concealed and sheltered himself in a thicket near at hand, after
his desires and entreaties became fruitless, in requiring me to retire with
him, when he came unto me, he found me not removed from the same place where he
left me. Wondering at this change, he took me by the arm; Sir, said he, what
occasions these ghastly looks, and timorous apprehensions? You seem as if you
had met your sins, or been accosted with your grandfather's ghost. What causes
thus to bend your eyes on vacancy, and fix your thoughts on shadows? Where do
you let your fancy run at random? Sir, consider where you are, and what time of
night it is and let us repair from this fatal place, that has brought you this
disturbance.

His earnest importunities brought me to myself: and seeing him expect a reply,
Yes, Fidelio, said I, my sins have met me in full bloom* and ghosts more
fearful than my grandfather. By heaven! Fidelio, shadows haunt me. Saw you not
my dearest Desdemona here, and the deceased Artimesia, who just now pronounced
the sentence of horror and damnation against me?

"Sir, replied he, these chimeras be nothing but the delusions of a disturbed
brain, which forms to itself wonders, which the spectators cannot behold: such
no doubt was yours; for I protest and vow to you I heard no voice, nor did I
apprehend any such similitudes: Artimesia lies quiet in her grave, and I doubt
not but Desdemona is asleep in her bed; rest will soon cure this disquiet:
come, Sir, let us walk home, the night grows aged, the late storm is past, both
call on us to depart, lest we should be prevented by a second disaster.

His entreaties, made me accord to leave the garden, and without returning an
answer, I straitway accompanied him. We soon came to my father's, where they
all sat up expecting my return; but they no sooner beheld me in that condition
and ghastly distemper, but they stood like people with amaze. I was led to my
chamber by Fidelio, where I betook myself to bed; but oh! the horrors that
accompanied me the latter part of the night! If asleep, Desdemona presented
herself to my imagination; yet suddenly starting from the trance, methought I
saw that object really which fancy formed in my dreams; so that fearfully
calling to Fidelio, who attended me, Oh! Fidelio, do thou not see my dearest
Desdemona; the blood streaming from her fair breast, now standing by my bed
side? behold she is going away out of the door. Oh stay abused innocence! and
tell me the reason thou do visit me in that dismal posture.

Here Fidelio, to divert these thoughts* made me this discourse, Desdemona
remains entirely yours, and you may bind her so by tying that inviolable knot
of matrimony, which you have already fastened by so many vows: since Artimesia
is dead, there is no obstruction can hinder you from giving her satisfaction,
and yourself content.

Here Fidelio ended when I embraced him saying, O my friend! I am willing to
believe whatever thou have related unto me, could it contain less of truth. I
should wish no greater happiness were Desdemona still among the living; I would
cease to expect and aspire to any greater hope, if I could once embrace her in
my arms, and repose this weary head in her bosom. Tomorrow, my Fidelio, I will
put thee to the trouble once more to deliver a letter to Desdemona; in the mean
time we will endeavor to take a little rest.

Night had no sooner fled, but I left my bed, and taking pen, I wrote to this
effect.

My Dearest Heart,
TO put thee out of doubt of the constancy of my affections, although necessity
compelled me to an enforced marriage, yet I knew not how to repair the fault,
nor give thee a real manifestation of my love, but by destroying the cause that
gave us this disturbance; know them, my dear, that to enjoy thy love, and to
give thee an example of the integrity of my heart, I have given my wife
Artimesia a potion that has carried her to her long home; and what rests there
now, but that I do thee right and equity, according to my vows, if you dare
permit me to that privilege and felicity, and give new life to one that daily
dies for you. Send my pardon signed from your fair mouth by this messenger, in
the expectation of which I shall look to remain miserable or happy. If you burn
this letter, the thoughts of any future danger is past: for I would not commit
the secret of my life to any but Desdemona, since it is only she alone that can
dispose of

ALMERIN.


I had no sooner ended my letter, but I cannot tell what horrid fate prompted
me to the contrary, to go myself in person, alleging that my presence would
procure more in Desdemona's breast, than my letter could. I went accompanied
with Fidelio, toward her father's house; but we had no sooner, lessened the
distance, but behold I saw a coffin covered with black, adorned with a garland
of flowers; the hearse was supported and carried by four young men and six
beautiful maidens accompanied them, each holding a part of the hearsecloth,
wherein they did intimate and silently speak their willingness to do something
obliging, it being the last service they could perform to the body of this poor
departed virgin. The company were all covered with a fable black, their pace
silent and slow, bent toward the great temple of the city. This sight began to
chill my blood: and that which gave suspicion to my fears was, because I saw,
them come out of Philaster's house; to confirm me that I was not in an error, I
saw the corpse followed by the old knight and his lady; their countenance and
actions declared them to be in the bitterness of sorrow, and plunged in the
depth of woe.

I had accompanied them to the temple, had not the earnest desire I had to be
resolved of the worst prompted me to the contrary, and persuaded me to go to
the house to be truly satisfied of my fears. We soon came to the door, and
having knocked were met by a servant of the house, who did know me since I used
to frequent the house; and being acquainted with the respect his lord and lady
paid me when they requested me to come in. I asked for the knight and his lady,
not taking notice that I had seen them; also for Desdemona; to which he gave me
a pitious look, letting drop from his eyes many tears. "Sir," said he, "you
come in a time to see us buried in woe, and to behold us overcharged with
sorrow; for about four days ago, after my mistress Desdemona had pined with
grief and given to sorrow the full reins and possession in her breast, when her
spirits being overcome with grief, and her senses overcharged with melancholy,
she sell into despair, and walking out as if she would recreate herself in the
garden, she retired into a house of pleasure there privately situated, where
with a fatal dagger she wounds herself to the heart, and this day, accompanied
with her friends, in a solemn manner they perform her obsequies, and convey her
body to the temple.

Here he ended -- while my apparition came bleeding fresh in my mind; -- my
crimes presented themselves in their own colors; and my conscience bid me
expect nothing but the fulfilling of murdered Artimesia's sentence.

I took my farewell, but not without shedding tears for the loss of one whom I
so dearly loved. -- In this distress of mind, I returned home; and about the
hour of ten, at night, while reposing on my bed, suddenly and unexpected, our
house was surrounded with armed men, my chamber doors broke open, my body
seized on, and taken prisoner; being thus surprised, I demanded the cause, and
by what authority they did it? To which one returned me this sharp answer,
their authority they had from the king, which I must obey, and the occasion,
the death of your late married wife Artimesia, supposed to be poisoned by you;
with a suspicion which is conceived of you, that you are the author and cause
of the death of Desdemona, daughter and only child of an aged knight of this
city, called Philaster; these are the crimes to which you must answer; in the
mean time you must yield obedience to our power, and immediately go along with
us. This said they laid hands on me, and speedily hurried me out of my chamber,
to convey me to prison; but we had not shortened half the way between my
father's house and the city goal, but by the shine of the moon, we might
discern a troop of horse, and perceive a small company of foot, which in a void
place of the city began to compass us about, which my guard no sooner descried,
but they cried out a rescue, a rescue: but their voices were soon stopped by
the horsemen which overran them, and the footmen that bravely assaulted them:
so that in a moment I saw myself free, and bravely mounted on a fresh horse.
Whilst I was wondering at the strangeness of this rescue, I saw one make toward
me, which I presently knew to be Fidelio. Sir, said he to me, cease your
amazement, and follow this guard with speed; for every moment you stay here
will be dangerous, and they will safely convoy you to the waterside, where a
vessel attends you, provided by your father, from whom, by my timely notice
came also this guard; for he now repents him of his obstinacy which occasioned
these evils for which you were accused fearing you are too much guilty to stand
in justification of yourself and your crimes too notorious to abide a trial;
and therefore being unwilling to leave you to the mercies and severities of the
law, that himself first brought into danger, waits for you at the waterside,
with some other company.

Being conducted to the vessel, and the wind blowing fair, so that we left
Syracuse far astern, and a few hours after wholly lost the sight of the island
of Sicilia; the gale continuing still fair, we gained a ken of the isle of
Malta, where we did not land, but continuing our course almost three days
gained a view of the main continent of Africa; and about the evening of the
third day, we anchored before the mighty city of Carthaga.

Here we landed and provided ourselves with all necessaries, as well offensive
as defensive, and all other things needful, which our so hasty parting from
Syracuse would not permit us to furnish. We lay there one day, and then weighed
anchor, and put to sea, where our intentions were to cruize about, in
expectations to meet with some vessels that came lately from Syracuse, of whom
we might enquire tidings of what we all did so passionately desire to know.

It was now seven days since we parted Sicilia, and two since we left the coast
of Africa, about the time of the day when the sun begins to decline toward the
west, when a boy stood sentinel on the top mast head suddenly cried out a sail,
a sail; being demanded from whence she steered her course? he returned answer
from Sicilia. This began to augment the desire I had to have news from
Syracuse; so that I gave commands to the pilot to steer his course to her,
which he had no sooner performed, but the boy called out again, saying, prepare
for your defense, for this vessel bears to us with all speed for an assault. He
had scarce ended these words but our eyes did give us proof the were fit for a
present fight.

This sight caused them to forget the concernment of others, and to think on
nothing so much as to provide for their own safety; yet they agreed with one
accord cheerfully to make good their defense, and manfully to guard themselves,
and me from being captured. We had hardly made our preparations for a
resistance, but we saw this vessel with great dexterity preparing to board us
on the weather side: their javelins in a moment were ready to grapple with our
vessel, in the performance of which we received a brave assault, and they as
gallant repulse. Our archers scarce spent an arrow in vain; neither did their's
slack their duty. The fight continued sharp while we lay off the one from the
other, but I heard him that seemed to be the captain of the vessel say these
words to his soldiers, "Arm yourselves with courage, noble hearts, and let the
king of Sicilia know you are valient. We are not mistaken; see fortune has
presented the murderous villain an object to your eyes, and brought him a
sacrifice to our just resentments. Now let the innocent death of Artimesia and
Desdemona sharpen your swords for a just revenge, and let their sorrowful
parents see your fidelity, and the interest you take in their wrongs, when you
present them with the head of their mortal enemy.

This speech left us no longer in doubt of their business; and although I
esteemed my life scarce worth preserving, yet the great promise this fellow
made of my head made me resolve not to part with it friendly to my enemies at
such a time when I was in good capacity to defend it. This raised my anger to
make a stout resistance; and his oration caused his soldiers to assail us with
double courage.

Now the fight began to be at the highest, and a great number of men were slain
on both sides. This battle was fought till the sun began to bid good night to
our horizon, yet fortune had left it doubtful to which side she should incline:
when we were pressed by our enemies, with so much vigor, that my men were
forced to retire, whilst they furiously mounted our vessel. Here I exposed
myself to certain dangers, very willing to part with life, so I could have lost
it nobly in resisting my enemies; but death flies them that seek him, and
intrudes on such as desire his absence. As I was desperately braving the utmost
danger, I met and engaged with their commander, so greedily we combated one
with another, and with so much desire endeavored the ruin of each other, that
it was no wonder fortune made haste to determine the end; many cruel blows we
exchanged, till at last I pushed my enemy so closely, and redoubled my blows
with so much violence, that directing a blow which fell on his head with my
greatest force, it parted in two, and he fell lifeless on the deck. -- Thus he
who so confidently disposed of my head, could not secure his own from my sword.

This sight began to abate the courage of our enemies, and to revive the
spirits of my almost vanquished men; for returning with a greater force than at
first, they made a mighty slaughter; and having dispatched all those in their
own vessel, with great speed we boarded our enemies, so that the offensive were
now become defensive, and performed their part so ill in maintaining it that we
soon became conquerors of the other ship, committing all the souls to the place
appointed for their deserts, where the spirits of all men are rewarded
according to their merits. The dead bodies of our men, and also of our enemies,
we cast overboard into the sea.

The night became extreme dark, not one star appeared in the firmament, as if
they had disdained to behold so bloody a tragedy: so that we were forced to
strike up lights, the better to see to clear the vessel of the dead carcases.
Myself, with a torch in my hand, went to behold the slain in the enemy's
vessel, where the soldiers, the tempest of their revenge being not yet stilled,
without pity cast as well the wounded as dead out of the vessel; when their
wounds, miseries, entreaties, prayers, or dismal moans, could not persuade them
to mercy.

Among many that were thus used, one of them, whom my men had taken up in their
arms ready to cast him away into the ocean, cried out, "O Sirs! spare me but
one moment, and bring me to your commander, to whom I shall relate such secrets
as he is yet ignorant of." This had not preserved his life, if I had not given
a speedy command to the soldiers to hold their hand; and although disfigured
with wounds, by his voice I quickly discovered him to be the servant of
Philaster, the same who related to me the death of Desdemona. And from him I
learned that the letter I wrote to Desdemona, and which I unfortunately dropped
near her father's house, had been found, and delivered to the earl of Palermo;
who thereby discovered me to be the murderer of his daughter, and who with a
design to revenge her death, had caused me to be arrested; but finding I had
been resqued by my father, applied to the King, who immediately armed and sent
vessels in pursuit of me; and that the earl's servants, and the servants of
Philaster, had voluntarily gone on board, determined to secure the author of
the calamities that had befallen their masters. He proceeded no farther, and
perceiving him to grow faint by the loss of blood, I ordered the surgeons to
administer the best relief; but in vain, for he soon expired.

Day soon advanced, and the enemies vessel appearing the strongest, and best to
sail, we removed our stores, sunk our own vessel, and set sail for the city of
Algiers, knowing of no other port that would give us protection, and that only
upon condition of our turning pirates.

It would be too tedious, madam, to relate the many adventures through which I
have since passed; and the many human sacrifices I have made to acquire wealth,
and to obtain the favor of the Dey. But here let me put an end to my dismal
story. I have given you, madam, a true relation, nor have I interwoven the
least falsehood, with a view to draw a veil over my crimes. But when you
remember that my first sins proceeded, not from inclination, but from my
adverse fate, and that having once entered the gulf of wickedness, there was
no possibility of going back, you will rather pity than condemn me. Was I
unconstant to, and did I practice Artimesia's death -- Oh! remember my
constancy and love to Desdemona; I am incapable of going farther in my own
justification. My crimes are a continual torment; but the rehearsal of them
affords me some satisfaction when it is done by your command.

The continuation of the History of ORSAMUS and CYNTHIA.
HERE Almerin ended the story of his life, leaving Orsamus and Cynthia in
admiration and astonishment; they saw he was pursued by a divine hand, and that
it was impossible for him to fly his fate; so that they began to look on their
own condition, fearfully apprehending the calamities that might befall them, in
being prisoner to one, who being followed by divine vengeance, made all
miserable that were concerned in any thing that appertained unto him. Their
fears almost made them despair but that they did remember Heaven does always
assist the virtuous in their greatest calamities, and is nearest at hand, with
remedy and relief, when our miseries become most desperate, and past cure.

These considerations dissipated the grief of lovers endured, else it had been
too heavy a burden; for their condition seemed so desperate that only a divine
power could relieve them. The relation of Almerin's life, became an addition to
their own miseries, and an augmentation of their tears, yet in civilitiy she
was enforced to render him thanks for his narration; after some discourse had
passed, and night began to cloth herself in a sable black, so putting a period
to their discourse, Orsamus and Almerin each taking their respective farewels
of Cynthia, left her to her rest; Orsamus retiring to his cabin, and Almerin to
give commands to his soldiers, concerning the ship.

Some days passed, while they cruised in expectation of more prizes; In the
mean time, Almerin prosecuted his suit to Cynthia with much eagerness; still
keeping himself in the bounds of his respect, until by the return of Cynthia's
beauty, his love blew his lust into a flame, which could not be extinguished
without peril to either side. Love is a passion of all others most lovely,
until lust take a moiety, and becomes its rival, then it becomes a very tyrant,
and is subject to the greatest villainy; for where passion bears sway, there is
no admittance for reason.

About nine days had passed away, since they were first surprised, when he came
very rudely into her cabin, and with much insolence treated her in this manner:
Madam, I see all civilities have been lost, and you provoke me to destroy all
the considerations that have flowed from that fountain. I have henceforth
decreed to seek my satisfaction by other means, so that I allow you until to
morrow to frame a resolution, and if that fail to overcome your obstinacy, I
shall know how to oblige you unto it, in spite of your aversion. He confirmed
this menace with many others; and his actions agreeing thereunto told him to
have spoke nothing but what he fully determined before in his mind; saying
this, he left the cabin without the least respect; and in going out, he
fortuned to meet Orsamus, then going to pay his usual visit to Cynthia, and
greeting him in his rough language, sir, said he, remember you are my prisoner;
and since fortune gives you no greater tie over your sister's affections, that
she will not suffer you to gain your freedom, from henceforth you shall be
treated like a slave, or like one that has baffled and deluded me with false
hopes; henceforth I shall find other ways to compass my ends, without your
intercession: until tomorrow I have allowed your sister to comply with my
desires, which if you can perfect you may both yet be happy. Base man, replied
Orsamus, do thou think thy villainy shall always remain unpunished, and that
there is no period set on thy wickedness. This said, he entered into Cynthia's
cabin, yet composing all that was fierce and terrible in his looks, where he
found the object of his felicity bathing in tears. Why these precious showers,
Madam? said he, wherefore the overflowings of grief? is it because this villain
has so confidently set a time to finish his desires? alas! my dear princess, he
does but hurry on his own punishment, and set an end unto his villainy; fear
not the issue, Madam; but dissipate those cruel apprehensions; for you shall
yet be free.

All the time of this discourse Orsamus remained at her feet; but recollecting
her spirits, taking him by the hand, rise Orsamus, said she, and blame not my
griefs since fortune intends to put no period to our misfortunes, nor end to
our miseries; she is become cruel without remorse, and pitiless without
compassion; if I think of hope, she soon transforms it into despair, and if I
dare imagine I may be more happy, she soon curbs me in that presumption. If
there is no preterminant end set to my misfortunes, why should I expect any
longer, and not count death as the last remedy? then blame not the tears I shed
in so woeful a case, since some fall for Orsamus, and accompany those that drop
for Cynthia. Orsamus ravished at this free and unconstrained answer of Cynthia,
and manifestation of her pity, Oh! Madam, said he, how happy do you make me! a
thousand such lives as mine spent in thy service were but a poor recompense of
the least of those precious tears that you shed: Oh rest contented, my dearest
princess: I am only safe in your security, and happy in your satisfaction. It
is impossible I should be thus fortunate, and yet be unhappy.

In such discourse they passed away their limited time, till Almerin, with
hasty steps made toward the cabin door; which was no sooner perceived by
Orsamus, but he made ready for his entertainment. Cynthia persuaded him from an
attempt upon his life: but he returned answer, Cease, fair soul, and let me
alone, middle ways to such enterprises are the most dangerous.

By this time Almerin came to the cabin door, which was opened on to him by
Orsamus, at his entrance he suddenly disarmed him of his sword with such an
impetuous fury, that before he could cry out for help or make the least
resistance, he cast him deadly wounded at his feet, "Lie there thou main
obstructor of my quiet, said he, take the reward of thy villainy in the grave."
Hardly was he fallen on the deck but his amazed spirits returned, being ready
to give a farewell to the body; which Orsamus seeing, made ready to give him
another blow, so to make a sudden end to that fatal separation, which Almerin
perceiving cried," "Oh, hold your hand! it is enough; I feel my soul is ready
to take her flight, and my continuance here will be but a few moments. Oh
horrible! still beginning and never ending eternity; now I desire to live
because I fear to die; yet I would die because I would be free from the fear of
worse to come. Oh happy they that so live, that they may be never afraid to
die; to such, death is eternal happiness; -- but mine is -- another voyage --
for my time is at hand, I go away in a mist I know not how; -- I can say no
more -- farewell." At this he gave up the ghost, to the amazement of Orsamus,
and to the terror of Cynthia.

In a moment the glory of the day was overcast with black clouds, the wind grew
boisterous, and the seas turbulent, the resounding echo of the thundering claps
were terrible to the hearers; flashes of lightning made the ship seem on fire,
with storms of hail and rain; so that the men made toward Cynthia's cabin, to
give notice to their captain to have his advise; when behold they were amazed
at the dismal object presented to their eyes; they saw him wallowing in his own
blood at the entrance of the cabin.

This sight was followed with a loud and bitter cry, with lamentations, of many
voices; still the storm continued, and their confusion increased until at last
recollecting their distraction, they agreed with one consent to make good their
revenge upon Orsamus, who they doubted not had been the murderer of their
captain; part they appointed to manage the ship in the storm, while the rest
went to sacrifice his blood to the ghost of their slain commander. Their
resolution was answerable to their design: for the loss of their captain whom
they loved so entirely, and in whom they built their future fortunes, had
raised their cholor to such a height, that nothing could allay it but his
death. This was made manifest in their fierce assault, which was by Orsamus as
bravely repulsed; for he had gotten this advantage, that defending himself at
the entrance of the cabin door, but one at a time could endanger or hurt him.
The combat continued hot on both sides, Orsamus, for the safety of his dearest
Cynthia, and the pirates their revenge. -- Three of the pirates Orsamus had
sent to accompany their captain, neither did he himself escape without wounds.
Things were thus stated when the tempest began to assuage, and one from the
forecastle began to cry out, A Sail, a Sail. This summons persuaded them to
defer their revenge for a time, so that of that great number that assailed him,
six only staid as a guard to secure him, fearing, should they engage, he might
issue forth and join with the enemy, to their no small disadvantage.

The ship drew nearer, making toward them with full sails before their
preparations were in readiness for defense, they were saluted with showers of
arrows that seemed to darken the sky; in a few moments they came to a closer
combat and grapple with their ship; then the fight began bloody, and cruel
despair made the pirates courageous, so that twice they repulsed them with no
small loss: in the third assault they were worsted and their enemies* taking
advantage of their retreat, slew all, leaving not a man alive, those that
guarded Orsamus were fled away, and escaped his hands, but it was only to fall
by others; some that were forwardest for plunder and spoil, would have entered
Orsamus's cabin, but their lives paid the forfeit of their folly: this
occasioned another bickering and drew most part of the conquerors together to
behold a resistance so bravely maintained by one man, where eight lay wallowing
in their blood yet he made good his defense, thus he continued triumphing in
their deaths, while the victorious captain that had boarded the ship was a
spectator, and pitying that so much bravery should wither in the bud, he
commanded his men to leave assailing him, and drawing something nearer, Gallant
man, said he, your courage has gained an esteem in the breast of your enemy;
cease this contest, and I promise, you life and liberty.

Your offer is noble, replied Orsamus, nor could it flow but from a breast
truly generous; it is not only against your men I have made this resistance,
but against the whole strength of this ship before your valor subdued it; the
captain lies here a sacrifice, slain by my hand; and nothing could have
preserved my life, had not providence directed you hither; yet being my
preserver, I dare not deliver myself on these terms; not that I doubt the
performance of your promise, but I have here within this cabin one whose safety
if I cannot secure, I shall little value my own. If you please to let us both
share alike in your bounty, and promise to include us both in that noble offer
of life and liberty, I will submit myself to your protection; if not, I am
ready to make good my defense, with the loss of that life I shall not esteem,
without the entire performance of those articles. Saying this, he put himself
in a posture of defense. Hold said the captain I will fulfill all thy request;
in the King of Kent's name, my royal master, I plight thee my faith. Orsamus
remained amazed at this answer, and after some revolutions in his spirit, he
replied, ha, King of Kent said you' come and finish what you have begun; for I
will never live to see in another's custody what is entirely due to my merit.

Scarce had he uttered these words when an aged man made through the crowd
toward him, and with extacy of joy exclaimed, My noble lord Orsamus, living
and found here! Heavens, you have satisfied my tedious expectations: and
pausing a while with admiration he continued his discourse; Sir, I am not so
much lost unto your memory, but you may remember one Willifred. At this Orsamus
recollecting himself, crying out, my dear father, Oh come into this fatal place
that I may have happiness in death to die in the defense of two persons that
share my soul betwixt them. Oh sir! replied the old man, talk not of death, we
come forth in search of you only for safety; that I make all this evident unto
you, cease your admiration for a time. This said, and all continuing silent, he
proceeded as follows.

Oswald, that famous king of the Northumbers, had a brother named Oswain the
only successor to that great kingdom: he was married to a noble lady, by whom
he had issue Egfrid the elder, and Orsamus one year younger; so that you are
not my son, as hitherto you have esteemed yourself. When that fatal battle of
Masterfield was sought by king Penda, the tyrant of Mercia, against your uncle
Oswald, king of the Northumbers, in which field he was slain, it was uncertain
whether Oswain your father, or your elder brother Egfrid had ended their lives
at the moment; as soon as tidings were brought of their dismal overthrow, I
fled with you, being as then about ten years old, unto the next port town,
where I got shipping and escaped to find a more secure sanctuary in another
country than our own; but I kept you from the knowledge of yourself; pardon, it
was my love that erred, for I did conclude a discovery would be prejudicial. --
While we were sailing on the ocean as you well remember, their arose such a
tempest, that the skill of the mariners was used in vain; so being left to the
mercy of the sea we were conveyed to unknown parts: and about the dawning of
the second day, we discerned land, and before we had time to recollect upon
what shore we were cast, we grounded on a rock so that the ship burst into a
thousand pieces. The little time I had left I did consider of your safety, so
that tying two casks together and seeing you safely on I left you to the mercy
of the sea, while I secured myself on a piece of timber that came from the
broken ship, but mine was driven a contrary course unto that which you went, so
that we soon parted to a great distance, that I never saw you since, until this
moment. Some time after your father recovered and took possession of his
brother's kingdom, and after I had made a strict enquiry about the part where I
conceived you were landed and not finding you, I imagined you had paid your
life as a tribute unto the unmerciful waves; so that I returned home sorrowful
into my own country, and made this relation unto your father, who bitterly
lamented your loss; but time at last put your memory into oblivion, when we
considered you were not among the living.

Some years had added themselves unto the age of time when same proclaimed in
our own country the excellent beauty of Cynthia, daughter to the king of Kent;
so much did the report of this seize your brother Egfrid's affections, as he
desired his father to treat of an alliance with the king of Kent by a marriage
with his daughter. -- His father, that after the report of your death, did
prize him as the apple of his eye, unwilling to cross affection in a cause so
just, immediately accorded with his desires and chose me for that embassage* so
that well attended, in a few days I arrived at Doraborina, the regal city of
Kent; in a small time I was admitted to a hearing, where I delivered the sum of
my embassage; hardly had I arrived unto the period of my commands, but with
tears in his eyes he began as follows.

"Sir, some few years ago, when I enjoyed my dearest Cynthia, for now she is
not; or if she be, is not to me: in a pleasant morning, before Sol had cast her
rays from the mountain tops, she arose to enjoy the variety of the pleasant
spring, which Flora had clothed in her choicest garb; the pearly dew did yet
hang on the sweet damask roses, and the infant blossom cast forth a pleasant
favor; the wild choristers of the wood made the valleys ring with echo of
their delightful notes; while her contemplation was taken up on the musing of
these rarities, her curiosity had brought her to a little path, which led
toward the sea, which was not far from the place where she was; straying
farther, and casting her eyes on the ocean, they encountered with an object
that at once excited her admiration and pity; she saw a youth about her age,
that had secured himself on two casks, and with his utmost skill endeavored to
gain shore; compassion is never wanting in so tender a breast, nor was it
absent from hers; she commanded those men that attended with all expedition to
make off and save his life, and bring him unto her, having more timorous
apprehensions of his safety than at that time needed. Her commands were exactly
obeyed, so that by their industry in a few moments they secured him ashore, and
weak and feeble as he was presented him before Cynthia. I remember I was
walking in my palace garden when they presented him unto me: Lo here, Sir, said
she, taking the youth by the hand with a smile, sweetly innocent, see how
fortunate I have been to day by my early rising, to be the preserver of this
pretty lad, which, with your consent, I would have to attend on me since it is
his desire, to spend his life, so happily preserved, in my service. With this
she related where, and how he came into her hands; I staid sometime for an
answer, contemplating his behavior, and sweet becoming graces; methought I saw
something in him of majesty. I questioned him of his name and country, to which
he gave me this answer, Sir, my name is Orsamus, my father is an aged old man,
who I fear perished in the late storm; my country is far hence, in parts
unknown to me; and being shipwrecked in the late tempest, he secured my safety
upon two casks; many hours I continued on the waves uncertain of life, until I
was cast upon this happy shore, and rescued from the jaws of Neptune, by this
fair divinity, in whole service I should be too happy were I assured of my dear
father's safety. At the period of his discourse he let fall a shower of tears
to the memory of so near a loss. We comforted him with the most agreeable words
we could frame, telling him his mistress would be to him instead of a father;
that if his father were cast upon our coast he should have notice given of his
safety. He seemed much satisfied with this discourse, which contentment he
expressed in his contenance; for that time he left me, and attended the
princess.

"He was already become the darling of the whole court; every day added to his
esteem he had already gotten, who all admired such uncommon graces should bud
in years so green; he had a solidity that overtoped his age, he was never
hardly from Cynthia's eye, nor indeed did she desire it; so that he seemed to
bound his whole felicity in her service; he waited upon her walks and
recreations, but still kept himself about her with a profound reverence; he
would not prize the dearest good before the least and smallest occasion to
please her; he courted all opportunities, time and places, to make it manifest;
if she would retire herself into an arbor there would he charm sweet sleep
upon her eye lids with delightful music, in which art he was excellent; and
while she slept he would remain a careful sentinel. The princess, young as she
was, did not bury those services in oblivion, but rated them at their true
value in her breast, rewarding all with a grand esteem, which was received by
him as a reward of all his merits; he could so sweeten his discourse and action
to so near a sympathy, his conversation being so charming and agreeable, that
Cynthia was never satisfied when he was absent; as his years increased, he bent
his delight to manly exercises, so that many times his gallant deportment in
public spectacles drew admiration from all that did behold him.

"His affairs stood thus in court, when my land was suddenly invaded by
Cavaline, King of the West Saxons; I raised an army to oppose him, and set
forward to meet him; when this young novice, fired with hopes of action, to
make trial of his valor, taking opportunity when the princess was alone, he
accosted her in this manner: "Madam, I am too happy, in the felicity you have
raised me to in being your servant; but now opportunity presents what perchance
fortune may never offer again; your country is invaded by enemies, and I desire
your good leave to accompany your father in this expedition, against those
Pagans that dare to commit so great a sacrilege; -- where, in the field of
honor, I may purchase trophies that may raise me to deserve that esteem you
have for me." Cynthia, having a while considered of his request, with an
unusual kindness, made this reply. "Yes, Orsamus, you have my free leave to go:
nor can I trust you better than with my father; yet it is no small hopes I
promise myself, from these early beginnings of your bravery; go then, and be
happy, for you shall never want the prayers of your mistress." This said, he
attended her to my chamber, where she made known his resolution unto me; nor
could I disapprove the gallantry of his mind, but commending his forwardness,
gave him consent, ordering him always to be near my person.

"We marched forward by usual journies, to hinder the enemies foraging in the
country, until at last we encamped upon a large plain, on the frontiers of my
kingdom; here we took the advantage of our ground, and bade the enemy battle;
it was first begun by the forerunners of our armies, but at last our main body
engaged, and the fight became bloody on both sides; victory as yet remained
doubtful to which side she would incline; at last, by a violent charge of the
enemy, my ranks were broken, my main battle disordered, and, in spite of my
guard I was taken prisoner. This was no sooner understood by Orsamus, but, like
a young Mars, he rushed into the midst of the throng, dealing blows with so
much bravery, that he soon redeemed me, and in short we became masters of the
field.

"But it fortuned soon after, I became the disturber of his quiet, and chief
occasion that he left my court. It fell out thus; the East Angles king, my
adjoining neighbor, asked Cynthia in marriage for his son Cordelio; my council
advised me to grant his request; I condescended to their advice, and concluded
the marriage with his ambassadors, telling them I would celebrate their
nuptials in Doroborino: the Ambassadors returned home, and in a few days after,
Cordelio arrived with a great train. The day was appointed to join their hands,
all necessaries provided; yet, by a turn of fortune, it came to no effect.

"After this contract of marriage Orsamus became possessed with unusual
melancholy! he sought out solitary places wherein to spend his time; a mortal
sadness was charactered in all the features of his face: the whole court
concerned them in his misfortunes, and myself was not the least; I often times
demanded of him from whence this change did arise, but he never yielded me any
account. This was soon taken notice of by Cynthia, so that being with him alone
in the garden walks, How now, Orsamus, said she, why these sighs? wherefore is
your countenance changed? why have you let yourself fall into a distemper below
the knowledge of your mistress? reveal it, that if possible I may procure a
remedy. -- Yes, said Orsamus, it is only you can yield a remedy; you made me
happy only to be unfortunate: Oh that I had been buried in the raging ocean! I
should have found a resting place in Elysium, and not have died by a second
death. Oh Madam! continued he, resolve me, must you be married? Yes, replied
Cynthia, it is so decreed: then farewell hopes, continued Orsamus; now, Madam,
you have provided a remedy, death and despair will soon give period to my life;
but because I will accord with your desires, that your displeasure may hasten
on the death I so much desire, know, from the moment you preserved my life,
until this time, I have nourished such a passion for your virtues, as will
follow my ashes to the grave. Seven long years are past since I have concealed
this a secret in my bosom; the summer's scorching heat, nor the tedious winter
nights, could never work the least change; it was daily nourished by your
goodness, although innocently, until it came to its full growth; whilst there
was the least hope it thrived nor did I ever complain; but to have hope torn up
by the roots, to be confined never to see you more, is a cruelty that cannot be
borne. Here he continued silent.

Whilst Cynthia remained astonished at his discourse; but at last recovering
that assurance she had lost the time of his discourse. "Orsamus? (replied she)
is it thus you pay your respects unto me? dare you raise your ambition to the
daughter of a king? or could you imagine I would own your pretensions? I am
sorry my esteem should be thus lessened by your folly; or if my intentions or
inclinations could lean that way, it is impossible my father should ever
consent, whose displeasure I would not gain to obtain the dearest good: to put
an end to those dangers that this may occasion for the future, I desire you
from henceforth to avoid my presence, since there is only this mean left to
cure your malady; while I restrain those innocent familiarities that have
disturbed your quiet." Oh Madam! said Orsamus, falling on his knees, mitigate
your displeasure -- there wanted only this to make me wretched. It is decreed,
replied Cynthia, and it behooves you not to dispute it. Then be it so, said
Orsamus, to thy cruel sentence will I submit, and henceforth avoid thy
presence, however fatal to me may be the separation from her who, through pity,
preserved my life: may my absence free you from the danger of your father's
displeasure; -- and if in death I still retain your pity, then shall my ghost
rest quiet in the grave. -- He bowed, and left the room.

The absence of Orsamus, soon produced great effects in the breast of Cynthia;
discontent seated herself on her brow, the carnation of her cheeks began to
abate, and the lillies began to possess their places; having demanded the
reason of those sudden effects, she informed me of the particulars that had
fallen out betwixt Orsamus and herself, and the occasion of his absence. Sir,
said she, see the resolution of this unfortunate youth occasioned by one hasty
word; which I fear will destroy what I so happily preserved, although his
audacious revealing of his love were an offense, it was not of that degree to
call his life in question. Shall I tell you, from whom I do not conceal my
greatest secrets; had Orsamus's love been authorized by your free consent, I
would have chosen him out of the stock of mankind; nor can I much offend in
loving one that has been the preserver of your life and kingdom.

I could not much gainsay, what she had said, for Orsamus's virtues were so
well grounded in my breast, that oftentimes I have had thot's to his advantage,
tending that way; but, as things were now stated, I durst not make my concerns
known unto Cynthia. The marriage day drew near, and Cordelio waited the
confirmation of his nuptials, so that I could not go back from promise without
provoking the East Angles King to be my enemy. This consideration caused me to
cloud my countenance with a frown: Fie, Cynthia, replied I, forget this man, one
of so low condition; were his birth any ways correspondent to thine, I think I
should have accorded with thy desires, had I known it before this contract with
Cordelio; but this has proceeded so far, that the deferring of it would
endanger my whole kingdom. -- Banish this miserable man from thy memory, and
obey the commands of thy father and king. She made no reply, but with a low
submission seemed to consent with what I desired, and left me. After her
departure, I sent spies throughout my kingdom to search for Orsamus, and bring
him back: my discontents came little short of Cynthia's, for I could not endure
the absence of him to whose valor I was so much obliged. My servants at length
returned without bringing the least intelligence of Orsamus; this added fresh
grief to Cynthia; and shunning those amusements which might have dispelled her
melancholy, she was soon reduced to an object of compassion. I beheld this
vicissitude with sorrow, and gladly would have procured a remedy. The day of
marriage fast approached, and being unwilling at such a time she should be
wholly made up of sorrow, I caused a stately banquet to be prepared in my
garden adjoining the sea environed by an unfrequented wood. It was here I
recreated myself when my business at court would permit my absence; and thither
I came with Cynthia, attended by Cordelio and a numerous train. We had ended
our banquet, and separated to participate of various pleasures. Cordelio
remained with me, and Cynthia, accompanied by her usual attendants, directed
her walk to that part of the garden abutting the sea; as she approached the
bounds of the garden she cautioned her servants to keep at a distance: these
commands were common, and always obeyed. She had retired an hour, when becoming
anxious for her safety, they ventured to break her commands, and resolved to
follow her into the wood: but better reason induced them first to give me
notice, as the turnings were so intricate, that, being once entered, they might
sooner lose themselves than recover their absent mistress. We then dispersed
into all parts of the wood; scarce a thicket was left untraced; night
approached, and we had almost despaired of finding her, when it was Cordelio's
fortune to discover her sitting alone. He had but just seated himself by her
side, when Orsamus issued from a neighboring thicket and cast himself at her
feet. So changed was his countenance, that he remained unknown to Cynthia until
he complained of her cruelty. Amazed at his sad appearance, she was unable to
reply. He became desperate; drew his sword, and resolved to sacrifice his own
life to his love, and the life of Cordelio to his revenge. Cordelio was falling
a sacrifice, when his attendants flew to his assistance; they instantly
assaulted him, and although by his bravery he slew five of the stoutest, yet no
doubt they would have put a period to his life, had not a strange turn of
fortune preserved him -- From a small creek issued sixteen pirates, at the
sight of which they that assaulted Orsamus fled; but he made good his defense
against them. Too late I had news of this, for when I came to the place,
nothing was to be seen but half a score of men lying dead on the ground. Among
those there was one who began to recover, and by assistance was soon brought to
his senses, to whom I promised life, on condition that he gave me a true
relation what they were: He began as follows:

My country is the Ocean, and the commander of these men with whom I came a
shore is Almerin the famous rover; under his conduct 16 of us came ashore, and
were bravely repulsed by one single man, who made good his defense against us
all, for the preserving of a lady who lay senseless on the ground; three of my
companions besides myself lay grovling in their blood at his feet, which sight
incensed Almerin to a speedy revenge, that they rushed upon him with such force
that it seemed impossible he should make any longer resistance; in fine, they
seized him, and conveyed both him and the lady aboard our vessel.

Scarce had he uttered these words, when casting my eyes toward the Ocean I
beheld the ship that contained all my worldly joys, going before the wind with
full sails. I gave orders to several vessels to follow this pirate; but all
things agreed to further his escape. The night became exceeding dark, and there
arose a mighty storm, so that he was conveyed to unknown parts, far from my own
country. This, Sir, is one reason I cannot accord with your master's desires;
and the other is, were she here I could not without breach of honor break my
promise to Cordelio."

Here, continued Willifred, the king ended his story, which I hearkened unto
with astonishment; at last recollecting my spirits, Sir, replied I, before I
proceed, tell me one thing truly, I see you prize Orsamus's virtues at their
full value, should his birth be as illustrious as his virtues, would you deny
him your daughter in marriage. Would I? replied the king -- could I be so
fortunate, his person and merits, would be the first to gain my breast. I was
much satisfied at the freeness of his discourse, and returned to him this
answer, Know, Sir, Orsamus is of royal blood, second son to my master, the king
of Northumbers, by casualty shipwrecked on your coast; I gave a relation of
what already you have heard, and told him I would return to my master, to give
him intelligence of those many strange adventures, from whence I would set out
with a ship well manned in pursuit of the pirate.

He seemed highly pleased at what I proposed, and speedily fitted out the ship
we are now in, dispatching this noble commander to assist in the recovery of
his daughter. The wind blowing fair we put off from shore, and gave farewell to
the king. In fine, we had a nimble passage into our own country, where I
landed, and gave your father an account of your fate. Your father rejoiced much
at the hope of your safety, according with the king of Kent in all his
requests; for they were equally concerned in each others disasters.

Hardly were commands issued for a preparation, but a ship that came into our
harbor brought news that Almerin was off at sea, and that they narrowly
escaped his hands; this opportunity would admit of no delay, which this brave
captain conceiving, hastened our departure; in a moment the ship was strongly
manned with our own men, who freely offered their lives to redeem their prince;
myself, though age would have excused it, accompanied this noble man, the thought
of your welfare extinguishing the imagination of my own danger; thus we made
off to sea, accompanied with one ship more, which was severed from us in the
late storm. Four days had not yet passed since I left my own country, in which
time heaven had been so kind to make us your preserver! Now what remains but
that we return to your father.

This discourse being ended, Orsamus and Cynthia left the cabin, whose beauty
was the admiration of all that did behold her, and claimed obedience as a
tribute from all hearts; and the respects there shown her were not inferior to
those she received in her father's court. After a short consultation, it was
resolved to stear for Northumberland; the ships were then cleared; Almerin's
body, with the rest, was committed to the waves, and this was the miserable end
of that wretched man.

A fair and pleasant gale soon wasted them to their native shore, where being
arrived, they made themselves known to the king, who was almost ravished with
joy at the sight of his long lost son; his brother caressed him, his friends
welcomed him, nor could there be a parallel to his entertainment. Cynthia had
such respects paid her as were peculiar to so rare a creature; such deep
impressions can virtue make on noble minds. Because they would not disturb
their happiness by a sudden journey, they sent a messenger to the king of Kent,
to certify him of his daughter's safety, and to give him advice, that in a few
days time Oswin would be with him in Doroborina, accompanied with his too sons,
and his fair daughter Cynthia, to celebrate Orsamus's nuptials; the messenger
was received with all joy and respect, preparations were made on all parts for
a triumphant entrance; at the time limited Oswin came and was received with
acclamations of joy. They had a splendid attendance to the palace, where
Cynthia threw herself into her father's arms, and they embraced with tears of
mutual gladness. The marriage was deferred no longer than the next week, when
Orsamus received Cynthia from the hands of the old king, as the best reward of
his services and valor. They lived in felicity, and, as a cruel winter makes a
lovely spring, so the adversity through which they had passed, added to their
new scenes of pleasure.

FINIS.

