OBSERVATIONS ON THE CAUSES AND CURE OF REMITTING OR BILIOUS FEVERS. TO WHICH
IS ANNEXED, AN ABSTRACT OF THE OPINIONS AND PRACTICE OF DIFFERENT AUTHORS; AND
AN APPENDIX, EXHIBITING FACTS AND REFLECTIONS RELATIVE TO THE Synochus
Icteroides, or Yellow Fever.

BY WILLIAM CURRIE, Fellow of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, etc.

Theory may deceive, Analogy may mislead; But Experience leads to truth.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY WILLIAM T. PALMER, NO. 18, NORTH
THIRD-STREET. 1798

INTRODUCTION.
THE following Production, (the result of much reading, reflection, and
considerable experience.) contains Observations on the situations, climates and
seasons in which Remitting or Bilious Fevers are most prevalent; the causes
from whence they originate, the circumstances which render them epidemic;
remarks on Sydenham's doctrine of the influence of constitutions or conditions
of the atmosphere. An examination of the question, whether Intermittents or
Remittents are contagious or not; and a comparison of their distinguishing
symptoms, with those of the Contagious Fever, commonly called the Yellow Fever,
which has occasioned so much mortality and distress, in different seaport
towns of the United States of America, since the year 1793. With a description
of the Remitting Fever as it appears in Philadelphia; and the method of
treatment which the Author has experienced to be most successful.

An Abstract is also annexed of the opinions and observations of almost all the
physicians, that have practiced in different ages, and in different climates,
which have come to the Author's knowledge, that he thinks worthy of notice; the
object of which, is to furnish those at a distance from public libraries, with
a compendious and connected view of every thing interesting, that has been
published, and that lies scattered in a multitude of volumes on the subject;
free from the perversions of falacious and misleading theory, or the
misrepresentations of uncharitable, and distorting party spirit. He therefore
expects that this part of the subject at least, will afford the discerning and
judicious reader, both pleasure and profit.

The experienced Lind, 2nd. Paper on Insection at page 79.
was of opinion, that a judicious synopsis, or abstract of the writings on
fevers, in a chronological series, would be a valuable work, as it would
contain treasures of useful knowledge in a small compass, provided facts and
naked truths disengaged from conjecture, or hypothesis were only ret^ined.

In such a work we might contemplate under one view, the principal advances
which have been made toward a more complete knowledge of fevers, and a more
successful method of treating them, from the first records of the healing art,
to the present period. Such a work would also assist us, in judging how far
hypotheses and pre-conceived opinions, (which teach by rule to stray) have
retarded its progress, and advancement. It would also enable us to distinguish
the deductions, and conclusions drawn from experience and observation, those
pillars of certainty and truth, from those derived from conjecture, or mistaken
facts.

An appendix is also added, exhibiting facts and reflections relative to the
synochus icteroides or yellow fever.

How the Author has executed his design, must be determined by those who are
competent judges of the subject, but he flatters himself, that the impartiality
and fidelity with which he has endeavored to execute it, will have the effect
of softening the censure, which its defects may merit.

PHILADE^^^^^, January 1^th 17^^.
OBSERVATIONS ON BILIOUS FEVERS.
FEVERS are termed bilious, when at their commencement, or during their
progress, a greater quantity of bile is secreted and excreted than in time of
health.

Fevers in which a preternatural or excessive secretion and excretion of bile,
is a characteristic symptom, have always more or less of a remission with
respect to the violence of the feverish symptoms once in every twenty-four
hours; this remission in the greatest number of cases takes place every day in
the forenoon, and the feverish symptoms begin to increase about noon, or
imitating the type or form of what is called a double tertian ague, the
remission comes on one day in the forenoon, and the next in the afternoon; or
alternately one day in the afternoon, and the next in the forenoon.

BILIOUS FEVERS,
Or fevers of the remitting kind accompanied with bilious evacuations, prevail
more universally than any other kind, and although they are not so dangerous,
or mortal, as pestilence or typhus, yet from the universality of their sway,
and the frequency of their occurrence they destroy greater numbers in a course
of years, than any other kind or form of fever.

During, or soon after the periodical rainy seasons of the torrid zone,
especially where the soil is moist and unsheltered from the parching rays of a
vertical sun, and abounds with putrefying vegetable and animal substances.
Fevers of a remitting type with reternatural excretions of bile, often occasion
mortality almost equal to that of the Asiatic plague.

This fever not only destroys the majority of new settlers in such situations,
but renders ^he constitutions of those who escape with life, infirm the
remainder of their days.

In many parts of Europe, particularly where the situation is flat, and the
soil moist, this fiend stretches his baneful scepter over the sickening land,
the whole autumnal season.

Along the Tyber in Italy, and on the flat grounds of Hungary in Germany, where
the summers are long, and the heat extreme, bilious remitting fevers are the
most fatal in the catalogue of diseases. Holland, which is little better than
an extensive morass, though situated so far north, is periodically visited by
the bilious fever. It also extends its sway to many parts of England and
Ireland. Nor is the continent of North America exempt from its baneful power.

Throughout all the low grounds from Canada to Florida, this distemper infests
the country at stated periods.

That the bilious fever is only a variety of the intermitting fever, altered in
its aspect and symptoms by climate, season, soil, and the sensible qualities of
the atmosphere, etc. is rendered certain, from its prevailing in similar
situations and states of the weather in all countries.

Thus, in the low grounds of some of the Provinces of Germany, those fevers
which owe their origin to the effluvia derived from a moist and putrid soil,
appear in the form of simple tertians, or distinct quotidians, while in Hungary
where the ground is more level, and the atmosphere almost motionless for want
of hills to conduct the winds, the fever produced by the same exhalations,
appears in the form of a remittent, with malignant symptoms and excessive
bilious evacuations, which in its progress, unless speedily relieved by nature
or art, degenerates into a state of extreme debility, and displays symptoms
exactly like those of the most malignant typhus, or putrid fever as it is
commonly called, occasioned by contagion.

In Italy, a fever the same in kind, but differing in degree of violence, often
appears in the shape of a double tertian, or irregular remittent, and is often
attended in its progress with pitechiae or purple spots, and apthous
ulcerations in the mouth and fauces.

In Holland the same occasional or efficient cause, produces a fever with
distinct intermissions every, or every third day.

In Ethiopia, and in all that tract of country from Sues to Babel Mondel, it
gives the disease the semblance of the pestilence in its most malignant form.

In America, as well as in other countries, the fevers which are occasioned by
the air of marshes, or the effluvia of putrefying vegetable or animal
substances, are amazingly influenced in their aspect and symptoms, by the soil,
situation, climate, season; and by the preceding and present qualities of the
atmosphere, and the customary mode of living of the inhabitants.

In the nothern states, fevers from the recited cause, are seldom epidemic,
though cases of remitting fever are by no means rare in those states, in marshy
situations during the autumnal months, but they mostly appear in the form of
intermittents. In the middle states remittents with bilious evacuations are
very common, but seldom very complicated or malignant, except when the
preceding spring and summer have been moist and sultry. Neither dry and hot, or
wet and cool summers, have been observed to render this kind of fever either
general or malignant: On the contrary, when it does occur after such seasons,
it is generally connected with an inflammatory diathesis, and requires
blood-letting and purging, repeated as often as the symptoms resume any
appearance of violence, as well as the strict observance of the antiphlogistic
regimen, to reduce it to its natural and simple form. But in Virginia, North
and South Carolina, and Georgia, where the heat is more intense, and the soil
more putrid, along the shores and ouzy banks of large rivers and ponds of
stagnant water, particularly after the rice harvest in September and October,
when an extensive surface of moist soil is exposed to the piercing rays of the
sun, a fever of the remitting kind is generated, which exhibits symptoms of
alarming debility and malignancy; and yet, there is not one instance on record,
of this fever however malignant and mortal it may have been to the persons
affected by it, ever being contagious, or of having communicated a fever
distinguished by the same assemblage of symptoms, from one person to another.

The authorities quoted by Dr. Rush, of its being contagious in other parts of
the world, shall be examined in the course of these observations.

From the influence of climate and situation upon the constitutions of the
inhabitants, it is reasonable to expect, that a diversity in the treatment of
the same disease would be requisite. The suggestions of reason are in this
instance, supported by the observations of authors of the most extensive
experience and sagacity; among these may be mentioned, Baglivi, Ziminerman,
Pringle, Tissot; and of more recent date, Lind, Bruce, and Jackson.

That diseases the same in kind, differing only in degree, require not only a
treatment differing in degree, but in kind, we learn from the medical writers
of different countries.

Thus we are informed, that the inhabitants of France bear bleeding without
injury, and often with evident benefit, in almost every form of fever that
occurs there; while in Italy it is thought to do injury in almost every case of
fever. Emetics, and other evacuants, agree with the constitutions of the
Germans, while sudorifics and cordials suit best to animate and warm the
phlegmatic Hollander.

Blisters, volatiles, aromatics and wine, are of use in the remissions of the
fevers that prevail in the autumnal season in the south of Europe, as well as
in the southern states of America, during every period of the disease. But in
the northern states they are seldom admissible, till the vigor and tension of
the arterial system has been reduced by blood-letting, purging, refrigerating
drinks, and abstinence.

Physicians should therefore always compare the climate and soil of the country
where an author has been in habits of making his observations, with those of
his own, before he submits to be governed by his rules or advice. -- Unless he
does this, he will be at a loss to know whether the practice of the author he
may have occasion to consult, will apply to the diseases where he resides or
not.

It also requires great caution as well as discernment, to avoid being misled
by the plausible theories of speculative and fanciful authors. For instance,
who, after reading in one of those authors, that every fever owes its existence
and continuance to a state of debility; that it is aggravated by debilitating
powers, and that purgatives of every species are debilitating powers, would
venture to employ a medicine of this class, in the cure of any kind of fever?
Yet in hot climates, where extreme and constant heat, and a variety of other
circumstances, are said to be constantly conspiring to increase the supposed
cause of the disease (debility,) there is nothing more common, nothing more
beneficial, than the frequent employment of mild purges in remitting bilious
fevers.

Or who that reads, that a convulsive state of the arteries is the proximate
cause of every fever, whether, pestilential, typhus, intermittent, or
remittent, and that copious blood-letting and purging are the best remedies in
one variety of fever arising from the same origin, viz. stimulus with all the
other varieties, would hesitate to employ the same remedies without measure or
reserve, in every form that can possibly occur.

Intermittent and remittent fevers, as well as fevers accompanied with local
affections, are greatly influenced, not only by the climate and soil, but by
the season and sensible qualities of the atmosphere.

Sir John Pringle remarks, that "In Holland toward June, (a healthy month;)
Inflammatory fevers begin to recede, and that bilious remitting and malignant
fevers often succeed, and continue throughout the summer and autumn, until the
return of winter, when inflammatory fevers recommence; the seasons and diseases
interchanging and running into each other."

Dr. Monro relates, that "The first time he saw much of the remitting fever in
Germany, was about the end of June, soon after the army took the field. At that
time the remissions were short, and the fever partook much of the nature of the
common inflammatory fever, and most of the sick were cured by blood letting,
and other antiphlogistic remedies.

"After the middle of June, the fever did not partake near so much of the
inflammatory nature as before; -- the remissions became much more evident, and
it was attended much oftener in the beginning with bilious vomitting and
purging, and in some few the disorder turned to a dysentery.

"A few had it changed into a continued putrid fever, from the wards in one of
the hospitals being too much crowded -- and in some few it terminated in
regular agues. In November several were taken ill of the remitting fever in the
garrison of Bremen, which mostly ended in a regular intermittent, the endemic
distemper of the place."

"In June 1762, the remitting fever began to appear again among the troops at
Natzungen, and continued to be frequent through the summer and autumn. The
greatest part terminated this year in regular agues, mostly in tertians, and
were cured by the bark, whereas the year before, very few terminated this way."

(This is a clear proof of the influence of climate and soil upon the
constitution, and of the power of constitution in modifying disease.) "Most of
those ill of this fever, had a yellowish color of the countenance, which went
off with the fever; in some more observable than in others; in general it was
slight; some few become yellow all over."

Dr. Pringle has also taken notice of this yellowness sometimes occuring in
cases of remitting fever, and remarks, that it was found more frequent during
the first campaign, than afterward.

Dr. Lind, the most experienced physician of the present age in febrile
diseases, relates, that "The years 1765 and 1766, were distinguished by an
uncommon appearance of intermitting and remitting fevers in most parts of
England, one obvious cause of this was the unusual frequency of the easterly
wind, (which contrary to what it is in America is always dry and hot in that
climate.)

"The year 1765 was remarkable, not only for the long continuance of easterly
winds, but also for an extraordinary degree of heat: In the month of August,
the thermometer was often as high as 82 in the middle of the day. This
considerable addition of heat, together with the want of refreshing rains,
greatly spread this fever, increased its violence, and in many cases changed
its form.

"The violence of the fever, with its appearances in an intermitting,
remitting, or a continued form, marked as it were the nature of the soil. -- In
Portsmouth, its symptoms were bad, worse at Kingston, and still more violent
and dangerous in a street called the halfway-house, where the situation of the
houses are low and damp.

"A constant pain and giddiness of the head, were the most inseparable and
distressing symptoms of this disease: some were delirious; and a few vomitted
up a quantity of bile, and in all, the countenance was yellow. The universality
of this fever, together with its uncommon symptoms, were at first alarming; but
when the lancet was withheld, and the bark given ple^tifully in large doses few
died.

"The disease decreased with the heat of the weather, and in the winter
appeared chiefly in the form of a quartan ague (Lind on Diseases of Hot
Climates, Edit. 2d. p. 25.)
."

We learn from the Observations of Dr. R. Jackson in his treatise on the Fevers
of Jamaica, that the season of the year has considerable effect upon the
diathesis of the system, and consequently upon the type, or form of the fever,
even within the tropics. Thus in the dry season (from December to April) though
the remissions are not always more perfect, the type is commonly more simple,
and the general diathesis more inflammatory. In the rainy months, remissions
are more distinct, but the type is more complicated, and the general diathesis
has a strong tendency to putrescency, and often with symptoms of nervous
affection. The stomach, bowels and liver, likewise suffer more in this season
than in the dryer months of the year. Besides this difference which arises from
season, we also find very constant effects from local situation. Thus in hilly
districts there is more of the inflammatory diathesis, with more frequent
determination to the head and lungs, and less distinct remissions than in flat
and champaign countries, where the stomach and biliary system suffer in a
remarkable manner."

This effect of season and soil, is still more remarkable in the intermitting
or remitting fever of the United States of America. In the spring and beginning
of summer, the double tertian or remitting fever, is the most usual type of
fever in the marshy tracts, and low grounds, in every part of the Union, and
the remissions are short and imperfect.

In the months of August and September, and part of October, quotidians, and
fevers with very imperfect and obscure remissions are more prevalent than any
other forms or types. As the autumn advances, single tertians and remittents,
with inflammatory symptoms become most prevalent.

Besides the changes, produced in the type and symptoms of fevers produced by
the air of marshes, or the effluvia of putrefying vegetable substances by the
change of season, and the condition of the soil, climate has a considerable
effect upon it -- For on York-Island, the type is generally, even in the heat
of summer, single tertian. In Georgia, the single tertian is the prevailing
type only in the winter and spring.

In summer and part of autumn, double tertians are common; and types of a still
more complicated kind frequently make their appearance in certain situations of
all the southern states. Dysentery, dropsy, and fevers accompanied with
malignant symptoms, are likewise more frequent in the southern, than in the
eastern or middle states; and the course of the fever in the former in general,
is more certainly checked in its early stage by the Peruvian bark, than in the
latter.

Virginia lies about half way between New York and Savannah, and the general
effects of its climate on the common endemic of the country, corresponds in a
great measure with its local situation. Deviations from the tertian type are
more frequent here than in New York, but less so than in Georgia.

SPORADIC CASES of remitting fever occur at Philadelphia, in the spring, and
early part of summer. During those seasons, they are generally accompanied with
inflammatory symptoms, and the remissions are very imperfect and obscure for
the first three or four days, after which they become more evident, and in a
few days more, unless prevented by improper treatment or conduct, change to
complete intermittents, which are readily removed by the use of the bark.

In the cases which occur in the vernal and summer seasons, bilious symptoms
are seldom observable, except at the accession of the fever, or with those
symptoms which usher it in.

Nausea and occasional puking, are common at the accession of every species of
fever, whether inflammatory, nervous, or intermitting: Under these
circumstances more or less bile is generally ejected, but as this is merely the
effect, and not the cause of the vomiting, and as the evacuation of bile in any
form or variety of remitting fever, is only a symptom, and not a cause of the
disease, there is no propriety in naming the fever bilious, in which it only
occasionally and under particular, or accidental circumstances becomes a
predominant symptom. With the same propriety it might be denominated
inflammatory in those cases where the pulse is strong and quick, the skin hot
and dry during the exacerbations, though the remissions be regular and distinct.

In both forms the fever is derived from the same occasional cause, miasmata,
operating on constitutions, differing only in diathesis.

The paroxisms of pure intermitting fevers are always finished in less than
twenty-four hours; -- so likewise in remitting fevers, though the hot and
sweating stages of the paroxism do not entirely cease before the expiration of
twenty-four hours from the accession of each paroxism; they always suffer
before that time, a considerable abatement or remission of their violence; and
at the same period every day, or every other day, a paroxism is in some shape
renewed, which runs the same course as before.

When it happens, and in certain circumstances this is often the case,
especially in an advanced state of this fever, that the remission is imperfect,
is perhaps without sensible perspiration, and that the returning paroxism is
not marked by the most usual symptoms of a cold stage, but chiefly by the
aggravation or exacerbation of a hot stage, it is difficult to distinguish the
disease from that species of fever denominated typhus, occasioned by contagion,
or human effluvia. -- But if these have passed from an intermitting or
remitting form, to that of a continued one, and still show some tendency to
become intermittent once a day, or at least every second day, and there is no
foundation to suspect exposure to contagion or human effluvia, and if they have
but one paroxism in the course of twenty-four hours, they certainly ought to be
considered and treated as remittents. For "Continued fevers which arise from
contagion, show little tendency to become intermittent or remittent, in any
part of their course, and especially after the first week of their continuance,
and have pretty constantly an exacerbation, and remission twice in the course
of every twenty-four hours." Cullens Practice of Physic, p. 73d, sect. 29,
published by Rotheram with notes in 1791.


Two circumstances diametrically opposite in their nature, appear to occasion
the remitting fever, to assume a continued form, viz. a phlogistic diathesis,
and a defect of power in both the nervous, and vascular systems, -- ^n the one
state, the actions produced in the circulating vessels are preternaturally
strong and quick, in the other they are preternaturally weak and irregular.

Inflammatory topical affections are very apt to occur during the season when
remittents and intermittents are prevalent, upon any sudden change of weather
to a colder state; particularly after rain has continued for three or four
days, which is very common at, or soon after the autumnal equinox. In these
cases, the remissions of pain and fever are more observable every morning, than
when they occur in winter or spring; which evinces that they are either
connected with the cause of common intermittents, or that the constitutions of
people are disposed, at that season to take on an intermittent or remittent
form, notwithstanding the presence of the stimulus of inflammation.

When the small pox becomes prevalent, either in the natural way or by
inoculation at the same season, the fever with which it is accompanied
frequently assumes the remittent form. And even the malignant yellow fever
which prevailed in 1793, did the same in numerous instances, though it had few
symptoms in other respects like those of a common remittent, and differed from
it essentially in its origin, nature, cause, and manner of attack.

The celebrated Sydenham (who, by the by, was a very erroneous philosopher)
misled by vague and erroneous notions, respecting influential constitutions of
the atmosphere (which he ascribed to some secret and inexplicable alteration in
the bowels of the earth, or to the influence of the planets; See his Letter to
Dr. Goodall, in his whole works translated by Swan, ad. Edit. page 547. -- In
which he gives an account of the rise of a new fever.
) held an opinion that the reverse of what I have assigned, took place when the
small pox or plague prevailed: "For these," says he, "either banished all other
diseases, or compelled them to wear their livery; that is, they assumed their
type, and leading symptoms, and required the same kind of treatment: -- An
opinion totally incompatible with facts and later observations. An author of
more modern date, from confounding epidemics derived from contagion, with those
from season, and soil, has also fallen into the same error."

It has been, and is still the opinion of several physicians of respectability,
not only in Philadelphia, but also in Baltimore, New York, and Boston, that the
contagious yellow fever which has prevailed during the summer and autumnal
months, in several of the seaport towns of America, since the year 179^, is the
same in kind, differing only in degree with the common bilious remittent; and
because the season was dry, and uniformly warm when it prevailed at
Philadelphia in 1793; its contagious quality was ascribed to that cause, and
when it prevailed at New York in 1795, because the weather was remarkably wet
at that time, it was as preposterously ascribed to that circumstance.

It is not only rational to suppose, but many facts favor the opinion, that
when no other disease appears in the place where a contagious disease prevails,
that the season or sensible qualities of the air, or exhalations from the soil
at that time, are not favorable to the generation of the diseases usually
endemic at that season. It is impossible that the contagion should have the
effect of banishing them, as it can have no effect upon the quality of the air,
to any extent from the bodies of those with the disease. Facts relative to the
state of the weather at New York in the autumn of 1795, and at Philadelphia the
present year, viz. 1797, which were wetter and cooler than many preceding
seasons had been, as well as those contained in almost every modern medical
author, establish this.

It is merely owing to a change in the sensible qualities of the air, or to the
removal of the various effluvia, or impurities with which it is occasionally
mixed, that one epidemic succeeds or takes place of another, and not to the
influence of one epidemic over another. For example: In the warm and impure air
of autumn, when intermittents prevail, pleurisies are rare, but on the approach
of winter the intermittents decline, and pleurisies increase. Is this owing to
the influence of the one disease over the other, or is it owing to a change in
the sensible qualities of the air? That febrile diseases derived from
contagion, and those from marsh effluvia, often prevail in the same place, and
at the same time, is known to every person acquainted with medical history.
Even Sydenham has recorded instances, (though they contradict his doctrine of
occult causes) of several diseases different in kind, being epidemic in the
same place at the same time See his Account of the Epidemic Constitution of
1670, 71, and 72, at page 142, Edit. 3d. translated by Swan.
. Change of season always banishes some kinds of disease, and favors the
generation and propagation of others. This is so simple and obvious, that none
but a man wedded to the most extravagant theory, would have looked into the
bowels of the earth, or up to the stars for the cause.

When however I reflect that philosophy was only beginning to emerge from
gothic darkness, in which it had long been sunk, at the time Sydenham published
his observations; I am willing to make due allowance for his errors: -- But the
present era, when philosophy has arrived at a state of improvement, which
approaches to perfection, such errors are not entitled to the same toleration.

I shall now transcribe a few remarks from other authorities, which will remove
every doubt, that two contagious diseases, different in kind, may prevail in
the same place at the same time. Examples of this kind are mentioned by the
experienced Dr. Lind, in his Observations on the Diseases incidental to
Europeans in Hot Climates, page 126, 5th Edit: And Russel on the Plague, at
page 24 and 48, relates that the remitting fever prevailed at Aleppo in August
1760, when the plague was on the decline, and in November 1761, the plague and
the small pox prevailed there at the same time.

Mertins in his History of the plague at Moscow in 1771, at page 186 gives
similar examples.

Dr. Maximillian Plinta has published an Account of the Scarlet Fever and
Hooping Cough, being prevalent at Elangen in the year 1790, at the same time
with an epidemic small pox. Diseases of various description also came under the
notice of several physicians in Philadelphia, during the prevalence of the
malignant yellow fever in 179^. Several cases of small pox came under the care
of Dr. Deveze, and Dr. Duffield, at Bush Hill hospital, which were sent out of
the city previous to the eruption, from suspicion of their having the malignant
yellow fever.

Several cases of the same kind came under my own notice: A Mr. Quinton from
New England, died of the small pox, at Mrs. Newark's in Spruce street at the
time, when two of her other lodgers had the yellow fever. -- Several cases of
quotidians and tertains came under my care in different parts of the city, and
in the suburbs, where the contagion never reached.

The same disease prevailed in the summer and part of the autumn of 1794, at
Fell's Point, adjoining Baltimore; at which time the small pox also became
epidemic, as appears by the report of the Committee of Health, and a letter
from Dr. Buchannan, dated October the 11th, 1794, published in the Gazette of
the U. S. October, 6th 1794.

Dr. Monson, in his account of the yellow fever which prevailed at New Haven in
1794, says the scarletina prevailed at the same time, and that a greater number
of persons were affected with the scarletina, than with the yellow fever; see
his letter to Noah Webster, Esquire. page 179 of Webster's Collection on Bilious
Fevers.

In the present year also, I saw several cases of scarlet fever, and of the
small pox, in the same part of the city where the malignant fever was most
prevalent, and one case of the latter, in the same chamber with two other
patients, ill of the malignant fever.

From this statement it appears, that all that can with propriety be understood
by an epidemic constitution of the atmosphere, is, that it is rendered more
capable of retaining miasmatic effluvia and contagious matters, at one time
than another, or that it renders the human body more susceptible of contagious,
as well as more liable to febrile diseases from other exciting causes, at one
time than another. From the facts on record respecting the plague, it appears
that a certain range of temperature is requisite for the contagion, by which it
is propagated, to operate: Hence it would appear that the pestilential
contagion is attached to, and rendered volatile to a certain extent, by a
certain quantity of caloric or matter of heat, or is attenuated and diffused by
the action of sensible heat, like water converted into vapor, so as to be
specifically lighter than the air near the surface of the ground. This opinion
appears to be confirmed, from the effects of excessive heat, as well as by
those of frost: The one rendering it more light and volatile, so as to rise too
high to have any effect; the other detaching the caloric, and letting the
contagious particles fall to the ground, etc.

Whether the effluvia with which the atmosphere of cities is occasionally
replenished from the various sources of nature, and art, can have the effect of
rendering any kind of contagion more active and deleterious, or not, I am not
prepared to determine; but it is reasonable to suppose a circumstance of this
kind, by diminishing the purity of the atmosphere; renders it sooner saturated
with the contagious particles, and cannot fail of rendering the human body more
easily affected, and the disease more dangerous when it does take place. The
kind of atmosphere, according to Mead, most favorable to the propagation of
pestilential fevers, is that which is hot, moist and calm. -- But from recent
observations, it appears, that the contagion of the yellow fever is most active
in the month of September* when the temperature of the air in the middle of the
day, generally ranges between 60 and 80, and is about 10 lower every morning
and evening: This inequality in the temperature rendering the human body
exceedingly irritable, and liable to be affec^^d, not only by contagion, but by
marsh miasmata.


This explanation of epidemic constitutions of the air, being less visionary
than that of Dr. Sydenham, and supported by a greater number of facts, and
observations, is the one I have adopted, and the one that I recommend to the
attentive examination of the reader.

It has become fashionable in this city, to call every fever bilious, that
occurs in the summer and autumn, whether accompanied with a preternatural
secretion and effusion of bile or not. This is certainly very objectionable, as
it has a tendency to mislead, all who are governed by names, instead of the
symptoms of diseases; nausea and some puking sometimes occur at the accession
of every kind, or variety of fever, and more or less bile is at that time
generally evacuated; but as this is merely the effect of the cold stage of the
fever, and the condition of the system at that time, and not the cause of the
fever; the impropriety of denominating it from that circumstance must be
obvious, especially, as that is not a constant, but accidental symptom of the
fever. On the other hand, if it be denominated a phlogistic or asthenic
remittent, according to the diathesis designated by the symptoms, the young
practitioner, will not be so liable to mistake the true indications, and will
employ those means warranted by the experience of ages, for the reduction of
excessive action, or the support of declining strength, as symptoms may
indicate.

OF THE CAUSES OF BILIOUS FEVERS.
FROM the numerous observations which have been made in different quarters of
the world, there can be no doubt, that the cause of the fevers under
consideration, is a miasma or exhalation, which issues from a marshy or putrid
soil, or from putrefying vegetable and animal substances. The similarity in the
season, situation, and soil, in the different countries and districts in which
these kind of fevers prevail, and especially the time of the year in which they
are most epidemic and dangerous, concur in proving that however symptoms may
vary in different situations and constitutions, they arise from one common
cause, and that cause is miasma.

This miasma is supposed to partake of the nature of the putrid source from
whence it is derived, but whatever its nature may be, it exists in the
atmosphere over the soil or putrefying substances, from whence it arises in
various quantities, and perhaps degrees of strength, according to the climate,
season, temperature of the air, and quantity of putrid matter. Hence in
temperate climates in the hot season, it is in less quantity or in less
strength, than in hotter climates with a similar soil. In hot climates also,
the heat and impurity of the air, favors its operation, by inducing debility
and preternatural irritability in the animal system. In temperate climates the
difference between the temperature of the air of the days and nights, render
the body more especially liable to be affected by febrile miasmata.

Why these miasmata when diffused abroad in the atmosphere of marshy districts,
do not produce fever in all the inhabitants within the sphere of its influence,
or why some are affected by it much later than others, can only be explained by
supposing that it can only operate on relaxed, infirm, or debilitated
constitutions, and that some debilitating cause must conspire with it, before
it can produce any morbid effect in vigorous and robust constitutions. This
appears to be confirmed by its effects on the emigrants from Ireland, which
generally arrive in this country the beginning of August. Very few are affected
with either the remitting or intermitting fever the first season, though
numbers are with the dysentery, whereas very few of those that take up their
residence in the suburbs of Philadelphia, escape it the second or third season
after their arrival: but many are affected the first season of their arrival
with infflammatory fever, especially if the season be dry and hot, -- if wet
and cool, the dysentery. This is also the case with persons who come to reside
in the city, from the western and hilly parts of Pennsylvania.

Mud and stagnant water in every climate, possess the materials which give
origin to the cause of this species of disease; but a combination of other
circumstances is requisite to give it activity. Among the principal of the
circumstances which give activity to this cause, may be reckoned the influence
of a powerful sun. Hence some situations, which in the winter season are
distinguished for no particular disease, are observed in the hot months to be
most remarkably unhealthful.

There are few men whose observations are so circumscribed, as not to know,
that it is in the neighborhood of swamps, mill-dams, and near the shores of
fresh water rivers, that intermittents and remittents chiefly prevail; yet it
deserves likewise to be remarked, that though a fever of one of these forms is
most prevalent in such situations, no champaign or level country is entirely
exempt from them, especially when wet summers are succeeded by dry and sultry
autumns.

Fresh cleared land in level countries, is rendered much more unhealthful for
some time, than when covered with wood. The reason is obvious; the wood not
only stops the progress of noxious vapors carried from a distance, but it also
covers and protects the ground from the immediate action of the sun; in doing
which it more than counterbalances the less free circulation of the air, or the
greater dampness of the ground. Hence no opinion is more erroneous, than that
the clearing a country of its woods, renders it healthful. Unless the grounds
be drained and cultivated as well as cleared, the effect is likely to be the
reverse.

FEBRILE MIASMATA Conveyed through the AIR to a considerable Distance.
IT would be a matter of utility could we determine which certainty to what
distance from their source, the noxious effluvia of marshes extend. But this is
a question which we can not expect to ascertain with precission. It is not
uniformly the same in all situations, depending perhaps on the concentrated
state of the exhalation, at its source, the obstacles it meets with in its
progress, and the nature of the ground over which it passes, or to which it is
directed. Dr. Jackson relates, that he has known their influence very
remarkable at the distance of a mile and a half, on the top of an hill of very
considerable elevation. (p. 412.)

The same author, as well as the experienced Lind, late physician to Haslar
Hospital, remarks, that a space of time almost constantly intervenes, after
exposure to the noxious effluvia of marshes, before the subsequent appearance
of fever. "This is not uniformly the same in all persons, owing sometimes
perhaps to the state of concentration, in which the exhalation is applied to
the body, or to the peculiar aptitude of the individual, to favor or resist
its operation." -- Both the last mentioned authors agree, that the fever seldom
attacks in less than seven days after exposure to the noxious effluvia, and Dr.
Jackson says, that he oftener observed it to attack fourteen days after such
exposure. (p. 415.)

The nature of this cause of fever, though it has long been a subject of
enquiry remains still unknown.

From the greater violence of the fever produced by it, as well as the
complexety, and often malignity of its symptoms in soils the most putrid,
during the autumnal season, we infer that the exhalation is in the largest
quantity, and has acquired a greater degree of power, or that the atmosphere
with which it is mixed, is by some means deprived of its correcting power. But
we have hitherto been able to proceed no farther, notwithstanding the aids
which modern chemistry has furnished.

It has been supposed, (and the supposition was adopted by the celebrated Dr.
Cullen,) to possess a S^eptic Principle, but this alone is by no means
sufficient, to account for the very peculiar manner in which it affects the
human race. Some other quality perhaps is therefore connected with it, which
cannot be brought under the inspection of our senses. But though the ingenuity
of the human mind, has not hitherto been able to penetrate the intimate nature
of this cause of fever, we still have it in our power to trace its effects upon
the human constitution.

We plainly perceive that a habitual exposure to it, is peculiarly unfriendly
to the principle of life, and in a very remarkable manner, shortens the period
of existence. Hence, as recorded by Dr. Jackson, while females born, and
constantly residing in the the low lands of Georgia, have seldom been observed
to live beyond the age of forty, males seldom exceed fifty, whereas Europeans
or Americans from the northern states, who had arrived at manhood before they
settled there, have sometimes lived to a very advanced age, though the majority
of new settlers have died, of what is called a seasoning to the climate, the
first or second year after their arrival.

Though these and other instances which will occur to every ones recollection,
afford sufficient proofs of the noxious quality and power of marsh effluvia,
yet we are by no means instructed as to the manner by which it becomes so. It
will therefore profit but little, to prosecute the subject any farther.

Certain limits are unquestionably prescribed to human researches, on the
present subject, beyond which, though fancy may take its slight, and theory
make wide excursions, all is conjecture, obscurity, or profound darkness.

Floods of rain, by diluting and precipitating putrid exhalations, relieve from
the remitting bilious fevers, common to marshy situations; but rain has no
effect upon the yellow fever, except when joined with cold, or succeeded by
frost.

1. IS THE BILIOUS FEVER, OR ANY OTHER VARIETY OF THE REMITTING FEVER
OCCASIONED BY MARSH MIASMATA, OR THE EXHALATIONS FROM PUTRID, OR PUTREFYING
VEGETABLES EVER CONTAGIOUS?

2. AND WAS THE YELLOW FEVER, WHICH OCCASIONED SUCH DEPLORABLE MORTALITY IN
PHILADELPHIA, IN THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN OF 1793, A D WHICH HAS APPEARED IN OTHER
SEAPORT TOWNS IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA SINCE THAT PERIOD, ONLY A HIGHER
GRADE OF THE BILIOUS FEVER, GENERATED BY THE SAME CAUSES?

These are questions highly interesting to the inhabitants of this country, and
as physicians of considerable respectability differ in opinion respecting them,
and the public mind has been much distracted by the discordant opinions which
have been published on the subject; a desire of reconciling this difference,
and of clearing it from the ambiguity in which different views have involved
it, has induced me to undertake the troublesome task of collecting the
sentiments and opinions of the most experienced writers on the subject, and is
now my motive for submitting them to the inspection of the public.

To these I have added a variety of remarks and explanatory notes.

How far these are calculated to determine those interesting questions, must be
submitted to the judgment of judicious and impartial enquirers.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCES RESPECTING THE CONTAGIOUS NATURE OF
INTERMITTENT and REMITTENT FEVERS
IT has been said that it is scarcely possible to open a practical book on
medical subjects, without meeting with facts which establish the opinion, that
fevers occasioned by the exhalations from putrid vegetables are contagious. The
fevers generated by putrid cabbage, mentioned by Dr. Rodgers, and by putrid
flax mentioned by Dr. Zimmerman, were both of them contagious. Lancisi,
Reverius, Bianchi, Cleghorn, Lind of Windsor, and Clark, have also been quoted
in support of this opinion. -- All of which shall be noticed in the sequel.

That Dr. Rodgers of Cork, was deceived with resspect to the origin of the
fever which broke out at Wadham College, is rendered more than probable by the
observations of the celebrated Lind of Haslar Hospital. This author informs us
in his Essay on Fevers and Infection, page 290, that almost all the cases of
fever which occur at academies and boarding-schools are derived from infection;
and that most cases of low fever which occur in private families are derived
from the same source. Dr. Cullen has expressed a similar opinion, which has
been adopted by Robertson, Clark, Ferriar, and a numerous host of authors of
the first rate abilities.

Dr. Zimmerman appears to have confounded epidemic with contagious diseases;
nor should this be thought extraordinary, for notwithstanding his abilities and
character, he has been frequently mistaken in his opinion respecting the remote
causes of other diseases. Among other mistakes, he says the scurvy is
propagated by contagion, Experience in Physic, page 125 of Vol. 2nd.
and that putrid fevers are occasioned by the exhalations from putrid animal
substances, and the plague at Grand Cairo, by the stench from swarms of dead
and putrid grasshoppers and locusts. Mead on the Plague, says it originates
from heat and moisture, acting on dead animal matter, which is also erroneous.
In the East, says he, it can be generated in this manner, but not in the
temperate climates of Europe. If that were the case the disease would be
propagated by the atmosphere, to a certain extent, to numbers at once, and not
from one to another in succession.


Lancisi who was physician to Pope Clement XI. was so much mistaken in the real
causes of diseases, that he ascribed the pestilence which prevailed more or
less at Grand Cairo annually, to the effluvia of hemp and flax, which happened
to be stored in granaries near that city, at a time when the disease was more
general than usual; he has also ascribed a fever which depopulated one end of
Rome, to the putrid effluvia from horses litter or stable dung. Vol. 1st. page
350.


That the plague never originates in that way, but is derived from specific
contagion, generated in the cities of the East, is clearly shown in Mead's
Short Discourse on the Plague, published in the year 1721, and in Russel's
treatise on the same, published in the year 1791. The other opinion of Lancisi,
viz. that one end of Rome was depopulated by a fever, which originated from the
putrid effluvia of horses litter, etc. Professor Rush has refused in the 2nd
Vol. of the American Philosophical Transactions, page 211 and 212: These are
his words. "Offal matters, especially those which are of a vegetable nature,
should be removed from the neighborhood of a dwelling house. The dung of
domestic animals, during its progress toward manure, may be excepted from this
direction. Nature which made man and these animals equally necessary to each
others subsistence, has kindly prevented any inconvenience from their living
together. On the contrary, to repay the husbandman for affording shelter to
these useful and helpless animals; nature has done more: She has endowed their
dung with a power of destroying the effects of marsh exhalations, and of
preventing fevers. The miserable cottagers in Europe who live under the same
roof, and in some instances in the same room with their cattle are always
healthy. Is this owing to the dung of those animals, or to the purity of the
air from other sources, counteracting or destroying the putrescent quality of
these exhalations?
In Philadelphia, fevers are less known in the neighborhood of livery stables,
than in any other part of the city. I could mention a family that has lived
near thirty years near a livery stable, in a sickly part of the city, that has
never known a fever but from the small pox or measles."

Dr. Zimmerman has indeed said, that "the effluvia from a little heap of flax
has been known to occasion a malignant fever, which proved fatal to the family
in which it began, and afterward spread its contagion through a whole
country." But it does not appear from this paragraph, whether he meant that the
exhalation from the flax, or the fever from the family spread its contagion
through a whole country. This can only be determined by reference to the
original, which I have not had an opportunity of examining, and it is seldom
that a translation conveys the precise meaning of the author. He has not
mentioned whether the disease, which he says was occasioned by the exhalations
from the putrid flax, attacked a number at the same time, or in succession, as
they came within the sphere of contagion, that is within six or eight feet of
the patient, for it has been ascertained by Dr. Haygath of Chester, that even
the contagion of the small pox is innoxious at that distance, where a free
circulation of air is preserved.

If the facts mentioned by Dr. Zimmerman were true, the human race might
literally work out their salvation with fear and trembling, since none of woman
born, could possibly survive one hot summer; for although, "a little heap of
putrid flax," should be wanting, there are always apples rotting on the ground,
putrid cabbage in the garden, turnips, potatoes, onions, or other vegetables in
vaults or cellars, -- and bilge water on shipboard.

As to Dr. Rogers it appears evident that he did not know the difference
between contagious, and epidemic diseases, for he has ascribed the former to
causes which (...) only produce epidemics or sporadics, and not contagious
ones. The fevers which prevailed annually at Cork, he says were owing to the
exhalations of the putrid blood from the slaughter-houses, particularly after
the summer rains; whereas it is well known (for it has been often observed)
that such diseases are common in all damp situations in the autumnal season,
where there are no slaughter-houses. The healthiness of the generality of
butcher's families, is opposed to his opinion, as well as the healthiness of
the manufacturers of starch and indigo, where vegetable putrefaction greatly
abounds, is to that of vegetable putrefaction occasioning malignant, much less
contagious fevers in situations open to the free introduction of the
surrounding air. Unreflecting credulity, -- like Shakespeare's Glendower, is
always ready to ascribe simple events to extraordinary causes. At my birth,
says Glendower, strange phenomenon appeared; comets, eclipses, and rocking of
the firmament. Percy to ridicule his vain credulity and self-sufficiency,
answers, that all these phenomenon might also have happened at the birth of a
kitten: Meaning that there could be no connection between such phenomenon, and
the birth of mortals. Physicians are too often apt to attribute the cause of
things to some circumstance most obvious to their senses, or to some remarkable
circumstance in, or phenomenon which accompanies or preceeds any disease; and
for want of tracing all the circumstances to their source, mistake effects or
coincidents for causes. Thus in the year 1699, when the yellow fever ceased
upon the coming on of frost, because Roger Gill a preacher had offered himself
some time before, as a sacrifice for the people, and soon after died, with
others exposed to the contagion, it was generally ascribed to a special
interposition of Providence, instead of being ascribed to the effect of frost,
which was the physical cause of its suppression. I once saw a bodkin thrust
through a hen's head, some of the balsam of Riga was applied, the hen walked
about soon after, and appeared to recover by the virtue of that balsam. Another
hen with a bodkin thrust through her head, to which no balsam was applied, did
the same and detected the cheat.

A medical professor, says, that Dr. Lind ascribes the yellow fever to
vegetable exhalations, but I can find no such sentiment in any of Lind's works.
His words are (in his Treatise of Diseases of Hot Climates, page 119 -- 5th
Edition.) This fever in general proceeds from intense heat, and a peculiar
unhealthfulness of the air, but he does not say how that unhealthfulness of the
air is produced. What he has said respecting the effects of unwholesome air at
Greenwich hospital in Jamaica, has no other reference to the subject, than that
every kind of fever is aggravated by such air, page 179, 5th Edition. The fact
is, that Dr. Lind was not acquainted with the source of this fever, but mistook
it for a higher grade of the bilious remittent fever, rendered so by a peculiar
unwholesomeness of the air; but unluckily for these opinions, there are no
instances of a bilious fever becoming contagious, nor one authentic instance
where the disease under consideration ever occurred in any state of the
atmosphere, without the concurrence of specific contagion. -- For proof of
this, I refer to the facts contained in Hillary's Diseases of Barbados, not to
his speculative opinions; Gough's History of the Friends; to Dr. Mitchel's
Letter to Dr. Franklin; to Lind on Infection; to Linings Account of its several
occurrences at Charleston, in 1732, 1739 -- 45 and -- 48, where it was each
time traced to importation, and when some of the seasons in which it occurred,
were both cooler and wetter than many which had intervened, or preceded them.
The fact is, Lind knew nothing about the disease but from the report of others,
otherwise he would not have published an extract of a letter from Dr. N. Smith
to oppose the opinion of its being contagious. (See his Essay on the means of
preserving the health of seamen, etc.) If Lind was right in his opinion, the
disease he speaks of could not be the same as the one which prevailed in the
West India Islands, as well as in Philadelphia, in 1793; for it was highly
contagious in both places. And in the West Indies affected the natives, as well
as foreigners. Not withstanding the positive manner in which the other, Dr.
Lind, (now of Windsor) who was surgeon to a little sloop of war, in the service
of the East India Company, has decided on the question, his opportunities were
too unfavourable, and his observations too limited to determine a question of
this nature.

Dr. Cleghorn has said, that tertians have as good a right to be called
contagious, as the measles or small pox, but as he has not mentioned any facts
in support of his assertion, it can only be considered as mere matter of
opinion, derived perhaps from hearsay, or the Ipse dixit of some professor
learned in ancient error.

It would be mere waste of time, to employ my pen against such authors as
Riverius and Bianchi. Works published when fair science was only beginning to
dawn, claim compassion.

But Dr. Clark is a champion in the cause of contagion, over whom a victory
would be honorable.

This author asserts that every form and variety of fever belongs to the same
genus, and is occasioned by one and the same cause, viz. contagion, and that
every form and variety is more or less contagious according to the situation,
state of the atmosphere, and the constitution of the person exposed to the
exciting cause of the disease. Yet he acknowledges that, "They are seldom
contagious, except when the air in the apartment of the sick, is saturated with
animal effluvia." Treatise on Diseases in long Voyages, etc. Vol. 2d. Edit. 2d.


To prove the contagious power of remittents and intermittents, he mentions the
following particulars.

"The Grenville Indiaman which touched at the Island of Java, suffered greatly
from the malignity of the air. A few were taken on board when the ship sailed
from Batavia ill of a malignant fever, which spread by contagion at sea, and
carried off great numbers. I visited several (adds our author,) when she
arrived at China, who were reduced to mere skeletons by the duration of the
fever and the dysentery, both of which were most certainly propagated by
contagion."

From Dr. Clark's mentioning his having visited several in this ship, after her
arrival at China, it appears that he was not on board of her at the time he
says "the disease spread by contagion at sea," of course he could not determine
with certainty, whether the disease was contagious or not.

Dr. Lind on Diseases of Hot Climates, says, "a person may be attacked by a
fever several days after exposure to the exhalations of marshy grounds. From
comparing many instances of people, who have slept on shore during the sickly
season, and which alone have been taken ill out of the whole ships company,
then lying in an open road, it appears that some are immediately seized with
sickness or delirium, many are not seized with any complaint till they have
been on board for two or three days; several have been only slightly indisposed
for the first five or six days; and in a few the symptoms of indisposition have
not appeared before the tenth or twelfth day. Diseases of Hot Climates, p. 182.
Edition 5th.
Hence the effects of the injury received on shore from land air, may not
appear till some time after the ship has been at sea, And as all the Patients
after such exposure, are not attacked at the same time, but in succession,
physicians are apt to be deceived, and to suppose it contagious when it is not
so. -- And as a contagious fever is frequently generated at sea from the
confined air of neglected holds, and the effluvia from animal bodies, it is
difficult to determine whether the diseases which occur on board, arise from
impure land air, or from contagion generated in the ship.
or a contagion may be generated even at sea, from causes which it is sometimes
difficult to ascertain."

Dr. R. Jackson in his late Treatise on the intermitting fever of America,
assures us that fevers produced by the air of marshes, (or the exhalations from
putrid vegetable substances) seldom if ever make their attack in less than
seven days after such exposure, and that some have been as long even as twenty
days after such exposure, before the was fever completely formed.

To support the opinion which he appears to have adopted from Dr. Cleghorn,
that common intermittents are contagious; Dr. Clark informs us, that an old
lady with the palsy, who lived up three pair of stairs, in a situation where no
marsh miasmata could reach her, was attacked with an ague, and as there was no
source of marsh miasma, from whence it could have originated it must have been
occasioned by contagion. But from whom she received the contagion he has not
said.

From this case it appears that Dr. Clark thought, no case of ague could take
place in any situation, or from any circumstance, unless the person affected
had been previously exposed to marsh exhalation, or to the effluvia of a person
laboring under the disease. A mistake which is unpardonable in an author, who
pretends to write for the instruction of others.

The fact however is very different from what Dr. Clark has supposed, for there
are a multiplicity of observations upon record, which as well as my own
observations, convince me that intermittents often occur in situations excluded
both from marshes and sick persons, where patients, after being debilitated by
any acute disease, fall into regular intermittents from exposure to the night
air, when the dews are copious, or after a sudden change of weather from dry
and hot to wet and cold. -- Perhaps this was the case with Dr. Clark's patient
who was debilitated by a chronic disease. We are also told by Dr. Clark, that a
decrepid and infirm gentleman, and his servant maid were both attacked by an
intermittent, for which no cause could be assigned, but the visit of another
maid servant from the country. He knew a child take the ague from being much
conversant with a person troubled with that disease -- "And a man from only
visiting a friend while sweating in a tertian." Since the year 1788, adds Dr.
Clark, "I have seen six instances of agues communicated from one to another by
contagion in the wards of the infirmary at New Castle."

These may appear unequivocal proofs of the contagious nature of intermittent
and remittent fevers, to persons not aware of the changes which the state of
the mind, the situation of place, and the change of living, as well as the
propensity to imitation, (which prevails in most diseases attended with nervous
symptoms,) have upon the human body.

Here Dr. Chalmers observes for me, that when one person in a family sickens,
and the disease cannot be removed in a few days, there is nothing more common
than for some of the attendants to be affected in the same way; this gives an
alarm to the neighbors, who conclude that the disease is contagious, though in
general, there is nothing more foreign from the truth -- for it is generally
owing to the similarity of the constitutions which now prevails in consequence
of climate and season, and to greater exposure than ordinary to the prevailing
causes. This is particularly the case with nurses and other attendants who are
deprived of their customary rest and food, when they expose themselves abroad
after being debilitated by confinement in the warmer and more impure air of a
sick-room.

From comparing that fever called by Dr. Clark Dr. Clark and Dr. Millar of
London, have both confounded the remittent, from the exhalations of vegetable
putrefaction with the continued fever (...) jails and hospitals.
a remittent, and which Sennertus says began in Hungary and spread by contagion
over Germany, with the camp fever described by Sir John Pringle, the hospital
fever of Donnald Monro, the jail and ship fever of Lind, Roupe, Blane,
Robertson, etc. and with the fever which prevailed in some of the American
hospitals, and British prison ships in the years 1776, 1777, and 1778, etc. I
am convinced that it was a typhus, or a continued fever of a putrid tendency
which originates from animal effluvia in a certain situation, and was
propagated by contagion, and was not a genuine remittent, or any fever that was
derived from the exhalations of vegetable putrefaction.

Dr. Ferriar, to whom in abilities and medical acquirements few are superior,
entertains an opinion that "all infectious animal poisons, that of the
hydrophobia excepted, are formed originally from some morbid process in the
living human body."

"It is true the putrefaction of dead bodies generates a poison, which is
highly noxious when received into the human body by a wound, or any raw
surface; but this poison does not seem to infect like that of fevers by
exhalation. Its first effect unlike the other, is to occasion the death of the
part where it is admitted. See Dr. Alexanders Experiments also.
"

"Noxious effluvia indeed frequently arise from putrefying animal substances in
a certain state. Dr. Monro mentions a remarkable instance of this in his
Treatise on the Dropsy, and some later examples are recorded by Mr. St. John.
But it does not appear from these cases, that the noxious effluvia produced any
symptoms resembling those of putrid or pestilential fevers; on the contrary
they acted by a direct stimulus, occasioning inflammatory complaints, from
which we may conclude that they are essentially different from febrile
contagion. Ferriar's Medical Cases and Reflections, page 220, etc,
"

It is now generally admitted (for it has been established by accurate and
repeated observations) that the effluvia from the living human body in certain
situations, whether affected by fever or not, become a poison capable of
producing a disease in a healthy body which has the power of propagating its
likeness to others, either from contact or near approach, or by means of other
substances, which have been within the reach of the exhalations from the body
of the sick.

If it were admitted, that a solitary example or two, have occurred of a fever
occasioned by the exhalations of putrid vegetable substances, occasioning a
fever to those who attended the sick, and from them to others, it will serve
very little toward determining the question, unless it can be made appear,
that the fever thus propagated, was marked by the characteristic symptoms of
either an intermittent or remittent, only diversified by season and
constitution, etc. -- For before any thing can be with certainty admitted as
the efficient cause of an effect, that cause must not be occasionally, but
constantly present whenever that effect is produced.

Though I believe the circumstances which I have already stated, and the
arguments which I have advanced, are sufficient to convince every impartial
enquirer, that the doctrine of the contagious nature of intermitting and
remitting fever's, so long as they retain their genuine type or character, is
erroneous; yet lest any doubt on the subject should remain, I will now proceed
to detail the observations and opinions of a few authors of the highest credit,
and most ample experience.

Baglivi, (who united great sagacity and indefatigable industry, with sound
judgment,) published his Observations on the prevailing Diseases of Rome in the
year 1696, in which he informs us, that remittents were endemic and exceedingly
malignant during the summer and autumnal months along the shores of the Tiber,
and the low grounds of the ancient Latium, which was in a manner a desert,
overrun with impurities, and that in several parts, particularly about Ostia
and Porta, the air was so unwholesome, that if any citizen went out and
remained there all night, and then returned to town, he was soon after seized
with a dangerous fever, commonly called "the Bad Air Fever." This fever
differed very much both in its symptoms, and method of cure from the fevers
that spring from other causes. -- It was relieved by blisters and cordial
medicines, but aggravated by blood-letting, etc. Baglivi however had no
suspicion of its being contagious, otherwise he would have mentioned it.

Baron Vanswieten tells us, that "double tertians, which imitate continued
fevers, and which are often epidemical are not contagious, though they are
often attended with exanthemata, gangrenous blotches on the surface of the
body, swellings of the parotids and other symptoms of malignity." This he
exemplifies by an account of the epidemic fever of 1756, occasioned by the
noxious effluvia of marshes. "Many visited the sick at different times; and
many of the sick were removed to families in health at some distance from the
sphere of the effluvia, and not an instance occurred of its being communicated
by contagion." Vanswieten's Commentaries, Vol. 16th. page, 50.


The celebrated Lind has given an account of a remitting bilious fever, which
was very epidemic and malignant in several parts of England in the autumn of
1765, accompanied in many cases with yellowness of the eyes and skin; but
instead of imputing it to contagion, he expressly says, the number of the
cases, and the violence and complexity of the symptoms marked as it were the
nature of the soil. At Portsmouth its symptoms were bad, worse at Kingston, and
still more violent and dangerous at a place called the Half-way-House, where
the situation is remarkably low and damp." That this was only an intermittent
diversified in its symptoms, and modefied by season and soil, appears evident
from its continuing to appear a considerable part of the ensuing winter in the
form of a quartan ague, and from its yielding to the bark in large doses when
it most resembled a continued fever.

Dr. Black, on the Human Species, asserts, that "though fevers of the
intermittent and remittent type are the endemics of all hot countries, and are
generally epidemic in certain situations and seasons, yet they are not
contagious, except the sick be crowded together in places from whence fresh air
is excluded." He adds that "this circumstance as well as the remissions which
occur only once in these fevers, in the course of twenty-four hours
distinguishes them from the continued fever which has two exacerbations, and
perceptible though slight remissions, twice within the same period. An
irrefragable proof that they are derived from a different source and belong to
a different genus."

Similar remarks may be seen in the 1st Vol. of Dr. Cullen's First Lines of the
Practice of Physic. (Vol. I. sect. 29th.) In none of the works of the last
mentioned illustrious author, is there the least intimation of intermittents or
remittents being contagious; and surely a man of Dr. Cullen's reading,
experience and observation, would not have omitted a circumstance of such
importance, if he had thought them so. His words are, " Cullen Vol I. Page 123.
The remote causes of fevers are chiefly contagions or miasmata, and miasmata
are the cause of intermittents, and contagions of continued fevers, strictly so
called. Drs. Gardner and Clark, though both strenuous advocates for the
doctrine of the contagious power of those fevers, acknowledge that they only
become so when the air in the apartment of the sick is confined and saturated
with animal effluvia." Dr. Zimmerman has delivered a similar opinion respecting
the contagious power of the dysentery.

The extraordinary and adventurous Bruce, informs us in his Travels, (Vol. 3d.
page 360, 8vo. Dublin Edition) that "Bilious fevers are often epidemic along
the Coast of the Red Sea, from Sues to Babel Mandel, and often prove mortal in
three days; but he makes no mention of their being contagious. These like other
remittents, yield to the bark, but it must be given in a different manner from
that employed in Europe."

The bilious intermitting fever described by Dr. Raymond, which prevails in the
autumn universally in the Islands of Zealand and the neighboring coast of
Zealand, he says, from a variety of facts is well known not to be in the least
contagious. Physicians who attend the sick, and other people who live in the
same house with them, are never siezed with the same complaint, unless they
have been previously exposed to the same cause. Duncan's Commentaries, Vol.
4th. page 145.


Dr. R. Jackson in his Treatise on the Intermitting Fever of America, says "the
exhahalations from swamps were a fruitful source of fevers to the British
troops, not only in the southern states, but at Kingsbridge on York Island, in
the year 1778 and -- 9; but remarks, that "none of these were contagious."
(page 88.)

Dr. Hunter was of opinion that none of the fevers which occur within the
Tropics, are contagious, and that when contagion is imported, then it is soon
extinguished.

Dr. Wade in a paper on the Prevention and Treatment of the Disorders of Seamen
and Soldiers in Bengal, written in the year 1791, declares that "during his
residence in Bengal, though fevers and dysenteries were often epidemical, they
never exhibited any appearance which could excite a suspicion of their being
contagious."

Dr. Ross, one of the members of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia,
also informs us that he was at Bossorah on the Euphrates in the year 1776, when
a bilious remittent prevailed there, which was unusually mortal, but was in no
instance contagious.

Dr. Chisholm in his Treatise on the Pestilential Fever which prevailed at
Grenada in the spring of 1793, remarks that "he had never in any instance known
the endemic bilious fever to be contagious."

Along the flat and swampy grounds of Maryland, Virginia, the two Carolina's,
and Georgia, especially where an extensive surface of putrid soil is exposed to
the scorching rays of a blazing sun, bilious remittents are periodically
epidemic, and amazingly malignant; but there is not one well authenticated
instance of their being contagious.

We are told by Mr. Townsend in his Travels through Spain, that a bilious
remitting fever prevails at Carthagena every autumn, in consequence of its
proximity to an extensive marsh on its east side called the Almajor, which
occasions great mortality; but that it differs in no respect from the bilious
fevers of other countries, excepting that putrid and nervous symptoms sooner
take place, than in colder climates with purer air.

Dr. D. Ramsay, whose authority is unexceptionable, remarks in his Sketch of
the Climate of South Carolina, that the bilious fever differed from the yellow
fever in not being contagious. Dr. Rush has given an Account of the Bilious
Remittent Fever, which was more than usually prevalent in the southern and
eastern parts of the city and district in the year 1780, which was occasioned
by the water that had been permitted to overflow, and stagnate upon the low
grounds between the conflux of the two rivers, from the neglected state of the
drains and banks. This fever was attended with extremely distressing symptoms,
but it did not bear blood-letting, nor is there a hint expressed of its being
contagious.

Dr. Buel has published an Account of a Bilious Fever, that was epidemic at
Sheffield and the country adjacent, to a large extent of marshy ground and
stagnant water, in the autumn of 1793, 1794 and 1795, which in some cases
appeared to be malignant. This fever he ascribes to marsh exhalations, but has
made no mention of its being contagious, which he certainly would not have
omitted, if he had ever observed any thing of the kind. See Webster's
Collection of Papers on Bilious Fevers.


The experienced Doctors Tailor and Hansford, in their Account of the Bilious
Fever which prevailed at Norfolk in the summer and autumn, of the year 1795,
deny that it was contagious.

The physicians of New York, who have written on the malignant yellow fever,
which prevailed in that city in the year 1795, and destroyed the lives of near
one thousand of the inhabitants; are decidedly opposed to the opinion, that
bilious fevers are contagious, as is evident from their denying that the yellow
fever was contagious; which they supposed was only a higher grade of the common
bilious fever, which prevails there more or less at the same season every year,
and which they ascribe to the effluvia of the mud and stagnant water of the
flats and docks.

Although Doctors Gardner and Clark, and a few other authors assert, that the
bilious remitting fever, arising from marsh miasmata is contagious, they
acknowledge before it becomes so, "It must be in some measure altered in its
nature by unfavourable situation, and the impure air of crowded wards." Animal
economy, page 234.


Lind, (of Haslar) whose opportunities of making observations were confessedly
great, though perhaps sometimes too much hurried by the duties of his station
to be always accurate, observes "that tropical remittents are the most
dangerous and difficult to manage, yet these are not contagious, unless when
accompanied with dysentery, and the sick are crowded together." This is an
important fact, and distinguishes this fever from the nervous or putrid fever.
In those febrile epidemics and endemics from marshy situations, the remissions
are also more perceptible and synchronous, than in those from animal contagion.
See Lind's Papers on Infection.


Here we have an acknowledgment from some of the ablest, and most learned of
the advocates for the doctrine of the contagious power of intermittents and
remittents, that "(they are not naturally or necessarily contagious, but may
become so after they have in some measure changed their nature."

This is certainly in effect giving up the point, for a disease changed in its
nature, is no longer the same that it was originally, but a new disease. If
they are not changed in their nature, and are contagious, they must propagate a
fever of the same character and type with themselves. But every case of fever
which originates from febrile contagion, exhibits the type and character of the
typhus or continued fever, with nervous or putrid symptoms.

When the attendants on patients with an intermitting or remitting fever are
attacked with a fever of a continued type, and nervous or putrid symptoms, it
implies, not that those fevers are contagious, but that a contagious matter has
been generated, accumulated, and rendered active, in consequence of the
situation and circumstances of the sick: For it has been often experienced,
that contagion has been generated in consequence of the confinement of healthy
persons in situations where the air is confined till it becomes saturated with
the effluvia issuing from their bodies, which are thereby converted into
contagion. But this contagion produces a fever of a continued type, and an
assemblage of symptoms which distinguish it from every other genus, and
propagates a fever of the same type and assemblage of symptoms from one to
another. But remittents do not produce their likeness to persons exposed to
their influence; therefore as remittents they are not contagious.

To conclude, if fevers become contagious and are communicated from one to
another, the disease caught being similar to the one from which it took its
origin; it may be inferred that they depend upon a specific and unaltered
contagion, -- but if a person takes a fever from another, different from the
original disease, it shows that a specific contagion has been generated,
entirely different from that by which the original disease was produced.

That a contagion may be generated by persons laboring under intermittent or
remittent fever in confined and unventilated situations, I do not pretend to
deny, but I contend that the contagion so generated is of a specific kind,
entirely unconnected with the intermittent and remittent fever, otherwise it
would occasion in those exposed to it, a fever of an intermittent or remittent
form; but instead of this it always occasions a fever of a continued form
capable of being communicated in succession from one to another.

That the contagion generated by patients laboring under the recited diseases
is not connected with those species of fever, but entirely independent of them
appears to be rendered certain from the very same kind of contagion being
frequently generated in similar situations, by persons entirely free from every
kind of fever.

How the exhalations from the living human body in a confined portion of the
atmospheric air become a poison, capable of generating a disease in a sound
body, distinguished by a particular assemblage of symptoms, I do not pretend to
know; but the fact is unquestionable.

Recent and accurate observations have not only convinced me, that febrile
contagion is always derived from the living human body, in situations deprived
of a due proportion of oxygen or pure air; but that the contagion is rendered
more virulent and deleterious in proportion to the extent and duration of the
heat to which people in such situations are exposed. This is confirmed by the
Account of the Origin of the Yellow Fever, which appeared in the Island of
Grenada, in the beginning of the year 1793, published by Dr. Chisholm. And of
that on board the Busbridge, East Indiaman, Annals of Medicine for 1796.
in 1792. Noxious effluvia indeed frequently arise from putrid animal
substances in confined situations. Dr. Monro mentions a remarkable instance of
this, and some later examples are recorded by Mr. St. John. But it does not
appear from these cases, that those noxious effluvia produced any symptoms
resembling those of putrid or pestilential fevers: On the contrary, they acted
as direct stimulants, and occasioned inflammatory affections, which were not
preceded by symptoms of debility, and which are, entirely different from the
effects produced by febrile contagion.

Let us now advert to the question, relative to the malignant fever being only
a higher grade of the common bilious fever which derives its origin from the
effluvia of marshes or putrid vegetable matter. Though it be difficult to
convey precisely in words a description of the symptoms which distinguish the
one disease from the other; their discriminating marks not consisting so much
in one or two symptoms, as in a certain assemblage of several, yet when the
whole of the symptoms of each are compared jointly and severally, the
difference is exceedingly clear and evident.

The malignant yellow fever is distinguished at its commencement, from the
worst cases of the bilious remitting fever, by the suddenness of its attack,
shortness of the cold stage, greater severity of pain in the forepart of the
head and eyes, which are also more frequently inflamed and watery in the
former, than in the latter; and especially by the costiveness or dysenteric
state of the bowels, the excretion of bile, which is a constant symptom in the
bilious fever of hot climates being as invariably deficient at the beginning of
the malignant yellow fever; the remissions are also more obscure, and the skin
more dry. The debility in the animal functions is greater, the stricture about
the precordia more distressing, the countenance more flushed, of a deeper
purple color, and exhibits the appearance of greater misery and distress. Dr.
Jackson observes, that though the yellow fever appears variously in persons of
different constitutions or diatheses, from its first accession, it may
generally be distinguished from the endemic remittent of the country, not only
by the obscureness of the remissions, but likewise by a certain expression of
the eye and countenance, with something unusually disagreeable in the feelings,
of which words convey an imperfect idea.

The malignant yellow fever which prevailed last in Philadelphia, differed very
considerably from the usual remitting fever in not showing any disposition to
puke, except when excited by medicine, before the end of the second, and often
not before the beginning of the fourth day.

The remarkable irritability of the stomach in the former, which comes on, in
the majority of cases (when the disease is permitted to run an uninterrupted
course) about the third or fourth day, in consequence of which a constant
nausea and retching to vomit, brings up every thing as soon as it enters the
stomach, and is accompanied with a burning heat, and sense of soreness, deep
and frequent sighing and restlessness, distinguish the yellow fever very
materially at this period from the bilious remittent.

The bilious color of the skin, and the coffee ground, or black vomitings,
which frequently occur in the advanced stage of the disease, may when they both
occur, be considered as decided and unequivocal marks, which distinguish this
disease not only from the bilious but from every other form of fever except the
plague.

But the yellow fever does not differ from the bilious fever, only in the
circumstance of contagion, and in the aspect and severity of its symptoms; it
differs from it also by its symptoms being rendered worse, by some of the
remedies which are most efficacious in the cure of the bilious fever. -- Nor
are these the only circumstances in which these fevers are dissimilar: The
bilious fever occupies more especially marshy districts, where the inhabitants
reside at a considerable distance from one another, and invades a number at the
same time; its cause being mixed with a considerable portion of the atmosphere,
and its influence sometimes extending more than a mile from its source; it is
also more or less endemic in such situations at the same season annually.

Whereas the yellow fever never appears among the the inhabitants of marshy
countries in temperate climates, but in such climates, when it does occur, is
always confined to seaport towns, where, on its first occurrence it has always
been traced to one contracted spot near to some wharf, or foul vessel. -- If it
originated from the same cause as the bilious remittent, every part of the
town, where it occurs, would be alike subject to the disease, at the same time,
or within a few days of each other. -- Some would be seized in the north and
south, some in the east and west, the center and circumference, at the same
time; but instead of this, the malignant yellow fever every time that it has
occurred in this city, (and it has occurred only five times including the
present year, in the course of the present century, and once before, that we
have any account of on record or have learned from popular tradition,) has
always made its first appearance in one circumscribed point, and first affected
a few individuals who resided near, or transacted business at that particular
point, while every other part of the city has continued perfectly healthy,
until the disease has had time to spread itself by contagion. From those
circumstances, it is evident that the seeds of the disorder do not float in, or
mix with the atmosphere to any extent, but must be sought for in some other
source.

If we go down to the meadows and marshes on the flats of the Delaware and the
Schuylkill, and look for it among the diseases, which exhalations engender, it
is not there. Imagination, and her whimsical daughter, Theory, have created
something in those places, which they have called its likeness; but, the Sallow
Imp of the marshes, is the offspring of different parents, and differs
essentially in its character from the jaundice-eyed fiend, which extends its
destructive sway by contagion. If we look for it, in the effluvia from the
gutters of the streets, the heaps of unmolested dirt, in the alleys and lanes,
the mud and litter with which the wharfs and water street is too often
encumbered, it still eludes our search. If it was the offspring of the last
mentioned sources, the market women, the farmers, and all those that transact
business in market street, and especially all that reside in the narrow and
dirty and crowded alleys, would be subject to the mighty destroyer every summer.

That the malignant yellow fever, is a species of fever belonging to a genus,
essentially different from that of the bilious remitting fever, is farther
supported by the authority of the majority of those authors, that have had the
best opportunities of acquiring information on the subject. -- To save the
trouble of transcribing the passages which support this opinion, the reader is
referred to the works of Warren, Desportes, Schote, Hume, Blane, Page 397 and 8.
Mosely, Page 396.
Jackson, Page 163, Philadelphia Edition.
Chisholm, and Bryce. Annals of Medicine for 1796, page 117.


Dr. Chisholm, after comparing the malignant yellow fever, (which was epidemic
at the port and town of St. George, in the island of Grenada, in the year 1793,
some months previous to its appearance in Philadelphia.) with the endemic
bilious fever of the islands, concludes thus, Page 149.
"If we may be allowed to draw a conclusion with respect to the diagnostic of
this disease, from the remote and proximate causes, from the symptoms, and from
the dissections, I apprehend we must consider it as truly pestilential, and
differing from the plague, strictly so called, only in not always exhibiting
all the symptoms that are peculiar to that malady."

The cases annexed to Dr. Chisholm's book, demonstrate, that the fever which
prevailed at St. George's, was essentially the same, as that, which afterward
prevailed at Philadelphia. I purposely reserve the result of my enquiries into
the origin, and causes of the malignant yellow fever, for a separate treatise,
which I am preparing for publication.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE BILIOUS REMITTING FEVER, AS IT USUALLY APPEARS IN
PHILADELPHIA, IN SUMMER AND AUTUMN.
IN this fever though there is not a complete intermission or cessation of the
febrile symptoms, there is an abatement or remission more or less evident once
in the course of every twenty-four hours.

This fever after being preceded for a day or two, and sometimes much longer by
a disagreeable sense of languor and debility, usually attacks between eight and
eleven o'clock in the morning with a chilly fit, which after a longer or
shorter duration, is accompanied with or succeeded by the following symptoms.
Alternate sensations of cold and heat, darting and thrilling through the back
and limbs, acute pain in the fore part of the head, back and limbs, yawning,
stretching, restlessness, constant thirst, dryness and clamminess of tongue,
mouth, and fauces, flatulency, nausea, and frequent attempts to puke, sometimes
bringing up bilious matter, and sometimes voiding it by stool. In many cases
the cold stage is accompanied with cholera; in others, especially when the
fever attacks persons of a phlogistic diathesis, or strongly disposed to local
inflammation, it is attended with costiveness. In these cases however the
patient generally has a call to the chair before the commencement of the second
paroxism. The urine during the cold stage is pale, copious and crude; but as
soon as the hot stage is established, and during its height it becomes high
colored, and during the remission appears thick and cloudy and sometimes
deposits a brick-coloured or brownish mucous sediment. During the continuance
of the hot stage, there is always a sense of tightness and uneasiness about the
thorax and stomach, and more or less frequency and uneasiness in respiration.
As the hot stage advances the pulse (which during the preceding stage was low,
small, quick, contracte^, and irregular) becomes freer, fuller, stronger; the
temporal and carotid arteries throb; the face becomes suffused with a scarlet
blush; the muscles of the face diminished during the cold sta^e, now become
larger than in health; the s^in shrunk, rough, pale and dry before, now becomes
distended and smooth. The sickness and propensity to puke so constant and
distressing during the cold stage, and also during the conflict between the
cold and the hot stages, before the latter becomes completely established, now
ceases; and about four o'clock in the morning sometimes two or three hours
sooner, but oftener an hour or two later, all the feverish symptoms begin to
remit and continue to decline till the hour of the first attack: Then the same
process is again renewed and the fever runs the same course as the preceding
day; and so on every day till it entirely ceases, becomes an intermittent or
degenerates into a continued form.

After the second paroxism, and sometimes after the first the fever is seldom
preceded by a cold stage, but comes on with sense of languor, restlessness,
flushings of heat, an increase of thirst, and some nausea, or flatulence at
stomach, and the fever generally continues moderate till four or five o'clock
in the afternoon, when it becomes more violent and continues in that state till
the morning. In some cases this fever is worse every second day. It also
sometimes makes its first attack in the evening. In those cases the paroxisms
are generally longer, and the remissions more obscure than when it attacks, or
when its paroxisms are renewed in the morning.

In some cases at the beginning of the fever, stomach sickness accompanied with
vomiting and discharges of bile from the bowels is so predomninant, especially
in children whose systems are extremely irritable during the season when
remittents prevail, in consequence of the summer's heat, and often from the
effects of teething, that many physicians, have supposed, that a redundancy and
depraved state of that fluid was the principal cause of the fever, and in
infants have confounded it with the cholera infantum: This is, however, a very
great error, for vomiting, by whatever means excited, if often repeated, with
violent efforts, scarcely ever fails of forcing bile from the biliary ducts,
and sometimes in enormous quantities. An extraordinary secretion of bile in
this fever, and in every other, is the effect of great irritability of the
stomach, in conjunction with a defect of power in the circulating vessels on
the surface of the body; the consequence of which is, a preternatural
determination to the vena cava, liver, etc. and of course the cretion of an
extraordinary quantity of bile in a given time.

During the exacerbation of the fever, there is always more or less, head ach,
and pain in the back and limbs, and in many cases delirium, accompanied with
much restlessness. The face and eyes also appear more turgid and lively; the
tongue appears at first whitish and moist, or lightly tinged with a streak of
yellow. But when the fever has continued for several days, with an increase of
debility, it becomes covered with a dark, brown, tough and dry crust. In some
cases, great prostration of strength is visible from the beginning, in others,
it decreases gradually in the course of the fever. The thirst varies with the
rise and fall of the fever, a bitter taste is common; a diarrhoea is more
frequent than costiveness -- the color of the urine varies with the rise,
progress, and decline of the paroxism: At the commencement of the paroxism it
is pale, thin and copious, at the height it is high colored, scanty and
cloudy, at the decline it is still high colored, but very turbid, and lets
fall a sediment; the heat of the skin, also varies with each stage the of
paroxism.

When the disease has continued for several days with increasing debility, it
is common for the skin and eyes, to become heavy dull and yellow, and the
countenance to appear ghastly. In those circumstances, the pulse is always weak
and exceedingly quick, and the mind affected with delirium of the low kind,
commonly called typhomania. -- When the disease has continued without
abatement, and especially when the prostration of strength has become very
considerable, the symptoms frequently become so much diversified in different
patients, that the inexperienced, are apt to suspect them to labor under
different diseases; some are costive, others have a constant diarrhoea; some
are chilled by every passing gale, while others are refreshed by the coldest
air; the skin of some is constantly parched with heat, while others are as
constantly bathed in sweat. -- But symptoms common to almost all at a late
period of disease, are a low, quick pulse, ghastly countenance, sunk eyes,
continual heat and restlessness, with sickness, faintness, and prostration of
strength, at the usual time of the accession of every fresh paroxism; and this
sickness, and increase of debility, generally lasts from morning till evening,
and frequently all night, particularly, every second or third day; after which,
there is generally some abatement of these distressing and alarming symptoms
for some hours. -- If the debility still continues to increase, the the pulse
becomes weaker, lower, smaller, quicker and more irregular, through every stage
of the paroxism, and the remissions become no longer discernable, except by
greater prostration of strength, anxiety and restlessness at one time of the
day, (generally about noon) than another. The days on which this fever usually
terminates in health, are the 5th. 7th. 9th. 11th. and 13th. These are also the
days on which the remissions are most manifest. When this fever terminates
favorably, the remissions become more distinct, accompanied with a warm
moisture on the skin, and a copious sediment in the urine, an intermission then
succeeds, and strength gradually returns. In many cases it terminates
unfavourably without the aid of art, but in the present improved state of
medicine, few die of this fever when judiciously treated. When this fever
proves mortal, and the strength is nearly exhausted, the patient, as in the
last stage of other fevers, lies altogether upon his back, and frequently
slides to the foot of the bed; in this condition, he has always more or less
twitching of the tendons at the wrist, and is affected with low delirium, in
which he mutters incoherently to himself. -- His tongue, his teeth, and lips
are covered with a dark colored, sordid crust: His tongue trembles when thrust
forth for inspection; his eyes appear dull and stupid; his sensibility, which
in the early state of the disease was too acute, is now the reverse; his
hearing becomes impaired; he doses with his eyes and mouth half open; he sees
objects indistinctly, and clouds appear to hover round him; a stupid
insensibility pervades all his faculties; the sphincters lose their retentive
power; the faeces and urine pass off involuntary; and as if lamenting his
hopeless condition, tears steal down his ghastly face; the pulse falters, and
only moves in tremors, losing, on the slightest pressure, all motion; a cold
and clammy sweat bedews his torpid limbs, his fingers, his nails, his lips grow
purple, his respiration becomes interrupted, by a collection of phlegm,
occasioning a peculiar rattling in the trachia, vulgarly called the death
rattle, frequently interrupted by hiccup. These symptoms are generally followed
soon after by death.

In some cases, this fever is protracted from one to four weeks; in others, it
terminates in a perfect intermission in as many days, especially when properly
managed. Cold and clammy sweats are almost infallible signals of approaching
death, in every stage and period of the disease.

The whole of the prognosis may be thus summed up. Tone and vigor, or a
moderate degree of that state of body, distinguished by the name of
inflammatory diathesis, without local affection, afford the surest signs of
safety: Whereas general failure of the powers of life, or irregular
determination to organs of importance, are the most certain signs of danger.

The season of the year, and state of the weather, with respect to dryness, or
moisture, as well as local situation, have considerable effect in varying the
symptoms, and in determining the mildness or violence of this fever. In marshy
and wet situations, and dry seasons, the cases which occur about the latter end
of summer and beginning of autumn, are generally attended with greater
debility, and have much more obscure and imperfect remissions; the general
diathesis of the system, has also a greater tendency to putrefaction, mixed
with nervous affection, and sometimes with symptoms of a malignant nature.

The stomach, bowels, and biliary system, suffer more under these circumstances
than at other times. When the summer and autumn have been wetter and cooler
than usual, the fever at its commencement, generally partakes of an
inflammatory nature, but the remissions at first are very imperfect, and with
difficulty discerned, yet with proper management they soon become distinct and
complete.

DIAGNOSTICS.
THE remitting fever, is distinguished from the typhus, or continued fever, by
the remissions being more distinct, and by having only one remission in the
course of every twenty-four hours, whereas the remissions in the typhus, though
perceptible only to those who pay particular attention to symptoms, occur twice
in every twenty-four hours. It also differs from the typhus at Philadelphia, in
being more constantly attended with evacuations of bile, by vomit and stool. It
is produced by a very different cause, and is not like that disease,
contagious: In these respects it also differs from the yellow fever of the West
Indies, as well as in the excretion of bile, though it often resembles that
disease, in occasioning a yellow color of the skin and eyes of the patient.
From the semi-tertian, it differs in no essential respect, excepting in the
violence of its symptoms; the remissions in most cases of each, being one day
more perfect than another.

CAUSES WHICH PREDISPOSE TO THE REMITTING FEVER
THE persons most subject to this fever, are the relaxed and debilitated, the
delicate and infirm: Persons thus circumstanced, exposed to the occasional or
efficient causes of the intermittent fever, contract a remittent, that is a
fever of the same nature as an intermittent, only differing in degree, in
consequence of the difference in constitution and predisposition.

In all cases of this fever in order to ascertain whether it partakes most of
the inflammatory, or nervous diathesis, the state of all the functions of the
body should be carefully examined; for by the prevailing diathesis as indicated
by the symptoms, our treatment of the disease ought to be regulated.

If the pulse be either rapid, strong and full, or even low and hard, or tense,
we may be assured that the disease partakes of an inflammatory nature, and more
especially if accompanied with pain of any particular organ.

But where the pulse is weak and soft, however frequent or quick, and there is
a corresponding debility in the animal functions or voluntary muscles, a
contrary diathesis is always prevalent.

The pulse however though generally a good index of the state of the arterial
system, is sometimes so much affected by passions of the mind, by the state of
respiration and by local affections that we may be misled, if we trust to it,
without comparing it, with other circumstances inseparable from the disease.

By attending to the state of the stomach, and of the muscles subservient to
the will, together with the state of the brain, and comparing the condition of
each with the pulse, we may generally form a proper estimate of the state of
the disease.

In forming a judgment of the state of the vis vitae from the sensible heat of
the body, much caution and discernment are requisite; for, although an increase
of sensible heat always follows an increased circulation of the blood, it does
not always depend upon the force with which it is impelled by the heart, but is
often owing to the obstruction of perspiration, whereby the heat is prevented
from passing off. Nor is the quickness of the pulse an index of power in the
system, but the reverse, excepting when joined with fullness or hardness.

PROGNOSIS.
THE prognostics in this as in other fevers, must be derived from our knowledge
of the causes of death in febrile disorders in general.

These in the present form of fever are to be determined by the state of
debility, and the degree of disordered action present in the several functions
of the body.

The symptoms which denote a great degree of debility in the animal functions,
are

1 st. Weakness in performing the voluntary motions, and swooning when in an
erect posture.

2 d. Imperfect sensations.

3 d. Typhomania or delirium, accompanied with great debility.

4 th. Those which denote a great degree of debility in the natural functions,
are foulness and dryness of the tongue, gums, and fauces; great loss of
appetite; distension of stomach; insatiable desire for acids and cold water;
involuntary stools and urine, etc.

Great debility in the vital functions, is denoted by the lowness, smallness,
or emptiness and quickness of the pulse; hurried, and interrupted respiration;
oppression at the precordia; restlessness; deep, and frequent sighing; sunk and
inanimate appearance of the eyes and countenance, etc.

With respect to the fluids, danger is denoted by petechiae, or the eruption of
livid or purple spots; effusions of blood under the cuticle; bloody and brown
colored urine; profuse and obstinate diarrhoea; profuse, weakening,
colliquative, or clammy sweats, accompanied with coldness of the extremities,
etc.

BEFORE I proceed to the treatment of this fever, it may not be improper to add
that cases of remitting fever frequently occur, especially in the early part of
summer and latter part of autumn, in which inflammatory symptoms or marks of
high arterial action are predominant; this happens especially when a
considerably long period of very warm weather is succeeded by heavy rains, and
a sudden change of temperature in the atmosphere. While the atmosphere
continues either uniformly dry and warm, or uniformly wet and cool, fevers are
very rare; of this we had striking examples in the hot and dry summer of 1782,
and the wet one of 1788.

The pulse in such cases is not only frequent during the paroxism, but it is
likewise quick, hard, and vibrating; the heat is often intense; the internal
functions, and the various secretions are considerably disordered, and the
whole surface of the body appears dry and rough.

The remission that follows for the most part is obscure, the pulse frequently
retaining, a preternatural quickness and hardness, and the skin still retaining
a considerable degree of febrile heat. In these circumstances, the excretion of
bile is an unusual symptom, and the patient is inclined to be costive, till
after the preternatural and strong action of the arteries, is reduced by
depleting remedies. In these cases the head and back sufferes more severely,
than when it appears in any other form.

In this climate, contrary to what occurs within the Tropics, rainy summers and
autumns, though they do not occasion the remissions always to be more perfect
and visible, they render the type more simple, and the diathesis oftener
inflammatory.

In hot and dry seasons on the contrary, especially from the beginning of
August, to the middle, and sometimes to the latter end of September, the fever
is usually blended with symptoms of a nervous kind, and particularly
accompanied with bilious evacuations.

In these cases the mind is much seldomer affected during the exacerbations,
than in the former: Sometimes, however the patient is affected with lively and
unruly delirium, sometimes the delirium only amounts to a slight incoherence in
the train of ideas, or a momentary suspension in the power of recollection.

The paroxisms in this variety of the fever seldom exceed eighteen hours, and
in some cases are finished in twelve, and the remissions are distinguished by
more or less perspiration, though this seldom extends completely to every part
of the body. The remissions in those cases, which are accompanied with copious
evacuations of bile, though more perfect than those, in which the phlogistic
diathesis is predominant, are by no means complete; the headache and other
disagreeable feelings usually abate, but signs of languor, and of imperfect
solution, are still observable, in the tongue, pulse and skin.

The paroxisms frequently increase in violence, in the progress of the fever,
and the remissions become less distinct. In children the first paroxism, is
sometimes introduced with an epileptic sit, and in many of such young subjects,
it is common for the febrile action to be determined, particularly to the
brain; and to terminate in hydrocephalos internus: This is more particularly
the case in the early part of summer, when cold weather is succeeded by sudden
and intense heat.

In some cases, particularly in persons addicted to free living, instead of a
paroxism, consisting of different parts, in a certain order of succession,
there is sometimes an entire stupor and insensibility, which continues for a
determinate space of time, accompanied with evident signs of fever, especially
with flushing in the face, and full pulse; while in others during the whole
period of each paroxism, and especially previous to the exacerbation, a tremor
and agitation of the limbs are constant.

In debilitated constitutions, each succeeding paroxism generally returns
sooner than the regular period, always with symptoms of great distress, and
sometimes with new and alarming ones; it generally declines at the beginning in
twelve or fourteen hours, but each succeeding remission becomes less distinct,
except when obviated by the rules of art.

The fevers which occurred at Philadelphia, in the autumn of 1794, (the spring
and fore part of the summer of which had been preceded by a great deal of
rain,) were generally double tertains, the paroxism beginning one day in the
forenoon, the next in the afternoon. In the cases that became dangerous, or
difficult of cure, the paroxisms were gradually anticipated half an hour, or an
hour every day, till the fever became an obscure remittent, resembling the
typhus, or fever of a continued type. In those cases in which the paroxism came
on later every day, the disease in a few days became a regular intermittent.

In the central parts of the city, this fever was a rare occurrence; but in the
suburbs and the southern and western parts of the city it was, to a limited
degree epidemic. But from the notes which I kept of the state of the weather
and diseases of that season, it appears that on the 1st. of September, there
were twenty cases of simple intermitting fever, to one of remittent.

Several cases of remittent with bilious puking occurred on the 16th. Three
cases of double quotidian came under my care, i. e. two paroxisms came on every
day, one in the forenoon and one the evening, but the symptoms were always more
violent every third day. The water in the ponds which had been constantly full
of water, on each side of pine and lombard streets began to diminish rapidly
about the middle of the month. On the 19th. a sudden change of the wind to N.
W. reduced the thermometer 17. Immediately after this change in the temperature
of the air, almost every family in the vicinity of those ponds were attacked
with tertian, or quotidian fevers. On the 26th. I visited sixteen patients,
with distinct intermissions.

Ten cases remittent, with inflammatory symptoms, and three with bilious
evacuations. Intermittents and remittents, continued prevalent till after the
middle of October; but as the season grew colder, they either declined or
became combined, with topical inflammations.

EXTRACTS from my NOTES on the WEATHER and DISEASES of the year 1795.
THE spring and summer of the year 1795 were agreeable, cool, and frequently
refreshed with rain. Torrents of rain fell all the first week of August, the
wind N. E. and occasioned remarkable freshes, which occasioned great injury to
the agricultural interest. Not a case of remittent came to my knowledge before
the 16th of this month: From this time till after the middle of October,
intermittents and remittents were only sporadic.

All the ponds, ditches and hollows about the city, continued full of water,
from July till after the 10th. of September, a proof that much rain had fallen
within that period: About the middle of the month heavy dews began to fall, and
several cases of remittents occurred, accompanied with bilious discharges.
Several cases of cholera also occurred at the same time. On the 16th of
September, the proportion of intermittents to that of remittents, was ten to
four.

By the 17th. the water in the ponds and ditches had diminished considerably,
and presented a moist and putrid surface to the sun.

Frost was observed for the first time this season, early in the morning of the
23d. The cold weather has begun to give an inflammatory complexion to the
intermittents, which have lately occurred in southwark and the extremities of
the city. The weather became mild on the 24th. and continued so till the 4th.
of October, two days excepted, on one of which a considerable quantity of rain
fell.

On the 5th. of October it became so cold, as to render fires necessary.

The proportion of remittents, to that of intermittents, was three to one; but
cases of neither were very numerous.

From the 6th. to 12th. the weather was calm and mild; after rain which fell on
the 11th. the wind changed to N. W. and became cool and pleasant; on the 13th.
it again became calm and sultry, 14th. cloudy; 15th. heavy rain: remittents
were now more general than they had been any part of the season, and were for
the most part accompanied with strong and quick action of the arteries.
Blood-letting soon after the commencement of the fever, to a second, and
sometimes to a third time, from ten to fourteen ounces at a time, was sometimes
found requisite to procure a perfect intermission. From the 14th. to the 20th.
the weather was exceedingly variable.

Ice appeared on the gutters, in the morning of the 18th.

On the 21st. I had several cases of intermittent, but only one of remittent
fever.

EXTRACTS from my NOTES on the WEATHER and DISEASES, of 1796.
THE measles, the scarlatina, the tussis ferina, the small pox, and the mumps,
were all prevalent at the same time in the month of April, and in some
instances in the same family.

The winter and spring, till May, had been remarkably cold: The weather in May,
variable and generally cool.

June till the 17th. was almost constantly wet.

From the 21st. of June, to the 1st. of July, the weather was fair.

A few cases of intermittents occurred about the end of the 1st. week in July.

August 1st. Intermittents had not increased in number.

Weather cold and variable from 1st. to 9th. Sultry from 9th. to 15th. 15th.
cloudy and remarkably cold, continued cold till 20th.

The remainder of the month, sultry, with frequent showers.

The whole of August remarkably healthy; inflammatory cases most prevalent.

The first case of remittent, that occurred in my practice this season, was on
the 8th. of September. Intermittents were considerably numerous.

After the middle of September, cases of remittent fever, became more numerous,
but were generally mild.

Return of Patients with Remitting Fever, admitted at the Dispensary in the
Year 1787.
February, 2 April, 1 June, 1 July, 7 August, 8 September, 10 October, 3
November, 3 December, 1

Return of Patients with Remitting Fever, admitted in the Year 1788.
January, 1 March, 1 June, 4 July, 4 August, 3 September, 3 October, 1
November, 1

Return for 1789.
March, 1 May, 1 June, 2 July, 4 August, 4 September, 7 November, 1 December, 2

Return of Remittents for 1790.
January, 1 February, 2 March, 2 April, 3 May, 1 June, 4 July, 4 August, 8
September, 4 October, 7 November, 3 December, 1

Return of Remittents admitted in the Year 1791.
May, 1 June, 1 August, 2 September, 7 December, 3

Return for 1792.
February, 1 March, 1 June, 1 July, 2 August, 8 September, 11 October, 11
November, 2

The preceding returns demonstrate that the bilious remitting fever very seldom
becomes epidemic in Philadelphia, though sporadic cases occur annually at the
same season.

Nor have I ever met with a case of bilious, or any other form of fever,
occasioned by the air of the city, or of the marshes which has communicated a
fever to the nurses, attendants, or physicians.

A register of the weather and diseases of the present year, I reserve for my
intended publication on the Malignant Yellow Fever.

OF THE TREATMENT.
IN order to the successful treatment of this fever, the first thing to be
attended to is the removal of the remote causes, or those circumstances which
gave it birth. Removal therefore to a dryer situation and purer air, is next to
indispensible.

The next step is to attempt by the most efficacious means to obtain an
intermission as speedily as possible after the attack of the fever, that the
Peruvian bark may be administered to the best advantage.

With this view, we are to consider how far the violence of the fever on its
first attack, will admit of blood letting and the antiphlogistic regimen,
always retaining in memory, that so long as the inflammatory symptoms are
evident, which is always the case when the pulse is strong and full, or quick
and hard, or tense, however small and low it may feel, and the skin continues
hot and dry, the tongue white and moist, the pain in the head, back, or limbs
violent, blood letting is not only a safe, but a necessary remedy, a Sine qua
non, which ought not to be dispensed with.

The success which attended blood-letting in some cases of yellow fever,
connected with local affection in the autumn of 1793, and an opinion which has
since been conceived or adopted by some of the physicians of Philadelphia, that
all fevers depend on the same proximate cause, differing only in degree,
however produced; and that they are all inflammatory at the beginning, has
induced several physicians to transfer the fame practice to the kind of fever,
under consideration. In cases also purely in ammatory, blood has been drawn to
an astonishing quantity, without any apparent injury, but in every case as far
as I have been able to obtain information, it has proved injurious and in some
cases fatal when the disease was not attended with inflammatory symptoms, or
when th^se were partial and slight.

In a great number of patients however with a fever of a remitting form,
connected with an in inflammatory diathesis (which frequently occurs in the
fore part of summer, and the latter end of autumn) I have frequently found it
requisite to take away ten or twelve ounces of blood every day to a fifth time,
and in a few cases where the pulse was very quick and hard, I have opened a
vein with advantage twice a day, and I believe it ought to be a rule in all
such cases, to bleed more or less according to the violence of the symptoms,
without regard to the period of the disease, or the name which others may think
proper to call it. I must at the same time observe, that where purging and
antimonials are freely employed, they will in many cases even when inflammatory
symptoms are predominant, supercede the necessity of being so very lavish of
human blood.

I have learned by frequent experience the truth of Dr. Balfour's observations,
that all laxative and purgative medicines as well as injections, are very
uncertain in their operation, and frequently disappointment us, so long as any
considerable degree of fever is present. The period therefore at which fevers
show a tendency to remit, should be carefully watched, and purgatives
administered on the first signs of a remission -- And when these are not
evident, still the usual period of remission is to be preferred for that
purpose. At this time they will generally operate and evacuate the bile,
secreted and accumulated during the exacerbation, which is the first and
indeed, an indispensible requisite in the cure of these fevers.

Mercury is so effectual for this purpose and at the same time attended with so
little hazard, that it may be with propriety styled the key of the hepatic
system.

Mercury has been for several years employed as a purge of superior efficacy in
bilious fevers, by several respectable physicians in Europe as well as in the
East and West Indies, particularly by Dr. Gilchrist, Pringle, and Hamilton. And
it was employed by the late Dr. Huck Saunders in the cure of intermittents, in
which the bark failed; but, the discovery of its efficacy in the cure of
malignant and contagious fevers when employed so as speedily to affect the
salivary glands, was reserved for Dr. C. Chisholm, who first employed it for
that purpose in the year 1791. See Duncan's Med. Comment. for 1793.
How far it will have the same effect in cases of the fever under
consideration, remains still to be determined by future observations; -- but
from its effects in cases of obstinate intermittents, when given in small and
repeated doses internally, or employed by friction externally, till it
occasions salivation, there is every reason to expect it will have the same
effect in cases of bilious remitting fever.

Dr. Clark, in his Observations on Diseases of Long Voyages, gives the
following account of the efficacy of mercury in violent cases of fever. Vol. I.
page 182. edit. 2d. "I have had much experience of the superior efficacy of
calomel, conjoined with opium, in taking off irritability of stomach, and in
opening the bowels: And therefore in all dangerous remitting fevers, attended
with vomiting, burning heat, and pain at stomach, I would recommend the pills,
No. 4. Four of these, contain ten grs. of Calomel, and two of opium.
Two to be taken immediately, and one to be repeated every half hour, till the
pain abates. After this their operation is to be assisted by glisters,
fomentations, and in very urgent cases, by the use of the warm bath.

"When the irritability of the stomach, is by these means removed, all bilious
and corrupted humors should be carried off by a solution of salts, in a
decoction of tamarinds, or an infusion of sinna, etc." In a note at page 183,
Dr. Clark adds, "The yellow fever of the West Indies, and that of Senegal, have
been represented to be always beyond the power of medicine; but I have little
doubt, that the fatality of the worst kind of fever, may be obviated by a
practice similar to that above mentioned." In such cases, he also recommends "A
hundred drops of laudanum in an emollient glister; the patient to be put into a
warm bath, and when removed to bed, eight or ten grs. of calomel to be given in
the form of pills, with opium, if the anodine glister has not removed the
vomiting, the operation of the pills to be promoted by purgative glisters, and
as soon as the bowels are opened, to throw in the bark, in the most liberal
manner, without loss of time."

Dr. Balfour, who practiced medicine twenty years in different parts of the
East Indies, gives the following testimony in favor of the use of mercury in
fevers. (Treatise on Putrid Pestilential Remitting Fevers, published in 1790,
page 109.) "Calomel in a decree, superior to any other medicine, I am
acquainted with, possesses the property of loosening and detaching the mucus of
the intestines: It requires, in general from six to ten hours to effect this
perfectly, and operates best when the patient lies quietly in bed. A proper
dose to an adult, is from six to twelve grs. and this dose must be repeated
from three to six times, or as often as the state and contents of the
intestines may require, at the beginning of the disease, and afterward
occasionally, as it may seem to be required, by the fullness of the bowels and
the state of the contents." When the mucus is loosened by the calomel, Dr.
Balfour, prescribes a solution of salts, with a very small portion of emetic
tartar, to be given in divided doses, every morning after the calomel, at the
beginning of the disease. After this process, he prescribes the liberal use of
the bark, etc.

Dr. Wade, also a physician of considerable experience, who practiced in the
East Indies, after delivering an opinion, that the fevers of that climate,
depend upon a vitiated state of the mucus of the intestinal canal, and
recommending active purgatives for the removal of their cause, adds, "As the
disease does not always arise from the quantity or quality of grosser matters
in the stomach and intestines, or from any portion of vitiated bile and other
secretions, which the utmost power of the usual purgatives can effect, we must
have recourse to such as are active, and better calculated to remove the
complaint. It may be deemed particularly fortunate, that the purgatives which
prove most successful in fevers, are as mild in their operation, as they are
certain and powerful.

"From two to ten, or more grs. of calomel, with a greater proportion of any of
the other articles, form a dose of the utmost safety. These doses should be
repeated every second night, or if the symptoms are pressing, every night, as
long as any thing offensive shall remain to be discharged from the bowels." Sir
John Pringle prescribed twelve grs. of calomel, and thirty of rhubarb, for a
dose to soldier. W. C.


"It may be received as a general rule, that the mercurial laxative be given at
night, and the medicines necessary to promote its effects, early next morning,
as well as in the course of the day. The more those symptoms called putrid, or
nervous are present, is the use of mercurial purgatives indicated.

"Mercury exhibited, in the yellow fever, black vomit, etc. to as to affect the
mouth, has uniformly proved successful." Edin. Med. Com. for 1793, Vol. 18.

Dr. Blane, in his Observations on the Bilious Remittent Fever of Hot Climates,
remarks, that "when the fever appears to be kept up by a fresh accumulation of
bile, the repetition of evacuants is necessary, and calomel will be found to
answer remarkably well as a purgative, its stimulus being so extensive as to
loosen, and bring away bile, when the saline purgatives had failed of having
that effect; and it will be still more effectual for this purpose, if given
alone, in a dose, from five to ten grains, and followed some hours afterward
by some other purgative." (Observations on Diseases of Seamen, page 392, etc.)

In obstinate and protracted intermittents, that resisted the power of the
bark, it was the practice of the late Dr. Thomas Bond, at the Pennsylvania
Hospital, to put the patient under a slight course of mercury, after which the
bark generally succeeded. And we are informed by Dr. Blane that Dr. Huck
Saunders assured him, that he had frequently cured agues, in which the bark had
failed, by putting the patient on a course of mercury, and afterward returning
to the use of the bark. (Page 428 of Dr. G. Blane's Observations, published in
1785.)

Dr. Chisholm first discovered the efficacy of mercury in 1791 in a contagious
fever which he at first mistook for the hepatitis, in the cure of which its
efficacy had been for a considerable time established, not only in the East
Indies, but in England, as appears from the 9th. Volume of the Edinburgh
Medical Commentaries. In the yellow fever at Grenada in 1793, he also
experienced its superior efficacy. Dr. Gilchrist, (as appears from the
Edinburgh Essays and Observations, Physical and Literary, Vol. III. page 498)
more than fifty years ago, entertained the most decided opinion of the virtues
of mercury in the low state of fever, connected with inflammation. Dr.
Gilchrist's discovery has since been followed and improved upon by several
physicians of acknowledged merit. But he whose penetration makes the first
discovery or improvement, and removes injurious prejudices, is entitled to the
greatest share of gratitude and applause.

Dr. Gilchrist's practice was afterward applied to the liver disease in the
East Indies, and from an apparent analogy, being applicable to bilious fevers,
it has since been a remedy in the hands of almost every practitioner.
Consequently as a medicine in those kinds of diseases, it is not entitled to
the distinguished name of a New Remedy.

As the chief objects of attention in the majority of cases in this fever (when
debility and bilious evacuations are the most prominent symptoms) are the
contents of the stomach and intestines; upon the patient's first complaint,
before the paroxism of the fever has formed, or while the patient perhaps only
complains of alternate heats and chills, the contents of the stomach should be
immediately evacuated, either by an emetic, cathartic, or by a purging glister.
But if the pain of his head be violent, blood-letting should always be
premised, unless great prostration of strength should forbid it.

The next step toward procuring a remission, is to open the pores of the skin.
This in the beginning of the disease, where my observations have principally
been made, is best accomplished by the following draught, repeated every second
or third hour, with plentiful warm dilution of the antiphlogistic kind.

Aq. Ammon. Acetat. ij vel ss Aq. hord. vel simp. i Tart. Emet. gr. 1/6 vel
Sach. Alb. ij M. f. haust.

Experience teaches us that antimonials are particularly useful in the early
period of this fever, especially when there is the least tendency to an
inflammatory diathesis, which is always the case when the pulse at the wrist is
tense, and the throbbing in the temporal and carotid arteries strong.

In cases however where there are are no evidence of such diathesis, but where
the prostration of strength is very considerable, they are not only useless,
but injurious, as they have a tendency to counteract the small degree of power
still remaining, and which can only be augmented by cordial and nutritive
remedies.

When the means already prescribed, fail of inducing an evident remission, the
fever is generally kept up by a fresh accumulation of bile in the gall bladder
or ducts of the liver. When this is the case, there is generally a sense of
weight or uneasiness about the hypochondria. In these circumstances a
repetition of evacuants is requisite, and calomel as recommended by the
sagacious Dr. Blane (a living author in high estimation) is generally sound to
answer remarkably well as a purgative, its stimulus being so extensive, as to
loosen and bring away bile as well as hardened faeces, when the saline
purgatives have failed of that effect. "The calomel has been found most
effectual for this purpose when given during the remission, in a dose of from
five to ten grains, followed five or six hours after by a glister, or some mild
purgative."

This being effected, antimonial are to be again administered in small doses,
and if there be no inflammatory symptoms present, an anodine, combined with an
antimonial, and a little of the saline mixture should be given every night at
bed time.

: Suc. Limon. ss. Sal. Alk. Veget ss. Tart. Emet. gr.. Tinct. Opii. gtt. XL.
Aq: Com: Sacharat iss. m. f. haust.

The principal point of management, after an evident remission is obtained, is
to administer the Peruvian bark to the best advantage.

Whatever may be the case in tropical climates, more or less remission is
always necessary in this part of the world, especially at an early period of
the disease, before this medicine can be administered with success, or even
safety.

When the remission is prevented by excess of debility in the arterial system,
which may generally be discovered from the weakness of the pulse, and great
propensity to faint, or become sick at stomach upon being raised up; blisters
as well as a more cordial regimen are absolutely necessary, and in general
produce a favorable effect.

The bark should be administered during every remission, in as large doses as
the stomach can retain, without occasioning much oppression or sickness.

It is best in substance, but when it cannot be taken in that manner, it may be
made into a strong decoction, in conjunction with a little Columbo root and
serpentaria: Should the stomach reject it in this form, we ought without delay,
to have recourse to it in glisters, with the addition of a little laudanum. In
this way, from two to four drachms of bark, with ten or fifteen drops of
laudanum should be administered every two hours, mixed with a tea cup full of
panada or sowl broth, till the return of the fever, during the exacerbation of
which an antimonial mixture is again to be made use of.

When considerably weakened by the paroxism, a little wine, especially old
port, on account of its astringency and tonic effect, should be occasionally
joined with the bark, or a little of it given after every dose.

Wine however is seldom proper, or even safe in large draughts, in the early
stage of this fever, except in those cases when the prostration of strength is
very evident and alarming.

In every case, where the remission is obscure or imperfect, and no local
affection, or inflammatory symptoms are discoverable, the most probable means
of affording relief, is to excite a universal sweat. This is not only an
imitation of nature, but is founded on reason and experience, for it is by
sweating, that the sit of an intermittent is terminated; this however should be
attempted by gentle soothing means, and not by strong stimulating, and heating
medicines and regimen.

For this purpose, the following composition, given at the height of the
paroxism, is frequently effectual.

: Aq. Ammoniac: acetat: ij. vel. ss. Tart. Emet. gr. ss. Tinct. Opii. gut. XV.
vel. XX. Aq: Cin: simp. iss. Sach. alb. q. s. f. haust.

To coincide with the same intention, and to render the effect of the above
composition more certain, plentiful and warm dilution is necessary: And I have
generally found an infusion of serpentaria, sage, or some other mild aromatic,
preferable to farinacious decoctions, or vinous mixtures. The application of
warm moisture to the surface of the body, renders the effect of the remedies
already mentioned still more certain. This may be performed by bathing the feet
and hands in warm water, or by fomenting the thighs, legs, and arms, with warm
stupes; these operations have the effect of bringing on a general relaxation on
the skin, of diminishing irritation and delirium, and of inducing sleep.

But before we make use of pediluvia and warm fomentations in this fever, we
should be well assured that the strength of the pulse and velocity of the
circulation are not already too great, otherwise instead of obtaining the end
for which we use them, we shall find if the heat of the water exceeds 98, they
will have a contrary effect, because of the stricture induced on the exhalents
by the heat, which not only stimulates the solids, but distends the fluids. The
pulse must however be raised several degrees above the healthy state of action,
otherwise no sweat will flow.

Some patients are troubled with incessant puking previous to the accession of
every fresh paroxism, and are sometimes so debilitated and reduced by it, as to
threaten immediate danger. In these cases after having immersed the feet and
legs in water as warm as can be conveniently borne, from 30 to 40 drops of
liquid laudanum should be taken in a draught of peppermint julep, or combined
with an effervescent mixture of vegetable alkali and lime juice, and should be
repeated after every evacuation, till it have the desired effect. If the
stomach reject the laudanum immediately after it has been taken, a double
quantity mixed with a little aromatic infusion or tea, should be thrown into
the bowels frequently. If this should fail, or should not be submitted to,
flannels wrung out of hot spirits of wine or brandy, and covered with powdered
spices, such as cinnamon, alspice, and cloves, or ginger, and black pepper,
should be applied to the stomach, feet, and wrists; or they may be rubbed with
oil of cloves, laudanum, and sweet oil, and covered with heated flannels. When
chilly sensations prevail, these applications are nearly equal to blisters.
Blisters to the thighs however may be applied at the same time when the case is
urgent; and in alarming cases, a blistering plaster should always be applied
to the stomach.

As puking frequently precedes or accompanies every fresh paroxism, and is
attended with a sensible diminution of vigor in the several functions of the
body, and takes place nearly at the same hour every day, or every second day;
it may generally be prevented by giving the patient from twenty-five to forty
drops of Thebaic tincture, in any mild and palatable cordial draught, two hours
before the expected paroxism, and especially if blisters be applied to the
wrists or legs at the same time.

When the case is not so urgent as to threaten immediate death, the feet and
hands may be plunged into cold water to increase their irritability, before the
application of heat and other stimuli.

In many cases incessant vomiting cannot be restrained by any means till the
circulation is restored to the surface, and perspiration takes place. For this
reason we are advised by Dr. Jackson to take the patient out of bed, dash cold
water over his head and shoulders, return him to bed, and to give him a cordial
anodine draught, with warm aromatic and palatable drinks. These means he
informs us (and my own experience confirms the truth of his information)
generally occasion a calm and equable perspiration, with great abatement of
irritability, and frequently a complete intermission of the fever; and by
keeping up a determination afterward to the surface by means of diaphoretics,
diluting drinks, and a blister to the liver, bilious evacuations seldom become
troublesome during the remaining course of the fever.

I have also frequently seen the stomach settled by small and repeated draughts
of hot lime juice punch, while the patient's feet and legs were fomented with
flannels wrung out of warm water.

Where lime juice cannot be readily obtained, for making the effervescent
neutral mixture, the following powder may be substituted.

Sal. Alk. vegetab. fixat gr. x. Pulv. Crystal. Tartar i Sach. Alb. ss M. (f.
Chapter No. j.)

By throwing this powder into a glass of water, an effervescent neutral
mixture, is instantly formed.

In the generality of cases in this fever, it is of much importance to prevent
the patient from becoming costive, and frequently to carry off the bilious
matter which is constantly secreted; otherwise the Peruvian bark, the remedy on
which we chiefly depend for the cure, cannot be given to effect. On the
contrary, if given when bilious and other acrid and excrementitious matters
abound, it generally occasions spasmodic affections, or distentions of the
stomach and intestines; adds to the feverish heat, and often occasions a
foulness of the tongue and fauces, and sometimes brings on delirium.

Moderate and frequent evacuations by stool, under these circumstances, instead
of weakening the patient, sensibly refresh and strengthen him, in proportion as
the aggravating cause of irritation and distress is removed from the bowels.

But as bilious, and other excrementitious matters originate and accumulate
from debility and relaxation, as soon as they are removed by the recited means,
their recurrence should be as much as possible prevented by the free use of the
bark, and such drinks and aliment, as are found upon trial, to agree best with
the patient. The application of a blister to the region of the liver, is a most
invaluable remedy for this purpose.

Where however, there is great lowness, and disposition to swoon upon rising;
glisters should be employed instead of purgatives, when occasion requires. In
these circumstances, copious evacuations are generally injurious.

In all cases attended with symptoms of evident debility, and ineffectual
re-action in the vascular system; blisters ought always to be employed without
delay, the earlier after the attack, the better. The excitement produced in the
center of the nervous system, the common sinsory, by their stimulating power,
is conveyed to every part of the system, and new vigor is given to every
function. That the power and action of the heart, as well as the voluntary
muscles, depend in a great measure on the excitement, and power of the
sensorium, is clearly demonstrated, by its cessation immediately after the
cardiac nerves have been divided.

Though the first effects of blistering is to stimulate, excite, and
invigorate, the discharge which follows, is debilitating in proportion to the
quantity discharged, after the inflammation produced by the blister has
subsided. For this reason, when our view in the employment of blisters, is to
excite and invigorate the circulating powers, and not to relax and debilitate,
the surface excoriated by the blister, should be healed as speedily as
possible, or fresh inflammation excited by some irritating ointment.

I believe, from some trials I have seen, that it would be advisable, as one
part heals, to apply a blister to another, for the purpose of keeping up
successive excitement, till an intermission takes place.

When from increasing debility, neglect, mismanagement, etc. the disease
assumes a continued form, (which is very common in low damp situations, when
the weather is very hot, sultry, and calm,) the most strenuous and persevering
efforts should be made to invigorate the whole system. For this purpose, in
addition to the successive application of blisters, (one of which in dangerous
cases should always be applied to the back part of the head and neck, or, if
much affected with nervous delirium, over the center of the head;) the best of
wine should be given in different forms, in panada, in whey, and by itself,
observing always to regulate the quantity, by the state of debility present,
and its effects upon the pulse, and brain.

Strong decoctions of bark and serpentaria, should also accompany the use of
wine, and may be given now without regard to remissions. If the stomach rejects
or loathes it in every form, it should be employed in glisters. In these
circumstances, we are assured by Dr. Jackson, that he found more service from
the cold salt water bath in the remitting fever of Jamaica, than from any other
remedy.

When the bath is employed, the patient, if his strength will admit, is seated
in an arm chair in a large tub, and one or two large buckets of water are
poured over his body, after which he is wiped dry and conveyed to bed: This
operation is generally directed twice or thrice a day, or oftener in alarming
cases. When the bath cannot be employed this way, the patient's body may be
washed two or three times a day with the salt water, as cold as he can bear it,
by means of napkins wet with it, and afterward wiped dry.

"Where a putrid tendency is evident in the system, which is always indicated
by petechiae and great prostration of strength, besides the cold salt bath,
cool air, clean linen, cold drink, and the liberal use of wine, cannot be too
much insisted on."




In cases accompanied with great debility, tremors of the hands, typhomania and
watchfulness, symptoms common in the latter stage of this, as well as of the
putrid fever, from contagion; opium is at present a favorite prescription with
many physicians, but they are by no means agreed with respect to the doses, or
periods of repetition.

Doctor Cullen, who paradoxically says, it possesses both a stimulant and
sedative power, advises it in large doses, and to be repeated only once in six
or eight hours, while others, less influenced by theory, perhaps, direct it in
small and repeated doses, in conjunction with vinous drinks. In this way it is
a remedy of superior efficacy, in all cases accompanied with low, weak pulse,
and failure of the vital powers; and especially in all cases attended with
typhomania and subsultus tendinum.

When any difficulty occurs in distinguishing the weak pulse from the strong
one, we are assured by Dr. Darwin (in his Zoonomia, Vol. 2d. page 301,) that
"it may generally be ascertained by counting its frequency. For when an adult
patient lies horizontally in a cool room, and is not hurried or alarmed by any
circumstance, nor stimulated by wine or opium, the strong pulse seldom exceeds
118 or 120 in a minute; and the weak pulse is generally not much less than 130,
and often much above that number. Secondly, in sitting up in bed, or changing
the horizontal, to an erect posture, the weak pulse is immediately quickened 10
or 12 pulsations in a minute, which is not the case in the strong pulse, when
the patient has rested after the exertion of rising."

It has long been known to physiologists, that sensation and voluntary motion,
depend upon a certain power or function of the brain; but it is a discovery of
modern date, that, though the muscular fibers of the heart, are endowed with a
certain degree of inherent power, they are still for such action as is
necessary to the motion of the blood, very constantly dependent on a nervous
power transmitted into them from the brain, which influences, and modifies the
actions of the heart: This is evident from the motions of the last mentioned
organ immediately ceasing, upon dividing the cardiac nerves. A force is
therefore supposed to be constantly exerted in the brain during life, which is
extended to the fibers of the heart, as well as to every other part of the body.

It is evident to the most superficial observer, that the sensibility, and
irritability of every part of the body, are rendered less susceptible of
impressions, by the use of opium.

In all cases of pain arising from any cause, except that from inflammation, it
is a sure and never failing palliative, and generally succeeds in procuring
sleep, if given in doses sufficiently large to overcome the irritations present
in the system, or to allay the exquisite irritability.

The best method of ascertaining the manner in which any medicine operates, is
in the first place, to observe the ultimate effect, and then to go back step by
step as far as possible to the primary cause: The first cause has in no
instance been discovered demonstratively; but in tracing secondary causes, we
may proceed with tolerable certainty: Agreeably to this plan, I have
endeavored to ascertain the effects of opium upon the living body; and have
found its first effect, is uniformly that of increasing the temperature of the
body. As from the sensible qualities of this substance it cannot act like heat,
by uniting with, and increasing the temperature of other bodies, it must act by
increasing the cause of heat, but as the heat of the body is always in
proportion to the strength, or the rapidity with which the blood circulates
through the vessels, nothing can increase the temperature of the body, which
does not at the same time augment the rapidity of the circulating blood. The
increase of heat takes place soon after taking opium, which must therefore be
owing to the stimulus of the opium upon the heart and vessels, by sympathy from
the nerves of the stomach, or through the intervention of the brain.

When there is great determination to the head, accompanied with ferocious
delirium and great restlessness, neither wine nor opium should be employed. The
most serious consequences have arisen, from the intemperate use of cordials in
such circumstances. Here bleeding, and blistering the head, and sedatives, are
indicated; but when the pulse is low and quick, accompanied with convulsive
motions of the muscles of the limbs, two or three grains of opium, joined with
eight or ten of Sal. Am. Vol. made into a bolus, with conserve of roses, ought
to be given at bed time; and five or six grains of the volatile salts, with
five or six drops of laudanum every two or three hours in the day time,
followed by a large draught of a strong decoction of bark and snake root,
sangree, or wine whey.

In the last recited circumstances, genuine Madeira wine is the most agreeable,
as well as the most effectual cordial that can be employed; and may be given
without restriction day and night, till the subsultus and tremors give way, and
the pulse feels fuller and more vigorous. Some of the cases which are the most
unmanageable and fatal, are those in which there is a spontaneous diarrhoea.

In every instance therefore, when the diarrhoea is so profuse as to
debilitate, an attempt should be made to restrain it.

This in general is most effectually done, by taking a small dose of tincture
of opium, with two or three table spoonfuls of the chalk mixture, of the London
Dispensatory, five or six times a day, and the confictio opiata, at night.

It often happens, that the patient cannot be prevailed upon to take the above
medicines: In such cases a few drops of tinct. opii. in a little wine mulled
with the yelk of an egg, cinnamon and sugar will have the same effect, and is
much more grateful to the patient.

The hiccup is most effectually relieved by opium and ether, and the
application of a blister to the stomach.

The most suitable and agreeable aliment is sago, panada, chicken broth, or
beef tea; with the addition of more or less wine, according as the debility is
greater or less.

When wine raises the pulse, and invigorates the system, without inducing
delirium, it is right to persist in giving it; but when it occasions or
increases delirium, restlessness and heat, it ought instantly to be
discontinued. The intention of giving wine, is to increase and support the
powers of the system; not to heat, irritate, and prevent sleep.

In general, if the bark be given freely in the time of the remissions, there
will seldom be a necessity to give much wine, during the first week of the
fever, and seldom afterward, to exceed one pint of Madeira or port, or a
bottle of claret, in twenty-four hours.

In cases, where coma, or lethargic symptoms come on, besides the cordials
already mentioned, a blister should be applied to the coronal future, and
sinapism to the feet.

When the fever is entirely subdued, and the patient in a state of
convalescency, he should still continue the use of wine, or porter, and a
nourishing invigorating diet. He should also frequently take moderate exercise
in the open air in suitable weather, observing to accommodate his dress, to the
changes of the weather, and to his debilitated condition.

To promote a more speedy recovery, it will be proper to make use of an
infusion of cort. Peru. or rad. Columb. in water with the addition of a little
of Huxham's tinct. cort. or old brandy, with the daily use of the cold shower,
or plunging bath, and a dose or two of some agreeable composition, with sal.
mart. or flor. martial. If the stomach remains weak and dyspeptic, brandy and
water, will be a preferable drink, to either wine or porter. Oedematous
swellings are apt to follow this fever, when it has been long protracted.

These, where no tumefaction and obstruction of the liver or spleen are
discoverable, generally give way to exercise, and regular, generous, but not
intemperate living. When they do not, diuretics ought always to be combined
with tonics.

Ten or fifteen grains of pearl ash, taken two or three times a day, in a
draught of the following bitter infusion, generally answers this purpose equal
to any other.

Rad. Gentian Co^tus ij. Cort. Aurant. ss. Sem. Coriand. ss. Aq. Com. lbiss.
coquend. ad lbj. and colend.

If this fails, the digitalis or powder of Squills alternated with chalybeate
pills should be substituted; and if the swellings still gain ground, recourse
should be had to mercurial frictions, repeated every night till the mouth
becomes affected, which should be kept in that state for three or four weeks at
least; the strength of the patient being supported at the same time with
suitable aliment.

If oedematous swellings increase, or prove tedious, boluses containing two
three grains of sal martis, or ten or fifteen of flores martiales with the
addition of some agreeable aromatic, may be taken several times a day, in
conjunction with a cordial and invigorating regimen. The tinctura ferri muriata
of the London Pharmacopaea, is a very efficacious preparation, and may be taken
several times a day in doses of from ten to twenty drops in any agreeable
draught.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE FEBRILE DISORDERS WHICH PREVAILED IN SHEFFIELD IN THE STATE
OF MASSACHUSETTS, IN THE YEARS 1793, 1794 AND 1795. EXTRACTED FROM A LETTER OF
WILLIAM BUEL, PHYSICIAN AT SHEFFIELD, TO E. H. SMITH, PHYSICIAN AT NEW YORK.
BEFORE entering directly on the subject of the disorders, which prevailed here
in 1793, 1794 and 1795, I shall mention some circumstances relative to the face
of the country in the Town of Sheffield.

The river Housatonak runs in a serpentine course through this town, from North
to South. Upon the banks of the river, on each side, is an extent of intervale,
or meadow land, averaging on both sides at about a mile in breadth. The
greatest part of this intervale is overflowed at the time of the thawing away
of the snow, in the spring; and sometimes, by large and sudden freshets, at
other seasons. The nature of the soil, in general, is such, that, very soon
after the water is off, the land is dry and fit for tillage. It is, however,
much interspersed with coves and marshes; in the former of which the water
remains stagnant a considerable part of the summer, and in many of them
perpetually; of the latter there are not many upon this river, but there are
some which remain such, through the season.

Beside the Housatonak, there are two other considerable streams, running
through part of this town, which unite and empty into that river. Upon each of
these streams are large tracts of low, marshy lands; great part of which is
overflowed by freshets, and is never perfectly dry. -- There is (which is very
material) a mill-dam, on each of these streams; and the two dams occasion the
overflowing of several hundred acres of the low lands. As summer advances, and
the ponds fall, considerable parts of these lands are left uncovered by the
water; more or less, according to the drought of the summer. In both of these
ponds are large quantities of timber and other vegetable matters, which in hot
weather, are always in a state of putrefaction. This state exists in an
increased degree as the substances become more exposed to the action of the
sun. The foetor occasioned by this putrefying mass is such, in hot weather and
when the water is low, as to be extremely offensive to the smell, at the
distance of many rods.

The inhabitants of this town, who live in the vicinity of these marshy and
drowned lands, have, as would naturally be expected, been always subject to
remittent and intermittent fevers, from its first settlement. It is, however,
generally remarked by the old people, that these disorders have of late years,
until the three last decreased, owing, probably, to the clearing, or partial
draining, of the lands.

Although, the disorders which have prevailed in this town, for two or three
years past, are owing undoubtedly, principally to these local causes; yet it is
not improbable, that some predisposition to them was occasioned by a general
constitution of the air. To ascertain this point, with any degree of precision,
we ought to have before us an accurate history of the weather, for several
years past. Even then it would, perhaps, be impossible; as it ever has been
found a difficult matter to trace any connection between the manifest qualities
of the air, and the effects of a general constitution of it, favorable to
disease. As I am unable, either from minutes, or memory, to give any account of
the weather, I shall leave the matter unattempted.

In the year 1793, during the season in which such complaints usually appear,
intermittents and their concomitants were more frequent than they had been for
many years before. In September and October, there were a few scattering
instances of bilious fevers.

Early in the spring of 1794, inflammatory complains, chiefly of the pneumonic
kind, were unusually prevalent. They were soon succeeded by intermittents;
which were more frequent than they had been the year before. Nothing peculiar
attended them; and they continued to occur pretty often through the summer.

Toward the last of July, the bilious, or, as it is called here, the
pond-fever, began to make its appearance; principally about the South Pond, one
of the mill-ponds beforementioned, and near the Canaan line. There were some
s^attered instances about the North Pond: and a few, which were at such a
distance from both, that they were, probably, occasioned by the stagnant water
about the great river, the Housaconak. But the disorder was chiefly confined to
the vicinity of the South Pond. The influence of this pond appeared to extend
about one mile and a half from its borders. Within this place there are about
150 inhabitants; and about 80 of this number were affected with the fever: part
of them inhabitants of Sheffield, and a part of Canaan. Among those who were
sick, there were five or six instances of mortality. There were not more than
ten or twelve persons who had the disorder in other parts of the town. From
these there was but one death; and that in a case complicated with pregnancy,
and eventually with phthifis pulmonalis. People continued to be attacked with
this fever through the months of August, September, and a part of October.

The disorder was, probably, in all respects, what is termed a bilious
remitting fever. It began with an ague fit; intense pains in the back, head,
and limbs, soon succeeded by thirst, dryness of the skin, etc. continuing
without much variation ^8 or 20 hours: a slight moisture then broke out upon
the skin -- ^^dom a profuse sweat; a degree of remission of the fever, and
abatement of the pains, then ensued, and continued till about the time of day
of the first attack, when another exacerbation of fever commenced, with
symptoms similar to the first. If the disease was left to itself, the
remissions would sometimes become shorter and more imperfect, as the paroxisms
were repeated, until it grew to be nearly or quite a continued fever. A
diarrhoea, and sometimes dysenteric symptoms were added to the rest. Most of
those who died were attended with a preternaturally lax state of the bowels;
which in several instances, might properly be called dysenteric. The tongue
was, from the first, covered with a white sur. After three or four days, a
black stripe began to appear; extending from the root, toward the extremity;
and gradually spreading as the the disorder advanced, till the whole tongue
assumed a black appearance. Even the teeth and gums were sometimes covered with
this black fur; and in some patients who afterward recovered.

In the treatment of this disorder, evacuation of some kind, is undoubtedly
necessary in the early stage of it. Venesection generally produced a temporary
relief from the violence of the pain, and was, probably, when the constitution
was firm and robust, and the habit plethoric, frequently useful; but it did not
appear to me to be important as a curative remedy. Emetics sometimes did well;
and where there was a great degree of nausea, I thought them useful. But
purging, with calomel and jalap, was the mode of evacuation I preferred, and
generally practiced; and the remedy which of all others appeared to be most
advantageous in the early stage of the disease.

It is unnecessary for me to say any thing more, in this place, than the
assiduous purging, in the beginning, and a plentiful use of the bark, after the
remissions had become such as to make it admissible, were the essential parts
of the management of this disorder.

So strong was the tendency to disorders of this kind, that people continued in
some instances to be affected with intermittents, or fever and ague, through
the winter. These were frequent in the spring, but with no peculiarities, and
yielding to the common remedy with the usual facility.

During the month of August 1795, I was in the county of Ontario, in the
western part of the state of New York. There was, at that time, a disorder
prevalent there, of the same nature with that which I found rise in Sheffield,
on my return, and which I am about to describe. It was chiefly existent in the
neighborhood of stagnant waters, and in situations similar to those places, in
this town, to which the disease was most confined. The treatment required was,
of course, the same.

On my return to Sheffield, which was the 5th. of September, I found a number
of the inhabitants, about the North Pond, afflicted with a fever, which began
to appear about three weeks before. The people first attacked were those who
lived nearest to the pond; whole families of whom were down at once. Numbers
continued to be taken daily, chiefly within the vicinity of this pond, or
within three quarters of a mile of its borders, till about the middle of
October; after which time there were few instances of new attacks. In this
time, i. e. from the 10th. of August to the 20th. of October, of about 200
(which is not far from the number of persons living within three quarters of a
mile of some of the borders of this pond) not less than 150 were affected with
more or less of this disease; out of which number, but one person died, and
that an aged man, previously debilitated and disordered. -- The number affected
with this fever, in all other parts of this town, did not, I believe, exceed
thirty. Of these, three died: one, an aged woman; the other two, pregnant
women, of whom one died in the fever, the other suffered an abortion, and died
some months after, dropsical.

The disease, this year, put on a different form to what it did the last. It
might, with more propriety be called an intermittent, than a remittent fever;
though it was very different from a common fever and ague. It began, like other
fevers, with an ague fit, attended with pains in the head, back and limbs. The
duration of this part of the paroxism was uncertain. It was succeeded by a hot
fit, whose duration was, in different persons, from six to forty eight hours. A
remission, and, sometimes, nearly or quite, a perfect intermission, then came
on; but whose duration was as irregular and uncertain as was that of the
paroxism before. After the first, the paroxisms were not generally ushered in
by a regular ague fit; only some slight chills were felt; and these were
irregular, both in degree and continuance. The length of the next succeeding
paroxisms and intervals could, by no means, be calculated for, from the
preceding, so completely irregular was this disorder. The fever evidently
tended to an intermittent form; but it could neither be called quotidian,
tertian, quartan, nor by any other name used by authors to distinguish the
different species of intermitting fevers. The pains in the head, limbs and
back, were very fevere, particularly in the latter, which were so universally
intense, that the symptom might almost be considered as characteristic of the
disorder. In the primae viae, flatulency was nearly a constantly attendant and
very troublesome symptom. Evidences of an increased secretion and excretion of
bile, were generally present through the disease, but were particularly
observable in the convalescence. Some degree of yellowness of the skin, which
was almost universal, indicated a reabsorption of this fluid, and a deposition
of it upon the skin. This yellowness was in two instances which I saw, very
intense. A slight degree of delirium was very common, during the height of the
fever. The appearance of the tongue was much the same that it was last year.

My method of treating the fever of this year, was similar to that which I
employed the last year. -- Purging, in the beginning, and afterward a
plentiful use of the bark, appeared to me to be the most successful way of
managing it. In extreme cases, particularly, a free and full exhibition of
bark, wine and laudanum, seemed the only means of salvation. It was absolutely
necessary that the patient should be thoroughly purged, previous to the use of
stimulants, otherwise the bark, wine, or laudanum, would have very pernicious
effects. I saw several instances, at the westward, where, by too early a use of
these medicines, the fever was changed into a continued form, attended with a
constantly dry and yellow skin, comatose symptoms, etc. One of the instances of
extreme yellowness, which I have mentioned, was of this kind, and at the
westward. I removed this symptom, and recovered the patient, by giving repeated
doses of calomel and jalap, some perspirative medicines, and afterward the
bark, wine, etc. Each purge in this case, lessened the degree of yellowness
very apparently. The other instance of intense yellowness, which I saw, was in
this town, in the case of the pregnant woman, whom I have mentioned to have
died in the fever. This woman's fever never had distinct intermissions. Several
slight attempts were made to administer the bark; but it would not do. Perhaps
my timidity in the evacuants, on account of her situation, was injurious to her.

The Bark did not suspend the paroxisms, in this disorder, in as short a time
as it does in common intermittents; but, if the patient was properly prepared,
and the use of it was persevered in, it never failed to have the effect.

Purging was probably useful in a twofold way: First by carrying off the
superfluous bile; which was evidently secreted and excreted in a preternatural
quantity: Secondly, by reducing the sthenic diathesis, which was perhaps always
present in the early stage of the disorder.

It is true, that those whose fever was suspended by the bark, were subject to
frequent relapses, and to a long and lingering state of convalescence. This
drew an odium upon that medicine; and many were induced to believe that it was
owing to the use of it that people were so long in recovering, and of course,
that it was improper. I am convinced, however, from very attentive observation,
that those who did not take the bark, but suffered the fever gradually to wear
away, as it sometimes would, were equally subject to those inconveniences.
Indeed this seems to be the nature of the disease, The old people in this town,
who recollect the times when disorders of this kind have prevailed here before,
and when the bark was not at all used, inform me that those who were afflicted
with them, were a long time in recovering.

It seems that in all cases, when patients have got rid of the fever, either by
means of the bark, or otherwise, there remains an increased disposition to the
formation and excretion of bile, and that this humor accumulates in the primae
viae, till it first destroys the appetite and occasions nausea, and then
excites a spontaneous discharge by stool or vomiting, or a relapse of fever, or
both. A continuance in the use of some laxative medicine, after a recovery, has
a tendency to prevent these effects; and, if strictly attended to, would
probably prevent them, and perhaps obviate the disposition to relapse entirely.

In reflecting on phenomena of this kind, the human mind is anxious to fix on
something satisfactory as their causes. Specific contagion, I am convinced, was
in no instance which came under my observation, either here or at the westward,
the cause of the propagation of the disorder. That marsh effluvia, to whose
action the inhabitants of some parts of this town are subject, is the exciting
cause, and is necessary to the production of the disorders in question, is
beyond any manner of doubt. This is evident from their existing only where this
influence extends. But something more is wanting; otherwise we cannot account
for their prevailing in some years, and not in others. Every circumstance
relative to the ponds I have endeavored to discover the cause why the sickness
in 1794, was confined almost entirely to the South, and in 1795, to the
North-Pond; but I can find no local circumstances to have existed which should
produce sickness about one, and not about the other, in either of these years.

It is probable this was owing to the different direction of the winds, at the
different periods when the fever occurred.

W. C.


and marshes in this town, has apparently been the same for many years past;
and yet very little of this form of disease has appeared, for ten or twelve
years back, until the two last. We must either suppose a peculiar constitution
of the atmosphere, occasioning a predisposition to these disorders, and
coinciding with the local cause, or marsh effluvia; or that the marsh effluvia
itself is, by some peculiarity of the atmosphere, wrought up to a higher pitch
of virulence, and thus produces a higher degree of disease. I am inclined to
admit the latter supposition, as I am convinced that the fevers which have
prevailed here for two or three years past, and the common intermittent fever,
are the same, only differing in degree. I have seen all degrees, from the
mildest form of intermittent, to the most extreme of bilious remitting fever.
It is impossible to say where the line of division shall be drawn. The disease
this year seems to have formed a connecting link between intermittent and
bilious fever; and were I to name it, I would call it a bilious intermittent.
Should the intermittent fever, in its usual form, prevail next year, the
disorder may be said in the three years, to have been in regular gradations run
through.

SHEFFIELD, NOV. 30, 1795.
EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM DR. THEODORE JOHNSON OF EASTON, TALBOT COUNTY, TO THE
AUTHOR, DATED MAY 16TH. 1794.
"BEFORE I give you a detail of the diseases which prevailed with us last
summer and autumn, it may not be improper to give you some idea of the
situation of Talbot, and a description of the season which preceded the sickly
one, as it is a well known fact, that a predisposition to certain diseases, are
frequently generated in one season, and the diseases produced in another.

This county is bounded on the west by the Chesapeak, and is variously
intersected by perhaps, as great a number of rivers and large creeks, as any in
the Union, some of which extend for many miles into the country eastward, and
are fresh some miles from their source. The country near the bay side in
general is much the most healthy, but (as you will readily conceive,) is much
the most affected by winds. The easterly and north-easterly winds, passing over
the unhealthy parts of this peninsula, usually take up and carry the seeds of
fevers with them; insomuch that when these winds prevail, the bay side is often
as sickly as any other part of the country.

Last spring was very wet, and the months of May and June were marked by the
excess, both in frequency and quantity of rain; in consequence of which the
crops of hay, etc. were larger than has been known for many years.

Part of July and August, was uncommonly warm.

We had comparatively few cases of fever in July, but early in August more
people than I ever knew, complained of different degrees of indisposition, from
a sense of lassitude to an intermittent fever. I really thought the remitting
bilious fever (if it may be so called) was also more frequent, and more
malignant, than I had ever seen it before. In some cases the vomiting was so
violent, as to bring away large quantities of blood from the extremely relaxed
exhalents of the stomach. I had one remarkable case of this kind, which
terminated favorably: I have no unequivocal proofs that this fever was
contagious, but am inclined to think it was, when it run into the typhus type,
and exhibited symptoms of malignancy.

The dysentery most generally occurs here in autumn, when fevers of various
types abound. It does not always keep pace with the autumnal fevers, yet I am
disposed to think it only a different modification of the same disease, as they
are often very much intermixed, and generally happen at the same season, and
both appear to be derived from miasmata.

Last year there did not appear to be any great uniformity, in the appearance
of the dysentery, with the fevers that prevailed; but I rather conceived it was
more influenced by diet, and the sensible qualities of the atmosphere.

May not the action of cold, or some error in diet, cooperating with miasmata
and other sedative causes, occasion the disease to fall with more force upon
the bowels, than the rest of the system, without the influence of which, it
would have assumed the common type of an intermittent? Or would you call this a
symtomatic affection? I am confident I once took a true idiopahic dysentery,
from getting extremely wet and cold, on being previously indisposed, at a time
when autumnal fevers were rife, which always impressed Sydenham's idea very
strongly upon my mind."

EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM DRS. TAILOR AND HANSFORD, TO THE AUTHOR, RELATIVE TO
THE REMITTING FEVER WHICH OCCURS AT NORFOLK, ON THE CHESAPEAK BAY IN VIRGINIA,
AND THE ADJACENT COUNTRY.
THE country around Norfolk is low land, mostly within twelve feet of the level
of the sea, intersected in all directions with salt-creeks and rivers, the
heads of which form swamps and marshes, and fenny grounds covered with water in
wet seasons. Wherever it is not cultivated, the land is covered with large
timber and thick underwood. The vicinity of the sea, and the salt-creeks and
rivers, occasion a constant moisture and warmth of the atmosphere, insomuch,
that although under the same latitude a hundred miles up the country, deep
snows and frozen rivers are very common during the winter, yet here we consider
such occurrences as extraordinary; for these reasons, the spring is very early
ushered in, sometimes so early, that many trees are in bloom about the latter
end of February; from this time, however, till the end of April we are subject
to cold rains, piercing winds, and sharp frosts.

About the middle of May, the weather becomes sultry, with some cool days,
occasioned by the change of winds to the north and north-east: At this period
all the diseases of the winter begin to decline, and the whole country is
universally healthy (except here and there a trifling vernal intermittent which
scarce requires the application of medicine) till the middle or latter end of
June, when diarrhoeas and dysenteries appear among the children, mostly with
those under two years old, though not absolutely confine I to such.

In some years the diarrhoea is almost universal, attended for the most part
with an irritation of the stomach, and an irregular fever of the intermittent
kind: After the proper evacuations, we apply bark in large quantities, joined
to the most approved astringents and anodynes, gum kino, opium, spec. e^scord.
etc. and when the stomach will not bear a sufficient quantity of bark, we throw
it up in glisters repeatedly, for many days together, and this we have learnt,
by experience, to be the only mode which can be depended on.

In July, the heat of the weather increases; but during the whole of this month
and the greatest part of August, there are no diseases at all, at least none
which can be called epidemic. On the approach of the autumnal months,
intermittents begin to appear throughout the country.

It is not our province here to recapitulate the several opinions concerning
the cause and nature of those fevers, nor yet to divide them into numberless
species and genera. We have never been able to distinguish any other difference
in the nature of intermittents, than that which constitution, climate, and
manner of living give rise to; those causes will divide them into perfect,
imperfect, or remittent: The several terminations of them which we frequently
observe into continued, putrid, or nervous fevers, will be found to arise from
the same causes, and under those simple terms we shall proceed to treat of
intermittents in all their stages.

Those which occur earliest in the season are uniformly of the mildest kind,
and yield soonest to the proper medicines. Among the laboring and temperate
class of our citizens, whose diet is simple, whose hours are regular, and whose
use of spirituous liquors is sparing, those fevers are perfect intermittents,
generally of the tertian kind, and though not confined particularly to any age
or sex, yet are most frequent among the younger class, the females and the
children; they are in wet seasons almost general among those of the latter
description in country places, and in low fenny ground. They yield immmediately
to proper evacuations, and the use of the Peruvian bark, and seldom outlast the
autumna^ months, even without the assistance of any art: Sometimes, however, in
relaxed habits, they terminate in jaundice, enlarged spleen, anasarca, and
death. We shall not be particular upon this sort of intermittents, because they
are in nothing different from those which prevail in all countries similarly
situated.

Among that class of citizens, whose hours are more irregular, and whose use of
wine and luxurious food is more frequent, those fevers, though still retaining
the intermittent, quotidian, and tertian form, are nevertheless impefectly so;
a great degree of heat, quickness of pulse, and debility remain during the
whole time, which may be called intermission, with partial or total loss of
appetite. Here intermittents begin to put on an appearance, which we think very
different from those of any other country; they are preceded by a chilliness,
which commonly seizes the patient when he thinks himself in perfect health.
Headache, great thirst and heat soon follow, in many instances delirium,
vomiting, diarrhoea, and large discharges of bile; -- about the fifth, seventh,
or twelfth hour the patient is relieved by profuse sweat, which continues with
the aforementioned heat, quickness of pulse, and debility, till the next
paroxism. These are generally of the tertian kind, and return regularly if no
medicine is used, from nine to fourteen days, when they will commonly terminate
altogether, or degenerate into a slight quotidian, which allows the patient to
walk about, and when the cold weather approaches, for the most part, leave him
altogether.

People of the latter description are more rarely the subjects of intermittent
fevers than those who live in a plain manner; and if proper evacuations are
made, and the bark administered with perseverance, and attention to the stomach
and first passages, the disease may almost certainly be cured after the third
paroxism, and very often even a second is prevented.

We have always experienced cathartics to be the safest and most effectual
evacuations in those kinds of fevers; and if the patient has an irritated
stomach with costiveness, emetics are not only inadequate and unnecessary but
dangerous. We frequently find great difficulty in making the stomach bear a
sufficient quantity of cathartic medicines to procure the desired evacuations:
when this is the case, laudanum and aqua menthae, or extract. thebaic. are
administered an hour or two before the purge, which generally causes the latter
to remain, and though the opiate retards the operation, it does not ultimately
prevent it, or render it less powerful. after this we proceed to the use of the
bark during the intermissions, and without regard to measure, give it as
profusely as the stomach will permit, and in the most powerful form, beginning
with the powder, and occasionally using the decoction, the extract, and cold
infusion. It too often happens, that the stomach will not bear the medicine at
all, in which case we give large quantities of the decoction or infusion by
clysters; and we can venture to assert, when those clysters are retained in
sufficient quantity, the effect is equal to that produced by any other mode of
administering it. During the paroxism, we find great relief procured, by making
the patient drink plentifully of a strong infusion of serpent. virgin. to
which, when the symptoms are very painful, we add laudanum in sufficient
quantity to procure the patient perfect ease. These last medicines,
particularly the serpent. have a visible power of shortening the paroxyism, and
will rarely disagree with the stomach. The use of opium, its safety and
advantage in those cases, we presume to be well known; therefore we shall
decline making any observations upon it, except that we have not found it (as
has been asserted) capable per se, of curing intermittents. It has been advised
to give it in conjunction with the several preparations of bark, where the
irritable state of the stomach will not bear the cort. alone. This expedient
will succeed, if the quantity from time to time be increased, and is often used
with success, though it invariably occasions great distress to the patient when
the fever leaves him, by inducing an h^slerical or hypochondriacal sensation,
which if it does not amount to pain, the patient will tell you his feelings are
far worse than if it did.

The use of this medicine to prevent the passage of the bark by stool is known
to every one; but we think the gum. kino for general use much better, and more
permanent in its effects.

At the accession of those fevers there is frequently a full hard pulse,
inflamed eyes, a sense of fullness in the breast, and sometimes a sharp pain in
the side, resembling that which attends inflammatory fevers. These
circumstances have often led practitioners, and others who are not acquainted
with the climate, to bleed the patient; an expedient, which if it does not
produce a tendency to putrefaction, invariably fixes the fever so firmly, that
the cure becomes afterward exceedingly difficult.

When no medicines are given at all, we have observed before, that the fever
for the most part will decline of itself on the ninth or fourteenth day, or
degenerate into a slight quotidian, and sometimes a quartan; this is, however,
not always the case.

If no medicine has been given, or if the disease has been improperly treated
by bleeding, or by too great evacuations, otherwise by forbidding the use of
wine, etc. the fever sometimes becomes remittent.

In the town we have also many of these fevers, which though clearly belonging
to the class of intermittents, appear in the form of remittents; because, there
is an evident tendency to decline of the fever at a particular time, once in
twenty-four hours, every other day, or every fourth day, and all the
diagnogstic symptoms are precisely the same as they are in distinct
intermittents, making allowance for age, sex, and constitution; nor do the
means of cure differ, though variously applied.

In the town, throughout the months of September and October, many of the
inhabitants are seized with fevers, which begin with chilliness, a sense of
fullness in the stomach, followed by pains throughout the limbs, neck, back, and
hips, great heat and prostration of strength, which proceed and terminate as
before described, under the term of imperfect intermittents. But others who are
attacked in the same manner, particularly robust and plethoric habits, or those
who are accustomed to drink a great deal of wine, porter, etc. and take
plentifully of luxurious food, have a greater sense of heat, more pain in the
limbs, and much more oppression and debility -- are extremely restless,
sometimes with delirium, and great thirst; and when the period of intermission
of the fever should arrive, viz. the ninth or twelfth hour, are but partially
relieved, that is, the sense of heat is not so great, the delirium and
restlessness are somewhat abated, and there are some few strokes difference in
the pulse; and when there is nausea and vomiting, those likewise partly cease
to torment the patient, but the prostration of strength, pain in the limbs,
etc. with the dry skin, still remain: Here the evacuation by cathartics should
be attempted without delay, and the period of the remission (which though
obscure, lasts several hours) employed in administering bark in every possible
form, without regard to the quickness of pulse and dry skin; wine should be
given in large quantities, and on the return of the paroxism, the patient
should drink profusely of an infusion of serpentar. with wine.

When this plan is followed with perseverance, the patient almost always
recovers, though the paroxism, or properly speaking, the violent hours of the
fever, may return once or twice; but if this is neglected, after the second
return, the fever puts on ^ malignant and putrid type, and often ends in death.

We have sometimes found it impracticable to make the patient keep the bark in
any form, or by any mode of giving it; when this is the case, the disease is
always dangerous, and the only expedient we have left is the use of wine and
serpentar. and we have so many times experienced the advantage of this last
medicine, by giving it in a large quantity, that we cannot help earnestly
recommending it to the notice of every practitioner.

It is a medicine, though of known efficacy, very much neglected, at least the
proper administration of it; like the bark, it cannot be given in too large a
quantity, when the stomach will bear it. The fevers of the latter description
are less common than the others.

When the disease begins to yield to the medicine, a profuse sweat comes on;
the pulse grows full, slow, and soft; the sense of heat and pain in the limbs,
back, hips, and neck abate and gradually subside; the patient has a desire to
ear, and in a few days he feels nothing but a debility, which is far from being
so great as the violence of the disease would give cause to suspect, and a very
little time restores him to perfect health and vigor.

When it is about to terminate unfavourably, there is an increased irritation
of the stomach, with vomiting of cystic bile, mixed with tough mucus, attended
in some cases with diarrhoea, the pulse grows smaller, quicker, and intermits,
or rather seems at times to retreat from the finger while feeling it; the
countenance falls, the eyes become glossy, the tongue black and dry, the teeth
cemented over with a black mucilaginous substance, cold extremities, and death;
the pulse, however, is never to be depended upon in the termination of these
fevers; it is sometimes so hard, full, and regular, even at the moment that
every other symptom evinces the approach of death, that inexperienced
practitioners would be often induced to bleed or evacuate when the patient is
expiring.

When continued fevers from intermittents take place, they are generally
confined to relaxed, debilitated, or debauched habits; they are far from being
common with us, and as in every other country, they either terminate on the
twenty-first day, or lengthen out into what are called nervous fevers, we shall
neither treat of this stage of the disorder, or pretend to point out a mode of
cure, for whatever may be the predisposing cause, the disease is invariably the
same, and requires the same mode of tretament in every country. We must,
however, take notice of one effect which some intermittents produce, viz. a
debility or affection of the optic nerve, so as to render the patient perfectly
blind, till the bark and other tonics, have removed the fever, when those
patients recover their sight with health.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE OPINIONS AND PRACTICE IN FEBRILE DISEASES, OF PHYSICIANS OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES, etc. WITH OCCASIONAL REMARKS etc.
HIPPOCRATES, (who practiced medicine in Greece, about four hundred and fifty
years before the Christian era, and who was the first that we have on record,
that reduced the healing art to any kind of system) has described a bilious
fever, under the title of typhus, Typhus is employed by the moderns to signify
a malignant or putrid fever.
which he says invades, when the bile is moved through the body when the dog
star arises in the summer time. In this disease immediately an intense burning
was felt, together with an acute fever; and immediately the strength was
exhausted, with a weakness and heaviness of the body, and such an impotency of
the legs and arms that they were of no use to the patient. He also remarks that
the belly was disturbed with violent gripings, and evacuations of offensive
excrements. The remedies recommended by this celebrated and venerable physician
in the cure of this fever, were cold, and thin suppings, black austere wine, or
if that disagreed, white austere thin wine. He also advises the application of
linen cloths dipped in cooling liquors to those parts of the body where the
greatest heat is principally perceived Vanswieten's Comment. Vol. 7th. page 23.


This extraordinary physician collected together the signs that occur and
appeared to be characteristic of every disease that came under his notice, and
by comparing them with what he observed in a natural state of health, estimated
the danger in proportion to the degree that those signs of disease departed
from a state of health. If the physicians since his time had been content to
have learned the treatment of diseases from a faithful observation of the
effects of remedies instead of puzzling their heads with researches into their
intimate causes, the healing art would not have been subjected at this time to
the opprobrium of a conjectural art.

Erasistratus, a physician distinguished for certain innovations in the
treatment of diseases, two hundred years later than the Coan sage, Asclepiades
and his disciple Themison, who practiced medicine with reputation at Rome a few
years before the introduction of Christianity into the world, were all enemies
to blood-letting in fevers. Believing the disease to depend upon a straitness
of the minute or extreme vessels of the body, and especially on the surface,
their practice was to prohibit the use of all kind of aliment for the first
three days, and to drench the patient with copious draughts of water to relax
and render the vessels permeable.

Hippocrates remarks that one should open a vein in acute diseases, if the
disorder appears violent if the patient is in the vigor of his age, and the
strength at that time is also considerable Vanswieten's Comenmt. Vol. 7th. page
196.


Serapion who made his appearance about the same period as Erisistrates, was
the founder of the empyric sect, as the latter was of the methodic. His
followers were numerous, and many of them respectable; but we have no account
of their practice in the fever under consideration. The summary view of Celsus,
or the accidental fragments in the volumnious works of Galen, furnish only
imperfect information. Contentions however, ran high between the Dogmatists and
Empirics, the former of whom, were chiefly guided by reasonings; and generally
misled by the erroneous philosophy of the age in which they lived, while the
latter trusted solely to experience.

Celsus, who lived in the reign of Tiberius, says, "Blood-letting is required
when the fever is violent, and the body looks red, or the veins swell, and
appear full." -- Celsus however, makes no mention of venaesection, where he
treats of the cure of an ardent fever, by which term the ancients understood a
disease similar in almost, or perhaps in every respect, to the malignant yellow
fever of the West Indies of pestilential origin, as appears from the
description of the symptoms, and period of its termination, given in
Hippocrate's Epidemics, the substance of which, is delivered in Vanswieten's
Commentaries, Vol. 7th. p. 96.

In continual fevers, with symptoms denoting inflammation, it was the practice
of Galen, who left Pergamos and settled in Rome about the year 160, to bleed
the patient till he fainted, with the view of extinguishing the fever at once.
In this kind of fevers, he expressly advises blood-letting and the drinking of
cold liquors. But he has made no mention of blood-letting, in intermittent or
remittent fevers.

Neither Aetius, nor Paulus Aegineta, who lived after Galen: The latter in the
7th. century, and has given an analysis of the opinions and practice of the
prolix commentator of Hippocrates, make any mention of opening a vein, either
in the remitting, or ardent fever, as they term the synochus. -- But Aroeteus,
a cotemporary of Aetius, treating of the cure of a syncope, the beginning of
which he pronounced an ardent fever; recommends venaesection, when the syncope
proceeds from too great a quantity of blood, and some considerable inflammation
appears about the liver, or precordia. He however subjoins, that "much less
blood ought to be evacuated, than upon other occasions, because the least error
committed in this respect, may be of fatal consequence."

Avicenna, the Arabian, who practiced medicine at Ispahan, the capital of
Persia; and compiled a Treatise on Diseases, from the works of Galen, in the
10th. century. His theories are those of Galen: In the general conduct of the
cure, he follows him closely. He is indeed more reserved with the lancet, while
he is not always consistent with himself, in the manner of employing it.

The healing art, after the surrender of Alexandria, was little cultivated by
the slothful and dispirited Greeks, but it sprung up with fresh vigor, in
Syria and Arabia, and being extended with the conquests of the Saracens, it was
introduced into the northern coast of Africa, and from thence was introduced
into Spain and Italy.

After the fall of the Roman Empire, the genius of learning made no exertion in
Europe, for a very long period of time. The Europeans were content, with the
imperfect knowledge they could glean from the writings of Avicenna. -- And part
of the 16th. century passed over, before any real improvements were made in the
treatment of fevers.

Among the most celebrated of the followers of Galen in the 16th. century, were
Fernelius, Forestus, Lommius, and Sennertus; men of considerable talents, but
too strongly attached to the opinions of their master, to exercise their own
judgments to the best advantage.

Lommius in particular, we are assured by Dr. Patterson, (in his Remark's on
Dr. Rush's Works,) recommended the use of blood-letting in the beginning of
fevers in adults, and in whom vigor naturally abounds; but he reckoned it
dangerous to repeat it in the exacerbation, or height of the paroxism. -- When
the patients strength is not much exhausted, but purely a little diminished,
with lowness of spirits; venaesection is neither to be entirely omitted, nor
the quantity of blood drawn, to be copious. The length of the intervals is to
be regulated by the strength of the patient, and the violence of the disease.
In great weakness however, the lancet is to be entirely withheld, estimating
this condition principally from the situation of the vital powers; while
considerable caution is to be used in judging from the pulse, as it is liable
to be affected by a variety of circumstances, which are often totally
unconnected with the disease. The quantity to be drawn, should depend upon the
result of a comparison between the disease, and the strength of the patient.

In a violent fever, if the patient's strength be not impaired, Lommius advises
a liberal evacuation of blood, and justifies the practice of Galen, of
bleeding, in such cases till the patient faints, on the principle that the
sudden depletion brings the patient directly to a state, different from what he
had been in just before, whilst he may be revived from the syncope, by
refrigerating means.

Botallus, who also lived in the 16th. century, carried blood-letting to still
greater lengths, especially in pestilential fevers, in which he asserts, as
quoted by Sydenham, that he found no speedier, and safer remedy in pestilential
disorders, than copious and seasonable bleedings; in all his patients, which
were exceeding numerous, both at the siege of Rochel, at Mons, and at Paris.

Sydenham himself had a high opinion of copious and repeated blood-letting in
the plague, as well as in all inflammatory disorders; but he prohibits it in
every form of the autumnal intermitting fever, even when concealed at the
beginning, under the mask of a continued fever.

"Autumual intermittents when the constitution is epidemic usually appear about
June, but otherwise not till August, or the beginning of September, and very
rarely in the following months. It is likewise to be noted, that it is a
difficult matter at the first appearance of intermittents, especially of those
that are epidemic in autumn, to distinguish them exactly; because at this time
they are accompanied with a continued fever; and for some time afterward,
unless great attention be given, nothing more than a remission can be
discovered; but by degrees they perfectly intermit, and put on a form entirely
agreeable to the season of the year." (Swan's Sydenham, p. 55.)

"Frequent experience has taught me," adds Dr. Sydenham, "that it is very
dangerous to attempt the cure (of autumnal intermittents) by purging; unless in
a way hereafter mentioned, and especially by bleeding. For in tertians,
particularly in a very epidemic constitution, if bleeding does not prove a
present cure, it prolongs the disease even in young, strong, and otherwise
healthy subjects; but aged persons, after having long struggled with it, are
destroyed thereby. What has been observed of bleeding, holds also of purging,
with this difference only, that the latter is less dangerous, unless it be
frequently repeated." (Page 59.) Boerhaave and Vanswieten have both adopted the
same opinion. (Com. Vol. 7th.)

In treating of the epidemic diseases, from the year 1675 to 1680, the same
author observes, that "though tertians and quotidians, after a fit or two may
seem entirely to intermit, yet they frequently afterward degenerate into a
kind of continued fevers, and only come to a remission on those days that
promised an intermission, etc. In this case I seize the opportunity of the
remission, though it be ever so short, and give the bark more liberally during
that interval, than when the intermission is perfect" (Page 310.)

The most common termination of fevers, is by sweating; this fact was observed
by Van-Helmont, and furnished him with the design of prosecuting the cure of
the disease, entirely on that plan. This practice appears to have been early
adopted in many parts of Europe, and was in general reputation in England, at
the time Sydenham engaged in practice. Sydenham having observed the bad effects
of heating medicines, employed indiscriminately for this purpose, was induced
to employ antiphlogistic processes, and especially venaesection, which he
carried to a considerable extent, particularly in fevers accompanied with an
inflammatory diathesis, or connected with local inflammation.

But as it is the fate of the healing art, as well as every other, that depends
upon opinion, to pass with large strides from one extreme to its opposite.
Sydenham frequently employed his depleting remedies, in cases which later and
more numerous observations, demonstrate that they were improper. His practice
was always at open war with his principles; for if the fever as he believed, is
an effort of nature to exterminate something hurtful from the constitution,
bleeding and those evacuations, which diminish the powers of life, are not the
proper means of effecting this purpose. In admitting such essential differences
in the cause of epidemics, he also necessarily leads us into embarrassment, and
often leaves us in a state of uncertainty; the fevers which he supposes to be
essentially different, and occasioned by different constitutions of the
atmosphere, is in fact the common endemic of London, and the adjacent country,
diversified as in other places by the season, soil state of the weather,
constitutions of the inhabitants, and idiosyncrasies of individuals.
Circumstances arise in all countries, which modify the general cause of
intermittent fevers, hence the disease appears at one time with symptoms of
in^^ammatory diathesis, at another with symptoms of nervous affection, and at
another with a general disposition to affections of particular organs.

Baglivi, who published his Observations on the Diseases of Rome, in the year
1696, says, that "The air at Rome, which is hemmed in by seven hills, is
naturally moist and impure, particularly in autumn, when the days are extremely
hot, and the nights cool, and accompanied with heavy dews. At this season, the
air is also much impregnated with the exhalations from the low moist ground,
and the waters which wash the soil in its vicinity. That city is also much
infested with unwholesome winds from the south, south-west, and south-east. The
air is sometimes so prodigiously hot, as to exhaust all the moisture of the
soil, and to occasion fevers of a very dangerous kind; the Hemitritaiae of
Galen, in which symptoms resembling apoplexy, were common. The air is
particularly impure and unwholesome, near the flat grounds along the Tiber. But
all the parts of the city, which stand high, and are thick settled, with a
prospect to the north or east, and are a considerable distance from the Tiber,
are healthful. In the Campagnia di Roma, which is surrounded by a ridge of
mountains in every direction, excepting a tract which extends toward the
Mediterranean, the air is so impure in autumn, when the south wind prevails,
that if the inhabitants of the city happen to remain there only one night, and
then return to the town, they are soon after seized with a fever accompanied
with malignant symptoms, called the Foul Air Fever. In this fever, cordial and
vinous medicines, and blisters, are very beneficial, but bleeding is extremely
pernicious."

About the beginning of the present century, when every department of science,
had arrived at a considerable degree of improvement, there appeared in the
writings of Stahl, of Hoffman, and of Boerhaave, three new and considerably
different systems of physic, which for a considerable time had, and still in
many parts of Europe, have a considerable share in directing the treatment of
diseases.

Trusting much to the efforts of the animal system, which they supposed were
conducted with constant attention and wisdom: Stahl and his disciples have in
general, proposed only very inert and frivolous remedies, and are extremely
reserved in the use of blood-letting, vomits, etc. in fevers.

The celebrated Boerhaave, who was professor of the theory and practice of
physic, in the University of Leyden; in his Aphorisms concerning the knowledge,
and cure of intermittents, particularly at Section 762, expressly says, "Hence
blood-letting in these fevers, is in itself generally prejudicial, otherwise it
may be of service by accident, or in some cases, as may be, likewise a thin and
strict diet."

On this Aphorism, his learned and experienced commentator, the Baron
Vanswieten makes the following, among other remarks; "Since blood-letting is so
efficacious a remedy in quieting the too great violence of a fever, as we said
before, many physicians have been likewise of opinion, that it may be of great
use in the cure of intermitting fevers; and some have even believed, that these
fevers might be removed only by repeated blood-letting. But since it was
demonstrated under the preceding Aphorism, that all evacuations if violent and
repeated, are prejudicial because they weaken, so the same is true likewise of
blood-letting."

IN the System of Medicine of Dr. Hoffman, late professor at Hall in Saxony,
published at Geneva in the year 1761, since translated by the late Dr. Lewis,
and published by Dr. Duncan; we have the following observations on
intermittents and remittents, etc. Vol. 1st. p. 55, 56, etc.

"In the uncommonly hot and dry summers and autumns of 1726, 1727 and 1728, a
variety of anomalous, malignant intermittents were epidemic almost throughout
Germany. Some suffered one, some two sits a day. In some they were at first
continual, and changed on the 3rd. or 4th. day into intermittents; in others
they intermitted at first, and changed afterward into dangerous continuals. In
some there were excessive evacuations of bilious and pituitous matter, both
upwards and downwards, in others constant sweats, and faintness, during the
remissions or intermissions. Some complained, during the fever, of heat and
cold at the same time. Young persons were sometimes highly delirious in the
paroxism; the aged sleepy: All complained of an anxiety and painful pressure
about the region of the stomach; a dull pain of the loins, feet and head, and
in the time of intermission, a pain in the nape of the neck, scapulae, and
along the spine. At length pustles breaking out on the face, or purple miliary
eruptions on the body, all the symptoms abated. if a sorbutic miliary fever was
joined, the disease proved of longer continuance; if the eruptions were white,
it was generally fatal.

"These fevers were most frequent in marshy places; to persons of an irregular
life, or weak constitution; after bleeding, strong purgatives, immoderate
passions; and to women on the approach of the monthly period. Freedom of
perspiration, openness of the bowels, avoiding cold moist air and unwholesome
foods, were the surest preservatives. Some recovered in a fortnight; with
others the disease lasted a month. Very few died, unless from some great
mismanagement.

GENERAL METHOD OF CURE.
1. "In the beginning of the disease, small doses of nitre were given, both in
the paroxisms, and in the intermissions, along with some agreeable simple
waters, to which were added a few drops of spir. nit. dulc. or the mineral
anodyne liquor. The common drink was water gruel, with lemon juice and lemon
peel, or reduced with almonds, into the form of an emulsion.

2. "The belly, where costive, was loosened by glisters of water gruel, with
cammomile flowers, oil of almonds, and common salt, and potions of mana and
cream of Tartar. In some persons, rhubarb answered better.

3* "A sweat was promoted at the end of the paroxisms, where nature was too
weak to effect it without assistance, by saturated diaphoretic mixtures, mixed
with equal quantity of the anodyne liquor, and a few drops of volatile aromatic
spirits.

4. "When, by these means, the fever had abated, and changed into a true
intermittent, it was successfully treated as such. In some cases, the bark was
given at the beginning, after a gentle emetic, along with cascarilla, nitre and
calx of antimony.

"In these fevers strong purgatives, and emetics did harm. Bleeding, acrids,
sudorifics, and all hot medicines were apt to change the single intermittents
into double, or into continual fevers. Mild evacuants were serviceable.

"When vomiting, restlessness, and coolness of the extremities were urgent, a
gentle diaphoresis was promoted by the mineral anoydine liquor, mixed with a
few drops of volatile spirits, distilled oil of mace, or a small quantity of
the extract of saffron, and warm diluting drinks."

SIR JOHN PRINGLE observes, that, "Though all moist countries are subject to
intermittents, yet if the moisture be pure, and the summers are not close and
hot, the fevers will mostly appear in a regular tertian form, and be easily
cured. But if the moisture arises from stagnating water, in which plants, fish,
and insects die and rot, then the damps being of a putrid nature, not only
occasion more frequent, but more dangerous fevers, which oftener appear in the
form of quotidians, or double tertians, than, in that of single ones.

These marsh fevers are not only apt to begin with little remission, but after
intermitting for some days, to change again into continual fevers, with putrid
and malignant symptoms.

It is also remarkable how they vary with the season; for however frequent,
violent, or dangerous they have been in the decline of summer, or beginning of
autumn, when putrid exhalations are most abundant, yet before winter, they are
reduced to a small number, become mild, and generally assume a regular tertian
form.

The first kind were observed in the campaign of the year 1747, to prevail near
the inundations in Dutch Brabant; the next were those of Zealand; of the 3d.
degree, were those in the lines of Bergan-op-Zoom; and the mildest sort, were
such as were most frequent in the cantonments around Eyndhoven, in villages
rendered moist by plantations, and subterraneous water.

At the height of the epidemic it appeared, that both intermittents and
remittents, by extending or doubling their paroxisms, frequently changed into a
continued, putrid and dangerous form, and that most of those that were lost,
died in this way. But in general the mortality was not in proportion to the
number of the sick, nor to the alarming nature of the symptoms. Although the
distemper was violent, yet it yielded to medicine; and no kind of acute
disorder seemed to require it more. One of the most unfavourable circumstances,
was the proneness to a relapse, the danger of which was greatest during the hot
weather, less in the decline of autumn, and least of all after the frosts began.

Frequent relapses brought on visceral obstructions, which made the
intermittents more obstinate and irregular, and terminate in a dropsy, or
jaundice. (p. 182,) etc.

Fifteen hundred patients, the greatest part with the dysentery, and a number
of wounded men, being crowded together in a hospital, 3 leagues from Hanau,
vitiated the air, and gave rise to a still more alarming distemper, viz. the
jail or hospital fever; the common effects of foul air from crowds and animal
corruption. (p. 22). This fever, and the dysentery grew daily worse. Few
escaped, for however mild or bad the flux was, for which the person was sent to
the hospital, this fever almost surely supervened.

The petaechial spots, blotches, tumifaction of the parotids, frequent
mortifications, contagion, and the great mortality, sufficiently showed its
pestilential nature.

Of fourteen mates employed about the sick, five died; and excepting one or
two, all the rest had been ill and in danger. The hospital lost near half of
the patients; but the inhabitants of the village having first received the
flux, and afterward this fever by contagion, were almost entirely destroyed.

One general hospital being established at Newied, the sick were removed from
their several quarters, and carried down the Rhine to that place; where by the
change of the air, those from Feckenheim were at first relieved, but the rest
who were mixed with them caught the infection, which the following circumstance
rendered still more general and fatal. For orders coming soon after to remove
all the sick from Germany to Flanders, they were embarked in Bilanders, and
conveyed by water to Ghent. The Capital of Flanders.
During this voyage, the fever having acquired new force by the confinement of
the air, by the mortification and other putrid effluvia, it became so virulent,
that above half the number died in the boats, and several of the remainder soon
after their arrival.

The resemblance of this hospital fever, to the true plague was further
evinced, by the following memorable incident. The late malignant fever in
Philadelphia, was occasioned by a circumstance very similar to this recorded by
Sir John Pringle, viz. by the light sails made use of for bedding, by the crew
of the ship Arethusa from the Havanna; and also by those of the armed ship
Hind, from St. Domingo, which were put into shores and sail lofts near the
places where those vessels anchored. W. C.
A parcel of old tents being sent on board the same Bilanders with the men,
were used by them for bedding: These tents, in order to be refitted were put
into the hands of a tradesman at Ghent, who having employed 23 Flemmish
journeymen about the work, lost 17 of them by the distemper, though they had no
other communication with the infected."

From these observations, and from the frequent notice taken of the supposed
contagious effects of the dysentery, it is manifest that Sir John Pringle never
observed the remitting or intermitting fever to be propagated by contagion; on
the contrary, he expressly says, the circumstance of the dysentery being
contagious, shows that it is essentially different from these fevers.

Sir John Pringle is of opinion from the symptoms and contagious nature of the
pestilential fever, which occured in the Imperial army in Hungary, A. D. 1566,
described by Sennertus, (p. 254 Edit. 6th.) that it was a compound of the
bilious and hospital fever, taking its rise in the camp, but acquiring its high
degree of malignity and contagious quality, from the foul air of the places in
which the sick were crowded.

In his Observations on the treatment of the bilious remitting, and
intermitting fevers of marshy countries, Sir John Pringle remarks, that "In
most cases, it was necessary to open a vein, either upon the first attack, or
the next day, if there was no intermission. But repeated bleedings, unless upon
evident marks of a fixed inflammation were so far from producing the desired
effect, that they seemed to render the fever more obstinate. It ought also to
be remarked, that the rule about bleeding regards the soldiers only, and not
the natives, whose constitutions were different from the soldiers, who were not
only young, but robust and sanguine. And even among the soldiers, bleeding was
seldom necessary upon a relapse, as the fever then appeared without
inflammation, and as a regular intermittent.

An antimonial emetic generally rendered the intermission more distinct. The
marsh fever, during the hot season, being more apt to run into double paroxisms
or to change into a continued form, than to remain regularly intermittent, it
was necessary after due preparation to stop it in the first fair intermission.
And for this purpose, the bark was found to be no less specific in those parts
than at home -- and there was no security against relapses, unless the patient
took an ounce of the bark in powder, once every ten or twelve days throughout
the autumn. The most effectual way to make a soldier continue the use of the
bark, is to mix it with equal parts of brandy and water." Page 109, and sequent.

MOST of the fevers of Minorca "A small island in the Mediterranean sea,
situated about 100 miles distant from Catalonia in Spain, and in 40 N. ^. The
mercury in the thermometer in summer generally stands at about 80, and in
winter at 48 or 50. The weather in summer is generally dry and regular in the
day time, and moderate dews fall at night -- Showers are sometimes very heavy,
and generally fall in the night* ^he surface of the island is generally rough
and unequal -- on the (...) side the hills are numerous, with low marshy
valleys between them. A considerable part of the island is rocky, and covered
with woods and thickets. The soil is thin, light and stoney."
make their first appearance in the shape of a true simple, or double
intermittent tertian. The cold sit seldom lasts above an hour or two; and as it
goes off, some bilious matter is commonly discharged by vomit or stool. Then
follows an intense heat over the whole body, which raises the mercury in the
thermometer to the 103d or ^04th degree: And lastly, a profuse sweat puts an
end to the paroxism. The apyrexy is tolerably complete, though for the most
part the patient complains of a disagreeable taste, loss of appetite, headache,
and pain in the small of his back, and pit of his stomach upon a full
inspiration. The pulse during the intermission is almost natural: in the fits
it varies according to their predominant symptoms: When they are attended by
acute pains in the praecordia, it becomes small and obscure, so as to indicate
greater weakness than there really is: on the other hand, when drowsy lethargic
symptoms come on, it often resembles that of a person in full health, though
the sick is in the utmost danger. The urine, whether made in the time of the
paroxism or interval, is always clear, frothy, and of a deep red color,
without any separation. Blood drawn from a vein is most commonly florid like
scarlet, without any sizey crust: the serum is sometimes tinged with yellow,
but oftener red like the lotura carnium, and in great quantity. Sometimes the
serum and crassamentum remain united in a lax gelatinous mass.

As the fever advances to its height, the coldness and shivering which usher in
the paroxisms become less, or entirely imperceptible: in which case a cholera
morbus, or acute pains in the back or limbs, often supply their place:
frequently the shiverings are intermixed with flushings of heat. In the mean
time, the paroxisms themselves become longer, and bring on more formidable
symptoms; such as head-achs, raving, sopors, apoplectic fits, bleeding at the
nose, cough, difficulty of breathing, palpitation of the heart, irregularity of
the pulse, sickness and anxiety, pain about the upper orifice of the stomach,
vomiting and purging; heat, tension, pain and pulsation in the abdominal
viscera; subsultus tendinum, and an infinite variety of other complaints, which
do not entirely cease with the sweat, that carries off the paroxism; so that
the apyrexy is not only shortened, but rendered more obscure.

Besides, it often happens, during the second, third, fourth, or fifth period,
that the tertian becomes double, though at first it was simple: Or if it was
double from the beginning, the weaker fit continues, without any intermission,
till the stronger comes on, and both being blended together, the disease puts
on the appearance of a semitertian, having one very long fit, with a short
interval every forty-eight hours. Sometimes a double tertian degenerates into a
triple tertian, two fits instead of one happening on the odd days.

It must likewise be observed, that, in the progress of the fever, the regular
order of the periods is frequently disturbed, by the paroxisms changing their
hour of invasion, and attacking, unawares without any previous cold. Nor are
anticipating fits always a bad sign, or those which postpone a good one, as
some authors insinuate; on the contrary, the first frequently show the strength
of nature, as the others do her weakness.

After this manner these proteform distempers continue to vary their shape in
every period, and to produce longer, more fevere, or more frequent paroxisms,
till they arrive at their height; about which time the fits and intervals are
often so confused, that they are scarcely to be distinguished: nevertheless, if
death be not speedily the consequence of this confusion, they commonly again
put on a more simple or regular form, and, after one or more slight paroxisms,
go away of their own accord.

Those fevers which come to their height in the third period, terminate in the
fourth or fifth period. Those which come to their height in the fourth period,
terminate in the fifth or sixth. And those which come to their height in the
fifth, terminate in the sixth or seventh. When the most vehement paroxisms
happen on the odd days, the crises will be on the odd days: When they happen on
the even days, the great changes of the distemper will likewise be on the even
days.

If the fever increases to the seventh period, it probably will not cease
before the ninth: But it rarely happens that intermitting or remitting tertians
run out to so great a length. Yet I have seen every year a few of the continual
kind, which began with great mildness, and increasing by slow degrees, broke
out violently in the third or fourth week; and soon after ended in
intermittents; though some of them have continued without any considerable
interval, for six or seven weeks.

In the cure of tertians, the symptoms of the paroxisms are more to be regarded
than the types of the periods; for caeteris paribus, simple, double, triple,
intermittent, and remittent tertians, together with the semitertians, all
require the same sort of treatment.

With regard to bleeding it has been warmly debated among both ancient and
modern authors where it ought or ought not to be used in tertian fevers. Much
has been wrote on both sides; but the question appears to me too general to
admit of a positive answer. CELSUS De Med. Praefat.
has justly observed that medicines differ, according to the nature of the
climate; one kind being necessary in Rome, another in Egypt, and a third in
France. And since we daily meet with a remarkable diversity of symptoms among
fevers of the tertian tribe even in the same climate at the same season of the
year, it cannot surely be surprising that any one remedy is not equally
beneficial in all cases, and at all times.

For my own part, when I was called early enough, in the beginning of these
fevers I used to take away some blood (unless there was a strong
contraindication) from people of all ages; namely, from robust adults ten or
twelve ounces; from others a smaller quantity in proportion to their strength
and years. And farther, if a violent headache, and obstinate delirium, and
great heat or pains of the bowels were urgent, within a day or two, I repeated
the bleeding. By which seasonable evacuation the vehemence of the paroxisms is
somewhat diminished; the apyrexies become more complete; the operation of
emetics and cathartics is rendered safer and more successful; and the terrible
symptoms, which often make their appearance about the height of the distemper,
such as raving sopor, difficulty of breathing, inflammations of the abdominal,
viscera, etc. are either prevented or mitigated.

But if before I was called, the fever had already continued some time, and the
mass of blood appeared to be too much melted down, or inclinable to a putrid
dissolution, which is often the case, during the extreme hot weather, about the
fourth period of the distemper, and is readily known by the great alteration of
the patient's looks and his sudden loss of strength; or if the first paroxisms
of the disease were attended with profuse evacuations, whether by vomiting,
purging, sweating, or a haemorrhage from the nose: In all these circumstances,
I either omitted the bleeding entirely, or took away a very small quantity,
though some importunate symptoms might seem to require a much larger evacuation.

But when bleeding is allowed to be necessary, it is asked at what particular
time of the periodical revolution it ought to be performed? The ancients Si
vehemens febris urget, in ipso impetu ejus, sanguinem mittere hominem jugulare
est, expectanda ergo intermissio, etc. CEL. l. ii. c. x.
believed that to open a vein in the height of the fever, was to destroy the
patient; and therefore they order you to wait for the intermission, or the hour
on which the symptoms are generally most moderate. But the experience of the
present age has taught us that this operation is safe enough, at any time of
the period, unless while the cold fit lasts, or is soon expected; or while the
skin is covered with critical sweats. Of late years, encouraged by the example
of some practitioners of reputation Astruc on Fevers, p. 71. Gourraigne de
Febribus.
, I commonly opened a vein in the beginning of the hot fit; by which means the
sick were immediately relieved; the immoderate heat of the body (which is often
productive of fatal effects) was diminished; and the critical sweats were
brought on sooner, and in greater abundance. But when that time of the paroxism
was passed before my being called, I bled in the evening, when it abated or
went off, that I might be at liberty next day to make use of the remission or
intermission, which commonly happens in the morning, to evacuate the first
passages.

When I first became acquainted with these diseases, the uncommon violence of
their symptoms induced me to lay the principal stress of the cure on
evacuations; and to have recourse to frequent bleeding upon account of the
inflammations of the viscera; endeavoring at the same time by repeated
cathartics to discharge the corrupted humors from the intestines: but when
experience had convinced me that the bark was both a safe and effectual remedy
in these circumstances, I then plainly perceived that such profuse evacuations
were unnecessary if not prejudicial; and of late years, as I seldom omitted to
bleed and purge once or twice, I rarely repeated either operation oftener.

In semitertians and remittents, which approach to the nature of continual
fevers, I give a cathartic early in the morning of that day on which the
symptoms are most moderate; hastening the operation with glysters (if occasion
requires) so that it may be finished before the middle of the day, about which
time the patient commonly grows worse. In true simple and double tertians there
is generally an interval every morning, in which the purgative may be
administered, but that which succeeds the worst fit, is the most proper, as it
is more calm, and continues longer than the other.

Proper evacuations being premised, if possible, within the first four or five
days of the distemper, I carefully examine the condition of the patient, during
the third revolution, and determine accordingly in what manner it will be
necessary to proceed. If the paroxisms of that revolution be neither longer,
nor attended with more threatening symptoms, than those of the second: if the
patient preserves his strength, bears his illness easily, and signs of
concoction appear in the urine, I frequently trust the whole business to
nature, which commonly terminates the fever about the fourth or fifth
revolution, and, for the most part, with an increase of some of the natural
evacuations; so that sweats, cloudy or thick urine, and bilious stools often
supervene, and sometimes a spontaneous efflux of spittle, or a copious
expectoration of pituitous matter.

But if the paroxism on the fifth day be evidently the longest and most fevere
that has happened; if it be attended with any doubtful or dangerous symptoms;
if the sick become giddy, feeble, and languid; in these cases, without delay, I
have recourse to the bark; and the same evening, as soon as the sweats have
procured a remission, I order two scruples or a dram of it in powder to be
given every two or three hours, or every hour and a half, so that five or six
drachms may be taken before next day at noon, with as little interruption to
their sleep as may be; and the assistants are strictly enjoined to comply
punctually with these directions, lest if this interval escape, we should not
afterward have a favorable opportunity of giving a sufficient quantity of the
medicine, as the fits about this period of the disease are wont to become
double, sub-intrant, or continual. Yet it is not always in our power to put an
immediate stop to the fever by this means: On the contrary, do what we can, it
will often proceed in its career, and, in spite of all our attempts, run
obstinately on to the seventh or ninth day* But the great advantage which
accrues from the early use of the bark, is, that it invigorates the powers of
the body, it prevents or removes the dangerous symptoms, and in tertians, which
of their own accord would continue to the end of the second week or longer, it
brings on a crisis sooner, and with much less disturbance. In short, to use the
expression of one of the greatest promoters of medical knowledge in this age
MONRO on the Use of the Bark in Small Pox and Gargrenes, Med. Essays, vol. v.
art. x.
, it proves an excellent assistant to nature, in what the ancients called the
concoction and maturation of the morbid matter; and (I must add) in the
expulsion of it likewise, sensibly or insensibly, by the most convenient
outlets. For so far is it from suppressing any beneficial discharge, as some
have asserted, that we daily observe a laudable separation in the urine, warm,
profuse, universal sweats, plentiful bilious stools, and sometimes the
haemorrhoids and menses coming on after it has been used; though it effectually
restrains the colliquative night sweats, to which persons weakened by tedious
intermittents are incident.

DR. HUXHAM in his Essay on Fevers, remarks that "Sometimes quotidian,
semi-tertian and tertian fevers, are very rife and cotemporary with epidemic
pleurisies, and peripneumonies; as particularly in Vid. Obs. nostr. de Aere and
Morb. Epidem. Vol. II. Martio, Aprili, Maio, 1744.
1744; -- The cold season, in some constitutions, bracing up the fibers so
high, and condensing the blood into such a degree of viscosity, as to bring on
these inflammatory fevers on taking cold, or other accidents; whilst, on
persons of a more lax system of nerves and fibers, and more weak watery
humors, it only raised the powers of the oscillatory vessels so high, and
warmed the blood so much, as to carry off the ill consequences of deficient
perspiration, and ropy heavy juices, by repeated fits of a regular
intermittent. -- Thus we often see persons of low spirits, and a
leucophlegmetic habit of body, raised into a feverish disposition by the use of
warm invigorating medicines, chalybeates, etc. And if this turn of nature, be
well managed, it generally ends in their perfect recovery. If you can change a
slow nervous fever into a regular intermittent, you soon cure your patient.

"It is commonly noted, that if the fever, from a regular tertian, runs into a
semi-tertian, or quotidian, or greatly anticipates the time of the regular
paroxism; a remittent, or continual fever is forthwith the consequence. -- And
this is too often effected by a very hot regimen, or a too hasty use of the
bark. Indeed we very frequently see that quotidians, and double tertians,
(which, by the bye, are oftentimes the same thing) will not bear the bark, at
the beginning; till the saline draughts, proper diluting attenuants, and in
some cases, bleeding, purging, and vomiting have been made use of. In truth, I
never think it prudent, in such kinds of intermittents, to give the bark, in
any form, till after four or five paroxisms at least, and after having drawn
more or less blood from persons pretty much inclined to the plethoric; and this
method is more especially to be observed in vernal agues.

If an intermittent runs into an inflammatory continual fever, bleeding and a
gentle cool purge will soon reduce it to its type.

But as some intermittents are apt to run up into an inflammatory fever, far
the greater number, especially in the autumnal season, are disposed to sink
into low irregular remittents, putrid or slow nervous fevers. It is not a very
rare thing to find a quotidian fall into a tertian, thence into a quartan, and
at last end in a dropsy; and this particularly in some seasons and places. This
evidently shows that the fibers grow more and more enervated and the blood very
vapid and watery. Even vernal tertians, which oftentimes cure themselves in a
favorable season, prove many times exceeding obstinate in wet, rainy summers,
and the patients are exceeding apt to relapse on the slightest occasions: This
was particularly observable in the wet, cold summers of 1734 and 1735. Vid.
Obs. nostr. de Aere and Morbis Epidemic. Vol. I.


Perhaps it is the winter-cold, bracing up the fibers, that commonly puts a
stop to agues in that season; for it has been noted, that they are often very
stubborn in a warm moist winter.

Improper evacuations by bleeding and purging, an unwholesome, gross glutinous
diet, vapid ropy drinks, as stagnant heavy water, foul beer, and the like,
render these agues very anomalous, obstinate and dangerous, and make them
frequently degenerate into malignant, putrid, or slow nervous fevers; otherwise
they end in dropsies, jaundice, or universal obstructions of the viscera of the
abdomen, and frequently in diseases of the genus nervosum. In a word whatever
takes down the spring of the fibers too much, and weakens the crasis of the
blood, will be productive of these mischiefs; and this especially, when due
perspiration is frequently interrupted by cold damp air, want of due exercise,
gross heavy slimy diet, as fish, lettuce, cucumbers, and other watery insipid
fruits, which are known to suppress the perspiration greatly.

These observations then evidently show the necessity of using a warm,
invigorating, attenuating regimen in the cure of agues, which affect persons of
a lax habit of body, and a poor thin blood; in a particular manner when a wet,
foggy atmosphere prevails. Under such circumstances the cortex of Peru, however
good and carefully chosen, frequently proves ineffectual, unless assisted with
proper alexipharmacs, as rad. serpentar. virgin. Contrayerv. myrrh, camphire,
etc. After four or five paroxisms, warm chalybeates may be added with very
great success. But never be too hasty in giving the bark, or chalybeates, where
the patient has a yellow cast of the countenance, a tense abdomen, and a very
costive habit of body. In which case mercurial, saponaceous deobstruents with
rhubarb, aloetics, regenerate or soluble tartar, should be premised; nay they
may in some cases be very conveniently joined with the bark.

THE eminent Morgagni, President of the University at Padua, remarks that "In
malignant and epidemical fevers, it is not of so much importance to counteract
the fever, as it is to counteract that malignant quality which is joined
thereto; and which is, to the great increase of the difficulty in such a
counteraction, almost peculiar in every constitution.

And certainly, unless you endeavor to overcome this malignant quality for the
most part; you do the same thing, as if you should endeavor to overcome a
fever, which had its origin from the bite of a viper, by antifebrile remedies;
without paying any regard to the poison infused; to make use of the same
example, which I perceive, from the history of the royal academy of sciences at
Paris A. 1753.
, the celebrated Du Quesnay has made use of also.

For which reason, we ought the more to give thanks to the providence of
Almighty God, that, in so very great an obscurity, and variety, of cases, it
has favored us with a remedy, the powers of which, in overcoming some
dangerous fevers at least, is proved by experience; though the method in which
it acts is somewhat obscure; I mean the Peruvian bark.

For this remedy, although some of these fevers seem to have one kind of
malignity joined with them, and some another; as appears from the external
causes and symptoms; can nevertheless counteract the one and the other equally;
and subdue their malignity; as I have learned both from my own observations,
and those of others.

Nor was the matter which has begun to be thrown out of the blood, either upon
the skin, or about the joints, by any means repugnant to the salubrious
efficacy of the bark; not even when repelled inwards, from thence, by the force
of the external cold.

For a very eminent cardinal was cured by the bark of a malignant fever, into
which he had fallen, in consequence of such a repulsion; as I have written to
you on a former occasion: Epist. 49. n. 80. and seqq.
And that very famous man Haller was also cured thereby of a very violent
fever, which had come upon him in consequence of a gout being thus repelled;
and which was attended with an erysipelas of the face likewise: and this he
relates in the remarks that he has made upon the hundred and fifty-second
disputation, among those which he has collected and published, as "contributing
to the history and cure of diseases."

For it is past a doubt, that these things are not so much to be attended to,
as this which I then spoke of; I mean, whether the fevers are periodical: that
is, whether they are wont to have an intermission, or a remission at least; so
as to afford us room to hope, that, by a timely and proper use of the bark,
both the fevers themselves, and their attendant malignity, will be overcome.

Nor does the bark only overcome what is febrile; but even that which is not
febrile; so that it does but recur periodically: although this effect is not so
general, when the disorder is without any manifest fever: and as we have
already said, that this has been observed, so we might now also confirm it by a
more recent, and more clear observation of Stephanus Weszpremus; I mean, of an
equally severe, and obstinate, hemicrania being overcome by the same remedy,
after having been already exacerbated every fourth hour, for two weeks
together; and not having remitted till after two hours.

And if this observation, which was made and published in the year 1756, could
have existed fifty years before; when I at length with difficulty put to flight
that very severe hemicrania, which returned every day at the same hour, by the
prescription of a number of different remedies; I should certainly have made
use of none more readily, and perhaps more successfully than this;
notwithstanding I had been ignorant of the mode in which it produces its
effects.

And I could wish the malignant and epidemical fevers, whereof we had begun to
speak, were all periodical, as they are almost all of them joined with a
various and obscure force of malignity; we should then have in this cortex a
medicine, which, although we might be ignorant in what manner it operates, we
might nevertheless try with a reasonable hope of success.

But they are very often synochae, or continual fevers; and such as, if you
dissect the bodies of those who have been carried off by them, either show
nothing, as I have said in the beginning, which discovers the peculiar nature,
and situation, of the principal disease; or show considerable and evident
injuries of the viscera indeed, but such as, if you compare them with those
symptoms that have been observed in the patients while living, you will
naturally conceive to have been produced by some other latent and principal
disease.

That is to say, by way of example, an inflammatory fever of the viscera, after
dissection, shows the viscera to have been inflamed, whether it is benign, or
malignant; but in the living patient if it he benign, it is alleviated by
repeated blood-lettings: If malignant, it becomes worse, and is very soon fatal.

The cause of the difference is another principal disease being joined to it;
as in that fever at Roan described by the celebrated Malouin, which, about the
end of the year 1753, carried off a great number, in a very short time, in that
place.

For by reason of the malignant acrimony of the matter which irritated the
stomach and intestines, that inflammation was at length produced, which was
found in those viscera, and was already degenerated into a gangrene: the other
internal parts being unhurt, and particularly those of the head; which
otherwise had been troubled with a pain, that arose from a consent of parts,
and increased every day so as to bring on a delirium.

The college of physicians at Roan, therefore, prudently and usefully
determined, that the inflammation was not then to be attended to; as it either
did not exist in the beginning, or arose accidentally in the progress of the
disease: but that every method must be taken to eliminate that very acrid
matter from the first passages; for from this, if it were left within, a
permanent irritation is much more to be feared, than a transient one from
purgative remedies, especially when they are of a milder kind."

AN ABSTRACT of Dr. TISSOT's HISTORY of the EPIDEMIC BILIOUS FEVER at LAUSANNE
"Lausanne is a large town in the canton of Bern, in Switzerland 46 33 N. Lat.
on the north side of the lake Geneva."
, in the year 1755.
The Constitution of the Air.
"TO the violent heats in summer 1754 succeeded a hot autumn; in the beginning
of winter, we had either perpetual showers or fogs, and the season warm. The
weather remained thus till the third day of the following year, when there
suddenly came on that violent cold, which by the 5th and 6th of January grew so
intense over all Europe almost, that it fell but little short of that
remarkable and since unparalleled frost of the year 1709. It continued very
severe to the 14th of the month, then it abated somewhat, though the same frost
still lasted till the 20th of February. March was showery; April hot, which is
very uncommon in our country, that happening at that time to attend patients in
the smallpox, I was obliged to renew the air in the chambers from all
quarters, and moisten the boards frequently with cold water. In the beginning
of May, the severe cold returned with a northerly wind, and was very pernicious
to the tender leaves and blossoms. The weather was unsettled during the whole
month. Violent heat commenced with the month of June, and continued to the 23d
of July.

The disease was not equally violent in all. With regard to its vehemence, it
may be accurately enough divided into three classes. The first was attended
with no danger, unless by being neglected it degenerated into a chronic
distemper. The second, though not void of danger, yet as far as I know never
proved mortal, except when either by wrong management, or no care at all, it
was changed into the third. The third class was very rare, but always very
threatening, and sometimes fatal.

The History of the Disease.
Patients of the first class complained first of a lassitude, weakness, weight
particularly of the head, loathing of food, an uneasy and almost constant
sensation of cold, insomuch that during the dog days they would go with great
pleasure to a kitchen fire; they were drowsy without sleeping; their mouth
slimy; and their tongue foul with a whitish-yellow tenacious covering. After
three or four days, sometimes later, a shivering came on toward evening, which
harrassed them for an hour or two, sometimes longer: this was followed by a
heat not vehement indeed, but troublesome and pungent, which communicated a
smart heat to the fingers of the physician; in some this continued till
morning, and then gradually went off without any sensible excretion; in others
after some hours a gentle sweat came on, for I never saw it profuse, but it did
not bring that placid interval, which succeeds the sweats of true
intermittents. I heard frequent complaints of the head in the time of the
paroxism, but none of the chest. In the first days the pulse hardly differed
from a natural one, except by its weakness; in the time of the shivering it was
very small, during the heat quick, contracted, and frequent, yet not exceeding
an hundred pulsations in a minute in an adult woman. When the paroxism was
ended, the patients remained in the same state of langour, which I described
before, rising indeed out of bed, but unfit for all kinds of employment,
torpid, lazy, dragging themselves from their chair to the bed, and from the bed
to the chair, and not walking without reluctance. The paroxism returned every
day, but frequently varied from its first hour; neither was it always similar
to itself in other circumstances. Nay, there were some patients, who without
regard to any period, shivered and grew hot often in one day; I knew several in
whom I could hardly suspect any exacerbation, unless from a little more anxiety
and debility in the evening, but they were never free from the oppression of
the langour, nor were they sooner cured than others. There were some,
particularly of the older women, who scarcely complained of any thing else
beside debility, loathing of food, and want of sleep. Some were distressed with
a pain of their stomach; and what was common to them all, they did not recover
till after some weeks. There were several patients whom, no such violent
symptoms appearing as required the speedy aid of a physician, I did not see
till fifteen days after they had been seized, and I found little or no
difference in their symptoms from the others, save that the heat and debility
had increased, and by that time brought them in danger of a slow fever. In the
beginning of the distemper, the belly was bound, toward the end a little more
lax; the urine during the interval was thin and crude, in the violence of the
paroxism a little more red; upon the decline of the disease it became concocted
with a sediment. I found very few who had much thirst. Boys, women, and old
people were principally subject to this species, men very rarely. Old men
escaped the second. The third attacked only young men in the flower of life,
from 15 to 40, and generally carried off the more robust.

The beginning of the second class was not very different from that of the
first; but after some days every thing was more aggravated, the weakness
increased, a nausea followed the loathing of food, but the sick very rarely
vomited spontaneously; the heat was more brisk, and the paroxisms more violent;
at the beginning they did shiver, though gently, but afterward scarce any
coldness was perceived before the paroxisms; but the heat grew gradually more
intense, generally in the evening; the pulse was more frequent, and upon trial,
in some persons I was able to count one hundred and sixteen strokes in a
minute. At this time several were distressed with most acute head-achs. After
three, four, or five hours the fever remitted, and, as in the first species,
without a sweat. Nor were sweats very desirable, for upon the decline of the
distemper they did good, but during its height, both in this, and in the third
species they were prejudicial; for the more profuse they were, the more severe
was the succeeding paroxism. The patient had not a perfect interval, and this
was the pathognomic symptom, whereby we might distinguish the second species
from the first. The urine was small in quantity, thin, and reddish; the natural
stools few and small, the tongue dry, and covered with a yellow mucus; they had
scarce any sleep, but what was turbulent, with anxiety, and not at all
refreshing; the thirst was more troublesome than in the first species, and yet
not so great as might have been expected from the heat; the patient was quickly
emaciated with a pale yellow face. The paroxisms were not so irregular as in
the first species. By bad management the transition was easy from the second to
the third class or degree.

The third class or degree, appeared to be a distinct distemper by itself; for
in several, although they made use of the best remedies from the first attack
of the disease, and their disorder seemed to be restrained by them, yet on the
sixth, seventh, or eighth day, all the more alarming symptoms came on. When I
had left a person in the evening with the hopes of a milder paroxism, I often
found him next morning dangerously ill after a severe night, with a frequent
and very quick pulse, a beginning delirium, and a flatulent swelling of the
abdomen, which two symptoms distinguished the third class from the second; then
the paroxisms scarcely any longer preserved the least order in their attacks,
but came on irregularly at all times; the pulse became so frequent, that the
strokes could hardly be counted; there was a general subsultus of the tendons;
the anxiety and restlessness were without intermission, the eyes fierce,
twinkling and gummy: the delirium increasing, made some brisk, and approached
almost to a phrenzy, in others it was more calm, and resembled a lethargy, in
both cases it was dangerous: The first talked incessantly, the others were
silent and morose, and made not the least complaint of the distemper, though by
holding their hand frequently to their forehead, it was plain they had a
violent headache. When the physician asked how they did, they looked steadfastly
at him and answered in a brisk tone of voice, Very well. They did not know
their friends, the flatulent swelling increased daily, especially about the
hypochondria. The breath grew short, so that they almost constantly panted; a
cough was an uncommon symptom; their stools were irregular, liquid, fat,
colliquative, and sometimes bilious, which was good; often white and frothy,
which was always a very bad sign, for it implied the retention of the morbid
matter, and a spasmodic disorder in the motions of the intestines. Some few
however were seized with a purging at the beginning; nor did things go better
with them: Nay, I saw a young woman in this distemper, which proved fatal, who,
as I was told, had been afflicted with a serous discharge by stool for two
months before the disease. In general a purging, which came on at the
beginning, was hurtful, for it was always symptomatic; and although it was very
fetid, yet it left the cause of the disease untouched; so that with the
increase of these evacuations, the disease grew worse, to the astonishment of
the bystanders. The urine was always crude; in other respects different every
day, white, thin, oily, turbid, resembling that of cattle, red and
colliquative; if there was any cloud it always occupied the upper part, which
Hippocrates condemns. From paralytic spincters and the delirium, the
evacuations were involuntary and unperceived by them. In five I met with purple
spots, to all whom they were mortal When any purple or livid pustules appear on
the skin, the by pochondria being tense and instated, the patient generally
dies. HOERHAV. Aphor. 735.
; there were either no hemorrhages at all, or they were fatal, no thirst,
though the tongue was dry, black, and tremulous; the voice was shrill, and
there was an universal tremor, a gathering of the clothes, and catching at
flies. After the greatest restlesness, came on the highest debility, which was
followed by death. Sometimes, when the distemper was disguised in the beginning
by the mildest symptoms, I was led to suspect some lurking mischief from the
small and quick pulse, a very gentle, but universal tremor, a sudden change of
the countenance, and a certain kind of anxiety and moroseness, quite opposite
to the mildness of the symptoms. I remember a man addicted to drinking, upon
whom the distemper gained ground so fast, that he appeared even on the third
day to be beyond hope, with a very bad pulse, a shortness of breath to the
highest degree, and a delirium; he was relieved in a short time by a vomit. In
this, as well as the other species, the paroxisms with regard to their
vehemence, followed the form of a tertian, so that I have always observed the
symptoms more aggravated every other day, and they died on the worst day, from
the seventeenth to the twenty-fifth day. I know of only two persons who died
after the thirty-fifth.

These are the principal and pathognomic symptoms of our epidemic distemper:
Some varieties and more remarkable cases I leave till afterward, to avoid
repetition. The greatest violence of it continued from the beginning of June,
to the end of October; during which time, it became so epidemic, that hardly
one in four of any family escaped it; and in several houses, two, three, nay
six, were ill of it at one time. Several were also seized with it in the
following winter, which being rainy and warm, favored epidemic diseases; some
severe instances I met with in the summer of 1756, and spring of 1757. There is
then no year altogether so favorable, where similar distempers do not occur.

Method of Cure.
At first for some time, I used ipecacuan, but I presently found that this
celebrated root had not in this case sufficient force; it had besides this bad
property, that after the evacuation was over, it left the patient costive and
sometimes thirsty; I was therefore glad to change it for the emetic tartar,
which I hardly ever dropped after that: the dose, being proportioned to the age
and other indications, was dissolved in eight or ten ounces of water, with an
addition of a sixth part of syrup of capillaire. I directed the whole to be
drank at two, three, or four draughts; and this method of dividing the potion
succeeded happily in so great a variety of sick people as I attended, the
generality of whose particular constitutions, I was till then entirely
unacquainted with. There was another advantage attending this medicine, that
being palatable it was not in the least nauseous, even to children and more
delicate people. I sometimes made an addition of manna, though the solution of
tartar alone seldom failed to procure stools, which I always reckoned of great
importance; for besides, that in this way the much larger quantity of morbid
matter is evacuated, it is the method nature points out for discharding the
relics of the morbid matter. The effect of the remedy was, that generally in
little more than half an hour; that is, some time after the second draught,
there was an inclination to retch, which was followed by vomiting; and if the
quantity of the discharge was judged sufficient, the remainder of the potion
was not used; if not, it was drank; the vomiting brought up viscous matter
mixed with yellow, bitter bile; then followed stools or liquid, yellow, fetid
excrements. I often encouraged the vomiting, by plentiful draughts of hydromel;
when it ceased, I promoted copious stools by giving at a spoonful each time
what remained of the potion diluted in a large vehicle. Thus after the
evacuation was over, the patient found himself better, with regard to his
anxiety, debility, and sleep. The same method was followed by that celebrated
practitioner, Walcarenghi, and has been recommended to posterity by G. E.
Stahl, for the method of cure, adequate to the removal of the peccant matter in
these fevers, can be no other than vomiting and purging De febre biliosa, ^ 46.
.

After the first evacuation refrigerating laxative remedies were prescribed;
and I never failed to observe, that those medicines, which before had hardly
proved cathartic, having their force increased by the diminution of the morbid
excrements, produced at this time two or three stools every day, always of a
putrid nature. The langour was gradually diminished, and also the length of the
paroxism. After three or four days, if a plentiful discharge of urine afforded
the signs of a concoction, we had recourse to purging by salts, manna,
tamarinds, and now and then a small dose of senna. Sometimes when there was
reason to expect that stools would be easily procured, it sufficed to dissolve
two ounces of manna with some salt in their common drink in the morning; and a
coipious discharge of excrements followed, from that, there scarcely remained
the form of a paroxism; the skin grew soft, their sleep became composed; they
no longer loathed their food, though they had not yet any desire for it. The
natural heat was more slowly restored, and they were almost always cold. Then
they took only a dose or two of their medicines every day; all the symptoms
went off gradually, the bilious stools which were so salutary still continued,
and both evacuated the morbid matter, and showed that the viscera recovered
their tone; for it was with us, as the famous Gallarotti observed it to be at
Cremona, we could safely hope for a complete termination of the fever, only
while the stools continued bilious. And indeed if we fell short of this happy
appearance, I was obliged both to give the refrigerents longer, and in a larger
dose, and to repeat the cathartic a third time, nay sometimes, but very rarely,
a fourth time. I do not remember an instance of a fifth purging being used. In
lax constitutions, which labored more under a viscosity than acrimony, I
sometimes avoided aqueous liquors after the first purging, and ordered a potion
composed of a large dose of tartar. regenerat. a small quantity of elixir
proprietat. with the distilled waters of succory and citron-peel, and compound
syrup of succory, adding oxymel, when the circumstances required it.

They who refused medicines, and after the first vomit laid aside all remedies
unless perhaps toast and water or lemonade, of whom there were many, having the
morbid matter lessened by means of the diet, which their loathing directed them
to, gradually got the better of the fever indeed, but they recovered their
health slowly, and imperfectly, and several of them were obliged after some
months to have recourse to medicines.

If it was dangerous to give over evacuations too soon, it was also dangerous
to continue them too long; and a man would be miserably deceived, if he
imagined they were to be persisted in, till the appetite and strength were
entirely restored. The inappetency and debility arose in the beginning of the
distemper from the cacochymy oppressing the stomach and primae viae; and now at
the end of the disease they were owing to a laxity of the fibers, the languor
of the secretions, and a defect of good juices in the body. We must therefore
here attend to the caution of Boerhaave, what does good at one time, may yet be
hurtful, if given at another, though in the same distemper, and we had a sad
proof of this by experience. For while some continued opening medicines with a
view of discharging the the morbid matter, which they blamed for these
complaints, I have seen the disease protracted, the debility increased, and the
excessive irritation of the gastric and intestinal nerves followed by the whole
train of irregular spasmodic symptoms. These I never observed, if the
cathartics were dismissed in proper time, and a suitable diet with exercise in
the country, and some strengthening medicines were made use of. An infusion of
bitters in wine was taken with great success.

CASE 1st.
Being called in the middle of the night to visit a gentleman with a biliary
ardent fever, I prescribed a clyster, and a draught of barley-water, which was
at hand, with some drops of Hoffman's anodyne mineral liquor, which after
agitations of mind, I have found an excellent remedy by drinking some tepid
liqour after it. The symptoms abated, and in the morning I could safely give
manna, tamarinds, and a small dose of emetic tartar, dissolved in a decoction
of grass, of which he was to take three ounces every hour, and after this dose
was finished, the same decoction of grass with juice of sorrel and citron.
Returning in the evening, for the patient lived in the country, I found he had
drank scarce half the pur^ing draught, and but little of the acid ptisan, but
he had taken the anodyme mineral liquor frequently, he had gone thrice to
stool, and the discharge was bilious, his head which I left clear when I went
away in the morning, was now confused; and his pulse very quick: the following
night he passed without sleep, and the delirium increased. In the morning I
prescribed the same laxative ptisan, and another of barley water, an acid
syrup, and spirit of nitre, and strong sinapisms to the soles of his feet. I
took my leave, and every thing was set aside, a consulation is talked of, which
met in the afternoon; instead of the forementioned drinks, milk-whey with
tamarinds is prescribed, instead of the sinapisms, blisters to the legs; next
day every thing grew worse, no evacuations followed; the day after there was
another consultation at six in the morning; he labored under the greatest
restlessness, and a strong phrenitic delerium, his pulse as before, frequent,
small, and quick, which was very bad, for phrensies with a strong tense and
slow pulse are curable, hardly with a small and quick one. Upon account of the
delirium he is bled, which I remonstrated against in vain, he grows more
outrageous, and his hypocondres become tense. Three hours after by the advice
of the other physician, he is again bled in the foot, still against my
judgment; the patient faints, and the delirium abated a little from his
weakness, for it returned again with his strength; several doses of an emetic
medicine are given, but hardly any evacuation followed, he had a very bad
night. Next day the result of the fourth consultation was, giving a strong
cathartic; his pulse was hardly perceptible, with a strong delirium: he had no
stool; in the afternoon a sharp clyster is injected, and there followed an
immense discharge; and by continued faintings an end was put to the life of
this worthy man. I leave it to the judgment of physicians, whether the former
method was preferable to the latter. Death certainly could not follow with more
cruel symptoms, nor more rapidly; all indications with regard to the strength
were neglected, nor were any other remedies administered, but such whose
futility I have demonstrated. Would the cold bath have done any service in this
case? The ancients undoubtedly thought so, for in a continued putrid fever, if
the patient was not emaciated, and was young, the temper of the air hot, and
the fever very violent, they permitted swimming in cold water.

Similar histories may be seen every where; nature points out the way, and
reason confirms the method, why should we fear to follow it: former ages did,
and succeeding ages will deride our cowardice, and those of our own times
suffer for it.

CASE 2d.
A German shoemaker, of Zurich, if I remember right, was seized with the
epidemic fever in the month of October 1755. I was sent for on the third day,
and ordered a vomit on the fourth, and other suitable medicines; but the
obstinate man drank very little, being averse to it, nor did he observe such a
diet as I had prescribed; on the eighth day I purged him; on the tenth the
tumid inflation was so great, that the skin of the abdomen began to grow red
from the violent distension: his breath was very short from the impossibility
of the descent of the diaphragm, his pulse was small, and what surprised me, he
was almost free from a delirium. Being afraid of the mischievous consequences
from a compression of all the bowels, and an obstructed respiration; finding no
other cause but air rarefied by the bile, whose putrefaction he had not
sufficiently corrected by drinking, and being satisfied from feeling the
abdomen before, that there was no obstruction prior to the distemper; and
having to do with a sullen patient who would hardly conform to rules, and
employing my thoughts in searching for a remedy, which would most quickly
strengthen the fibers, restrain the flatulency, and stop the putrefaction; I
recollected the observations of the ancients and some moderns, and my own
experience with respect to cold water. Having weighed them all carefully, I
ordered a linen cloth, twice doubled, dipped in cold spring water, to be applied
over all the abdomen, and to be changed every quarter of an hour, and the
patient to drink as often, three ounces of the same water. In two hours the
swelling of his belly subsided, his respiration became easier; in less than
three hours a flight colic came on, which produced many large bilious stools,
with a continued discharge of wind; the linen cloths were taken away, the
following night he slept, and next day his belly was soft, the fever much
abated, and in a short time he got well, without changing his drink, which I
often found exceeding salutary, and it is to be lamented that the use of water
has grown obsolete. We give nothing now, unless it be prepared, and often
spoiled by the apothecary's art. The wiser ancients, when the concoction was
perfected gave cold water, an excellent strengthener, and as much of it as the
patient was willing to drink, as appears from the works of Hippocrates,
Aretaeus, Galen, Alexander, Caelius, Aurelianus, and others. Galen has even
reproached his co-temporaries for neglecting the use of cold water, and calls
them Hydrophobi. Among the moderns Fernelius, Hoffman, Van Swieten, Kloekhof,
Grainger, and many others have prescribed cold water, and added cautions for
its use.

Of Bleeding in Bilious Fevers.
Those people who are fond of venaesection, attribute every disease to the
blood, and are incessantly talking of a plethora and stagnation, and omit
bleeding in no distemper, will be amazed, that I have not made the least
mention of it, though we frequently had heat, dryness of the skin, headache, a
violent delirium, and acute fever, which might seem to require such an
evacuation. But it is a sad misfortune to those, whose physicians make no
enquiry after the cause, and are forward to stop all violent fevers by
bleeding; for when the fever is increased after the operation, it kills the
patient. It is now four years since I published my opinion, that venaesection
is never useful when there is not a plethora; I may add, except in the
beginning of an inflammatory distemper, or while it is in a crude state, after
violent exercise, being heated in the sun, a fall, and in people only, that
strictly are not plethoric, but robust, sanguineous and florid. And far from
changing my mind since that time, I every day meet with the mischievous
consequences of bleeding, where these conditions are not found. I grant that
redundancy of blood may bring on distempers, which indicate bleeding; but the
blood repels distempers that do not arise from itself; for the more a person
has of that vital fluid, provided he is not plethoric, and that is not
frequently the case nowadays, the better is his situation, and he is the more
able to resist the production and attacks of other diseases. The more blood
therefore he looses, the more obnoxious he will become to them; for it is
absolutely certain, that an evacuation of blood from a sound man who is not
plethoric, disposes what is left to a cacochymy, depravity, and the disorders
proceeding from putrefaction.

It produces relaxation, and from thence debility with its consequent
disorders, increases the irritability and paves the way for irregular
commotions, as we learn by innumerable observations. For who has not seen
bleeding followed by faintings, tremors flatulent spasms as they are called,
universal, or partial; a delirium, fever and convulsions: when improperly used
to several girls for fainting sits, or hysteric suffocations, it has brought on
real and dreadful convulsive motions.

But it may be asked, would bleeding not abate at least, the frequency of the
pulse, or the fever? I answer it neither did nor could do this, for while it
aggravates all the causes of the fever, it is difficult to conceive how it can
mitigate the fever itself.

And besides the observations furnished by our epidemic, we are not destitute
of others to confirm this theory. While I formerly attended the hospital of St.
Eloy at Montpelier, a custom prevailed there, which has been strongly
recommended by the practical physicians Gouraigne and Fifes, of bleeding in the
height of the paroxism in intermittent and remittent fevers; and by this means
I did not want opportunities of observing its effects in those distempers,
which amongst the people of Guiene almost always approach to the bilious kind.
And I solemnly profess that I several times found the pulse quicker after
bleeding; but I never could observe that its frequency abated, or that the
paroxism was sooner terminated. Only the following accident once happened to a
young man, who labored under a tertian; a little after he had been blooded the
bandage was loosened by chance; in a short time he lost such a quantity of
blood, that he had several fainting fits; his fever indeed presently ceased,
which I would have taken notice of, as consonant to the doctrine of the
ancients, but he was oppressed with a languor of long continuance. Two
physicians had the care of the hospital, and they attended a fortnight each by
turns: when one of them, the younger man, treated bilious and putrid malignant
fevers by bleeding, purging, and cooling medicines, many patients presently
lost the distemper and their lives together. The other, an older man,
prescribing a vomit at their first appearance cured almost all, speedily,
safely, and with ease to his patients.

Aretaeus, Celsus, Alexander every where agree with Hippocrates, that
blood-letting is improper in bilious, or putrid fevers. I must confess that
Galen appears to differ, when in several places he prescribes bleeding in
putrid fevers; but any body, who reads over his works attentively may thus
solve the difficulty. He has wrote in such a manner as to advance several
things often more from hyphothesis than experience, he always supposes a
fullness of the vessels, which is to be removed, before other medicines are
administered; but Galen is mistaken, and the building falls of course when the
foundation is destroyed, and contradicting himself more than once whenever he
lays aside the notion of a plethora, he proceeds upon no other doctrine than
ours. In his Method. Medend. he affirms, that bleeding cures neither
obstr^ction nor putrefaction. Lib. II. cap. ^iv. Oper. O^^n. T. vi. p. 278. In
that and the following chapter he prescribes bleeding in putrid fevers; whence
then this opposition to himself? ^n putrid fevers he forbids bleeding, upon
account of the putrefaction and obstructions; which he orders elsewhere for a
plethora and inflammation.
In the very treatise where he defends phlebotomy against Erasistratus, he
sharply reproves those, who bleed indiscriminately in all putrid fevers; there
is one where bleeding does good, in ours it was hurtful; in the first Galen
would have made use of it, in the second he would have avoided it. Amongst the
moderns Fernelius coincides with our sentiments; Bleeding is bad in a regular
tertian, because it evacuates the useful and necessary humor, and leaves
behind the impure and noxious, for in ^is fever the body is commonly wasted and
the quantity of blood (...); and the acrid bile, the very fuel of the fever
abound^ and ferments under the cavity of the liver; and as this is not removed
by bleeding, consequently the morbid matter is not lessened by it. Nay if blood
be discharged either spontaneously or by any operation, you will generally find
the bile to rage more ^^^r^^ly and the fever gain strength.

I have hitherto opposed bleeding in bilious distempers by reason and
authority; we must now consider what light was offered by our fever. Among the
common people I remember several, who died in a short time after bleedings
quickly repeated.

Not to leave our work imperfect, it remains to be explained, why illustrious
physicians from antiquity down to our own times, have advised bleeding in
putrid fevers. I have already touched upon this point; the reason then is this,
that there are two kinds of putrid fevers, some simply putrid, in which
phlebotomy is always hurtful, and which physicians who were truly skilled in
the medical art, never attempted to cure by bleeding: but it must be observed
that frequently men of fluent conversation, though destitute of all accurate
erudition acquire the character of famous practitioners; and however
illustrious they may be reckoned by their ignorant adherents, they are deemed
by other physicians and impartial posterity pestilent quacks, whose destructive
practice cannot be too cautiously avoided.

The second is of that kind of putrid diseases, where there is a concomitant
inflammation, in which bleeding is an admirable remedy. We are not yet
sufficiently acquainted with the theory of inflammation, or the manner in which
its stimuli act, to be able to explain, why it is sometimes joined to a
putrefaction, and sometimes not; experience has convinced us that it is so, and
distinctly shown the pathognomic symptoms of both cases; and every day's
practice affords many instances of it; they are to be found both elsewhere, and
in the elegant histories of epidemics published by the illustrious Huxham. How
me to insist a little upon that which the celebrated Pringle has so accurately
described. It is denominated indeed a bilious fever, but by an attentive
consideration it will soon appear, that the appellation is not comprehensive
enough; the ingenious author speaks several times of an inflammation of the
stomach; there was a true inflammatory phrenzy, which he cured by
antiphlogistics. When the inflammation was removed, it remained to combat with
the bilious colluvies, which he judiciously dislodged by vomits and purging,
which in distempers purely inflammatory are found very hurtful. But the
Edingburgh physician had to deal with robust soldiers, young, and bred in the
mountains, accustomed to drink spirituous liquors, and in fine, obnoxious to
all the causes of inflammation, and in whom it very easily follows the
application of a stimulus. Thus the first mischief of the putrid ferment was to
produce an inflammation. If in such circumstances it had been attempted to
vomit or purge before the inflammation was resolved, it would have been
attended with the worst consequences. Such a distemper ought to be esteemed and
treated like an inflammation of the bowels."

Dr. SOLOMON DE MONCHY, of Rotterdam, in his Essay on the causes and cure of
the usual diseases in voyages to the West Indies, translated from the Dutch
philosophical transactions, and published at London in the year 1762, remarks
that, "it has long since been the observation of many persons, distinguished by
their medical abilities, that the multiplying diseases, naturally the same, or
only symptoms of or accessory to others, and the various appellations by which
they have been distinguished, has at all times been an embarrassment both to
the study and practice of physic, and has obstructed its improvement; as the
tremendous catalogue of distempers, besides the load it charges on the memory,
is a discouragemant to many, and must finally be productive of perplexity and
confusion.

Further, all the world knows, that one identical morbific cause* according to
its different force, its different seat, the difference of constitution,
climate, season and weather, produces symptoms, which though they may differ
widely in their external appearances, and especially in the degree of violence,
yet the nature of the disease is the same, as being the effect of one and the
same proximate cause; and therefore requires the like method of cure.

It has been the opinion of some, that the ardent putrid fever, belonged to the
class of inflammatory disorders, though Hippocrates, by whom, it is termed the
kauses, i. e. febris ardens or burning fever, places it among the summer
diseases; and never among those of the winter and spring.

Another difference between inflammatory and bilious fevers and the others of
that febrile class, is, that in hot weather, the former are more remittent and
the latter less.

Fevers are moreover observed usually to regulate themselves according to the
greater or less force of their proximate cause, which is common to every form
or variety, however they may differ in the number, violence, or complexity of
their symptoms.

The dysentery If the dysentery and putrid continual fever were both derived
from the same cause, contagion could have no effect on the patient, or if any,
in could only aggravate the dysenteric symptoms, and not suspend them. That the
dysentery is often combined with the intermittent fever, there are numerous
examples recorded, and in those cases the dysenteric symptoms instead of being
suspended or banished, are aggravated by the exacerbations of the fever. --
Note -- If these are established facts, and if the remitting fever from marsh
miasmata, is only a lower grade of the synochus icteroides, or West India
yellow fever, and the dysentery is only a modification of the remitting marsh
fever, how came the disease to be suspended in the soldiers at Grenada by the
yellow fever?

W. C.


, though it occurs in the same season and from the same apparent causes as the
bilious or remittent fevers, appears to differ essentially from the putrid or
continued fever, because it ceases upon the accession of that fever."

Remarks on Venaesection in Fevers.
With regard to venaesection, it is generally found less necessary in hot
countries and hot seasons, than in the cold; and its benefit in putrid fevers
This author uses the term putrid and bilious as synonimous, though very
improperly. The generality of writers, formerly denominated all fevers that
were dangerous, but not contagious, putrid; and those that were both dangerous
and contagious they denominated malignant. W. C.
is probably very limited, being proper only in the first stages of putrid
fevers, or of malignant fevers caught by contagion; and even then only when the
patient is plethoric, or has a strong full quick pulle; from which circumstance
the disease will appear more or less to partake of an inflammatory nature. In
ardent bilious fevers, the access and progress of which are sudden and short,
and attended with violent headache, immediately followed by strong delirium,
the lancet has been found indispensibly neccessary. With regard to the timing
of venaesection, whether in the exacerbation or the remission of the paroxism,
this seems less material, than the necessary circumstance of bleeding very
early in the disease.

Mr. Vanswieten found much bleeding quite unnecessary in the common fevers at
Batavia, and sometimes very detrimental.

The pernicious effects of bleeding in putrid fevers are also attested by
Hippocrates, Aretaeus, Celsus, ^lexander, Fernelius De Corter of Petersburg,
Glass, Bianchi, Junker, Huxham, Tissott, and many others."

The mode of treatment by the above author in other respects is nearly the same
as that recommended by Dr. Tissott.

Dr. LIND observes that "Intermitting and remitting fevers prevailed in their
utmost violence in the year 1765, not only in Hampshire, but in many other
parts of England, which seemed to have been increased that year by the unusual
and excessive heat of the summer; together with an undiluted putrid moisture in
the soil, and the long duration of easterly winds. The universality of this
fever, together with its uncommon symptoms were at first alarming; but when the
lancet was withheld, and the bark freely given in large doses, few died. --
(Diseases of Hot Climates, p. 22.")

In the Low Countries, particularly Zealand, the most obstinate diseases of
this kind frequently rage, and are particularly distressing to strangers.

Dr. Wind, in his translation into Dutch, of my Essay on preserving Seamen
A^nmerking XI.
, has among other judicious remarks, the following observation relative to what
I have there said of certain fevers.

He observes, "that at Middleburgh, the capital of West Zealand, where his
father and himself had practiced twenty-eight years, a sickness generally
reigns toward the latter end of August, or the beginning of September, which
is always most violent after hot summers.

"It makes its appearance after the rains, which generally fall in the latter
end of July; the sooner it begins, the longer it continues, being checked only
by the coldness of the weather.

"Toward the end of August, and the beginning of September, it is a continual
burning fever, attended with a vomiting of bile, which is called the
gall-sickness. This fever, after continuing three or four days, intermits,
assumes the form of a double tertian, and leaves the patient in a fortnight, or
perhaps sooner; strangers, who have been accustomed to breathe a dry pure air,
do not recover so quickly.

"Foreigners, in indigent circumstances, such as the Scotch and German
soldiers, who are garrisoned in the adjacent places, are apt, after those
fevers, to have a swelling in their legs, and a dropsy; of which many die.

"Fluxes are frequent in September and October; toward the latter end of which
indeed the air becomes more healthy, and then few diseases prevail. At this
time, those who have labored under the fever sometimes suffer a relapse; but
then it is into a simple tertian, which seldom confines the patient."

The Doctor farther observes, "That those diseases are the same with the double
tertian fevers, common between the tropics. Such," says he, "as are seized with
the gall-sickness, have, at first, some flushes of heat over the body, a loss
of appetite, a white foul tongue, a yellow tinge in the eyes, and a pale color
in the lips. An emetic administered before the gall-disease appears, is
serviceable. Bleeding is seldom requisite, unless in persons of a plethoric
habit. The gall-sickness is removed chiefly by cooling medicines; but, in
October, the tertian agues cannot be cured without the bark.

"Such as live well, drink wine, have warm clothing and good lodgings, do not
suffer so much during the sickly season us the poor people: however those
diseases are not infectious, and seldom prove mortal to the natives."

"The most frequent and fatal diseases in the sickly season in Guinea are not
of an inflammatory nature. Indeed so much harm has been done there by the
lancet, in the hands of such as have read only Sydenham's works, or authors who
treat of inflammatory fevers only, that it is most advisable for the
inexperienced in such climates to abstain altogether from its use, and to trust
the safety of their patients, in such cases, to vomits and the early
application of blisters, together with the use of tartarum emeticum, in small
doses, or of antimonial medicines of gentle operation, during the fever, and of
the bark upon its first remission; whi^^ will be found the most successful and
judicious method of treating those fevers.

The loss of a small quantity of blood, in the beginning of a fever, does often
neither good nor hurt; and there are diseases incident to Europeans in that
part of the world, especially in the dry season, which may require even a
repetition of that operation. But during the rainy or sickly season, in the
case of Europeans laboring under the fever, it is seldom necessary to take
away blood; and large and repeated bleedings are attended with fatal
consequences. Nothing can be a plainer proof of the disposition of the air in
this country, to produce remitting and intermitting fevers, than the common
observation that those who have had obstinate agues in England or Holland,
almost constantly suffer a relapse when they come on this coast.

Bengal, next to Bencoolen, of all the English factories, proves the most fatal
to Europeans. The rainy season commences at Bengal in June, and continues till
October: the remainder of the year is healthy and pleasant. During the rains,
this rich and fertile country is almost quite covered by the overflowing of the
river Ganges, and converted as it were into a large pool of water. Diseases
rage among the Europeans in the months of July, August, September, and October,
attacking chiefly such as are lately arrived. Here, as in all other places,
sickness is more frequent and fatal in some years than others. The distempers
are fevers of the remitting or intermitting kind; sometimes they may begin
under a continued form, and remain several days without any perceptible
remission, but they have in general a great tendency to a remission. They are
commonly accompanied with violent fits of rigors or shiverings, and with
discharges of bile upwards and downwards. If the season be very sickly, some
are seized with a malignant fever, of which they soon die: the body is covered
with blotches of a livid color, and the corpse in a few hours turns quite
black and corrupted. At this time fluxes prevail, which may be called bilious
or putrid, the better to distinguish them from others which are accompanied
with an inflammation of the bowels. In all those diseases at Bengal, the lancet
is cautiously to be used.

I have been favored, says Dr. Lind, with the following ingenious observations
by Dr. Bogue of Titchfield.

'The diseases most fatal at Calcutta, while I was there, in 1757, began with
the rainy season, and were obstinate putrid intermitting fevers. The cold fit,
which was excessively violent, continued often for twelve hours; and as the
fever returned every day, the patients had not above four or five hours respite
from it. During the rains, and for some time after, we had sick, at the same
time, in this place, one half of the men in the squadron under the command of
the admirals Watson and Pococke. Out of three ships of the line, and a 20 gun
ship, and those not fully manned, we lost in six months upwards of 200 men,
most of whom died of these fevers.

'Camphire was found the best medicine in the fit. Bark and other antiseptics
were administered in large quantities, after first giving an emetic, and
emptying the bowels. This fever reduced the patients in general to such a weak
state, that Mr. Ives, then surgeon of that hospital, judged it absolutely
necessary to give arrack in their boiled rice to those who were on the
recovery, or who had not the disorder in a violent degree. He likewise
generously supplied them with Madeira wine.

'In the inflammatory fevers preceding the rainy season, bleeding with caution
was found of service; but as soon as the rainy season set in, the lancet was
seldom or never used.

'A salivation generally cured the disease of the liver, if the spitting was
brought on before matter was formed. In some the mercury produced a looseness,
which also cured the patient. In inflammations of the liver, when it adhered to
the peritoneum, which was generally the case, and a tumor appeared externally,
it was several times opened with success.'

This gentleman again visited India in the year 1772, where he had, for three
years, the superintendance of the naval hospitals. He is so obliging as farther
to inform me, that when he was last in India, mercury was more in use on the
Coromandel Coast, than it had ever been before. In bilious fluxes, when the
common remedies failed, it was used with great success, either by unction or
internally, obstructions in some of the viscera being then supposed to be the
cause of the disease. Fluxes of long standing were seldom cured without it. In
all bilious complaints, emetics were not so frequently given as formerly, being
only intended to cleanse the stomach, but the greatest dependence was placed on
mercurials, and purges given at a few days intermission, which was supposed to
be the most natural method of carrying off the bile.

'At Senegal, in the rivers Gambia and St. Domingo, on the Coast of Guinea, at
Carpenter's River, near the Musquitoe Shore, in the West Indies, and in many
other places, I have been told, that almost all the European strangers, at
their first coming, lose their appetite and color, becoming yellow, and
troubled with sickness or indigestion; and that gentle vomits are found
suitable to the diseases in those climates.

The fever with which they are soon afflicted, begins sometimes with a
delirium, oftener with a vomiting; it will not bear bleeding, but blisters,
camphor and the bark, are the appropriate remedies for it, as well as for
contagious fevers. If the patient after the application of blisters, still
continued bad, and was delirious, with a low pulse, some have empirically given
from five to ten grs. of calomel, joined with camphor, which was said to remove
the delirium. This circumstance would not have been mentioned (being a practice
we cannot recommend) if I had not been informed, by some judicious and
authentic accounts, lately sent me from the East Indies, that mercury has been
experienced a most useful medicine in the hipatitis, after the inflammation had
been somewhat abated by bleeding and the neutral salts, etc." Paper on
Infection, p. 78.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE BILIOUS FEVER WHICH OCCURRED IN A VOYAGE TO THE EAST
INDIES, IN THE YEAR 1766, BY DR. BADENOCH, (Published in London Med. Observe.
Vol. 4th, p. 156.)
"JULY 16th. 1766, we came to an anchor to leeward of the Island of Joanna, (in
the Eastern Ocean, near the north end of Madagascar, where the ships of the
East India Company usually stop in order to wood and water.) The sick, chiefly
scorbutics, to the number of about 40, were sent on shore to remain during our
stay. The carpenters, coopers, and several others likewise slept on shore. July
21st. we left that Island, most of our scorbutics being recovered. During the
remainder of that month, we were becalmed in sight of the Island. From the
beginning to the 10th. of August, most of those who had slept on shore were
attacked with bilious and remitting fevers of a bad sort. Few, if any of the
other people of the ship, were seized with them, from which it did not appear
to be infectious.

"REMARKS ON THE CURE.
"To expect success in treating these fevers, it appears to me necessary to pay
particular regard to their different degrees of violence. For example, the
bilious fever, in the north of Germany, is much less violent than the same
fever is in Minorca; and this again, than those frequent in Africa, or the East
Indies.

"For the cure of the bilious fever most frequent while at sea, bleeding in the
beginning, especially in athletic constitutions, was generally necessary; after
which and the use of antimonial medicines and saline mixtures, the fever soon
came to intermit; and then the Cort. Peru. being administered, a few days
completed the cure.

"But when the ships are in the ports of the East Indies, even though the fever
runs high, blood-letting is so far from being advisable, that I believe it is
hurtful. Of the patients violently attacked with this fever at Joanna, I bled
only two, one of which ^ied the day following, the other escaped by soon after
taking the bark. Mr. Bruce also bled two of his patients after leaving Mohila,
one expired soon after, the other recovered.

"Dr. James Lind in his Treatise on the Remitting Fever of Bengal in 1762,
observes, that by taking away only a few ounces of blood in the remission,
there followed such a prostration of strength, that they sunk under the
violence of the next paroxism.

"During the rage of the Joanna fever, I began the cure with evacuants, etc. in
expectation of procuring a plain remission or intermission; but I found myself
much disappointed; for it assumed the appearance of a continual fever, with now
and then violent exacerbations, under which several sunk. Fearing this might be
the fate of the greatest part of the remaining sick, I without farther delay,
gave between 30 and 40 patients in the different stages of the fever, Pulv.
Cort. Peru. i. in wine or wine and water every hour. Several with sunk pulse,
and apparently within a few hours of their end, were relieved in a few hours
after taking a few doses of the bark, and by continuing it for a day or two,
recovered.

Dr. RUSH, in a paper read before the London Medical Society, August 8th, 1774,
published in their 5th vol. at page 32, mentions, that of fifty or sixty
patients which he had attended in bilious fevers, the two preceding summers and
autumns in Philadelphia, he had the misfortune of losing but one, though he had
constantly refused to comply with the solicitations of his patients with
respect to bleeding. After emptying the stomach and bowels by emetic tartar and
catha^ic salts, it was his practice to watch the fever ^s e^^^^ly as possible,
and without waiting, as some have directed, till nature has thrown off
something oppressive to the system, by a crisis of some kind, he threw in the
bark as soon as he perceived the least shadow of a remission. These remissions
generally continued four hours, in some longer, in others not quite so long,
and occurred for the most part once in twenty-four hours. -- "I must here add
(says Dr. Rush) that I attribute my success in treating this fever to my giving
the bark in substance, and in very large doses: If it ever fails of breaking
the fever, it is owing to its being given in too small a quantity." He
acknowledges his obligations to Dr. Archibald, of the island of Nevis, for the
freedom with which he used the bark, who had often given ss. of bark every half
hour, for a whole day or night together in the West Indies, and that it would
stay upon the stomach when no other medicine could be kept there.

Dr. Rush has also published an account of the bilious remitting fever, which
was epidemic in Philadelphia in the year 1780, of which the following is an
abstract.

"THE spring of 1780 was dry and cool.

July and August were uncommonly warm. The mercury stood on the 6th of August
at 94, on the 15th of the same month at 95, and for several days afterward at
90.

The winds during these months blew chiefly from the south, and south-west. Of
course they passed over the land which lies between the city, and the conflux
of the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill, the peculiar situation of which, at that
time, has been already described.

The dock, and the streets of Philadelphia, supplied the winds at this season,
likewise, with a portion of their unwholesome exhalations The musquitoes were
uncomonly numerous during the autumn. A certain sign (says Dr. Lind) of an
unwholesome atmosphere.
The dock, was a wide and deep trench, extending from the Delaware, in a
serpentine co^rse, near four squares, replete with mod and putrefying vegetable
and animal substances, from whence most (...) or halations constantly exhaled
during the hot season, every (...).
.

The remitting fever made its first appearance in July and August, but its
symptoms were so mild, and its extent so confined, that it excited no
apprehensions of its subsequent more general prevalence throughout the city.

On the 19th. of August the air became suddenly very cool. Many hundred people
in the city complained, the next day, of different degrees of indisposition,
from a sense of lassitude, to a fever of the remitting type. This was the
signal of the epidemic. The weather continued cool during the remaining part of
the month, and during the whole month of September. From the exposure of the
district of Southwark (which is often distinguished by the name of the Hill) to
the south-west winds, the fever made its first appearance in that appendage of
the city. Scarcely a family, and in many families, scarcely a member of them,
escaped it. From the Hill it gradually traveled along the second-street from
the Delaware, improperly called Front-street. For a while it was confined to
this street only, after it entered the city, and hence it was called by some
people the Front-street Fever. It gradually spread through other parts of the
city, but with very different degrees of violence. It prevailed but little in
the Northern Liberties. It was scarcely known beyond fourth-street from the
Delaware. Intemperance in eating or drinking, riding in the sun or rain,
watching, fatigue, or even a fright, but more frequently cold, all served to
excite the feeds of this fever into action, wherever they existed.

All ages, and both sexes were affected by this fever. Seven of the
practitioners of physic were confined by it nearly at the same time. The city,
during the prevalence of the fever, was filled with an unusual number of
strangers, many of whom, particularly of the Friends (whose yearly meeting was
held in the month of September) were affected by it.

This fever generally came on with rigor, but seldom with a regular chilly fit,
and often without any sensation of cold. In some persons it was introduced by a
slight sore throat, and in others, by a hoarseness which was mistaken for a
common cold. A giddiness in the head was the forerunner of the disease in some
people. This giddiness attacked so suddenly, as to produce, in several
instances, a faintness, and even symptoms of apoplexy. It was remarkable that
all those persons who were affected in this violent manner, recovered in two or
three days.

I met with one instance of this fever attacking with coma, and another with
convulsions, and with many instances in which it was introduced by a delirium.

The pains which accompanied this fever were exquisitely severe in the head,
back, and limbs. The pains in the head were sometimes in the back parts of it,
and at other times they occupied only the eyeballs. In some people, the pains
were so acute in their backs and hips, that they could not lie in bed. In
others, the pains affected the neck and arms, so as to produce in one instance
a difficulty of moving the fingers of the right hand. They all complained more
or less of a soreness in the seats of these pains, particularly when they
occupied the head and eyeballs. A few complained of their flesh being sore to
the touch, in every part of the body. From these circumstances, the disease was
sometimes believed to be a rheumatism. But its more general name among all
classes of people was, the Break-bone Fever.

I met with one case of pain in the back, and another of an acute ear-ach, both
of which returned periodically every night, and without any fever.

A nausea universally, and in some instances, a vomiting, accompanied by a
disagreeable talle in the mouth, attended this fever. The bowels were, in most
cases, regular, except where the disease fell with its whole force upon them,
producing a symptomatic dysentery.

The tongue was generally moist, and tinctured of a yellow color.

The urine was high colored, and in its usual quantity in fevers.

The skin was generally moist, especially where the disease terminated on the
third or fourth day.

The pulse was quick and full, but never hard in a single patient that came
under my care, till the 28th. of September.

It was remarkable, that little, and in some instances, no thirst attended this
fever.

A screatus, or constant hawking and spitting, attended in many cases through
the whole disease, and was a favorable symptom.

There were generally remissions in this fever every morning, and sometimes in
the evening. The exacerbations were more severe every other day, and two
exacerbations were often observed in one day.

A rash often appeared on the third and fourth days, which proved favorable.
This rash was accompanied in some cases by a burning in the palms of the hands
and soles of the feet. Many people at this time, who were not confined to their
beds, and some, who had no fever, had an efflorescence on their sl^ins.

In several persons the force of the disease seemed to fall upon the face,
producing swelling under the jaw and in the cars, which in some instances
terminated in abscesses.

When the fever did not terminate on the third or fourth day, it frequently ran
on to the eleventh, fourteenth, and even twentieth day, assuming in its
progress, according to its duration, the usual symptoms of the typhus gravior,
or mitior, of Doctor Cullen. In some cases, the discharge of a few spoonfuls of
blood from the nose accompanied a solution of the fever on the third or fourth
day; while in others, a profuse haemorrhage from the nose, mouth, and bowels,
on the tenth and eleventh days, preceded a fatal issue of the disease.

Several cases came under my care, in which the fever was succeeded by a
jaundice.

The disease terminated in some cases without sweating, or a sediment in the
urine; nor did I find such patients more disposed to relapse than others,
provided they took a sufficient quantity of the bark.

About the beginning of October the weather became cool, accompanied by rain
and an easterly wind. This cool and wet weather continued for four days. The
mercury in the thermometer fell to 60, and fires became agreeable. From this
time the fever evidently declined, or was accompanied with inflammatory
symptoms. On the 16th of October, I met with a case of inflammatory angina; and
on the next day I visited a patient who had a complication of the bilious fever
with a pleurisy, and whose blood discovered strong marks of the presence of the
inflammatory diathesis. His stools were of a green and black color. On the
third day of his disorder the rash appeared on his skin, and on the fourth, in
consequence of a second bleeding, his fever terminated with the common symptoms
of a crisis.

During the latter end of October, and the first weeks in November, the mercury
in the thermometer fluctuated between 50 and 60. Pleurisies and inflammatory
diseases of all kinds now made their appearance. They were more numerous and
more acute, than in this stage of the autumn, in former years. I met with one
case of pleurisy in November, which did not yield to less than four plentiful
bleedings.

I shall now add a short account of the METHOD I pursued in the treatment of
this fever.

After evacuating the contents of the stomach and bowels, I gave small doses of
tartar emetic mixed with Glauber's salt. This medicine exited a general
perspiration. It likewise kept the bowels gently open, by which means the bile
was discharged as fast as it was accumulated.

On the third or fourth day, in the afternoon, the pains in the head and back
generally abated, with a sweat which was diffused over the whole body. The
pulse at this time remained quick and weak. This was, however, no objection to
the use of the bark, a few doses of which immediately abated its quickness, and
prevented a return of the fever.

If the fever continued beyond the third or fourth day without an intermission,
I always had recourse to blisters. Those which were applied to the neck, and
behind the ears, produced the most immediate good effects. They seldom failed
of producing an intermission in the fever, the day after they were applied.
Where delirium or coma attended, I applied the blister to the neck on the first
day of the disorder.

Where the fever did not yield to blisters, and assumed the symptoms of typhus
gravior or mitior, I gave the medicines usually exhibited in both the species
of that fever.

I took notice in the history of this fever that it was sometimes accompanied
by the symptoms of a dysentery. Where this disorder appeared, I prescribed
lenient purges and opiates. Where these failed of success, I gave the bark in
the intermission of the pain in the bowels, and applied blisters to the wrists.
The good effects of these remedies led me to conclude that the dysentery was
the febris introversa of Doctor Sydenham.

I am happy in having an opportunity, in this place, of bearing a testimony in
favor of the usefulness of OPIUM in this disorder, after the necessary
evacuations had been made. I yielded, in prescribing it at first, to the
earnest solicitations of my patients for something to give them relief from
their insupportable pains, particularly when they were seated in the eyeballs
and head. Its salutary effects in procuring sweat, and a remission of the
fever, led me to prescribe it afterward in almost every case, and always with
the happiest effects. Those physicians enjoy but little pleasure in practicing
physic, who know not how much of the pain and anguish of fevers, of a certain
kind, may be lessened by the judicious use of opium.

In treating of the remedies used in this disorder, I have taken no notice of
blood-letting. Out of several hundred patients whom I visited in this fever, I
did not meet with a single case, before the 27th of September, in which the
state of the pulse indicated this evacuation. It is true, the pulse was full,
but never hard. I acknowledge that I was called to several patients who had
been bled without the advice of a physician, who recovered afterward on the
usual days of the solution of the fever. This can only be ascribed to that
disposition which Doctor Cleghorn atributes to fevers, to preserve their types
under every variety of treatment, as well as constitution. But I am bound to
declare further, that I heard of several cases, in which bleeding was followed
by a fatal termination of the disease If the malignant yellow fever is only a
higher grade of the fever just described, how does it happen that the remedies
which cured this, were, in the majority of cases, injurious, or at least
useless in that fever? Diseases differing in degree, surely require remedies of
the same kind, differing only in quantity or degree of power. W. C.
."

"Philadelphia became unusually sickly after the year 1778, during the late
war, in consequence of the meadows being overflowed to the southward of the
city, and of the cutting down of the trees by the British army, which formerly
sheltered the city from the exhalations of the grounds to the north and
north-west. From the repairs of the banks of the meadows, which exclude tides
and freshes; from the cultivation of the grounds to the westward of the city,
which were formerly covered with filth, or with stagnating waters; and lastly,
from the more regular cleaning of the streets, and the enclosure of a large and
offensive canal which crossed two of the principal streets near the center of
the city, Philadelphia, from having been formerly the most sickly, has become
one of the healthiest cities in the United States."

SIR GEORGE BAKER, in a communication to the College of Physicians of London,
published in the 3d vol. of their transactions, relates, that in obstinate
intermittents, which prevailed in London in the year 1782, he had observed
evident good effects from small doses of calomel, taken two or three evenings
successively, and then followed by a purgative of moderate strength. He also
mentions the case of a siphlitic patient with a quartan ague, who had not a
single return of the fever after the commencement of the salivation.

It appears from a quotation in the same communication, that Dr. Willis,
cotemporary of Sydenham, had proposed to cure a young lady by inducing a gentle
salivation, to which she consented; and that the fever ceased as soon as he had
affected a salivation, which he was twelve days in accomplishing.

It appears from historical facts, collected by Sir George Baker, that the
Peruvian bark, which Sydenham claims the credit of introducing into practice in
London, belonged to an apothecary of the name of Talbor, whose cures were so
remarkable and surprising by its use, that he was knighted by King Charles the
II. Harvey, Lister, Hodges and Morton were all cotemporaries of Sydenham.

The same author says, that a medicine composed of arsenic and opium, (the dose
of which was a very few drops in water) was taken by some people, and sometimes
successfully; but that now and then violent vomitings, colic, and dysentery
were the effects of it. He had also received information of an ague thus cured,
which was followed by a palsy of the lower limbs: and concludes, that it
cannot be deemed to be a proper remedy for an intermittent fever, whilst an
intermittent fever is less formidable than arsenic.

Dr. CULLEN, in the first lines of his Practice of Physic, published in the
year 1784, remarks, that, "The paroxisms of pure intermittent fevers are always
finished in less than twenty four hours: and though it happens that there are
fevers which consist of repeated paroxisms, without any entire intermission
between them; yet in some cases it is observed, that, though the hot and
sweating stages of the paroxism do not entirely cease before the twenty-four
hours from their beginning have expired, they suffer however before that time,
a considerable abatement or remission of their violence; and at the return of
the quotidian period, a paroxism is in some shape renewed, which runs the same
course as before. This constitutes what is called a remittent fever.

When in these remittents the remission is considerable, and the return of a
new paroxism is distinctly marked by the symptoms of a cold stage at the
beginning of it; such fevers retain strictly the appellation of remittents. But
when it happens, as it does in certain cases, that the remission is not
considerable, is perhaps without sweat, and that the returning paroxism is not
marked by the most usual symptoms of a cold stage, but chiefly by the
aggravation or exacerbation of a hot stage, the disease is called a continued
fever.

In some cases of continued fever, the remissions and exacerbations are so
inconsiderable as not to be easily observed or distinguished; and this has led
physicians to imagine, that there is a species of fever subsisting for several
days together, and seemingly consisting of one paroxism only. This they have
called a continent fever; but, in a long course of practice, I have not had an
opportunity of observing such a fever.

It is, however, to be observed here, that the fevers of a continued form are
to be distinguished from one another; and that, while some of a very continued
form do still belong to the section of intermittents, there are others which,
though still consisting of separate and repeated paroxisms, yet, as different
by their causes and circumstances from intermittents, are to be distinguished
from the whole of these, and are more strictly to be called and considered as
continued. Such are most of those which have been commonly supposed to be
continent; and those which by most writers have been simply named continued;
and which term I have employed as the title of a section, to be distinguished
from that of intermittent.

I shall here add the marks by which, in practice, these different continued
fevers may be distinguished from one another.

Those fevers of a continued form, which, however, still belong to the section
of intermittents, may be distinguished by their having passed from an
intermittent or remittent form, to that of a continued; by their showing some
tendency to become intermittent, or at least remittent; by their being known to
have been occasioned by marsh miasmata; and, for the most part, by their having
but one paroxism, or one exacerbation or remission, in the course of
twenty-four hours.

On the other hand, continued fevers, to be more strictly so called, may be
distinguished by their showing little tendency to become intermittent or
remittent in any part of their ^^urse, and especially after the first week of
their continuance, by their being occasioned by human contagion, at least by
other causes than the marsh miasmata; and by their having pretty constantly an
exacerbation and remission twice in the course of every twenty-four hours. In
both cases, the knowledge of the nature of the epidemic for the time
prevailing, may have a great share in determining the nature of the particular
fever.

With respect to the form, or type, of fevers, this further may be observed,
that the quartan, while it has the longest interval, has, at the same time, the
longest and most violent cold stage; bu^ upon the whole, the shortest paroxism:
That the tertian having a shorter interval than the quartan, has, at the same
time, a shorter and less violent cold stage; but a longer paroxism: And,
lastly, that the quotidian, with the shortest interval, has the least of a cold
stage; but the longest paroxism.

The type of fevers is sometimes changed in their course. When this happens, it
is generally in the following manner: Both tertians and quartans change into
quotidians, quotidians into remittents, and these last become often of the most
continued kind. In all these cases, the fever has its paroxisms protracted
longer than usual, before it changes into a type of more frequent repetition.

It has been rendered probable, that the remote causes of fevers are chiefly
contagions or miasmata, and neither of them of great variety. We have supposed
that miasmata are the cause of intermittents, and contagions the cause of
continued fevers, strictly so named; but we cannot with propriety employ these
general terms. For, as the cause of continued fevers may arise from fomites,
and may, in such cases, be called a miasma; and as other miasmata also may
produce contagious diseases; it will be proper to distinguish the causes of
fevers, by using the terms human or marsh effluvia, rather than the general
ones of contagion, or miasma.

Nothing is more evident, than that blood-letting is one of the most powerful
means of diminishing the activity of the whole body, especially of the
sanguiferous system; and it must therefore be the most effectual means of
moderating the violence of reaction in fevers. Taking this as a fact, I omit
inquiring into its mode of operation, and shall only consider in what
circumstances of fevers it may be most properly employed.

When the violence of reaction, and its constant attendant, a pillogistic
diathesis, are sufficiently manifest; when these constitute the principal part
of the disease, and may be expected to continue throughout the whole of it, as
in the cases of synocha; then blood-letting is the principal remedy, and may be
employed as far as the symptoms of the disease may seem to require, and the
constitution of the patient will bear. It is, however, to be attended to, that
a greater evacuation than is necessary, may occasion a flower recovery, may
render the person more liable to a relapse, or may bring on other diseases.

In the case of synocha, therefore, there is little doubt about the propriety
of blood-letting: But there are other species of fever, as the synochus And the
(...) has (...).
in which a violent reaction and phlogistic diathesis appear, and prevail
during some part of the course of the disease; while, at the same time, these
circumstances do not constitute the principal part of the disease, nor are to
be expected to continue during the whole course of it; and, it is well known,
that, in many cases, the state of violent reaction is to be succeeded, sooner
or later, by a state of debility, from the excess of which the danger of the
disease is chiefly to arise. It is, therefore, necessary that, in many cases,
blood-letting should be avoided; and even although, during the inflammatory
state of the disease, it may be proper, it will be necessary to take care that
the evac^ation be not so large as to increase the state of the debility which
is to follow.

From all this it must appear, that the employing blood-letting, in certain
fevers, requires much discernment and skill, and is to be governed by the
consideration of the following circumstances:

1. The nature of the prevailing epidemic.

2. The nature of the remote cause.

3. The season and climate in which the disease occurs.

4. The degree of phlogistic diathesis present.

5. The period of the disease.

6. The age, vigor, and plethoric state of the patient.

7. The patient's former diseases and habits of blood-letting.

8. The appearance of the blood drawn out:

9. The effects of the blood-letting that may have been already practiced.

When, after the consideration of these circumstances, blood-letting is
determined to be necessary, it should be observed, that it is more effectual,
according as the blood is more suddenly drawn off, and as the body is, at the
same time, more free from all irritation, and, consequently, when in a posture
in which the fewest muscles are in action.

Another evacuation whereby the quantity of fluids contained in the body can be
considerably diminished, is that of purging.

At the same time, this evacuation may induce a considerable degree of
debility; so, in those cases in which a dangerous state of debility is likely
to occur, purging is to be employed with a great deal of caution; and more
especially as the due measure of the evacuation is more difficult to be applied
than in the case of blood-letting."

Dr. BLANE, in his observations on the Diseases of Seamen, published in the
year 1785, remarks, that, "Bilious remitting fevers arise in the same
situations in hot climates, in which intermittents arise in temperate ones.

Seldom arise at sea, unless where there has been previous exposure on shore --
In those cases, the persons that have been exposed to the noxious air of
marshes or woods, are generally affected seven or eight days after such
exposure.

The most distinguishing symptom is a copious secretion of bile, which attends
it. The symptoms are peculiarly violent (to Europeans) at the beginning. This
fever, when it arises merely from the effluvia of woods and marshes, has a
natural tendency to remit. But in many of those that arose at Jamaica, little
or no remission was to be perceived. It was distinguished from the ship fever
by the bilious vomiting and stools, more violent delirium and headache, and by
being attended with less debility. These men had been exposed to such causes as
usually produce continued fevers, such as infection, the foul air of the French
prizes, intemperance and hard labor. Some of them were affected with
yellowness of the eyes and of the whole skin, but without the other symptoms
that characterise the yellow fever, properly so called.

In this fever venaesection was generally beneficial at the beginning, etc. A
remission was then procured by emetics, saline purges, and an^i^nl.
preparations, with neutral salts, etc. p. 92.

When from a fresh accumulation of bile the fever appears to be kept up, a
repetition of evacuants is necessary, and calomel will be found to answer
remarkably well as a purgative, its stimulus being so extensive as to loosen
and bring away bile, when the saline purgatives have failed of having that
effect: And it will be still more effectual for this purpose, if given alone in
a dose, from five to ten grs. and followed some hours afterward by some other
purgative.

If the fever should not yield during the first week, but takes an unfavourable
turn, the pulse then becomes more small and frequent, there is a general
agitation, the tongue is tremulous when put out, great thirst, dry skin and
delirium.

In these circumstances, besides the continuation of antimonials in small
doses, with diaphoretic anodines, and the occasional use of purgatives,
blisters now become proper. Camphor combined with nitre, is also an excellent
medicine at this period of the disease.

In protracted cases the free use of bark and wine or other stimulating or
cordial remedies become requisite, without regard to the remissions or
exacerbations."

Dr. B. MOSELEY, in his treatise on tropical diseases, 3d edition published in
the year 1792, remarks, that "At the setting in of autumnal diseases,
intermittents are always attended with a greater secretion of bile, than they
are afterward, when the season has farther advanced. And the earlier the
autumnal sickly season commences, the more the liver is affected, and the
greater is the quantity of bile attending them. For which reason, bark at that
time is improper, when given without perfect intermissions. A patient can take
much more bark, without injur^, in a December intermittent, than he can in an
^ugust one. Yellowness in the eyes, tension of the abdomen, and a cough, are
generally produced by a few doses of bark, in the beginning of autumn; and this
is an infallible sign, that the body is not properly prepared for it. But when
the autumnal intermittants do not set in until November, bark, in general, may
be taken with safety, without much previous preparation, because they are
^^ldom attended with those excessive bilious secretions, and that febrile
disposition, which accompany them in the earlier months.

Spring diseases, in hot climates, though not always strongly marked, have in
general an inflammatory tendency; which tendency gradually declines with the
season, and disappears in autumn.

The autumnal diseases, in Jamaica, in the year 1776, set in, in November; the
season was cold and rainy. Fevers came on with a shivering; but a good
intermission generally succeeded the first paroxism; in which, if eight or ten
drahms of bark were given, all went on well: if not, the fever returned the
next evening, and the following day only a remission succeeded -- bark then
would not answer. The third fit universally ended in a low continued fever,
which required early blisters, cordials, and stimulants, as the patients all
sunk very much, and many died.

The type of diseases is very often dissimilar, in the same season, in a
district only of a few miles. In hot, marshy, low situations, autumnal
intermittents have generally a putrid tendency; and sometimes after a few
paroxisms degenerate into irregular, low, fevers, accompanied with colliquative
sweats, and diarrhoeas. Here the early use of bark, in every climate, is
proper; and the almost indiscriminate adiministration of it, seldom attended
with danger.

This locality of disease ought to be well considered, by those who write for
the information of others; and should not be confounded with the endemics of a
country, or of a climate at large: for such varieties occur in every part of
the world.

On examining the situation of Modena, in Italy, I found many local
circumstances combined to make it probable that TORTI's extensive
administration of bark, had better reasons to support it than his theory; or
than his adversaries admitted. However, TORTI adopted the important
distinction, between a corruptive, and a depurative intermittent; which is a
distinction, I wish to inculcate between the tropics. In the former, which
chiefly belongs to the autumnal season, TORTI's doctrine may sometimes apply;
and "ab ipso exordio per corticem suppremi poterit Therapeutices Specialis,
Lib. I. cap. viii. p. 60. Ed. Venetiis, 1769.
;" but in the latter, if there be not an intermittent disposition in the
season, or some local putrid tendency, it will be found that bark is not always
necessary in the cure of intermittent fevers; and that frequently, by
obstructing some design of nature, does great mischief, and particularly when
given too early.

The notions of asthenia, and putridity, so universally prevailed in Jamaica,
at the time of my arriving in the i^sland, that the word inflammatory, as
connected with fever, was scarcely known; and copious, or repeated bleeding,
was in general considered as an agent of death.

There had been violent contentions formerly on these points, particularly as
referring to the yellow fever: but no person had ever defined that fever with
accuracy, nor considered it as a genuine inflammatory disease.

The two unfortunate physicians Williams and Bennet, at Kingston, who
terminated their disputes on this subject by killing each other in a duel on
the 29th of December 1750, both, adopted the opinion that the yellow fever was
a bilious fever, and gave it that appellation; and though Williams's intentions
of cure were rational, yet it did not appear that he was able to distinguish
this disease from others which are really bilious, and peculiar to that part of
the world.

This want of discrimination had always existed in the West Indies; and the
consequence was, that cardiacs and refrigerants, evacuants and bark, emetics
and bleeding, frequently, and fatally, usurped the place of each other."

According to the observations of the accurate Dr. Jackson, "the paroxisms of
the fever of Jamaica are observed in many instances, to terminate in more
perfect remissions, than the paroxisms of the endemic of North America, which
is known to be fundamentally an intermitting fever. Hence authors are generally
of opinion, that all the difference which appears to take place in those
fevers, depends merely on accidental causes, viz. on the greater or less heat
of the climate and moisture of the soil

The common fever in that part of Jamaica called Savanna La Mar from the year
1774 to 1778, was not only disposed to terminate of its own accord; but it was
disposed to terminate on certain critical days, often at an early period, and
by signs of crisis too clear to be mistaken; neither did the Peruvian bark, in
the manner at least, in which it was managed, ever cut short its course with
certainty. The endemic of America, on the contrary, often lasted long. It
frequently indeed, changed to another disease, after a length of time; but no
period could be assigned for its natural termination, especially in the
northern states. Neither did the Peruvian bark. though its effects were so
equivocal in the fevers of Jamaica, scarcely ever fail of stopping the progress
of the fever. To which we may add, that the complaint which, strictly speaking,
is called the intermittent or ague and fever, can scarcely be said to belong to
Jamaica; at least it was not known at Savanna-^a-Mar.

The fever that chiefly prevailed at Savanna-La-Mar, was usually mild in its
symptoms, and more regularly remitting in its form, than in most other parts of
the Island. Savanna-La-Mar is situated close by the sea; its particular site,
and the surrounding country, to the distance of several miles, is perfectly
level; whilst in consequence of its being open to the sea on the east, it is
visited early and constantly, by a salutary and refreshing breeze. It is
however, almost surrounded on the north by a morass, from whence it might be
suspected to be unhealthy, but this is not the case.

The sea at high water, particularly at spring tides, overflows the swampy
ground, and in a great measure, perhaps, prevents the usual noxious qualities
of marsh exhalations.

The prevailing fever in the southern states of America, often loses its
distinctive marks of intermission, in the hot months of summer; whilst it
approaches in other respects, so near the fever of Jamaica; as to be
distinguished from it with difficulty.

This was particularly the case at Ebenezer in Georgia, in the year 1779,
during the months of June and July. A cold sit was seldom observed in this
place; unless, perhaps, in the first attack; lowness, languor, headache, pain
of the back, and other disagreeable feelings, remained even in the most perfect
remissions. The disease was likewise much disposed to terminate of its own
accord, on critical days: Yet though these resemblances were very striking, the
fever of Ebenezer was perfectly under the control of the Peruvian bark, which
was not exactly the case with those of Jamaica. But the fevers of the various
islands in the Aegean sea, as described by Hippocrates, and of Minorca, by the
accurate Cleghorn, bear the nearest resemblance to the endemic of
Savanna-La-Mar.

The fevers of Italy, of different parts of the continent of Asia, as described
by various writers, as well as the endemic of North America, seem to be
degenerated or rather imperfect intermittents, than the disease commonly
understood by the appellation of remittent.

The different time of day at which fevers of a different type usually
commence, is a matter of no small curiosity. The single tertian at Jamaica for
instance, was constantly observed to begin in the forenoon, usually between the
hours of eight and eleven; while those forms of disease that were evidently
quotidian, or still more continued, as constantly began in the evening
generally from four to eight. This seemed to be a fixed distinction, and it is
an important one. (It is also repeatedly mentioned as a fact, by Dr. George
Fordyce, in his Essay on Simple Fever, published in the year 1794, that the
paroxism of the continued fever always commences in the evening.)

This rule respecting the connection between the hour of invasion and the type
of the fever, does not hold true in the different parts of the continent of
America; for there the most usual hour of the invasion of the single tertian,
was twelve at noon; though in some cases, the paroxism came on as early as ten
in the morning, or as late as two in the afternoon.

Of the bilious vomiting, so much insisted on by Galen as a distinguishing mark
of the single tertian, I can only say, that I constantly observed such
evacuations to be more frequent in the different forms of the tertian, than in
those that appeared to be quotidian, or that approached nearer to a continued
type."

"The general nature of the cause of fever, or the nature of its various
modifications is a mystery, which we do not as yet know. We only know, that
when present in a certain state of vigor and activity, it deranges or disturbs
the actions and functions of the system; while we likewise know, that it does
not always disturb every action or every function in the same degree. It has
occurred too often to have escaped the most superficial observation, that where
one part of the body suffers particularly, the others are often relieved in
proportion. We frequently in this manner observe, that general fever is
diminished by the appearance of local pain; or, on the contrary, increased by
its removal. It likewise often happens from the same principle, that where the
stomach and biliary system suffer much, there is less disorder in the other
parts: and on the other hand, that where these sufferings are removed or
mitigated, the general fever runs higher, and often continues high, till the
same, or other local affections, are again produced. Thus, though we are
totally ignorant of the intimate nature of the cause of fever, we still
perceive very plainly, that it either possesses something in its own nature, or
accidentally meets with something in the constitution of the individual, which
determines it to affect the different parts of the body in an unqual degree. It
usually exerts its greatest force upon parts, which are preternaturally
weakened by the general influence of climate, season, situation, or other
accidental causes. Hence bilious appearances are common in the hotest months of
hot climates, pneumonic affection in cold and dry weather, greater degrees of
vascular excitement among the temperate and more active races of men; while
symptoms of nervous affection prevail among the luxurious and enfeebled. The
above, with other species of the increased action of the cause of fever on a
particular part of the body, depend wholly, perhaps, on circumstances of
accident; yet it has so happened, that those irregular determinations have
unfortunately been considered as the efforts, which nature employs to expel
from the body a cause, which disturbs the economy of health I shall not, at
present go so far as to contend, that these determinations are not, in fact,
intentions of nature; but shall only beg leave to suggest, if they actually are
intentions, that it is mere chance which determines whether they are salutary
or fatal. It is a truth which nobody will deny, where the force of the disease
is accidentally directed to an organ of excretion, or to a part of little
importance to life, that the rest of the body is often proportionably relieved,
and even that a recovery of general heaith is sometimes the consequence; yet
the contrary is the effect, where the functions of the part, upon which the
force of the fever has been thus accidentally diverted, are of immediate
importance to the action of living. The Gout, a disease, the cause of which
bears no very remote analogy to the cause of fever, may be adduced as affording
an illustration of this truth. The proximate cause of gout, is equally hid from
us as the proximate cause of fever. We know, however, that the one equally with
the other, has a tendency to destroy life. We likewise know, that there is a
power or principle in the constitution, which to a certain degree resists
destruction. The nature of this power, however, is unknown. We are not only in
the dark with regard to its nature; but we can only form conjectures about the
part where it principally resides. -- We, however, clearly perceive its force
and activity to be different in different parts of the body. We may next be
allowed to remark, that where the cause of gout is in a certain state of
modification, tumults, (which properly enough may be termed re-action,) arise
in the system, and go on to continue till this cause or hurtful matter finds an
outlet from the body, or a lodgment on one particular part. The outlets from
the body are numerous: the parts on which the gout seems principally to fix its
seat, are the extremities, where the power of resistance is smallest. -- The
vital principle, however, becomes weaker as man advances in years; and the
cause of the disorder seems then frequently to find accommodations in parts,
which are less remote from the sources of life. This more especially is the
case, where tone and vigor have been preternaturally weakened. Hence the
stomach, the bowels, sometimes the brain, and even the heart itself suffer from
the immediate action of this disease, in the latter periods of life. But though
no person perhaps will deny, that the cause of gout finds readiest
accommodation, (if I may so apply the term) in those parts of the body, where
the vital powers are naturally weak, or have been accidentally weakened from
various causes; yet we may add, that it is likewise removed from the parts, on
which it has been thus fixed, by such applications as excite their active
powers; or, in other words, which call forth the local re-action of the system.
We may also observe, that tumults arise in the general system, in consequence
of this repression or repulsion of the morbid cause from a particular part; and
that they do not in general cease, till an outlet is opened, or accommodation
found in some other parts of the body. The above appearances, occur daily in
the history of gout. They seem to bear a strong analogy to those irregular
determinations, which frequently take place in fevers, and their cause perhaps
is the same. We do not perceive any other law by which they can be explained,
than the natural or adventitious state of activity of the powers of life, which
resist destruction with unequal force in the different parts of the system: so
that we shall be obliged to conclude, that those sufferings, which have
hitherto been styled the efforts of nature, are in reality more of the passive
than of the active kind.

The circumstances which I have now mentioned, combat the very existence of the
opinion, which has been commonly received with regard to the vis medicatrix
naturae. I have hinted, that the extent and limits of that principle are
narrow, and that the salutary effects are accidental. I shall next endeavor to
show, that they cannot, without danger, be made the basis of the general plan
of cure in febrile diseases. The task is important, but the attempt may be
thought presumptuous, as an opinion, contrary to that which I advance, has
obtained almost the universal consent of mankind. I have no desire of changing
names, or of making distinctions, where there is in fact no difference. I
perfectly acquiesce in retaining the word vis medicatrix naturae, provided it
is limited to a certain mode of re-action, or to a power in the constitution
of resiisting destruction unequally in its different parts, in consequence of
which, irregular determinations sometimes prove salutary by accident; yet I
must add, that if we mean to denote by this term a system of laws, which have
the best directed tendency to remove from the body a cause which destroys
health, and endangers life, the opinion has a very uncertain foundation. There
are few persons so ignorant, or so blindly devoted to the doctrines of
autokratcia as not to own, that the usually reputed efforts of nature, are
often ill directed, sometimes pernicious: in short, that they are obviously the
causes of death. The truth of this observation cannot be denied, and
unfortunately it obliges the advocates of the vis medicatrix naturae, to grant
the conclusion, that the laws of the principle are imperfect. The works of the
author of nature, as far as our limited knowledge can trace them, are
universally without defect, if examined according to the plan on which they
have been originally formed. If they appear otherwise, it becomes us to
hesitate before we decide. We may not have comprehended the fundamental
principle of the design; but we revolt from the idea, that the execution would
be left imperfect, had it been intended by the Author of our being, that the
mechanism of the frame would be such, as should oppose and remove, in the most
effectual manner, the derangements of the morbid cause. Defect and imperfection
can have no place in the designs of the Almighty. Had it actually been the
original design of our Creator, that the human body should be provided with a
system of the best concerted laws for restoring its health, when deranged by
the numerous causes of diseases, as it is impious to suppose, that those laws
could be defective so we may reasonably conclude, that the effects of fevers
would not then have been fatal. We find however, that fevers, as well as other
diseases, are fatal to people of all ages and descriptions: and that nature's
intention of cure, if they really are intentions, are often destructive to
herself. I need scarcely remind the reader of examples of their pernicious
tendency. Vomiting, sweating, increased discharges by stool, etc. are generally
considered as the salutary efforts of nature: but instances are numerous, where
the excess of those evacuations have obviously proved the causes of death. In
the same manner, abscesses, which in the remote parts of the body, sometimes
attend, and even sometimes perhaps influence the favorable termination of
fevers; in the brain, or in other organs of importance, are no less certainly
the cause which destroys life. In both instances the design of nature, if it
can be called a design, is the same. The force of the disease being turned
principally upon one part, the rest of the body is in a great measure relieved
from its sufferings; -- but the health and structure of the part are hurt or
destroyed by the change; and it depends wholly upon the accidental importance
of the organ, upon which this diversion has been made, whether death or
recovery is the consequence. Thus it often happens, that the reputed
indications of nature prove the immediate causes which destroy the existence of
the individual; a fact not reconcilable, with the infinite power and wisdom of
the Author of our being.

I have insinuated, that the efforts of nature are uncertain and precarious.
They depend on accidental determinations to different parts of the body; and I
may add, that if we endeavor to investigate the cause, which directs the
mechanism of the frame, to adopt one species of effort, or one mode of
determination in preference to another, we shall not perhaps be able to find
any other, than a difference in the states of the powers of life, which resist
destruction with unequal degrees of force in the different parts of the body.
Where there is the least resistance, either from the natural or accidental
circumstances of the constitution, there the disease most obviously exerts its
greatest force: Hence we are sufficiently warranted to conclude, that though
the structure of the human body is perfect with respect to every purpose for
which it is intended, being only endued with a principle, which resists
destruction, or persists in continuing life to a certain degree; yet that it is
extremely defective, if we consider it as a machine furnished with a system of
laws, which have an invariable and well directed tendency to restore health by
the most judicious and rational efforts. The restoration of health, in
consequence of this re-action, or irregular determination which takes place in
the system, is only a circumstance of accident. The skill of man sometimes
succeeds, where the efforts of nature have obviously failed.

Of the particular cure of the fever of Jamaica.
THE fever, which prevailed in the district of Savanna-La-Mar, was naturally a
disease of the remitting kind; yet circumstances were sometimes connected with
it, in such a manner as prevented it from assuming its proper form. To remove
those circumstances, which thus masked or concealed the real genius of the
disease, was considered as the first step toward a cure. The accomplishment of
this purpose, however, was sometimes difficult; neither could it always be
effected by the same means. Thus it happened frequently in cases, where there
was excess of excitement, or a high degree of inflammatory diathesis, that the
remissions where scarcely perceptible; as it was likewise observed, that where
there was a want of reaction, the paroxisms were often languid and obscure. In
the one case, the remissions discovered themselves in consequence of bleeding,
dilution and copious evacuation; in the other, wine and cordials determined the
disease to assume its proper genuine form.

In the first place, evacuations were usually employed as the means of
procuring remission, where the inflamatory diathesis prevailed in excess; I may
add, that they were proper for the most part, and that they seldom failed of
producing the effect. Bleeding was frequently necessary, and generally of
service. Its efficacy, however, was often heightened by particular modes of
management. Thus relaxation of spasms, and removal of inflammatory diathesis,
more certainly followed bleeding, if the blood was drawn from a large orifice;
if the patient was placed in an erect posture, during the operation; and more
certainly still, if the lower extremities were at the same time immersed in
warm water. When bleeding had been premised, and repeated according to the
circumstances and urgency of the case, it was then customary to open the body
freely: for which purpose, I have not found any thing answer better, than a
thin solution of Glauber or Epsom salts, with a small portion of emetic tartar.
The operation of this medicine was extensive. It might be so managed as to
occasion nausea, or moderate vomiting; to operate briskly downwards, or to
promote a gentle diaphoresis. Remissions were generally the consequence of this
method of proceeding, where there was no defect in the manner of conducting it.
But where it so happened, that the circumstances of the patient forbad the use
of this laxative; or where it might not be proper to carry it to a sufficient
length, benefit was derived from a powder, composed of nitre, camphire, emetic
tartar and opium, given in pretty large doses, and repeated frequently.
Remission, at least a great abatement in the violence of symptoms, was
generally the consequence of this plan of treatment; particularly, if assisted
by the plentiful dilution of watery liquors, by warm bathing and large glysters
of simple water. It is superfluous to mention the use of blisters in cases of
local affection; but it will be less expected, that this remedy should be
recommended in fevers, where there is an excess of the general inflammatory
diathesis. -- I can, however, bear testimony to its efficacy. The manner by
which blisters produce their effects, is not yet agreed upon among authors;
neither do I pretend to throw any new light upon the subject; but I would beg
leave to suggest, that the mode of affording relief in the present, at least,
did not seem to be much unlike the effect of local affections, in consequence
of which the violence of fevers is sometimes observed to subside.

I pursued the above method of procuring remission in those fevers, were there
was real inflammatory diathesis prevailing in excess; but it so happened, that
the signs of this diathesis were fallacious, appearing in some instances to be
present, though the real genius of the disease was actually of a different
nature; a circumstance, which occasioned a difference of management in
conducting the method of cure. Excessive evacuations were not only unsafe in
such cases, but in general had not any powerful effects in disposing the
disease to assume a remitting form. Bleeding, however, was often found to be
necessary, though it was seldom requisite to repeat the operation. The good
effects which were observed to follow the use of cathartics, were not in
general very remarkable; yet it was proper, in most instances, to open the body
freely; for which purpose, no form of medicine, with which I am acquainted,
answered better than a solution of salts with a small portion of emetic tartar,
and sometimes with the addition of laudanum. In cases of local pain, blisters
applied near the seat of affection were always of eminent service; and in cases
of general irritability, they were often equally useful, when applied to the
back part of the head and neck. A powder composed of nitre, camphire, emetic
tartar and opium, was likewise employed with success; but the liberal use of
warm bathing, was still more to be depended upon. No person, perhaps, will
refuse consent to the method of proceeding, which I have hitherto recommended;
but when I mention a free and bold use of cold bathing, even in an early stage
of this fever, I do not expect the same concession. To dash cold water on the
head and shoulders of a person in a fever, has an appearance of rashness and
hazard. I can, however, produce the testimony of repeated experience for the
safety of the practice, no less than for its success in procuring remission;
and shall therefore consider it a duty to recommend it warmly to the public.
Wherever it was employed, -- and the cases in which it was tried were numerous,
a calm and equable perspiration, additional tone and vigor, with great
abatement of irritability, were constantly observed to ensue.

The paroxisms and remissions were generally distinct in the beginning of
fevers, where the nervous system was principally affected; but often became
less so, as the disease advanced in its progress; a circumstance which did not
arise oftener from the nature of the complaint, than from the common method of
treatment. Bleeding was often dispensed with in the fevers of the West Indies;
but vomiting and purging were indulged in with freedom. The distinction of
paroxism and remission was sometimes evidently rendered obscure by this
practice; while it was likewise obviously restored again, by the use of wine
and cordials, which excited the powers of life. In this species of disease,
evacuations were seldom necessary; seldom indeed admissible in a great extent.
Bleeding, unless under particular circumstances, was totally improper.
Cathartics were sometimes dangerous, and antimonial vomits often sunk the
patient irrecoverably. Blistering, on the contrary, even at an early period,
was generally of service; as also were opiates, and a judicious use of the warm
bath; but cold bathing with salt water, was, of all others, the remedy of the
most powerful effect. I do not pretend to say, that it absolutely stopped the
course of the fever; but I can say with truth, that it generally restored the
distinction of paroxism and remission, diminished irritability, and imparted a
degree of tone and vigor to the system, which was justly considered as a sign
of safety.

To procure remission in fever, distinguished by a prevalence of the putrescent
tendency, is not in every instance an easy task. A remitting, with marks of
specific putrefaction, is not a disease of common occurrence in Jamaica; but a
fever with signs of putrefactive tendency, mixed with symptoms of great
irritability, or a high decree of malignity, is not altogether rare. From the
complicated nature of the disorder, the indications of cure are often difficult
and perplexed. Bleeding is universally condemned; more, I believe, from theory
than from actual observation. It was, and perhaps still is, a fashionable mode
of reasoning, to impute the languors and other marks of debility, which are
common in the fevers of the West Indies, to a putrescent tendency in the
system. Such symptoms however are in fact more generally the attendants, or
distinguishing signs of fevers, where the nervous system is affected. In such
cases, bleeding is obviously hurtful; in the one of which we now treat, (where
such a disease actually exists,) it is not only a remedy of safety, but of very
eminent service, previous to the application of cold, particularly previous to
cold bathing, which may be used with freedom and boldness. Cold bathing,
indeed, is the remedy on which we must principally depend. There are others
which do good occasionally; but this is the only one I know, which has any very
considerable effect in changing the nature of the disease. There is a general
rule in the practice of medicine, which a requires to be particularly
remembered in those complicated species of fever, viz. that as the indications
of cure are often embarrassed; so the appearances, which principally point to
danger, are first to be attended to; while the plan of cure, which we determine
to be the most proper, must be followed up with vigor and resolution. We ought
always to bear in mind, that in dangerous and difficult cases feeble remedies,
or even powerful ones timidly used, are of little avail. Cold bathing, employed
with timidity, failed of doing good in some instances. I met with no example,
where the boldest use of it did harm. It was seldom, I must again repeat, that
it did not succeed in obviating irritability, in checking the putrescent
tendency, and in imparting to the system that degree of tone and vigor, in
which safety is observed to consist.

The method of procuring remission, in those fevers which were distinguished by
local affections, or irregular determinations to particular parts, was nice,
and sometimes difficult. Bleeding was frequently proper, especially, if there
subsisted at the same time marks of a general inflammatory diathesis: but it
was seldom sufficient wholly to accomplish the business. However, together with
a judicious management of warm bathing, it greatly heightened the good effects
of blisters, the remedy on which the principal dependence was placed. In fevers
which were accompanied with uncommon pain of the head, I have sometimes found
it serviceable to apply cold to the part affected; the feet being at the same
time immersed in warm water, and blood flowing by a large orifice from the arm.
I also frequently observed, that the general fever ran higher, though it
likewise more certainly assumed its proper form, in consequence of bleeding,
blistering, and the removal of local pain. In those fevers, where bilious
appearances were the effect of accidental, irregular determination to the
stomach or liver, the remissions were often obscure: neither did the method of
treatment, which was generally adopted, seem to be well calculated to bring
forth the natural, genuine appearance of the disease. Bilious appearances. it
must be owned, sometimes vanished, while the type of the fever became more
distinct after the exhibition of an emetic or brisk cathartic; yet there is
cause to doubt if this depended on the evacuation of bile. It might be said,
with more truth, perhaps, that the action of the emetic, by exciting the powers
of the stomach and biliary system, effected a change in the irregular
determination, which had formerly taken place to those parts. It was generally
observed, where good effects did not follow the first exhibition of remedies of
this kind, that harm was usually the consequence of a second. Vomiting, in
short, was often rendered continual, and the distinction of paroxism and
remmission was apparently destroyed, in consequence of the operation of violent
emetics. Instructed by repeated examples of their hurtful effects, I at last
scarcely ever employed antimonial vomits; even the safest kind were used with
caution. If it appeared, at any time, that the action of vomiting would be
serviceable, camomile tea, or at farthest a few grains of ipecacuana were
generally thought sufficient for the purpose. When this business was finished,
a draught of cordial stimulating liquor, which had a tendency to promote a
diaphoresis, was next administered. By this mode of treatment, especially if a
blister was applied at the same time to the region of the liver, I have the
satisfaction to add, that the bilious appearances for the most part vanished,
and, if care was taken to support a determination to the surface, seldom ever
returned during the continuance of the fever. Different seasons, an^ different
situations of country were particularly distinguished by corresponding
determinations. Thus a tendency to the bowels and biliary system was chiefly
remarkab^e in the autumnal months, and in low and champaign countries; the head
and breast were oftener affected in the winter months, and in hilly situations.

I observed before, that it is the first object in the cure of fevers, to
remove those circumstances, or accidental states of the body, which hinder the
disease from assuming its proper form. Thus, to procure remission, appeared
universally to be the first business in the cure of the fever of Jamaica; the
next, and a very important one, is to prevent the return of the paroxism. If we
knew a remedy, which could be depended upon to accomplish this purpose with
certainty, the cure of the disease would be easy; but the Peruvian bark, which
almost infallibly stops the course of intermitting fevers in all countries,
does not seem so indisputably to possess the same power over the usual endemic
of the West Indies.

Having mentioned the different methods of treatment, by which it was attempted
to procure remission in the endemic fever of Jamaica, and having likewise
edeavoured to ascertain how far we can go in preventing the return of
paroxisms, it only remains to detail some particulars in the management of the
plan of cure, where the different species of fevers were distinguished by a
peculiar train of symptoms. It was observed in general, that fevers, with a
moderate degree of inflammatory diathesis, seldom required our interference.
The disease, after a certain duration, terminated usually of its own accord,
After I had gained some experience of the general course of fevers, I usually
allowed those, in which I did not perceive marks of danger, to go on their own
way, that I might better discover those periods, at which the disease was
naturally disposed to terminate. Thus where the paroxisms continued regular and
distinct, the remissions perfect, and the vigor unimpaired, nothing material
was attempted to be done. On the contrary, where the paroxisms were long, or
less distinctly formed, with signs which indicated an approaching affection of
the nervous system, bark, and other remedies, which excited and supported the
powers of life, were given with the earliest opportunity. Changes from
inflammatory diathesis to nervous affection, were observed to happen frequently
on the fifth day. Bark, and such remedies as imparted tone and vigor to the
system, were given without delay; and the disease terminated for the most part
on the ninth. In those fevers, which were of a complicated nature, in which
signs of inflammatory, nervous, or putrid diathesis were variously mixed,
blisters, applied in different manners, opiates, bathing and antispasmodics
were often materially useful; but it would be arrogance to attempt to describe
rules for the particular mode of application, which must vary more or less in
almost every case, and which only can be learned from actual observation. There
is one rule, however, in the treatment of fevers, of which the practitioner
ought never to lose fight, viz. that wherever it was necessary to interfere, it
is only the most vigorous decision which can do good. We cannot, as is said
before, depend with certainty upon bark as a remedy possessed of the power of
absolutely cutting short the cause of the fever of Jamaica; yet wherever the
fevers of that country discovered signs of nervous affection, I do not know any
thing in the materia medica, from which such beneficial effects may be
expected. If it did not actually stop the disease, it was eminently serviceable
in conducting it to a favorable issue. Opium, wine, snake-root, etc. were
often observed to heighten its good qualities: but the particular use of such
additions can only be regulated by circumstances. Wine has been freely
recommended in fevers with symptoms of nervous affection; and it must be owned,
that its good effects were considerable, not only in real debility, but
wherever the cause of the disease acted by weakening or depressing the powers
of life. Wine was likewise observed to be more useful in cases of mobility and
weakness, than in cases of stupor and suspension of the nervous influence. But
though it is actually a remedy of great value, its virtues appear to have been
greatly enhanced. In many instances it was not proper in any quantity: in some,
it was only proper in a small quantity, and in very few, perhaps, could we
allow of the quantities which are given in common practice. At one time I
carried the use of wine in the nervous fever of Jamaica, to a very great
l^ngth; but I afterward learnt, that a third part of the quantity would have
probably answered the purpose better. Though it undoubtedly is an useful
cordial and tonic, it is still inferior to cool air, and particularly to cold
bathing.

It is an opinion, which seems to date its origin from Hippocrates, that bile
vitiated in quality, or redundant in quantity, deserves to be considered as the
cause of the species of disease distinguished by the name of ardent fever: and
it must be confessed, that the frequent appearance of bilious discharges, in
the fevers of hot climates, gives countenance to the supposition. From the
frequency of this symptom, perhaps, the practitioners of the West Indies
adopted the idea, that bile is the cause of the fever of that country; while
the method of cure, which they usually pursue, has served to confirm them in
their error. Prepossessed with an opinion of the prevalence of bile, they
administer cathartics and emetics with a liberal hand. If bile appears in the
first evacuations, they consider it sufficient authority to proceed; if it does
not appear, they conclude that the remedy has not been of sufficient force to
reach the seat of the disease; and therefore persist in their intentions, till
the effect is at last produced. It is well known, that a repetition of
cathartics and emetics seldom fails to produce the appearances of a bilious
disease. Hence this symptom of fever, and all the dangers which follow it, are
frequently the work of our own hands. That this is the case, appears from a
relation of the method of cure, which I usually adopted in such fevers as were
distinguished by symptoms of this nature at an early period. Instead of
encouraging the vomiting, or promoting the evacuation of bile downwards, I
generally did every thing in my power to moderate, or even to check it. --
Sometimes I prescribed an emetic; but it was more with a view to excite the
action of the stomach and biliary system, than to promote an evacuation of
redundant or vitiated humors. After the operation of vomiting was finished, a
blister was usually applied to the region of the liver, and such a plan of cure
was pursued, as supported a determination to the surface of the body, and gave
tone and vigor to the stomach and general powers of life. By this mode of
treatment, bilious appearances vanished speedily, or ceased to be troublesome;
while by the repeated use of emetics and cathartics, they generally continued
long and often prevailed throughout the course of the disease. We may thus, I
hope, conclude, without any unnatural inference, that there appears to be
danger in encouraging those tumults, which have been usually considered as the
efforts of nature. If they are in fact efforts, no person can pretend to deny,
that they are generally precarious; nay, that they are often the immediate
causes of death.

I have now detailed the particular steps of the method of cure, which I
adopted in the remitting fever of Jamaica; a disease which I treated, in some
respects, on a different plan, and, if self-love has not blinded me, with more
success than the generality of those practitioners whom I had the opportunity
of knowing. I treated the disease with success; but I dare not affirm, as some
have done, that under this method, of treatment, I never lost a patient. I
proceeded, indeed, with dissidence and distrust of the powers of the medical
art; venturing no farther than to support the general powers of life, and to
obviate symptoms of a fatal tendency. Many pretend to cut short the course of
fevers, by the force of a single remedy; but the means do not appear very
obvious, and the effect was often precarious. I grant, that it is sometimes in
the power of the practitioner to exterminate the cause of disease by forcible
means, or to destroy a certain aptitude of constitution, in which this disease
may be said to consist; but I must at the same time observe, that there is
danger likewise, least he extinguished life. The bark, which has been so much
celebrated for checking the course of fevers, though generally safe, was seldom
effectual: others are frequently dangerous. During the time that I remained in
the West Indies, I observed attentively the state of body, which usually
attended recovery; as likewise those appearances which preceded, and apparently
were the causes of death. Tone and vigor, or a moderate degree of the state of
body distinguished by the name of inflammatory diathesis, without local
affection, afforded the surest signs of safety; general failure of the powers
of life, or irregular determinations to organs of importance, were the most
certain appearances of danger. Thus, after obviating particular symptoms of a
fatal tendency, it was the principal indication to support the general powers
of life, or to excite the tone and vigor of the system. This was best
accomplished by bark, wine, cool air, and above all, by cold bathing, which I
am induced to consider as the most important remedy in the cure of the fevers
of the West Indies; and, perhaps, in the cure of the fevers of all hot
climates. Though it might not absolutely cut short the course of the disease;
yet it seldom failed to change the fatal tendency of its nature."

The experienced LIND informs us, in his 5th edition, that, "When an European
is taken ill of a fever (in hot countries) during a season of prevailing
sickness in those countries, it is necessary to endeavor, by the most
efficacious means, to bring it as soon as possible to a remission, that the
bark may be administered without delay.

With this view, the physician is to consider how far the violence of the fever
in its first attack, will admit of bleeding; but he must remember that this
operation is in general to be used with great caution, and the repetition of it
with still greater in those climates.

The chief objects of attention in all such fevers, are the contents of the
stomach and intestines. Upon the patient's first complaint, and during the
first hours of the fever, while perhaps he is only chilly, or complains of
alternate fits of heat and cold, the stomach and intestines should be
immediately cleansed, either by a vomit, a purge, or by an oily purging
clyster: after which the patient may immediately take an antimonial draught,
and repeat it every six hours.

: Sal. C. C. grs. x. Suc. Lemon. iij. vel. qs. ad saturationem; Aq. Minth. pip.
simp. x. Vin. Antim. guttas x. ad xl. (vel. potius in vicem vini antimonialis,
Tartari Emetici quartam partem grani.) Misceantur.

It is to be observed, that according to the state of the stomach, the dose of
this, or of other antimonial medicines, is to be increased or diminished,
taking care that they do neither irritate or offend the stomach: to prevent
which, especially if there be a tendency to retching or vomiting, a few doses
of tinctura thebaica must be added to each draught; or if violent, the
antimonial may be omitted, and the opiate be given in a full dose.

If the antimonial medicines after thoroughly cleansing the bowels, produce a
sweat, the patient will probably have an intermission of the fever, or at least
a mitigation of its symptoms, in twenty-four hours; when the bark if no symptom
forbids, is immediately to begiven.

The next day a return of the fever is to be expected, if a sufficient quantity
of bark has not been taken. In this case the antimonial medicines are to be
repeated during the continuance of the fever; or if the headache be violent,
and the patient threatened either with a delirium or coma, a blister should be
applied to the back, and recourse must be again had to the bark, as soon as the
fever remits; to which (if he is much weakened by the preceding fits) some
snake-root or camphire may be added.

If the antimonial medicines have not caused plentiful discharges by stool,
(which they commonly do) a purge may be given occasionally in the absence of
the fever.

For this purpose, a solution of salts in a strong decoction of cortex, is as
palatable as any; copious bilious stools proving frequently salutary and
critical.

A perfect intermission, the most desirable crisis, being by these means
obtained, the bark must be plentifully administered in order to obtain a
perfect cure."

EXTRACTS from DR. FORDYCE's This author has given the most perfect description
of fever that has ever been published. W. C.
DISSERTATIONS on FEVERS, published in 1794 -- 5.
"A fever is a disease which no knowledge of the structure of the human body,
as far as it is at present known, no knowledge of the properties of the fluids,
as far as they have hitherto been investigated, no knowledge of the action of
the moving parts, as far as they have hitherto been observed, could give the
smallest ground of supposition, that this disease could never have existed. In
showing its history, therefore, observation of the disease is to be entirely
adhered to, without any reasoning why, or how any thing in it takes place, or
without any theory, as it has been called. It would be just as fruitless, at
least for any useful purpose, as if a geographer were not to describe a
country, but reason why a hill should be placed in one region, a valley in an
other; why one shore is rocky, another sandy; instead of actually giving the
situation of the hills and valleys, the rockyness or sandyness of the shores.

A great many more fevers begin between eight in the morning and eight in the
evening, than take place between eight in the evening and eight in the morning.
There is a remarkable difference; according to the author's observation, at
least ten fevers take place between eight in the morning and eight in the
evening, for one that takes place between eight in the evening and eight in the
morning.

It is to be remembered, that the history of fever should be given as it arises
from observation, and not from any supposition. It is not therefore pretended
to be understood, why this difference of proportion should take place. Some
have supposed that the sun's passage over the meridian has an effect, but there
does not appear to be any ground for this, because the number of first attacks
of fever, which take place at noon, or near it, are not remarkably greater than
those which take place two or three hours sooner or later. In short, fever is a
disease, the whole of the appearances of which have been in no ways accounted
for.

It has often been supposed that the redundancy of bile constituted an
essential part of the attack of fever; whereas it is a mere accident. If the
pancreatic juice had been blue, and had any particular taste or smell, and the
bile had been colorless, insipid, inodorous, or as much so as the pancreatic
juice is, in that case, whatever has been said of the redundancy of bile as en
essential part of the attack of fever, would have been said of the pancreatic
juice. It is clear that no experiment hitherto made public has shown that any
bile was ever contained in blood vessels, excepting in case of jaundice, and
that, therefore, there can be no redundancy of bile, excepting as much as can
be contained in the biliary ducts, and gall bladder. Much more than this is
thrown out by twenty times in the attack of a simple fever in half an hour.
Therefore, the bile thrown out is a consequence of the sickness, exactly in the
same manner as it is a consequence of the sickness arising from the agitation
in a ship at sea, and is not at all to be taken farther than as a mere accident
in the attack of fever. The loss of appetite increases, and the nausea and
vomiting take place so instantly at the beginning of fever, that they can
hardly be conceived otherwise than as an affection of the stomach itself.

All the causes, to which fevers can be ascribed from observations, are,
certain substances applied to the body, as floating in the at^osphere, or
applied in a fluid form to some part of the body. Sudden exposure to cold.
Moisture in the atmosphere. Moisture of the clothes, or other covering of the
body. Indigestible food, or other substances affecting the intestinal canal.
Sudden rising of the passions of the mind attended with anxiety. But it happens
frequently, that fevers arise without any of these circumstances having been
known to precede them. They are then to be referred to marsh effluvia or to
contagious but invisible matter.

Of the particular secreted fluids which have been thought from their
redundancy, or alteration of properties, to be causes of fever, bile has been
the most frequent.

The ancients, whose knowledge of the properties of the matter of the body was
very superficial, and depended solely on the external view, on which hypotheses
were founded, supposed that the fluids consisted of red blood, phl^m, bile, and
black bile, as is well known to those who have looked into their writings, and
that to a redundancy, or alteration of the qualities of these, diseases were
principally owing, and this idea has continued down to the present day. Bile is
conspicuous from its color and taste, its color is varied by substances that
it meets with in the intestines. This difference of appearance has made it be
considered still of great importance in disease. But modern enquirers have
shown that it is a fluid secreted only by the liver, is not at all contained in
the blood vessels, but formed out of the substances which constitute the blood.
There cannot, therefore, be any redundancy of bile in the blood vessels because
generally there is no bile contained in them at all. Bile may, however, and
sometimes does get into the blood vessels. When it does, being capable of
passing through all the secretory organs, it soon shows itself in all the
secreted fluids, by giving them a color, and converting them into a yellow
dye, and by tinging all the surfaces of the body that are exposed to the eye,
of a yellow color. When this happens, fever is never known to be produced, or
to have followed, or taken place more frequently than in any other state of the
body. Bile, therefore, when it does get into the blood vessels, never can be
accounted a cause of fever.

When the secretions of those glands which open into the intestinal canal are
increased from any cause, the secretion of bile is increased along with that of
the pancreatic juice, mucous, etc. When these increase considerably, they are
evacuated upwards or downwards. Bile being the only conspicuous one, from its
color and taste, has often been attended to while the others have been
neglected. There is ^o evidence that in these cases the liver secrets a larger
proportion of bile than the other glands of the intestines their fluids.
However that may be, apparently there is a great quantity of bile thrown out.

There is no instance upon record, nor none the author ever knew, where fever
more frequently took place after such increased secretion and evacuation than
in any other circumstance. In that sickness, for example, which is produced by
the agitation of a ship, vast quantities of bile are often secreted, and
evacuated, yet there is no instance of fever taking place; in consequence
therefore, bile getting into the blood vessels, or secreted in any quantity,
cannot be admitted as a cause of fever. When so much has been said by many
authors of great eminence about bilious fever, is their authority to be thrown
aside entirely? Certainly no authority but that which rises from observation
and experiment can ever be allowed in true science. It would be great pity to
rob patients of their consolation in being bilious or nervous, but medicine is
a science which never can be comprehended without much study, considerably more
than can ever be given to it by persons following other occupations.

It happens not uncommonly, that there is no crisis takes place after the first
attack of a fever, but a second attack takes place before the first paroxism is
much diminished, so that the disease at first puts on the appearance of a
continued fever. In this case, the subsequent attacks are often in the fore
part of the day, or if they should come on at the time of the ordinary returns
of a continued fever, which are in the evening, they observe the tertian type;
in either of which cases, we may expect in a tertian period or two, first an
imperfect crisis, followed gradually with more perfect ones, till all the
crises are at last complete. When the crises are very imperfect at first, they
almost always grow gradually more perfect, until it often happens, that they
become so perfect, as not to leave behind the least vestige of the disease.

In a temperate or cold country, when the patient is strong, and there are only
slight remissions at the beginning of an intermittent, or it puts on the
appearance of a continued fever, excepting that the exacerbations do not take
place in the evening, it is not necessary to give great nourishment, yet some
is absolutely necessary. The Greek physicians appear plainly not to have
allowed any food or drink whatever on the first days. This seems improper, for
if no watery fluid were exhibited, the proportion of fluids in the body would
probably be too much diminished by the vapor which flies off from the lungs
and other external surfaces of the body, and by the necessary evacuations.
Accumulation of sea salt could not take place if neither food nor drink were
thrown into the body; but common sal ammoniac and phosphoric ammoniac are
continually forming by processes which seem rather to decompose than to produce
blood or other fluids, and would be accumulated. Yet these might not be
detrimental, as water might be formed by the same decomposition, so as to
render their solutions equally dilute.

Neither the solids nor fluids of a living body are subject to putrefaction;
yet some portion of the fluids or solids, or both, seem to verge so near
putrefaction, as to be converted into mucilaginous matters which are constantly
washed off by watery secretions. Were the quantity of water diminished, they
might not be carried off, but go still farther on to putrefaction, producing
salts and vapors which might be pernicious. On this account it may be
necessary to throw watery fluids in this case of the disease into the
blood vessels.

When the remissions and intermissions of the fever are very imperfect, or when
the disease at the beginning puts on the appearance of a continued fever, only
that the exacerbations do not take place in the evening, perhaps it is not
necessary that much chyle should be formed, because when the intermissions
become more perfect, there will be time for food of greater nourishment to be
digested, without interfering with the paroxisms of the disease; nourishment
may therefore be out of the question at this time of the disease.

Remarks on those remedies which appear not to have a beneficial effect.

"The first of these is evacuation by bleeding; a powerful remedy in many
diseases, but in a regular tertian intermittent, it has not the least effect in
preventing the paroxism from taking place, rendering it more regular, inducing
more perfect crisis, or rendering the intermissions more perfect.

There seems to be a great error in the view of remedies employed in fever;
practitioners frequently making no distinction between those used to cure the
disease itself, and those employed to remove accidents that have arisen in it,
although such distinctions are extremely necessary to be made. If, for example,
in the course of a tertian, a pleurisy should happen to arise, taking away a
quantity of blood would be a powerful remedy for the pleurisy, but although the
pleurisy were removed, the intermittent tertian would go through its course
just as if no blood had been taken away, excepting that the patient would be
rendered weaker.

Those who are uninformed in medicine expect that diseases are to be cured by
violent remedies and suddenly. The attention of bystanders is often drawn to
practitioners who employ strong acrid medicines. This has frequently induced
those practitioners who are least acquainted with the real history of disease
to use the most violent medicines in their apparent effects, supposing that
they would also be the most efficacious in curing the disease, while
practitioners really well informed, find it often much more proper to leave
diseases to go through their natural course, while they are careful not to let
slip an opportunity of employing a remedy that is efficacious in carrying them
off.

Purgatives have often been employed in regular tertians, with a view to carry
off certain humors supposed to occasion the disease. But it has been found on
the other hand that purgatives have re-produced the disease, after it has been
carried off by other remedies, and that excepting in so far as they prevent
costiveness, and the use of stimulating ones, to assist the action of sudorific
remedies, they tend to render the disease longer in its paroxisms and the
crises less perfect,

Evacuation, either by bleeding or purging, is hurtful, in so far as it weakens
the patient, and renders him less able to bear the repetitions of the
paroxisms, and on this account are improper, although not so highly prejudicial
as in continued fever, for in the intermissions there is time for food to be
digested, so as to replenish the blood vessels."

An ABSTRACT of DR. PATTERSON's REMARKS, published at Londonderry, in the year
1795.
"SEVERAL authors of considerable credit, both ancient and modern, have
maintained with Dr. Rush, that malignant distempers are caused by the effluvia
from corrupted vegetables; and this opinion they adopted from a belief, that
these kind of effluvia, acting as a ferment, produced a putrescent state in the
fluids of the human body. But it appears from experiment, that the vapor of
putrefying vegetables, instead of being a septic, is a strong antiseptic
matter, and preserves animal substances by the fixed air which it contains
Alexander's Experimental Enquiry, chap. v. -- Dobson's Medical Commentary on
Fixed Air, sect. v.
.

It has, indeed, been properly remarked, that ridiculous, if not dangerous
doctrines have been proclaimed, founded on deductions from some of these
experiments, namely, That, in the time of a prevailing pestilence, dead animals
should be thrown into the streets and roads, to fill the atmosphere with a
putrid smell; and that in an epidemic season, nothing is better or more
salutary, than for one to smell, three times a day, either a necessary-house or
a sheep-house Alexander's Experimental Enquiry, chap. vii. -- Although putrid
matter, as Dr. Alexander shows, will preserve other substances from
putrefaction, and although the air proceeding from such matter be noxious to
the lungs (Priestly on Air, vol. 2, p. 254, et seq.) yet I do not admit that it
is the parent of pure fever.
.

The effluvium, which exhales from a mass of putrefying vegetables, consists in
a mixture of fixed air, inflammable air, vital air, and phlogisticated air. To
this mixture of various airs, some part of the principles of the plant, namely,
the oil and the acid, are superadded; being not totally decomposed, although
the vegetable itself be so, but merely volatilized by the putrefactive process.
Inflammable air abounds in those places where vegetables are rotting in heaps;
and marshes furnish it in great quantity, from whence it has been characterised
by the name of marsh inflammable air; but, in the latter case, it is extremely
liable to decomposition, and to pass into the state of phlogisticated air Now
called by the French chemists Azote, or nitrogen gas.

W. C.


.

This ready decomposition of inflammable air is particularly observable in the
diminution of common air by phlogistic processes, in which a true inflammable
air is first produced, and in its nascent state, as Priestly terms it, is
immediately decomposed, previous to the phlogistication of common air -- But
for the manner in which this is accomplished, I must refer the reader to
Priestly's Works on Air, vol. ii. p. 266, and the succeeding pages; and in the
1st vol. p. 127, it is shown, that the volatile effluvium emitted from
putrefying substances is phlogiston, loaded with that matter which contributes
to affect the nostrils with the sense of smell. Hence we may conclude, that the
exhalations from putrid vegetables, and from marshes, which may be supposed to
injure the atmosphere, and extend their influence to any distance, consist
principally of phlogisticated air.

Besides this product of plants in general, certain kinds yield, during
putrefaction, a particular sort of air, of a very foetid smell, resembling the
hepatic odor. This species of vegetables is found to contain sulphur and
volatile alkali, which uniting, form a sulphurous ammoniacal air, inflammable
and highly offensive; furnished plentifully by onions, radishes, etc. and still
more abundantly by cabbages De La Metherie sur l'Air Pur, etc. vol. ii. p, 150,
51, 52. -- Priestly on Air, vol. i. part. i. sect. iv.
.

The observation of Lancisi, that steeped flax and hemp are productive of what
he calls a camp-fever, has been copied by many writers as well as Dr. Rush. It
is an observation, however, which should be received with caution. For although
the effluvia are extremely offensive, in this country, where prodigious
quantities of flax are watered annually, and in warm weather, I never could
trace our fevers to this source. The typhoid A remitting fever with nervous
symptoms.
fever, it is true, to which this kingdom is liable, appears to be most prone
to commence about the same time of the year. But the flax-water cannot
reasonably be accused of procreating the disease; because, many years ago, when
the culture of flax was little known in Ireland, the fever was observed to
arise about the same season Boote's Natural History of Ireland, chap. 24. p. 99.
.

In Germany, people seem to concern themselves very little about the danger
supposed to arise from the effluvia of steeped flax. Nor do I find, as far as I
have been able to search on the point, that this kind of effluvia has been
charged with generating malignant diseases in Egypt, a country early noted for
its great cultivation of flax, and remarkable for a hot climate. On the
contrary, the pestilential diseases, to which Egypt is obnoxious, have been
imputed to other causes, namely, to the annual inundation of the Nile, and the
hot winds from the deserts Is it any wonder that Dr. Lind, was mistaken in the
causes of the malignant yellow fever, when he erred so egregiously respecting
the cause of the plague at Grand Cairo, which he has ascribed to the conjuct
effects of the inundation of the Nile and the hot winds from the deserts? W. C.
.

As to the celebrated instance of putrid cabbages related by Rogers, by which
so many writers have supported their hypotheses, it should be considered, that
when a malignant fever breaks out in a seminary, workhouse, or manufactory, the
persons interested are at great pains to find out some pretense for fixing its
origin on another cause than that to which it is really due; and generally
pitch upon something known ^o have emitted a disagreeable smell in the
neighborhood.

Another source of illusion is, that in our endeavors to account for
epidemical disorders, we are apt to lay hold of every perceptible difference
which we discover in the air, or situation of places that are attacked, from
those that are free; and often, without duly examining and considering these
diversities, conclude that we have detected the cause, which is perhaps
involved in inextricable difficulty.

It does not appear, that in the West Indies, the utmost care in clearing and
draining swampy grounds, nor the setting in of cool winds, will prevent the
recurrence of the yellow fever amongst troops. For we find from Dr. Chisholm
that, although the best means were used, yet they did not preclude a fever of
this kind, which began in Grenada in September, from returning the December
following, with a^l its formidable and destructive symptoms. Neither does it
appear, that it undations producing marshes ought to be accused of exciting the
yellow fever; because Dr. Balfour's observations show us, that this disorder
occurs at Banaris and other places in Bengal, not less than three hundred miles
distant from the reach of tides.

These are confirmed by other observations: We find, from the 9th volume of the
Transactions of the Batavian Society, that a fever, which carried off nearly
one seventh part of the inhabitants, prevailed in Rotterdam, after draining
some marshes in the neighborhood of that city. and Dr. Jackson says, that the
fever at Savanea La-Mar, in Jamaica, which is situated in a level country, and
partially surrounded by a morass, was more mild in its symptoms, than in most
other parts of the island. He, therefore, thinks that the neighborhood of salt
marshes is not so prejudicial to health as has been imagined; on the contrary,
he believes it to be a healthy ^^^^^tion, especially respecting its disposition
to generate ^ebrile affection.

Of the effluvia from putrefying animal substances.
IF Dr. Ru^h be earnest in imputing the generation of fever to the exhalations
from putrefying vegetables, he is on the other hand disposed to think, "it is
much less common for the effluvia of putrid animal matters to produce fevers.
How seldom do we hear of them in the neighborhood of slaughter-houses, or of
the work shops of skinners or curriers? Account of the yellow fever, p. 25, 26.
"

Together with the several kinds of air which the exhalations from putrid
vegetable matter contains, that from animal putrefaction is composed of a
species of alastic fluids, called ammoniacal air and sulphurous ammoniacal
air. These airs are imflammable and very foetid; and phlogisticate the
atmosphere at least equally as the effluvium from vegetable putrefaction. They
also contain certain volatilized substances, denominated oily, which modify
their influence, according to the nature of the matter from whence they
proceed. And although they are active, and emit a considerable stench, yet I so
far concur with Dr. Rush, that I cannot assent to the doctrine of some writers,
who conceive, that they constitute the miasmata which generate contagious
diseases. Like putrid vegetable effluvia, I believe they are proper vehicles of
contagion; and, therefore, are not principles, but accessories only. Or, in the
language of the systematic, to whom Dr. Rush seems attached, every impurity of
air diminishes its stimulus; and consequently impure air, or air blended with
impure matters, without doubt debilitates, and produces asthenic diathesis,
which prepares the body for the operation of contagion.

That slaughter-houses yield a considerable quantity of putrid animal
effluvium, is certain; especially in places circumstanced as Cork is, in this
kingdom. It is built on islands situated in a deep valley, and surrounded by
several branches of the river Lee. These islands were naturally marshy, and
subject to be overflowed by spring tides, until the ground was raised by art.
The rest of the marshes, both on the east and west, are periodically covered by
those tides; and, in the intervals, putrid vapors are exhaling from them.
Continued ridges of hills, on which the suburbs are built, bound this vale on
the north and south.

In the north and south suburbs, the slaughter-houses are numerous; the blood
and odure from which are received in vast pits, where they are suffered to
putrefy, and emit such noisome steams as corrupt even the most wholesome
breezes that pass over the city; and, upon great rains, these c^ss-pools
discharge, by the declivities of the hills, their foetid contents into the
river. Nor is this source of impure air confined to these places; for great
quantities of filth and offals crowd the streets, and particularly the close
confined alleys and lanes where that description of people reside, whose
circumstances are peculiarly adapted to foster and propagate febrile contagion.
Rogers on Epidemic Diseases, p. 36, 37.


That we seldom hear of fevers being particularly prevalent in the
neighborhood of the work-shops of skinners and curriers, and, I would add, in
that of tan-yards, is not at all surprising. The processes, which the hides
undergo in the hands of the tanner, prevent the putrid fermentation; and,
consequently, the generation of that kind of effluvium favorable to the action
of contagious miasmata, is primarily opposed. The smell issuing from tan-yards
(which by the bye, very much resembles that from steeped flax) however
offensive, seems to be very different from that which is emitted from
putrefying animal substances; and probably is owing to principles which do not
adequately phlogisticate the air. If this be the case with respect to
tan-yards, certainly the work-shops of those tradesmen, skinners and curriers,
who receive the skins almost entirely freed from the corruptible parts, will be
still less chargeable with being the source of contaminating effluvia.

Several facts tend to prove, that very foul animal effluvia will not excite
fever, without the concurrence of specific contagion. Two men traveling on
foot in the county of Kent, were assaulted near a town on the road with an
extremely loathsome stench, which they imagined arose from animal putrefaction,
and which continued to offend them for the space of two hours. The sky was
clear without the least cloud; and, from the direction of the wind, this vapor
could neither come from the unwholesome air of Sheppey island, nor from the
muddy banks of the river Thames or Medway, nor from the Rhumney marshes. Yet
these men neither grew sick at the time, nor experienced any future
inconvenience from this foetid exhalation.

The offensive smell, proceeding even from the excrementitious discharges of
patients confined with non-febrile diseases, does not occasion pure fever. In a
bilious colic, the evacuations both upwards and downwards, have been so
intolerably offensive, as to produce stomach sickness and retchings in one
case, and giddiness, vomiting, and tremor, in another; yet fixed fewer does not
appear to have been the consequence in either.

Many instances have occurred, in which thousands of dead bodies have been left
to putrefy on the field of battle, without causing putrid fever; and it is well
known, that in no case has the origin of this disease been traced to the
effluvia of subjects in a dissecting room. Nor have fevers been observed to
originate, or to rage more severely, in houses surrounding graveyards, in the
middle of large towns, though the stench of the bodies accumulated in such
receptacles, is often intolerably offensive.

In the cases which have been brought to show, that infectious effluvia arise
from putrefying bodies, it does not appear that they produced any symptoms
resembling those of pestilential fever; on the contrary, they acted by direct
stimulus, exciting inflammatory complaints; from which it may be inferred, that
they are essentially different from febrile contagion.

I may now fairly conclude, that pestilential fever is not generated by marsh
miasma, by the effluvia from stagnant water, nor by the exhalations from putrid
vegetable nor animal substances.

That the yellow fever at Philadelphia did not arise from the effluvium of the
rotten coffee, is an inference strongly corroborated by the facts and reasoning
contained in the preceding section.

But that the disease was really imported from the West Indies by means of
three vessels, the ^melia, Sans Culottes, and Flora, appears to be rendered
almost certain from the judgment and accuracy with which it was traced to its
former source. It was at first confined to a few persons in that part of
Water-street contiguous to the suspected vessels, and from thence was
propagated to other parts of the city, proceeding with the greatest violence
through its proper channels -- close unventilated lanes and alleys.

The College of Physicians, three only excepted, confirms this opinion. "No
instance," say they, "has ever occurred of the disease called the yellow fever,
havin^ been generated in this city, or in any other parts of the United States,
as far as we know; but there have been frequent instances of i^s having been
imported, not only into this, but into other parts of North America, and
prevailing there for a certain period of time; and from the rise, progress, and
nature of the malignant fever which began to prevail here about the beginning
of last ^ugust, and extended itself gradually over a great part of the city, we
are of opinion, that this dise^se was imported into Philadelphia by some
vessels arriving in the port after the middle of July. Letter from the College
of physicians in answer to one from governor (...), dated November 26th. 1793.
"

This declaration of the College, if it required any support, is materially
strengthened by the testimony even of one of the dissentients, Dr. Redman. the
president. For we are told by Mr. Carey, that from this physician's notes it
appears, that, when the yellow fever occurred in Philadelphia, in 1762, it was
introduced by a mariner, who arrived ill with it from the Havannah, and who,
having taken lodging, communicated the disease to the family where he resided,
from whence it spread by contagion to other parts of the city.

The citizens, therefore, (notwithstanding what Dr. Rush and others of the
faculty endeavored to inculcate) having good grounds to believe, that, on the
late occa^ion, the malady was of foreign original, could not be actuated, as
the Dr. alleges, by mere prejudice.

Moreover, on the presumption that the fever was engendered by the effluvia
from either vegetable or animal substances putrefying upon the wharfs, how are
we to explain its appearing in Kensington, where those miasmata could not reach
undiluted, about the same time that Dr. Rush was called to visit Dr. Hodge's
child near the supposed cause of infection? -- On such a presumption, the
cotemporary visitation of the disease in Kensington and Water-street is
inexplicable. But on the ground of its being imported from the West Indies,
that occurrence may be accounted for in a satisfactory manner, by alleging that
some of the sailors, passengers, or articles from tainted vessels made their
way to Kensington very soon after their arrival in port. The fact indeed is,
that some Danish sailors and other persons, who had been in the neighborhood
of the infected places, carried, the fever to that village; and, that these
people caught the disease by contagion, we must continue to believe, until we
have better reasons for ascribing its origin to the damaged coffee, than those
we are yet furnished with on the affirmative side of the question.

The same opinion is entertained by a well-known and justly celebrated
professor, Dr. Duncan, who is very conversant in medical inquiry, and who
writes thus: "Indeed, when we consider, that it is on all hands allowed, that
the disease after making its appearance, was propagated only by contagion, it
seems much more probable, that the contagion itself was imported, than that it
originated in Philadelphia; especially when we reflect, that at the time of its
first appearance in that city, and for many months before, it had raged with
great severity in different West India islands, from whence there were frequent
arrivals at Philadelphia."

Nay, further -- In the histories of the yellow fever, furnished by the best
authors, we find included the same symptoms, as those which Dr. Rush accounts
characteristic of the disease The authors here alluded to are, Sir J. Pringle;
the two Linds; Dr. Rouppe, whose narrative Lind reckons full, clear, and
masterly; Dr. Bruce, who was a native of Barbados, and whose account is
original; Drs. Clark, Hunter, Blane, and Curtin.
. We find the flow pulse, called by him the sulky, and by one of his pupils the
undescribable pulse -- we find the indications of determination to the head --
we find the bilious affections -- we find costiveness -- we find childhood not
exempt -- and we find the peculiar rapidity of progress. Can we, then, at all
doubt the identity of the Philadelphia fever with that which prevails in the
West Indies? -- And if the same, why might it not have been imported from these
islands into that city?

The great difficulty, or in general the impossibility, of tracing the
contagious stream to the particular spring from whence it issues, has caused
much confusion and contrariety of opinion respecting the operation of
infectious effluvia. Dr. Rush, for instance, imputes the germination of the
Philadelphia fever to exhalations from putrid vegetable or animal substances;
whilst he attributes its successive production to the effects of contagion. But
an infectious, or morbid effluvium, emitted from the living body, must contain
some elementary principle, differing from any composing that which arises out
of dead vegetable or animal matter. This being the case, to say that miasma and
contagion produce one and the same disease, would be saying that two dissimilar
causes, acting on the like subjects, bring forth a similar effect; which would
be alleging a physical absurdity.

On the contrary, as there is good reason for supposing pure fever to be an
idiophatic disease, engendered by its own proper cause, which cause must
consequently be uniform; and, as the epidemic under consideration is evidently
a pure fever; it follows, that it must have originated from an infectious fomes
derived from a febrile system. A different opinion leads to the diversification
of fevers, which has done infinite mischief, particularly amongst the troops in
the West Indies in the last war. See Robertson's Observations and Essay on
Fevers; and Reide on the Diseases of the Army.
In this particular, we derive considerable support from Dr. Rush's book, p.
40; for it is there maintained, that the proximate cause of the yellow fever,
and of all other fevers, is the same. The identity of the proximate cause,
then, being admitted, fever must consequently be a primary disease of a
specific nature. That the bilious remitting fever, in whatever part of the
world it takes place, is radically the same, Dr. Gardner thinks manifest from
numerous observations; and Dr. Cullen seems confident, that in every species of
contagious fever, except the exanthematous, the contagion is essentially one
matter. Gardner on the Animal economy, sect. viii. p. 350 and seq. -- Cullen's
first lines, vol. i. chap. ii. parag. 83. -- And Dr. Rush, p. 217, where we
find Dr. Stevens, whose talents and experience are recorded in the same book,
affirming that contagion is the native source of yellow fever.


Although we can but seldom ascertain the birth place of a spreading contagion,
yet, as researches on this head have been sometimes successful, we may from
thence presume, that zeal and perseverance, in our state of knowledge, would be
attended with farther advantages. With respect to the plague, Sennertus avers,
that whole families and towns have been infected with it, from the venom which
had been pent up in clothes and beds for the space of many years. The variolous
contagion will remain latent even in linen during several weeks, and sometimes
for a number of months. Febrile contagion, which is less investigated, and
which is seemingly a more fugitive thing than either the pestilential or
variolous poison, has been known to reside in a garment several weeks.

Contagion sometimes will adhere with an extraordinary pertinacity even to
seasoned wood Lind on insection.
; for although a sickly vessel has been well fumigated with the vapor of tar,
yet the seeds of a malignant fever have broke out after some time in the same
vessel, and the disease has been thence conveyed into others. And thou h^all
the sick from the tainted vessels were removed -- though these vessels and
crews were kept remarkably well ventilated and clean -- yet the infectious
venom remained long lurking in the timber.

No place is better calculated for discovering the source and progress of
contagion, than the navy. An infectious malady can be more strictly traced in
fleets, or in a number of different ships, than in towns and villages, "as all
the ships which compose a squadron, are under the same influence of diet and
climate, the circumstances of the men being likewise in other respects for the
most part similar." Hence a contagion may often begin in a secret manner, and
spread itself unsuspected over a town or village; while in a fleet of ships its
commencement and extension become more apparent, from its confinement to one or
more vessels.

From the retentive disposition of goods and ships, few people have suffered
oftener than the Philadelphians, by the importation of the contagion of the
yellow fever from the West Indies through those mediums. Along with other
instances on record, I beg leave to call the reader's attention to the
following: "A gentleman dying at Barbodoes (some years before 1761) his wearing
apparel and linen, packed up in a chest, were sent to his friends at
Philadelphia, where, upon opening the chest containing those tainted vestures,
the family was taken ill; and the clothes being unluckily hung abroad to be
aired, they presently diffused the contagion of this yellow fever over that
town; by which the gentleman who furnishes me with this relation," says Lind,
"was an unhappy sufferer, and of which fever two hundred died The danger to
which they are manifestly exposed from this s^^^ce of (...) ^as no (...) been
the cause of establishing the (...) by d^^ve^s sometimes prevail in (...)
voyage to (...), seeing that the prepetual winds betwixt the tropics, called
trade winds, have a considerable influence in preserving the health of seamen,
and that they are not exposed to marsh miasma, or vegetable exhalation? -- They
may be reasonably accounted for by supposing* that contagion lay lurking in the
timbers of the ship, clothes of the men, or other articles on noard.
."

That the fomes of the yellow fever may remain in all its vigor for a
considerable time, even in these islands, we have indubitable proof. Three
months after this fever had entirely ceased in Haslar hospital, two nurses,
lodging in the same chamber, were seized with fevers, and both became yellow;
one died, the other recovered. By a strict examination, it was discovered, that
they had concealed some shirts and clothes belonging to the infected men from
America Lind on fevers and infection, p. 2, 23, 36, 7^, 74.
.

When a nurse is seized, or when two or three persons in a family are attacked
with a fever, it is imputed solely to cold, fatigue, grief, or the like
debilitating causes; which seem to act no otherwise, than by strongly disposing
the constitution to receive and animate the taint. And when such a disease
appears in a boarding-school of boys or girls, the calamity is often ascribed
to causes which are not in the least accessory. Of this Dr. Lind relates an
instance; and I have been able, more than once, to trace very virulent
contagions to those kind of places.

As the phlogisticated state of the air depends upon the separation of one of
its constituent parts, whereby the remainder becomes capable of keeping
suspended the contagious matter; it has been conceived, that, if this state of
the air be restored to its former purity, by adding to it that portion of which
it had been deprived by the pulmonary and cutaneous functions, its powers of
elective attraction will be altered, and that which was before held suspended,
will now be precipitated. This precipitation of the morbid mephitis
(conjectured to be in some cases in the form of powder) being deposited upon
certain substances qualified for receiving it, is supposed to constitute what
authors have agreed to call a fomes.

From some facts, however, it appears that the contagion is not soon, if it be
at any time entirely, separated from the phlogisticated air. Upon visiting the
cells where some men were confined with contagious diseases, Mr. Howard's
clothes became so impregnated with the effluvium, that he was obliged to expose
himself to the open air on horseback; and the vinegar, to which he was always
accustomed to smell, became likewise so saturated as to be intolerably
offensive Alderson on contagion, p. 12, 20, 21 -- Darwin's Zoonomia, sect.
xxxiii, 2, 8.
. An atmosphere charged with a peculiar odor, well known to those conversant
in the smallpox, surrounds patients in that disease, even before the eruption
of the pustles; and clothes, which are long retained about the sick, preserve
the same odor a considerable time.

This theory enables us to account for a number of facts -- why combustion
injuries the air in an epidemic constitution -- why the upper strata of air in
a room are pure, while the lower are vitiated -- why ventilation is not of
itself sufficient to purify tainted places and substances -- why fomites are
more virulent than the effluvia fresh from the sick, etc.

Dr. Clark, who has been already quoted, declares, that he is convinced both
from his own experience, and from the information he rec^^^^^ ^^om others, that
the remitting fever is every where the same, and ^^quires the same treatment
However p^t but little stress on Dr. Clark's opinion as he and Dr. Millar (in
his observations on the prevailing diseases of Great Britain) as well as Dr.
Robertson, have all confounded the typhus or putrid fever from contagion with
the remittent from other causes. W. C.
. Although he thinks, t^^t the genus of this fever does not require bleeding;
yet, as this evacuation had been so generally recommended by eminent
physicians, particularly by Drs. Huck and Cleghorn, he was induced to open a
vein during the first paroxism in three patients. The consequence was, the
first did not bear the evacuation, his pulse flagged, and he was very delirious
in the ensuing fit. The other two, who were seized suddenly with delirium,
returned to their senses on performing the operation; but before fire or six
ounces of blood were taken, they became faint, and the feverish paroxism ran
higher than in those who did not suffer the evacuation. For the future he
resolved to be very cautious in blood-letting; and, since that period, he laid
it asude in every fever in warm climates, both at sea and on shore, unless
accompanied with topical inflammation.

In cold and temperate climates, indeed, he grants that venaesection may
sometimes have a good effect; at least taking away some blood in the beginning
of a fever, he ^hinks cannot be attended with great danger. It may likewise be
used at the commencement of warm weather, when many of the fevers are so mild
as to require almost no other cure, than to cleanse the primae viae, and to
produce an equable perspiration by relaxants. But when a person has continued a
short time in a warm climate, he pronounces that blood-letting is extremely
detrimental. "I have frequently been induced to try it," says he, "when it
seemed to be strongly indicated by great drought, headache, flushed
countenance, and oppressed pulse; but I seldom ever saw it answer any good
purpose."

Dr. John Hunter found, that blood-letting did no good even in those cases
which seemed to require it most, and, if copious or repeated, was always
hurtful; and that too where it seemed necessary to bleed freely on account of
pulmonic inflammation. Dr. Balfour also, whose principal dependence, as before
observed, is placed on other means, advises bleeding, but to be joined with
blistering, provided they be indicated by the violence and obstinacy of the
local affection, especially when seated in any vital or important part;
attending at the same time to the precautions, mentioned already, for
preventing the bad effects which are apt to follow the evacuation Doctor Huck
physician general to the British Hospitals found bleeding generally of use at
the beginning of the bilious fever during the war between England and France in
the West Indies as appears from his letter to Sir John Pringle. Two
practitioners in the ^ast-Indies of the name of ^eates and M^ lean who from
their practice and opinions appears to be deranged, condemn bleeding in
diseases of every description. W. C.
.

In this point, then, until I have good reasons for the contrary, I must concur
with the objectors (to Dr. Rush's practice) who contended, that bleeding was
unnecessarily copious, and proved often destructive; that many of the
indispositions, and much of the subsequent weakness of persons, who recovered
after the free use of the lancet, might be ascribed to it; and that the
blood-letting was prescribed indiscriminately, without paying sufficient regard
to age, constitution, or the force of the disease. Beside, with the boasted
efficacy of both the favorite remedies, purging and bleeding, how shall we
reconcile the following confession? "Under every mode of treatment, it (the
fever) seemed disposed after it was completely formed to run its course."

DR. WADE, in a medical paper published in 1793, is of opinion, that "the ideas
entertained of the origin of fevers in warm climates, are probably erroneous,
and that they may be deemed universally to originate in those latitudes from
the bowels and their contents. From this persuasion, he relies chiefly on
purgatives for the cure.

Venaesection, he regards as always a dangerous remedy, never to be employed
previous to the operation of purgatives, even in the most inflammatory fevers.

He trusts the cure of all species of fever, to copious intestinal evacuation."

CONCLUSION.
FROM a review of the preceding Observations and Abstracts, it appears, that
the remitting or bilious fever as it is commonly called, is only a variety of
the intermitting fever, occasioned by an invisible matter, (known to exist only
from its effects) derived from dead vegetable and animal matter, in a state of
putrefaction; that it is distinguished by an evident remission or abatement,
but not a total suspension or cessation of all the febrile symptoms once in the
course of every twenty-four hours, most commonly in the morning, and a renewal
and increase of the same before the evening; differing in this as well as other
circumstances, from the typhus, or continued fever, occasioned by human
contagion, in which there is almost always an exacerbation or increase of the
fever later in the evening. -- That the nearer it approaches to or resembles
the intermitting type, the greater is the prospect of safety. That the
paroxisms are prolonged and intermissions prevented, or rendered imperfect, by
two opposite circumstances, viz: by a phlogistic diathesis, and by
preternatural depression of strength.

That this kind of fever is not contagious or communicated from one person to
another, and that it differs from the malignant yellow fever, not only in that
respect, but in its causes, nature and symptoms, as well as in the remedies
requisite for its cure; as must be strikingly evident to every one that is
capable of tracing effects to causes and will take the trouble to read the
account of its origin and progress in Grenada in the year 1793, previous to its
appearance in Philadelphia, published by Dr. Chisholm, and recollects that it
had not made its appearance in Philadelphia for the space of thirty-one years
before, though the summers had frequently, during that period, been as warm and
dry, and some of them more so, and the streets and wharves more replete with
putrefying matters, and the air with the additional exhalations from the deep
trenches and muddy docks, the receptacles of every kind of filth and impurity,
as well as from the stagnant water of the suburbs and adjacent marshes, sources
which had neither a local habitation or a name in 1793 -- And that the fever
was occasioned by foreign contagion last summer, a committee of the College of
Physicians has furnished the legislature of this state with ample and
unequivocal evidence.

It also appears from the abstracts of the opinions and practice of different
physicians, that no general or infallible rule can be established with regard
to blood-letting in remitting fevers derived from marsh miasmata; for we find
some of the same authors that recommend this remedy at one period of the
disease or at a particular season, condemn it at a different season, or at a
different period, or in a different situation.

General and indiscriminate recommendation or interdiction of blood-letting,
besides being inconclusive, have been too often founded upon some favorite but
uncertain hypothesis instead of being derived from observations of its effects
in different constitutions, and under different circumstances.

That blood may be drawn when certain circumstances are present in every kind
and variety of fever, if not with advantage, yet certainly without injury, no
one conversant with medical facts will deny. The difficulty is to know those
circumstances when they are present, and the quantity of blood requisite to be
drawn to produce the greatest possible advantage. Symptoms are the only guides
we have to this knowledge; but the symptoms which conduct to this knowledge can
only be distinguished by men of accurate observation and extensive experience.

Great diversity of opinion also unfortunately exists among the physicians in
the West Indies, as well as in this country, respecting the effects of
blood-letting in the malignant yellow fever, owing in a great measure I believe
to its having been employed, too indiscriminately, too lavishly, too
frequently, or at too late a period of the disease, the nature and progress of
which had not been sufficiently attended to. My experience and observations in
the year 1793, as well as last year, warrant me in affirming, that I found
blood-letting not only a safe, but an indispensable remedy in every case
connected with unequivocal symptoms of inflammation; such as acute pain in the
head, stomach, or bowels, and hard, tense, chorded or contracted pulse, whether
it felt small or full, and especially if those symptoms continued without very
sensible abatement more than twelve or fourteen hours.

On the other hand, I have always observed that it increased the debility, and
accelerated the fatal termination of the disease, in almost every case which
commenced with great prostration of strength, extreme anxiety and oppression
and sense of weight about the epigastric and hypochondric regions, accompanied
with a small, quick, irregular pulse, little alteration of heat on the surface,
hurried and interrupted respiration, frequent and deep sighing, dejection of
mind and constant restlessness, and especially, if those symptoms continued
without sensible and distinct abatement, more than eighteen or twenty-hours.

I have also seen blood-letting, when employed in the remissions, where the
symptoms were by no means alarming or unfavourable in appearance, bring on
faintings, and convulsions, and in some instances, death.

It can not therefore, be too often repeated, that it requires that judgment
which can only be acquired by extensive experience and attentive observation,
to enable a physician to distinguish the circumstances which require or justify
the employment of a remedy which seldom fails of doing either good or harm.

APPENDIX,
Exhibiting a Sketch of Facts and Reflections relative to the malignant Fever,
commonly called the West India Yellow Fever.
A CONTAGIOUS fever called the West India yellow fever, has occurred at
Philadelphia six times since the first settlement of the city, viz: -- In the
years 1699, 1741, 1747, 1762, 1793, and 1797. The same kind of fever prevailed
in Charleston, the capital of South Carolina, in the years 1700, 1732, 17^9,
174^, and 1748. A few cases also occurred in the years 1792 and 1794, but it
did not become epidemic in the years last mentioned. It prevailed in Virginia
in the years 1741, 1747, and 1795. At Baltimore, the capital of Maryland, in
1794. At New York, in 1743, 1^91, and 1795. At New Haven, in Connecticut, in
the years 1743, and 1794. In the capital of Massachusetts in the year 1796.

An account of the contagious fever which prevailed in Philadelphia in the year
1699, is contained in the Journal of Thomas Story, Esquire. City Recorder. The
mortality was greatest in September, and ceased entirely by the 1st of
November. Mr. John Gough, in his history of the Society of Friends, (vol. 3d,
p. 516) says, this fever "was the disease which has since been called the
yellow fever;" and that it had for a considerable time before, been very mortal
in several of the West India islands.

In the year 1741, it is recorded by Dr. Lind, in his 2d paper on infection,
that the disease was introduced by means of a trunk of wearing apparel received
from Barbados, which had belonged to a gentleman that died of the disease in
that place; and that the disease spread from the family that received the
trunk, into the town, and destroyed above two hundred of the inhabitants.

A letter from Mr. Lardner, contains an account of its prevalence and mortality
in 1747, and adds, that many whose business and families would permit them,
fled from the city.

An account of its prevalence in 1762, has been preserved in the notes of Dr.
Redman, and by him communicated to the College of Physicians. According to
those notes, the disease was introduced about the latter end of August, by a
mariner, who arrived from the Havanna ill of it, and took lodgings near the New
Market, below Pine-street. The fever that year made but little progress above
Spruce-street, but was confined principally to the vicinity of the New Market,
and the streets west of it; spreading gradually from one family to another,
till toward the end of September; from which time it gradually declined, and
ceased entirely about the middle of October.

In 1793, the disease made its appearance the latter end of July, in three or
four families about the same time, in Water-street, very near to a wharf where
a French privateer called the Sans Culotte, with a prize ship from Europe, and
two small vessels from a port in Hispaniola, lay; one of which landed several
sick passengers immediately upon her arrival, some of whom took lodgings at
Richard Denny's, within a very short distance from, and directly opposite to
the wharf where they landed, The first victims to the disease were two of
Denny's lodgers, one of which was attended by Drs. Cathrall and Physic. Dr.
Hodge, prescribed mercurial purges for three of Mr. Le Maigre's servants on the
2d of August, whose house was one of the nearest to the infected vessels. For
nearly two weeks the disease was confined to that neighborhood, or to persons
that had transacted business, or that had communication with those that were
sick in it. But as the circle of contagion enlarged, the disease rapidly spread
through almost every part of the city, and destroyed four thousand and
forty-eight persons before the 10th of November, by which time it entirely
ceased, having gradually declined from the commencement of frost.

In 1797, the disease made its first appearance the latter end of July, in the
neighborhood of Mr. Russel's wharf, a few paces below Pine-street, where three
vessels lay; One of which had been in port all summer, one called the Iris,
arrived from Oporto with wine, and took her station at the wharf on the 21st of
July; and the other called the Arethusa, from the Havanna, on the 24th. The
last mentioned vessel had been employed in transporting slaves from Jamaica to
the Havanna, the latter end of June. The carpenter and one of the mariners died
with symptoms of the yellow fever on board, during her passage, according to
the deposition of Mr. St^phen Kingston, and a letter from Mr. Fitch, two
respectable merchants, who were passengers on board of the Arethusa to the
Havanna. The captain also acknowledged to me that a negro boy died on the
passage from the Havanna to Philadelphia.

The pilot, James Mulford, was attacked with fever on board the Arethusa in the
night of the 23d. being the last of her quarentine near the Marine Hospital,
and was taken to his lodgings immediately after his arrival in her at the city.
I attended him in his disease, which soon unfolded its true nature, and came to
a crisis on the 5th day from the attack.

On the 29th of July, the mate and cook of the brig Iris, the vessel from
Oporto, which lay in contact with the Arethusa, were attacked with fever: The
case of the cook, who vomited matter black as ink, and died on the 5th day, was
communicated to the College of Physicians by Dr. Stewart who attended him. The
mate's fever terminated favorably on the ^d day. Three more of the same crew
were attacked with the fever, three days after the mate and cook and all
recovered, though one of them became very yellow. G. Latimer, Esquire. who resided
at Pine-street wharf, was attacked on the 29th. his servant man and maid a few
days after. -- Mr. N. Lewis, Mr. Nixon's, and Mr. Russel's clerks; who
transacted business in stores near the wharf where the Arethusa lay, and one of
capt. Holland's cabin boys on board the adjoining vessel, were all attacked on
the first or 2d of August. Mr. Lewis died on the 5th. Mr. Hall also died, after
being affected with black vomiting.

Mr. Joice, who had been frequently on the wharf where the Arethusa lay,
attending to the discharging of the cargo of his vessel from ^ourdeaux, the
latter end of July, was attacked with the same kind of fever on the 3d of
August, and has no doubt himself, that he received the infection from the
Arethusa. Captain M'Cowan, who conducted the Arethusa down to the Fort on the
21st of August, was attacked with the fever five days after, and was attended
by me on board his own vessel at Queen Street wharf.

John Larcha^^, who worked on board the Iris, and lived back of Mr. Smith's
store near the same wharf, was attacked on the 3d of August, and in the course
of the same week, several other persons all in the same neighborhood.

The weather which had been warm and dry, part of June and July was at this
time cool and pleasant, and the air was rendered exceedingly pure, by torrents
of rain which fell the latter end of July, and beginnin^ of August; the streets
and wharves were also remarkably clean and sweet, and every other part of the
city was uncommonly healthy. Nothwithstanding this, the disease made gradual
progress, and in the course of three months (at the end of which, it was
extinguished by the frosts) there died in the city, the District of Southwark,
the Northern Liberties, and in Kensington, one thousand two hundred and
thirty-two persons; including all ages, sexes and colors; although more than
one half of the inhabitants had retired into the country.

Dr. Li^ing, who wrote and transmitted the account to Dr. Whytt of i^s several
occurrences in Charleston, published in the Edinburgh Physical and Literary
Essays, remarks that it had been each time traced to some infected person,
lately arrived from some of the West India Islands; and that some of the
seasons in which it had become epidemic, were much cooler, and the air more
pure than in many other seasons when it had not occurred. The same remark holds
good, with respect to the condition of the streets, wharves, and air at
Philadelphia, both in 1793, and 1797; particularly the latter.

Dr. Mitchell, in a letter to Dr. Franklin, in which he describes the symptoms
of the disease when it occurred in Virginia in 1741, and 1747, asserts that
"the disease has chiefly raged in America, in large towns, camps or ships, and
has been twice brought into Virginia by ships of war." (p. 2.) Not being
suspected to be contagious by the physicians of Norfolk in 1795, its origin was
not enquired into. I have not been able to procure any certainty respecting its
origin at Baltimore, in the year 1794; but from its appearing first at Fell's
P^int, the part where the vessels came to, which were daily arriving from the
West Indies, there is a strong presumption, that it was introduced into that
city by importation. About four hundred of the inhabitants of Baltimore were
destroyed by it. Frost setting in early put a period to its farther ravages.

Dr. Monson, in the account which he has given of the yellow fever, at New
Haven (Con.) in 1794, states "that in June the inhabitants of that city, were
alarmed at the number of sudden deaths, which had occurred from the 10th to the
20th of the month, and requested the selectmen to make enquiry into the origin
of the disease. On examination it appeared, that in the beginning of June,
Capt. Truman arrived from Martinico, in a sloop that was infected with the
contagion of the yellow fever: that this vessel lay at the wharf, within a few
rods of Isaac Gorham's house: that she had on board a chest of clothes, which
had belonged to a mariner, who died of the yellow fever, in Martinico; and that
his chest was carried into Mr. ^ustin's store, and opened in the presence of
Capt. Truman, Mr. ^ustin, Henry Hubbard, and Polly Gorham; the three last
mentioned of whom, died, in a short time after their exposure to the contents
of the chest. -- Hence it is highly probable that Mrs. Gorham caught the
disease from the infected sloop, or clothing. Mr. Austin's store stands within
three or four rods of Isaac Gorham's house; and no person in town was known to
have the yellow fever previous te Capt. Truman's arrival.

June 26th, Isaac Gorham lost an infant child with the yellow fever; and soon
after his son and daughter were affected with it: the former died. Solomon
Mudge died on the 30th; Jacob Thomson's negro woman, on the 1st of July;
Archibald M'Neil on the 9th; Polly Brown on the 3d of August; John Storer, jun.
and John Hide, on the 8th: and widow Thomson, on the 10th. Jacob Thomson's
negro woman, Solomon Mudge, John Storer, jun. and John Hide, had visited Mr.
Gorham's house, a few days before their illness; Polly Brown and Mrs. Thomson,
nursed in Mr Gorham's family; and Archibald M'Neal nursed Solomon Mudge. Elias
Gill, died-on the 12th of August; and Samuel Griswold's wife, on the 7th: the
former, visited Mr. Gorham's house; the latter nursed in his family.

There were a number of persons who caught the disease at Mr. Gorham's house,
and recovered.

Mrs. Thomson, on the first day of her illness, was moved half a mile from Mr.
Gorham,s, into George-street. Luther Fitch caught the disease from Mrs.
Thomson, and communicated it to his servant maid. Both recovered. Mr. Fitch
lives in College-street, nearly three quarters of a mile distant from Mr.
Gorham's house. I could trace the disease throughout the town. No person had
the yellow fever, unless in consequence of attending the sick, or of being
exposed to nurses, infected houses, clothing, or furniture.

I have inquired of several aged persons in this town, relative to the yellow
fever, whether they knew of its having ever been here, previous to June 1794,
and there is but a single instance; the facts relating to which are these: --
In the year 1743, a transient person, by the name of Nevins, who came from the
West Indies, lodged at the house of Nathaniel Brown, an innkeeper, in this
city. The man was taken very sick, in the night; and died shortly afterward;
and his body was very yellow, after death. Mr. Brown's wife sickened in a short
time, and died, of the same complaint; which was, at that time, supposed to be
the yellow fever.

I am credibly informed that several persons, at Mill-River, in Fairfield
county, and also at New London, died with the yellow fever, in August and
September 1795. It was propagated there by infected persons from New York.

Capt. John Smith died in this town, the 20th of August 1795. He caught the
disease in New York, and communicated it to one of his negro servants.

About 160 persons had the fever before the 1st of November when it entirely
ceased. The number of deaths was 64; of this number 44 were affected with black
vomiting."

In the year 1795, the yellow fever made its appearance at New York about the
20th of July, and ceased toward the latter end of October. Between these
periods seven hundred and thirty-two of the inhabitants fell victims to the
malady, though a great part of the inhabitants had deserted the city, and the
weather, the chief part of the time, was remarkably wet and moderately cool, a
few days excepted.

The disease was traced by the Committee of Health to importation from
Port-au-Prince, by the brig Zephir, which left that island the 1st, and arrived
at New York the 20th of July.

The first victims to the disease were Dr. Treat, physician of the port, and
some English sailors on board the ship William, which laid near the infected
brig. For the proofs of this account, I refer to the report of the New York
Committee of Health, dated Sept. 8th, 1795, and to that of the Philadelphia
Board of Health, dated Sept. 17th, published in the Philadelphia Gazette of
Sept. 24th, 1795.

We know from the publication of Dr. Chisholm, (entitled an Essay on the
Pestilential Fever, introduced into the West India islands from Boulam, on the
coast of Guinea, in 1793 and 1794) that the yellow fever was epidemic and
extremely mortal in the island of Grenada, and that it had been carried from
thence to Tobago and several other islands, several months before it made its
appearance in Philadelphia.

It is also a fact generally admitted, that the native inhabitants are very
seldom subject to the disease in the West Indies; and that it is almost
entirely confined to persons from cold or temperate climates, who, if attacked
at all, are attacked soon after their arrival; and, that its occurrence is
extremely rare, except when fleets or armies are stationed there. From all
which circumstances, taken separately and collectively, it may with almost a
convincing degree of certainty be concluded, that it is not derived from marsh
miasmata or the effluvia of putrefying vegetable matter, otherwise the native
inhabitants would be equally liable to the disease with foreigners, as is known
to be the case with respect to intermitting and remitting fevers in marshy
situations.

I purposely reserve my opinion respecting the source from whence the contagion
is derived, and by which the yellow fever is produced and propagated, for a
more ample discussion -- And shall now proceed to deliver a short description
of the disease as it appeared in Philadelphia in the summer and autumn of 1797.

Description of the Symptoms.
THE first symptom in persons of vigorous constitutions, was generally an acute
pain in the fore part of the head, and a burning sensation in the eyes. These
symptoms were either accompanied with, or immediately succeeded by a
chilliness, or sense of universal coldness, (but no shivering) accompanied with
the most excruciating pain in the back, knees and legs, hurried and confined
respiration, oppression and distressing structure about the epigastric region.
This chilliness alternating with transient flushes of heat, and with paleness
and redness of the face, with great restlessness, sometimes continued from one
to six or eight hours, and in some cases longer, but in many cases the violent
sense of heat came on in a few minutes without any mixture of cold. This fever
was rarely preceded by the sense of debility, which almost invariably precedes
intermitting and remitting fevers. The stomach was frequently affected with
sickness and retchings to puke during the continuance of the chilliness, but
seldom afterward for the first two days, excepting in those cases in which the
stomach appeared to be affected with inflammation from the beginning, as was
sometimes observed. When this was the case, the stomach always felt sore and
painful upon being pressed by the hand. The patient was also, always either
costive, or affected with dysentric symptoms accompanied with a burning
sensation in the bowels, till the disease came to a crisis, or at least till an
evident remission took place. And when stools were produced by art, they
appeared white resembling those of persons with the jaundice, owing, as appears
from various dissections, to an obstruction to the excretion of bile from an
inflammatory affection of the ducts which lead from the liver to the duodenum.

Though in cases that terminated favorably, there was generally a diminution
of the violence of the fever every morning, there was seldom a remission before
the third day, and in many cases not before the fifth. When a remission did
take place, it was generally accompanied with a copious discharge by the bowels
deeply colored with bile, and soon after with a general perspiration or a
copious slow of urine. In some cases a solution of the disease was accompanied
with, or preceded by a cholera.

The pulse after the cessation of the chilliness, was generally quick and
tense, and in some cases full and throbbing, especially toward the middle of
the afternoon, at which time the surface of the body was also more intensely
hot and dry, and the thirst increased. The tongue always white and moist for
the two first days, afterward it varied in appearance, from a light, to a dark
brown, etc. The eyes were generally inflamed and watery at first; this
appearance increased decreased with the fever. In many cases either a coma, or
a perpetual inclination to vomit accompanied with a pain at stomach,
intolerable anxiety, and frequent and deep sighing came on at the end of the
third or beginning of the fourth day, and sometimes later; in the former case
the pulse appeared to differ but little from a state of health, though
sometimes it was very low and small, seldom so slow and full as that which
arises from compression of the brain. In this case, unless speedy relief was
obtained, the limbs became cold, and blood issued in streams from the nostrils,
and often from the gums and intestines, etc.

In the most dangerous cases, if comatose symptoms did not supervene an
incessant puking came on, and every thing was cast up the instant it reached
the stomach, and the patient constantly complained of a burning and painful
heat in that organ. A yellowness of the eyes generally made its appearance
immediately after the commencement of the puking, and if the puking continued
with violent and ineffectual strainings, the yellowness speedily diffused
itself over the whole body. The pulse under these circumstances was always
small and low, but generally chorded, tense, or hard. When the cause of this
puking was not speedily removed, a sphacelus of the surface of the stomach took
place, as appears from dissections, and a mixture was thrown up, at first flaky
and of the color of coffee grounds, and afterward of a blacker color and
thicker consistence, resembling a mixture of soot and water. As soon as the
black matter began to come up, every severish symptom instantly subsided,
except a slight alienation of reason, and a want of recollection, and the
patient believed himself to be perfectly well: a cadaverous coldness now
pervaded the limbs, the fair became livid and bloated, and the patient soon
sunk into the arms of death.

When the disease terminated favorably, it was mostly on the 3d, 5th or 7th
day. When the reverse, it was on the 4th, 6th or 8th day. Convulsions
frequently closed the scene. Subsultus tendinum never occured, when the disease
terminated within eight days.

In many persons the disease affected the nervous system, more than the
arterial; in these cases, the febrile symptoms seldom run high, and the disease
was longer protracted -- longer in coming to a crisis. -- In some cases the
symptoms of debility and malignity, were great and alarming from the beginning.
-- In these cases the disease almost always proved mortal.

Treatment.
MY experience both in 1793 and 1797, convince me that blood-letting is not
only beneficial to a certain extent, but is absolutely necessary in every case
where the pain in the head is considerable, and the pulse quick and tense, and
the skin hot; and also when the stomach is affected with a painful burning
sensation, or feels sore upon pressure, especially if accompanied with puking,
and pain upon taking any mild liquid into it. Whereas it invariably does injury
in every case where the prostration of strength is great and sudden, the pulse
low, weak, and irregular, the limbs colder than in health, countenance shrunk,
pale, livid and dejected, accompanied with great oppression, weight and
stricture about the epigastric and hypochondric regions, quick, uneasy
respiration, with anxiety, restlessness, and frequent sighing. In two cases a
second bleeding sunk evidently the vital powers, and certainly did harm, as the
mercurial powders also did in another case.

In the year 1793, I certainly found bleeding beneficial in more than two
thirds of the cases that I attended after the 20th of September, (and I
frequently visited more than a hundred in a day at that time) for the majority
of the cases that year began, as well as the last year, with inflammatory
symptoms; and it is well known to physicians and historians, that bleeding is a
safe and often an useful remedy in every description of disease in which
inflammatory symptoms predominate, not excepting the plague, which appears to
be merely a higher grade of the yellow fever.

It is the abuse, the excess, or the mistimed application of blood-letting,
that should be rejected in the yellow fever, and not its judicious and moderate
application.

I am therefore, under these restrictions, an advocate for it in the early
stage of the yellow fever, in every case where inflammatory symptoms
predominate; and am of opinion that it may be repeated with advantage once
a day, or oftener, so long as those symptoms continue, at any period, and in
every stage of the disease; notwithstanding what has been said to the contrary
by the slaves of theory in the West India islands, particularly by Dr. Todd, of
Jamaica. I however, by no means, approve of the practice of those who bleed
profusely and indiscriminately in all cases in a sever that is frequently
attended with great loss of strength, dejection of mind, and putrid tendency.
But to condemn bleeding, and withhold it in all cases indiscriminately, argues
not only want of experience, observation, and of reflection, but of common
sense.

It is evident, however indirectly it may be marked by the symptoms, that an
inflammatory affection very frequently exists in some part more than another,
frequently in the stomach, peculiar, in this respect, that its tendency to
terminate in gangrene, as appears from numerous dissections, is infinitely
greater in this disease than in any other that has ever appeared in this
country. It is no less evident, that this stage, when violent, is almost
constantly succeeded by a diathesis, or state of a putrescent nature, unless
prevented by evacuating remedies early applied, and the strict observance of
the antiphlogistic regimen.

From these circumstances, no man attentive to the suggestions of reason, would
venture to draw off a very large quantity of blood at the first operation, lest
it should induce too sudden debility, and thereby prevent the vital powers from
counteracting the putrescent tendency of the disease; which is always the case
when the debility is great, as on the other hand, the premature use of c^rdials
and stimulating medicines inevitably increase the tendency of the existing
inflammation, to terminate in gangrene. I have seen many instances of both
these fa^al errors, from too profuse and from too sparing b^ood letting. Not is
this to be wondered at, in a disease which is still new to the majority of
physicians in this climate; especially as it assumes a variety of different
aspects according to the constitution of the patient, and the treatment he
receives, which occasions an embarrassment that nothing can remove, but a habit
of nice discernment, a quickness of apprehension, which enables a physician to
perceive real analogies, and a correct judgment, which secures him from being
misled by imaginary ones.

Dr. Chisholm's method of using mercury in the malignant fever when it appeared
at Grenada in 1794, was, "to give ten grains to an adult as soon as possible,
after seeing him, at every period, and under every circumstance of the disease,
this he assures us, generally acted as an aperient in the degree required,
about an hour or two after it was given. -- At the end of three hours he
repeated the same dose without opium, if the first had not purged more than
twice. At the end of three hours more the same quantity was given, adding
opium, or not, as the preceding doses had acted. In this manner ten grs. were
given every three hours, till the salvary glands became affected, which
generally happened in less than twenty-four hours from the commencement of the
treatment. Signs of returning health immediately succeeded the appearance of
salivation, and returning health was remarkably rapid." (See his Essay, p. 272.)

With the few cases that I have ventured to adopt this treatment, it has not
succeeded with the same certainty as the Discoverer's assurances gave me reason
to expect -- Yet in cases where the symptoms appear to be of a nervous kind
early in the disease, instead of inflammatory, and not accompanied with those
of a putrescent, or malignant appearance, perhaps it is preferable to any
other, when given in small and repeated doses; observing always to restrain it
from occasioning too copious evacuations, by the occasional addition of opium,
or by employing it externally When the debility is very great, or after the
accession of black vomiting mercury makes no impression, as the lymphatics lose
their power of absorption
. But in all cases in which inflammatory symptoms predominate, I am certain
that the most successful method of treating the disease, is by bleeding and
free purging, till those symptoms are subdued.

I reserve a more ample description of the disease, and more particular
directions for the treatment under various circumstances, for a future
publication; in the mean time I refer to the pamphlet which I published soon
after the cessation of the disease in 1793, entitled A Treatise on the Synochus
Icteroides, or Yellow Fever, as it appeared in Philadelphia, etc. which with a
few corrections, contains every thing requisite to be known on the subject, as
far as respects the symptoms and cure; and shall close the subject for the
present, with a copy of the Memorial of the College of ^hysicians of
Philadelphia, to the Legislature of this State, published in the Philadelphia
Gazette of the 9th of January of the present year.

To the SENATE and HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES of the COMMONWEALTH of
PENNSYLVANIA, the Memorial of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS of PHILADELPHIA
Represents:
"THAT your memorialists, deeply affected with the calamities produced by the
disease which has recently occurred amongst us, are impelled by a sense of duty
to their fellow-citizens and themselves, to inform you, that they consider the
laws which were enacted for the purpose of preserving this city from malignant
contagious disorders, are very imperfect.

The subject being of immense importance, they hope to be excused for stating
their sentiments with respect to it at large.

They are of opinion that the disease which produced so much mortality and
distress in the year 1793, was imported into this city from the West Indies;
and they are confirmed in this sentiment, by the circumstances attending the
disease of this year, which they consider as of the same nature and derived
from the same source.

Some of their most important reasons for this opinion are as follow: -- The
disease in question is essentially different from the fevers that occur in this
climate, and which originate from domestic causes. This difference particularly
regards the general progress of the symptoms, and the mortality, as is evident
upon a comparison of its history with that of the ordinary diseases of this
city.

A disease which resembles the fever of 1793 and of this year in many important
points, has long been known in the West Indies, and those parts of America
situated between the tropics, and in seven or ei^ht different instances, in
which a similar disease has occurred in the United States, in the course of
this century, there is good reason to believe that it was derived from those
countries. In most of the instances, the original history of the disease
contains the information that it was imported. In some cases, the infection can
be traced to the imported clothing of persons who died in the West Indies. In
most of the cases where the importation cannot be ascertained, the first
appearance of the disease has been, as in the other instances, in the
neighborhood of the shipping, or among persons connected with vessels.

The circumstances has attending the fever of this year are extremely in point;
and the narrative which accompanies this, will we trust, satisfy you that it
was imported.

The disease in question commenced invariably in our seaports, while inland
towns, equally exposed to the ordinary causes of fever, have escaped; and in
the two last instances of its occurrence in Philadelphia, the suburbs and the
country adjacent, were more healthy than usual at the same season; and at the
commencement of the disease, all the parts of the city, excepting the small
spaces to which it was confined, were remarkably healthy.

It exists in the West Indies, particularly in time of war, when great numbers
of strangers are to be found there; and reference to dates will show, that in
most of the instances of the occurrence of the disease in the United States,
there has been war in the West Indies.

Your memorialists are aware, that cases may be adduced where the disease has
occurred in persons who were not known to have been exposed to imported
contagion; but such is the subtle nature of this power, that it often exists
unsuspected; and similar difficulties occur respecting the small pox, and other
contagions, allowed by all to be of foreign origin. There also occur, although
very rarely, solitary cases of malignant remitting fevers, the symptoms of
which resemble so much the disease in question, that they are often supposed to
be the same; but there is this essential difference, that a malignant remittent
fever has never been, to our knowledge, contagious in this climate.

The difference of sentiment among physicians, now so much regretted, resembles
that which almost always takes place, when the plague is introduced into any of
the civilized parts of Europe, where it is not well known. The identity of the
disease, its origin and its contagious nature, have been often the subject of
controversy. Some physicians have considered it as of domestic origin; but
proper health-laws, strictly enforced, have latterly protected the commercial
parts of Europe from its ravages.

With these sentiments of the nature of the disease, your memorialists cannot
but regard a proper law respecting the subject, as a matter of the greatest
importance, and although they are perfectly sensible of the imperfection of the
science of medicine, yet from a conviction that physicians are the best
informed, as well as the most interested in the subject, they approach you with
that respect which is due to your Legislative authority, and declare their
belief, that the existing health-laws of this commonwealth are not such as are
best calculated to obtain the desired end, and that they ought to be improved.

Having lately communicated in writing to the governor, their ideas respecting
the best methods of preventing the introduction of contagious diseases, they
beg leave to refer you to that communication. At the same time they tender your
their professional assistance in framing an efficient law for this purpose; and
thus having performed their duty, they hold themselves discharged from all
responsibility, on account of the evils which may arise from the present
imperfect state of the Legislative arrangements respecting this important
subject.

By order of the College, JOHN REDMAN, President.
Attest. THOMAS C. JAMES, Secretary. Philadelphia, December 5 th 1797."

TO the above Memorial I shall only add, that to believe, the yellow fever
which is as contagious and nearly as malignant as the pestilence in its worst
form, "is only a higher grade of the remitting or bilious fever from marsh or
putrid vegetable effluvia," requires that credulity which never reflects; and
to ascribe the difference in the effects of the same cause, to a revolution in
the constitution of the atmosphere, is a doctrine too unphilosophical and
visionary to be embraced by any but visionary people; especially, as no
experiments have been made to prove that any such revolution in the atmosphere
has taken place; the contrary of which appears to be the fact, from the disease
being confined to cities and close unventilated situations, instead of marshy
tracts, which are the only situations in which intermittents and remittents,
ever become epidemic.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE. LINE. 3, 8, for pitechiae, read petechiae. 14, 12, from bottom, for 6th,
read 16th. 20, 7, for complexety. read complexity. -- 17, for skeptic, read
septic. 23, 8, for reverius. read riverius. -- 15, omit the word can. 26, last
line, for preceeds. read precedes. 32, in the note. 3d line from bottom, for
and jails, read of jails. 36, 20, for then, read there. 40, 3, add cause of
the. 42, 22, after the word plague, add and the gastritis. 43, 7, from bottom,
for wharts. read wharves. 47, 23, for cretion, read secretion 49, 12, from
bottom, for tra^hia, read trachea. 63, 2, from bottom, for sinna, read senna.
70, 3, omit "because of the stricture induced." 72, 15, from bottom, for
sinsory, read sensory. 76, 14, from bottom, for con^ictio, read confectio. 78,
1, for cortus, read contus. 88, 7, for health, read healthy. 101, 3, for
rabian, read Arabian. 104, 17, from bottom, for ammatory, read inflammatory.
111, last line, for intermittant, read in^ermittent. -- Prefix the name of
"^^ghorn," to the abstract respecting the remitting fever at Minorca. 114, 2,
for where, read whether. 119, 5, from bottom, for enervate, read enervated.
128, last line, for spineters. read sphin^ters. 163, 10, for intermittants read
intermittents. 164, 22, for insland, read island. 183, 2, R: for minth. read
menth. 187, 6, for phlem. read phlegm. 193, 4, last note. for conju^^. read
conjunct. 200, 5, from bottom, for idiophatic, read idiopathic.

THE reader will please to correct any other typographical errors that may
occur, several of which were unavoidable, owing to the author's want of leisure
at the time the work was in the press.


