OF THE CHOLERA.
THE chief symptoms in this disease are a vomiting and purging concurring
together, or frequently alternating with one another. And the evacuations both
upwards and downwards are manifestly mixed with bile.

From this last circumstance the disease appears to depend upon an increased
secretion of bile, and its copious effusion into the alimentary canal.

This effusion of bile irritates, and excites the motions abovementioned.

When the disease begins with violence the spasmodic contractions of the
intestines are soon communicated to the abdominal muscles, and very frequently
to those of the limbs. In this manner the disease frequently increases rapidly
in violence, till the strength of the patient is greatly and often suddenly
exhausted, while a coldness of the extremities, cold sweats, and faintings
coming on, an end is put to the patient's life, sometimes in the course of one
day.

In other cases the disease is less violent, continues for a day or two, and
then ceases by degrees; though such recoveries seldom happen without the
assistance of remedies.

In many cases of young children a diarrhoea returns after the vomiting has
ceased, and after continuing to harrass the patient for many weeks, proves
fatal.

The attack of this disease is not preceded or accompanied with febrile
symptoms, and though during its course, both the pulse and respiration are
frequent and irregular, yet these symptoms are generally so en^irely removed by
the remedies that relieve the spasmodic affections peculiar to the disease, as
to leave no ground for supposing that it had been accompanied by, or was
connected with that assemblage of symptoms which designate fever.

Dr. Sydenham considered the appearances of the Cholera in England to be
confined to the month of August, and observes, that in proportion to the heat
of the air, the violence of the disease was greater.

In Philadelphia it is most prevalent in the month of July, but cases
frequently occur in June and August.

From these circumstances, and from the facts stated by Tropical writers, it
appears evident that this disease is the effect of a warmer atmosphere inducing
a deficiency of vigor in the several functions of the human body, and
especially in the functions of the liver, in consequence of which, a
preternatural secretion and excretion of bile is readily induced by the remote
causes.

The chief of the remote causes of this disease appears to be a sudden change
in the temperature of the atmosphere, for it is always most prevalent, when
after extreme hot and dry weather, a fall of rain has cooled the atmosphere.

In some cases after the heat of the season has given the predisposition, the
disease is induced by eating too freely of crude vegetables, and such
substances as are of difficult digestion.

Emetics of the drastic kind are very apt to induce this disease when employed
during the hot season.

Though the effusion of bile into the alimentary canal generally gives rise to
the disease at first, it often continues after the bile is completely
evacuated, owing to the debility and exquisite irritability, first induced by
its irritation. This is similar to what happens after taking an over dose of
Tartar emetic; the vomiting often continuing after every particle of the emetic
which first excited it, has been evacuated.

The pores of the skin being relaxed and enlarged by the summers' heat, and
accommodated to the increased quantity of perspirable matter, which is
determined thither and exhaled, any plethora occasioned by a diminution, or
suppression of that discharge, must load those Viscera in the abdomen whose
ordinary secretions are most languid at that time. The consequence of this
dertermination is, a distention of the vessels of the abdominal viscera, and of
course irritation and pain, and this irritation and pain, occasion an increase
of the internal secretion, and among the rest, that of the bile. --

The bile, and the pancreatic fluid, as well as the gastric fluid, appear to be
more acrid in this disease than in a state of health, at least experiments
prove this to be the case with the gastric fluid; hence the application of
these, or of any other acrid substance to the debilitated and irritable fibers
of the stomach and intestines, occasion those enormous and irregular motions in
their fibers, which have been described.

These contractions sometimes exhibit an appearance of increased power, as well
as of action, but this appearance is falacious, otherwise sedative or
debililating and not stimulating remedies would afford relief.

REMEDIES.
IN every case of Cholera, the bilious and other acrid matters should be
immediately diluted, and carried off by large and frequent draughts or camomile
tea or warm water, and where the patient will submit to them by injections of
the same.

So soon as this is accomplished, or sooner, if the spasms have begun to affect
the limbs, recourse should be had to the internal use of opium, which should be
administered in a liquid form by the mouth, if the stomach will retain it. To
an adult, thirty drops should be given in a table spoonful of simple
peppermint, or cinnamon water, and repeated every hour if retained on the
stomach, till the evacuations and spasms cease, but if rejected, it should be
repeated immediately, after every evacuation. The laudanum should be
proportioned to the patients age and vigor; to a child from one month to a
year, from one to six drops will be proper.

To render the laudanum more certainly effectual: every means should be
employed to restore the determination to the surface. For this purpose, when
practicable, the patient should be immersed in the warm bath, but where that is
impracticable, flannel clothes wrung out of hot water should be applied to his
stomach, abdomen and limbs, as hot as he can conveniently bear, and the
application of these flannel cloths should be repeated as often as they become
cool.

These failing, from eighty to an hundred drops of Laudanum should be thrown up
the bowels, in a glister of chicken broth, rice gruel, or camomile, and
fennel-seed tea, or any other simple liquid, moderately warm, and should be
repeated every two hours, or after every evacuation, till the symptoms cease.

If the disease should continue, notwithstanding the judicious application of
the remedies which have been directed; Blistering plasters, or sinapisms should
be applied to the stomach and inside of the legs, and the whole of the spine
rubbed with mustard, mixed with the spirits of sal vol. ammon. or a mixture of
the oil of cloves and volatile spirits; and the patient should lie between
heated blankets, the doors and windows of his chamber being open, for the
benefit of pure air.

When the stomach rejects opium in a liquid form, one grain of solid opium may
be administered every hour, or after every evacuation, to an adult; and a
proportionable quantity, with any agreeable preserve and aromatic tea to an
infant.

In some cases double flannel cloths sprinkled with warm spiced brandy, or a
mixture of oil of cloves, volatile spirits and brandy, applied to the stomach
and bowels, and a common heated flat or smoothing iron passed over the flannels
have afforded speedy relief.

In some case^ also, ether exhibited in doses of thirty or forty drops in any
simple herb tea, and frequently repeated, has also succeeded when opium has
failed.

This disease is very liable to return the day following, unless prevented by
having recourse to preventitives: I therefore make it a rule to exhibit ten or
fifteen drops of laud. liquid in some agreeable draughts every twelve hours,
for three or four days after the evacuations have ceased

At the same time the patient should take a decoction or infusion of Columbo
root, with the addition of a few drops of lavender compound, or a little old
brandy four or five times a day, to restore strength and ease to the stomach
and intestines.

The lightest and most grateful food, should be taken in a small quantity, at a
time.

In general, adult patients soon recover perfectly from this disease, if
managed agreeably to the preceding directions; but in infants and young
children, the diarrahoea, with occasional vomiting, is very apt to continue
obstinate for a great length of time, and in general, proves more fatal to
them, than any other disease to which they are liable.

The bilious diarrhoea of children, shall therefore be the subject of the next
chapter.

Of the Bilious Diarrhoea of INFANTS, and young CHILDREN.
THIS disease is much more prevalent in populous cities, than in villages or
farm houses of America, and like the Cholera, of which it is frequently the
consquence, is confined to the summer and autumnal seasons. It is most frequent
and violent, during those seasons immediately after a sudden change of the
wind, to a colder quarter, and especially after rain, which gives a sudden
coolness to the air. This disease is confined principally to infants at the
breast and those under two years of age: it seldom occurs violently, or proves
fatal, after this tender age.

In Philadelphia, more children are annually destroyed by this disease, than by
all the others to which they subject.

This disease either returns after the suspension of the Cholera, or comes on
suddenly after exposure to cold, generally in the night, and is distinguished
from common diarrhoea, by the severity of the griping, and the bilious colored
stools, accompanied with a frequent inclination to puke, particularly a little
before the patient has an evacuation by stool, or at the time of such
evacuation.

It may also be distinguished from the Diarrhoea arising from teething by the
pulse, condition of the skin, the strength of the patient, and the aspect of
his countenance. In the latter, these differ very little from their natural
state, for several days after the commencement of the disease, whereas in the
bilious Diarrhoeaa, the debility in most cases, is evident from the
commencement. The pulse is weak, low, quick and soft, the skin pale, cold and
dry, or cold and moist, especially on the limbs -- the eyes dull, and the
countenance contracted, depressed and listless.

The internal heat and thirst are great -- the flesh grows daily more relaxed,
soft and emaciated, the thirst increases, the appetite fails; every kind of
food is loathed and refused; no drink but cold water acceptable, and that
thrown up soon after it is taken. In the progress of the disease, all the
enumerated symptoms increase, in some gradually, in others more rapidly. In the
worst and most obstinate cases, unless early relieved, the stools become daily
more copious, though not always more frequent, and have a cadaverous scent, the
debility increases, every thing taken into the stomach passes through the
bowels undigested or but little altered from its natural state; the thirst
becomes insatiable, the feet swell and become oedematous, the belly swells and
grows hard, the mouth becomes affected with superficial white eruptions and
ulcerations, which impedes the swallowing; a lethargy ensues, the skin appears
livid, and often spotted, and the patient dies.

The duration, as well as violence of this disease, is very various, some
recovering in three or four days, others lingering for as many months, and
recovering after being reduced to perfect skeletons; some die before the end of
the first week, others after lingering six or seven, and some still longer.

As this disease depends upon similar causes, only operating in a less degree,
as the Cholera, that is upon too great a determination to the liver and
intestines, and a want of tone in the extreme vessels, on the external surface
of the body, and a general state of debility in the circulating organs, and is
occasioned by the application of debilitating powers; it is obvious that the
indications of cure, and the remedies employed, should be the same as those
employed in the cure of Cholera, only differing in degree, or the proportion in
which they are applied, at a time when the patient is in an imperfect state of
vigor.

An increased peristaltic motion of the intestines, may be considered as always
the chief part in the proximate cause of dirrahoea, and the disease, is
diversified by the different causes which produce this increased motion.

But in the species under consideration, viz. that in which bile predominates
in the evacuations, the increased peristaltic motion is occasioned and
continued by the bile, effused into, and irritating the intestines*

THE INDICATIONS OF CURE
are, therefore to evacuate the bile already effused, and to prevent its
excessive effusion in future.

To effect these purposes, I have found the following treatment preferable to
any other.

Pulv. Rhubarb i. Magnesia Alb. i. Ol: Minth Piper: vel Cinnam. gut i. Aq: Com:
ii. m.

Two or three tea spoonfuls of this composition, is to be given every hour till
it alters the color of the stools, and from ten to forty drops of the common
parigoric elixir called Tinct. Opii Camphorat. in sweetened water, at bed time.

The day following I direct from one to four tea spoonfuls of the following
mixture according to the age and strength of the patient, to be given every
third or fourth hour

In cases where acidity abound, i of calcined magnesia should be substituted in
the place of prepared chalk. And when the griping is severe, and not attended
with hot skin* tense pulse, or other symptoms of inflammatory fever, I have
found the following formula more generally successful than any other.

: Magnesia Calcinat. iPulv: Rhubarb gr. x. vel xv.Sach. Alb ii -- Ol. Minth
pipervel Cinnam. gut i. vel ij.

These are to be rubbed together in a mortar, and two ounces of water, with
from fifteen to twenty-five drops of liquid laudanum, are to be added and mixed
together.

To an infant under twelve months old, two tea spoonfuls of the mixture may be
given three times a day, and twice as much to one from one to two years old.

If the child cannot retain this mixture on its stomach, the same articles may
be well triturated in a mortar, and the liquor strained and pressed through a
linen cloth, and the strained liquor given. Any pleasant tea or mild aromatic
infusion, may be given after the medicine.

Children are always thirsty when debilitated with this disease, and as they
are apt to drink more than their stomachs can bear, they generally puke up part
of what they drink. -- To prevent this effe^t, they should be restrained to a
small quantity at a time, and not su^fered to take their drink very cold. Water
with a piece of bread or biscuit toasted brown, infused in it, given in small
draughts is not only grateful, but generally rests easy on the stomach.

After the diarrhoea, sickness, and griping are relieved, a composition of
Thereac Vienet. ij Pulv. opii i Camphor i well mixed and spread on leather,
applied to the stomach, has frequently appeared to prevent a relapse.

Ol. Menth. and Caryophil, have also been employed with success without the
(...)


: Cret: pp. iss. Pulv. Gum Arab. ss. Ol: Minth pip. vel Cinnamon gut i. Sach.
Alb. ss. Aq. Com. ij. m. et Add. Tinct. Opii. gut. no 8. Spr. Sal. Vol. Alk.
gut. xvi. m.

If the diarrrhoea becomes suspended by these means, mild tonics should be
adminestered to prevent its return. For this purpose the Columbo root, either
in substance or infusion, is in high estimation, and is generally found to rest
better on the patients stomach, than the Peruvian bark. From five to ten grains
of the powder mixed with a draught of simple peppermint water, or cinnamon
water may be given to an infant at the breast, and repeated four or five times
a day.

If the child refuses to take it in powder, it may either be triturated with
water in a mortar and strained through linen, or ij of the bruised root may be
infused in eight ounces of boiling water, and from ij to ss of the strained
liquor may be taken several times in the course of a day.

When the Columbo can not be exhibited, or if it fails of success -- The
compound tincture of the bark, or the tincture of gum kino may be substituted,
and a little of the common chalk julep, rendered cordial with volatile spirits,
peppermint and laudanum, occasionally interposed.

When the debility is great, laudanum should always be given in very small
doses, and at considerable intervals. From neglecting this circumstance,
numbers have been rendered worse instead of better by its use.

To render the recited remedies more effectual, the warm bath either general or
partial, should be employed, and the patient's stomach and abdomen rubbed with
spiced-brandy, or a composition consisting of Sp: Vin. Gallic lbss Sp: Sal Vol.
Alk. ii Ol. Caryoph: ij two or three times a day, and afterward covered with
soft flannel or muslin, so long as the diarrhoea continues, and the child's
strength appears to decline.

When the child's countenance appears pale, shrunk and depressed, resembling
one extremely fatigued, a declension of strength is always indicated. If to
these circumstances, the stools are copious, watery and green, preceded by
restlessness, tossing of the limbs, rolling the head, and retching to puke, the
case is dangerous and alarming. Under these circumstances two or three drops of
laudanum should be added to every dose of the chalk julep, with a due
proportion of Volatile aromatic spirits, or essential oil, and given every hour
till it affords evident relief, and afterward once in six or eight hours till
all danger of a return ceases, which will generally be the case before the end
of the third day. The patient should then be removed out of the hot and impure
air of the city, till the season becomes cooler. -- Unless this is complied
with, a relapse is always to be apprehended, so long as the causes which
originally produced the disease, continue to exist.

In short, we might with as much reason expect to cure inflamed eyes occasioned
by a smoky room, without a change of circumstances, or situation, as to cure
the bilious diarrhoea, so long as the heat and impurity of the air, which gave
origin to the disease continue to operate.

In cases where great debility or prostration of strength is e^ident, and the
little sufferer tosses his limbs and hea^ backwards and forwards, and retches
to puke before every stool, which is generally watery, curdly, and of a
greenish color: I have seen immediate benefit produced by small glisters of
tepid warmth, made by infusing camomile flowers and cardamom seeds, or annis
seeds in boiling water. In these circumstances during the intermissions from
griping, the child should take a tea spoonful or two of the following mixture
every hour till easy, and afterward, once in four or six hours as
circumstances may require.

: Magnes: Calcinat. ij. Gum* rab. i. aqu: com. i. cui. Add. vel. menth. vel.
cinnam. gat i. sp. Sal. Vol. Alk. gut xvi. tinct. theb. gut. vi.

When the debility is great, and the acid in the primae vi^e copious, calcined
magnesia, or lime water is preferable to chalk, occul. cancror. bol. arm. or
any of the common absorbent earths, because they are freed from the carbonic
acid with which the others are combined.

The usual dose of aq. calcis for an infant, is from one to four drachms,
diluted with common water.

When the debility increases, accompanied with insatiable thirst, wine whey, or
thin milk punch should be given frequently in small draught^. The stomach and
bowels should be rubbed at the same time with warm camphorated spirits and
laudanum, or the volatile liniment, and covered with flannel; and if the nights
and mornings are considerably cooler than the rest of the day, which is
generally the case after the middle of August, worsted stockings or a flannel
petticoat long enough to cover the feet, should be worn constantly. Small
blistering plasters applied to the limbs, and repeated occasionally, frequently
afford rely, not only to the fever, but to the diarrhoea.

As soon as the diarrhoea and thirst cease, the cold bath, either by way of
shower or immersion, should be employed regularly once a day at least.

When the bath can not be conveniently applied in either of the ways just
mentioned, the whole body may be walked by means of a thick linen cloth, dipped
in cold water and brandy, and wiped dry after each washing with a warm napkin;
this occasions a glow on the surface, and in some measure, supplies the place
of exercise.

By the use of the bath, a proper regulation of diet, and frequent exercise in
the open air, a relapse may be generally prevented during the extreme heats of
July and August; but for farther security, as the season advances, and the
nights and mornings become cold, while the middle of the days continue
distressingly hot, it will be proper to let the infant wear a flannel shirt, as
well as a long flannel petticoat or worsted stockings. Flannel from its texture
repels moisture, and has the property of retaining heat, whereas linen being
smooth and compact, suffers it to escape immediately: hence flannel clothing
preserves the warmth on the surface, and thereby prevents morbid determination
to the internal viscera.

Cases of diarrhoea often occur during the hot season, that are not bilious,
particularly in June and July. In these cases, the alvine evacuations are
generally mixed with more or less mucus; the griping, though more severe is
attended with less sickness, and less thirst, and the countenance is always
more animated, and the functions in general more vigorous. -- Children whose
gums are inflamed by teething, are most frequently affected with a diarrhoea of
this kind; and my observations give me reason to believe, that the effects of
teething, instead of being the cause of the bilious diarrhoea, is always a
preventative, except the inflammation which the irritation of the teeth
occasion, before they pass through the gum be so great as to bring on indirect
debility.

When therefore the gums begin to appear swelled and red in cases of bilious
diarrhoea, it may be considered a favorable circumstance. -- From this
circumstance it is very probable, that mercurial frictions would be beneficial
in cases of bilious diarrhoea, by inducing a similar swelling and inflammation,
and a general phlogistic diathesis.

To promote the cure of the diarrhoea mucosa which if not caused, is often
aggravated by the irritation and pain of teething; those parts of the gums
where the teeth are ready to protrude, should be cut across with a scalpel
sufficiently deep to prevent any farther irritation from the edge of the tooth.

The irritation and pain occasioned by teething, generally renders the stomach
liable to be disordered by every thing the infant takes. When this state of the
stomach is attended with thin watery stools, and no fever, laudanum
proportioned to the age of the patient is the most certain remedy; but when
frequent inclination to puke is accompanied, or followed by mucous stools, and
symptoms of more or less fever, I have observed the following method of
treatment to be the most efficacious.

: Magnesiae: Alb: i Sal. glaub: epsom vel Rochel: iv. Sach. alb. ij. Pulv. Gum
Arab. i. Ol. menth. pip. vel. Cinnam. gut i. Aq. Commun: ij. M.

From two to four tea spoonfuls may be given every two hours, till it occasions
copious and liquid stools.

At night from two to six drops of the tincture of opium, commonly called
liquid laudanum, should be given at bed time, in any thing agreeable.

If the stools appear to be mixed with mucus, or if the patient is troubled
with ten^smus, the same medicine^ are to be repeated every day in the same
manner, or at longer intervals, till they afford relief.

If the diarrhoea should become liquid, or watery, and not accompanied with
symptoms of inflammatory fever, the following laxative absorbent mixture, is
the best remedy that I am acquainted with.

: Magnesiae Alb. i. Pulv. Rubarb gr. xii Sach alb. ij. Ol: Menth piper, vel.
Cinnam. gut. j. Aq: font. i. M.

When this medicine is intended to carry off acrid, or irritating matter from
the intestines, two, three, or four tea spoonfuls, more or less, adapted to the
age of the infant, should be given every hour, till a change in the color of
the stools, render its operation evident. The operation may be promoted, by a
simple decoction of bread and water, made palatable with sugar; by sago gruel,
or fowl broth, etc. The breast may also be allowed. An anodyne at night, suited
to the age and strength of the little patient is generally found necessary to
procure tranquil and refreshing sleep, unless the complaint be attended with
fever of an inflammatory kind.

When the medicine is intended to correct acidity, calcined magnesia is
preferable to the common kind, and may be employed in the same quantity and
manner, and when the griping is severe, from half a drop to three drops of
tinct. opii. may be added to each dose of the mixture, and given every hour
till that symptom is relieved, and afterward three times a day till the
evacuations are suppressed. When this is accomplished, tone may be restored to
the stomach, intestines, and the whole system by the use of tonics, combined
with laudanum, and given in proper doses, and at proper intervals.

Tinct. Kino. iij. vel Tinct. Cort. Peru. Comp, vi. Tinct. Opii gut iv. vel vi.
Aq. font. i. Or,

Pulv. Alumen. Coccinel an: gr. viij. Tinct. Opii gut iv. vel vi. Sach. Alb. i
Tr. Lav. comp. i Aq. Com. i M.

A small tea spoonful or two of either of the above, according to the age and
strength of the patient, should be given three or four times a day.

Wine whey or brandy and water made weak, and sweetened with loaf sugar to be
given in the intervals. In aid of these, great advantage may be derived from a
proper regulation of the patient's diet, clothing, and exercise in the open
air, and from the daily use of the cold bath, when the strength will admit of
it with safety.

When the debility and emaciated condition of the patient has rendered the cold
bath unsafe, the hot bath has frequently been observed to turn the tide of the
disease.

My experience does not enable me to determine precisely the degree of heat
which renders the bath most salutary, but as all degrees below 96, decrease the
strength and fullness of the pulse; if the experiments of (...) in the Analytic
Re^i^w for 179^.
Dr. Macard of Hanover are correct, it ought not to be much below that point.
Pian of almost every kind and degree, is mitigated by the application of warm
water to the part, and even in internal pains; this effect is produced by
sympathy, when the warm bath is externally employed, even if it be only to the
feet.

Dr. Darwin considers a bath of 96 or 98o a salutary stimulus, which supplies
heat rather than produces it, and rather fills the system by increased
absorption, than empties it by increased secretion; and may hence be employed
with advantage in almost all cases of debility with cold extremities, perhaps
even in anasarca, and at the approach of death in fevers.

Removal to the high grounds of the country before the extreme heat commences,
is the best preservative against the diarrhoea of children, and after the
disease has taken place, removal to the country is the most cer^ain means of
preventing it from proving mortal.


