Dr. EMERSON's ORATION.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT KENNEBUNK, ON THE Fourth of July, 1798; THE
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY DR. SAMUEL EMERSON.

PRINTED BY E. A. JENKS, PORTLAND.

Kennebunk, July 5 th, 1798. SIR,
THE committee for directing the celebration of yesterday's Anniversary in this
place, are desired to thank you, in the name of those who honored the day, for
your federal and patriotic ORATION; and request a copy for publication.

Yours, etc. JACOB FISHER, per order.

To Doctor S. EMERSON.
DOCTOR FISHER,
SIR,
PLEASE to express to the respectable committee, the pleasure with which I
received their obliging approbation of my performance, and the honor they do me
in their request; if it possessed more merit, I should receive more
satisfaction in yielding it up to public perusal: Such as it is, accept it from

Your obliged friend, and affectionate fellow citizen, SAMUEL EMERSON.

ORATION.
EVER happy in obeying the requests of my fellow citizens, and inspired with
the general joy on this glorious anniversary, I hope to be indulged with
candor in stepping aside from the duties of my profession, and assuming the
attitude of a public speaker; tho conscious of my own unworthiness to ascend
this sacred rostrum.

IT has been the laudable practice of all nations, to commemorate important
national events: And there is an affecting propriety in keeping this joyful
festival -- the birthday of Liberty -- the SABBATH of Freedom! -- It brings to
our minds the exploits of our fathers and brethren; raises from the dead the
honored shades of those who bled in the sacred cause, all decorated with
immortal laurel, and exalts our affectionate gratitude to the ONE SUPREME, who
granted this infant country his holy protection through a red sea of blood and
carnage -- a wilderness of intestine machinations, to this blessed Canaan of
national dignity and glory.

THIS completes the twenty second year since the assembled wisdom of these then
colonies, dared assume a rank among the nations, and solemnly appealed to the
God of justice, to support them in their struggle to defend the Rights of Man:
He heard their prayer, and was pleased to crown their exertions with the most
abundant success.

NEVER was a time when there was a greater propriety in calling to mind the
price of liberty, than at the present eventful crisis! Let us then turn back
the pages of memory to '75. See the chains formed by a foreign nation, ready to
shackle every freeborn American: The plains of Lexington, and the bloody
heights of Charlestown, call us to remember the gloomy hour! The pale ghost of
WARREN rises to our view and declares in more than mortal accents, I BLED FOR
YOU! Venerable PRESCOTT looks from his peaceful grave, and calls us to our
duty! MONTGOMERY'S bones, and M'PHERSON'S blood, from distant Quebec, tell us
to beware of foreign chains. The long list of heroes who bled in New York,
White-plains and Saratoga, conjure us by the price of their sacred lives, to
remember their death with gratitude. But here let us pause -- for from this
period is dated the source of our present danger.

WHEN France beheld with astonishment a whole army fall a sacrifice to American
bravery, she, for the first time, dared to aid the cause of the oppressed. Her
breast on fire with hatred to England -- a hatred which had been fed by eternal
wars and bloodshed; she thought this her time to be revenged on her mortal foe:
the alliance was formed, and Britain was humbled. But how? -- Brave GREEN, were
there any Frenchmen with you at Guilford and Eutaw springs? No -- all were
freemen: it is true they were at York Town, but only looked on to see their
enemies conquered to their hand. But allowing them ever so much credit, were
they not as much interested as we? and had we ever the smallest fraction from
them which we have not honorably repaid even before the time stipulated by
contract? Why then do we hear long fallal of American ingratitude? -- Heaven
was our friend, and was pleased in mercy to bring about a peace founded on the
most advantageous principles to this country; and to Heaven let clouds of
grateful incense rise!

NEVER 'till the forming the treaty of 1783 did the truth show itself, and
French policy, or rather perfidy appear. Our ADAMS, our JAY, and the manes of
the venerable FRANKLIN, can testify that the French minister insisted upon the
independence of the States not being laid as the basis of the treaty; and that
our plenipotentiaries should relinquish all claim to some of the most important
sources of national wealth -- the fishery for one! Did this look like that
disinterested friendship which her emissaries in this country have harped upon
as a reason why we should give up to France our all, and become her tributaries?

FROM the first formation of the French monarchy it has been necessary for the
neighboring States to league together to prevent her overbearing power from
destroying the balance of Europe, and becoming like ancient Rome, the tyrant of
the world. Her LEWISES, her HENRY'S and all the long catalogue of grand
monarques, from CHARLEMAGNE to LEWIS XVIth. have kept in view, but never been
able to effect any other purpose than by perpetual wars to impoverish the
kingdom and lesson the liberty of the subject, 'till the immense weight of
debt, and unbounded luxury of a profligate Court, precipitated her into a
revolution, and down tumbled the hereditary throne with all its grim apendages
of racks and bastiles, to the ground! -- Here America shouted from the heart,
long live the Republic of France!

SCARCELY a man on this side the water then dreamed that from the ashes of the
ancient monarchy, could arise a Phoenix which should pursue the same diabolical
policy. But what do facts say? See her banishing from her territory every one
who retains a single wish of justice toward her allies. Oh! FAYETTE, too
valuable a sacrifice at this black shrine! And lest honesty or virtue should
again show themselves in any form, see her spurning from her every vestige of
the sacred religion of Heaven, and tyrannizing with a high hand over the
neighboring States, whom, by the most solemn acts of national faith, she had
promised to protect. Such have been her amazing exertions in the vile project
of universal domination, that the only barrier now left, is the powerful
English marine, which has hitherto confined her to the continent, and fire and
devastation from overspreading the world.

Now, to convince every mind unprejudiced with party heat or secret gold, that
France has formed the same horrid designs against this happy asylum of true
liberty, let us only look at what she has done. -- Divide and govern, has
uniformly been her maxim: She first ferments cabals and parties, to weaken the
power she intends to attack; then sends her bloody myrmidons to aid the
faction, and thus carries her point: witness Holland, Spain, Venice, and in
fact every nation which has yet felt her horrid chains!

LET us look at home. When peace with her charming train, revisited these
smiling realms, America found herself encumbered with a serious debt, with no
other method to lessen it but direct taxation: The compact which held the
States together, went no farther than recommendation without any coercive power
to oblige the different States to pay their equal proportion of the public
demand. Public danger no longer operated as a stimulus. Uneasiness was the
immediate consequence, which in some places ran into high handed insurrection.
Heaven had by this time furnished us with a great number of worthies, who to a
sincere love of their country, added profound wisdom and knowledge in the great
science of civil government. They saw the necessity of a more energetic band of
union between the States; and brought about a Convention for the great purpose
of forming a national Constitution. Accordingly the May of 1787, saw assembled
at Philadelphia, all the greatest abilities of this extensive continent.

WASHINGTON, who, like himself, for he has no equal on the page of history,
four years before had peaceably resigned the command of the army, and retired
with his forest of laurels and the blessings of his countrymen, to his farm at
Mount Vernon, was called to the head of this august assembly; and, pardon me in
saying, the Great GOD of order and peace Himself, condescended to direct the
momentous business. The result was a Constitution, justly esteemed, the wonder
of the world.

BUT here an interesting scene is opened to the view of all united America. The
sublime task was complete, but it remained to be ratified by the separate
States; and strange to tell, in ten of the fourteen it met with the most
formidable opposition. Whether this opposition was in any wise indebted to
French influence, I will not pretend to decide: But when we reflect that the
most violent opposers of the Constitution have shown themselves the warm
partisans of France, ever since, have we not good reason to suspect that she
had her wily serpents concealed even at that early period? Notwithstanding all
endeavors to the contrary, the glorious fabric was supported, by the whole
fourteen pillars; and Heaven grant it may be coeval with the everlasting hills.

WEALTH soon began now to flow into our country, and every tide has since
brought us the rich productions of every climate; and the consequence of this
great national compact has been a rise of respectability and increase of
resource beyond the most sanguine calculations. -- The great WASHINGTON, who by
the unanimous voice of his grateful countrymen, had been called to the
presidential chair, foresaw that in the bloody conflict in Europe, both parties
would be anxious to draw us in for a partner in the war, wisely determined to
observe the most impartial neutrality; though not till we had come forward,
acknowledged the republic of France, and received her ambassador.

THE British government, yet sore at her disappointment respecting these
States, had never fulfilled the treaty, and now began to prey upon our
commerce. This was the very wish of France; thinking that the same vindictive
policy, which, on similar occasions, had ever disgraced the Cabinets of Europe,
would be followed by us, left no art unpractised to blow up the flame, and
drive us into a situation where we had nothing to gain, but on the other hand
every thing to loose. But our government, with a superior wisdom and prudence,
had recourse to peaceful negotiation; settled all differences in an amicable
way, and our envoy returned with a commercial treaty more honorable and
advantageous than England was ever known to grant to any nation on earth.

BEFORE this, France, by her infamous emisaries, had established a strong party
in these States, which now howled from St. Croix to the Missisippi. All those
who had opposed the Federal Constitution joined the vile clamor and the
disaffected Editors of newspapers poured forth torrents of abuse against
WASHINGTON and the government.

GENET, the French ambassador, some time before this, did not scruple openly to
insult our government in the most infamous manner, upon his first arrival; and
instructed to convert us to the vile purposes of France, he organized the
opposition into clubs, upon the plan of the French jacobin societies. who now
assumed the titles of THE PEOPLE -- EXCLUSIVE PATRIOTS -- and a train of
arrogant epithets, too conceited to enumerate; and false and imposing as they
were arrogant and conceited. But GENET'S conduct could not be suffered, and the
PRESIDENT obtained his recall: but instead of returning to France, he had the
address to connect himself with a conspicuous family in New York, where from a
public minister, he sank into a private declaimer against the government, to
carry into farther execution the plans he had laid while in office. Was this
part of the design of his mission? -- "We are adebts at intrigue," say the
French of themselves. If it was so, how far below contempt are such base means
to injure a people whose greatest error was then a too generous attachment to
France and her infatuated leaders.

NEXT came FAUCHET. Just the same plans are pursued: Bribery and corruption --
declamations to the people against their elective government -- extending the
old policy of divide and rule, by every practicable mean. Jacobins grow more
and more insolent; and had it not been for the British treaty which arrested
their vile career, and put honest men upon thinking, God alone knows where the
horrid drama would have closed. -- At length, full freighted with precious
confessions, and Jacobin adulation, home he went, and ADET reigned in his
stead. He just the same, but instructed to be more circumspect, went on to
lecture his dear disorganizing brethren, till almost every scoundrel through
the Union had learnt the horrid lesson to blaspheme the christian religion, and
condemn the American administration, without distinction of persons or measures.

EVERY arrival from France announced some shocking act of cruelty -- some
unheard of scene of savage brutality! -- Yet France is right -- hunddreds of
innocent women and children murdered in an hour -- all right, all good -- all
just as it ought to be: But on the other hand, the most important and
beneficial acts of our own government must of consequence be loaded with all
the execration which calumny and slander with their forked tongues can utter.

OUR commerce is now attacked by a herd of pirates! Yet our immaculate clubists
pronounce all right; and what is worse, they acted the same part toward
France, which the tories did toward England, previous to the late war: made
them believe that nothing was wanting but a few threats to frighten us into a
compliance with any demand which their insatiable avarice might prompt them to
make. -- "The terrible Republic! -- the negroes will be all armed and sent to
ravage the States from one end to the other!" with a thousand other bugbears,
were in constant circulation from their presses, those sinks of falsehood and
abuse!

AT this critical moment came on our election of PRESIDENT; and what rendered
it a complete touchstone, General WASHINGTON in a letter to the whole of his
great family of America, had resigned his pretensions to a new choice, and the
two candidates were of opposite parties. Here again we see France, in her base
insidious way, using every method to mislead that independent spirit which ever
ought to direct our elections of supreme magistrate. It was said, if ADAMS is
chosen our allies will be offended, and resent the inattention to their wishes!
-- What business, in the name of liberty, has any foreign nation to have any
wishes, or influence, or care about our internal policy? -- The very thought
brings a glow of resentment into every independent bosom, and crimsons every
cheek with honest indignation! -- We felt it. The election was happily closed,
and ADAMS, the dignified philosopher -- the firm, unshaken patriot the great
experienced civilian -- the hearty chrisstian -- ADAMS, is our PRESIDENT; and
all true friends to their country may justly glory in his open, dignified,
decided administration.

FRENCH depredations increased: -- their cruisers, regardless of the solemn
stipulations of national compacts, seize our property with a high hand! Our
government sends over Envoys with the olive branch: -- let us try peaceful
negotiation, said the PRESIDENT; but what has been the consequence? In the
first place -- vile temporising, under the wing of the very Directory! --
unpardonable delays -- "give us a bribe -- we cannot receive you without a
bribe! -- money -- money -- money, must open the door to peaceful negotiation!
-- You give the Indians money -- you give the barbarians money -- why not us?"
-- Is this the most refined, the most polished nation in Europe! -- Is it
France who says this to her only ally, from whom she has already robbed fifteen
millions? Oh how fallen! -- ill fated land, to bear on thy bosom a government
capable of such baseness! and that too in the midst of the most splendid
triumphs!!!

FINALLY an answer is demanded. The French minister, TALLEYRAND, is ordered to
give it: -- But how pitiful -- how evasive -- how childish! -- Americans, it
was only meant for an imposition upon your populace! something for your Auroras
-- your Chronicles -- your secret enemies -- your jacobin clubs, to clamor and
prate about, yet to cajole you, if possible to your destruction! This too was
translated in France, and sent to GENET and the printers of inflamatory papers
so as to be sure to make the first impression: But this will do good, for it
proves beyond a doubt that there has ever been a party under French influence,
to divide that they may ruin us.

LET us look for a moment to the consequence of such influence and division in
the old world. -- What could be more flattering than the manner in which the
Venetian ambassador was received by the Directory? and what could more strongly
express absolute assurance of protection and friendship, than their answer at
an open public audience? -- The next news we hear Venice is robbed of every
dollar -- of every moveable, even to her ancient Museum, and then vilely sold
to the emperor.

SWITZERLAND now rises all bloody to our view!=She too had listened to the same
vile flatteries, and slept in fatal security till she heard the thunder of
French cannon at her very gates, when she awoke only to see her great and good
men butchered! her people slain by thousands! her fertile fields laid waste!
her cities plundered! and her liberty and independence swept away in the
dreadful deluge, and sunk to rise no more!

MY friends, you here see a picture of French faith and fraternity, in their
true light, though but saintly drawn.

OUR PRESIDENT now stands firm at his post: -- arm, arm, he commands! -- arm,
arm, we echo from Georgia to Maine. We will not be duped! We hear the shrieks
of matrons and old men butchered -- of virgins ravished -- of infants dashed
against the wall! -- We wrested from the jaws of the British Lion our invaded
rights: and we are ready to defend them from the talons of the Gallic Vultures!
-- Let us stand up as one man, rally round our head, and declare to France and
all the world, that we will never barter our wellorganized Government for their
despotic confusion -- our trial by jury, for their secret daggers or open
guillotines -- our holy sabbath and heavenly religion, for their skeptic decade
and hellish atheism! -- We appeal to that GOD they have defied -- and may He,
in infinite mercy, strengthen our resolution and take us under his holy
protection.

FINIS.

