Delightful task! to watch with curious eyes
Soft forms of Thought in infant bosoms rise.
Plant with nice hand Reflection's tender root.
And teach the young Ideas how to shoot!


A PLAN FOR THE CONDUCT OF Female Education, IN BOARDING SCHOOLS, PRIVATE
FAMILIES, AND PUBLIC SEMINARIES.

By Erasmus Darwin, M.D. F.R.S. Author of Zoonomia, and of the Botanic Garden.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, RUDIMENTS OF TASTE, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS FROM A MOTHER
TO HER DAUGHTERS.

Embellished with an elegant Frontispiece.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN ORMROD, No. 41, Chesnut-street. 1798.

DEDICATION.
TO the parents and guardians, who are solicitous about the education of their
female wards, and daughters, -- to the governesses of schools instituted for
female tuition, -- to the teachers of young ladies in private families, and
public seminaries, -- this small work is with all due respect presented

BY THE AUTHOR.
CONTENTS.
Section
I. THE FEMALE CHARACTER. II. MUSIC AND DANCING. III. READING. IV. WRITING. V.
GRAMMAR. VI. LANGUAGES. PHYSIOGNOMY. VII. ARITHMETIC. CARD-PLAYING. VIII.
GEOGRAPHY. IX. HISTORY. X. NATURAL HISTORY. XI. RUDIMENTS OF TASTE. BEAUTY.
GRACE. XII. DRAWING AND EMBROIDERY. PERSPECTIVE. XIII. HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY. XIV.
POLITE LITERATURE. NOVELS. XV. ARTS AND SCIENCES. XVI. MORALS. XVII.
COMPASSION. XVIII. VERACITY. XIX. PRUDENCE. JUSTICE. CHASTITY. XX. FORTITUDE.
BASHFULNESS. XXI. TEMPERANCE. XXII. RELIGION. XXIII. ADDRESS. XXIV.
CONVERSATION. XXV. EXERCISE. DUMB BELLS. XXVI. AIR. BED-ROOMS. FIRE-GRATES.
XXVII. CARE OF THE SHAPE. COLD BATH. XXVIII. DRESS. EARRINGS. POWDER. XXIX.
AMUSEMENTS. CHESS. XXX. PUNISHMENTS. REWARDS. MOTIVES. XXXI. LISPING. XXXII.
STAMMERING. XXXIII. SQUINTING. XXXIV. INVOLUNTARY MOTIONS. XXXV. SWELLED
FINGERS, AND KIBED HEELS. XXXVI. BEDS. RHEUMATISM. XXXVII. DIET. NEW MILK.
XXXVIII. ECONOMY. XXXIX. SCHOOL-EDUCATION, USES OF. XL. CATALOGUE OF BOOKS.
APOLOGY FOR THE WORK.
THE following treatise was written at the desire of Miss S. and Miss M.
Parker; who were themselves educated for the purpose of educating others; and
on that account were originally placed in different seminaries for female
tuition; and afterward engaged themselves for a time as teachers in other
schools, and in private families; the better to qualify themselves for the
arduous task of conducting a boarding school for the education of young ladies.

About four years ago a house was offered for sale at Ashborne in Derbyshire,
at the very extremity of the town, in a most pleasant and healthy situation, on
a dry sandy soil, with excellent water, well sheltered from the north-east, and
commanding an extensive prospect of Sir Brook Boothby's park, and its
beautiful environs.

A spacious walled garden adjoins the house, at the bottom of which is a stream
of water, which may sometime be converted into a river-bath.

Miss PARKERS procured this eligible situation, and had the house well fitted
up for the purposes of a boarding school. It consists of an ample school-room,
and an ample dining room, and four smaller parlours, on the principal floor;
with two stair-cases, one of which is of stone. The whole is airy and well
lighted; and now contains about thirty pupils without being crowded.

They next had the good fortune to engage very excellent teachers in dancing,
music, and drawing, from Nottingham, Derby, etc. with a polite emigrant as
French master; and lastly applied to me for any ideas, I could furnish them
with, on the subject of female education. And now, as their establishment has
succeeded to their utmost wish, have expressed a desire, that I would give to
the public, what I wrote originally for their private inspection.

I have only to add, that a copy of the manuscript has been seen by many of the
ingenious of both sexes, and much improved by their observations; to whom I
here beg leave to return my most grateful acknowledgments.

A PLAN FOR THE CONDUCT OF FEMALE EDUCATION.
SECTION I. THE FEMALE CHARACTER.
THE PARENTS and guardians of young ladies of the last half century were less
solicitous about procuring for them so extensive an education, as modern
refinement requires. Hence it happens, that female education has not yet been
reduced to a perfect system; but is frequently directed by those, who have not
themselves had a good education, or who have not studied the subject with
sufficient attention. And though many ingenious remarks are to be found in the
works of Lock, Rousseau, Genlis, and other writers still more modern; yet few
of them are exactly applicable to the management of boarding schools; the
improvement of which is the intent of the present treatise.

The advantages of a good education consist in uniting health and agility of
body with cheerfulness and activity of mind; in superadding graceful movements
to the former, and agreeable tastes to the latter; and in the acquirement of
the rudiments of such arts and sciences, as may amuse ourselves, or gain us the
esteem of others; with a strict attention to the culture of morality and
religion.

The female character should possess the mild and retiring virtues rather than
the bold and dazzling ones; great eminence in almost any thing is sometimes
injurious to a young lady; whose temper and disposition should appear to be
pliant rather than robust; to be ready to take impressions rather than to be
decidedly marked; as great apparent strength of character, however excellent,
is liable to alarm both her own and the other sex; and to create admiration
rather than affection.

There are however situations in single life; in which, after the completion of
their school-education, ladies may cultivate to any extent the fine arts or the
sciences for their amusement or instruction. And there are situations in a
married state; which may call forth all the energies of the mind in the care,
education, or provision, for a family; which the inactivity, folly, or death of
a husband may render necessary. Hence if to softness of manners, complacency of
countenance, gentle unhurried motion, with a voice clear and yet tender, the
charms which enchant all hearts! can be superadded internal strength and
activity of mind, capable to transact the business or combat the evils of life;
with a due sense of moral and religious obligation; all is obtained, which
education can supply; the female character becomes complete, excites our love,
and commands our admiration.

Education should draw the outline, and teach the use of the pencil; but the
exertions of the individual must afterward introduce the various gradations of
shade and color, must illuminate the landscape, and fill it with the beautiful
figures of the Graces and the Virtues.

SECTION II. MUSIC AND DANCING
ARE generally taught by masters, who profess those arts; concerning which we
shall only observe, that they are frequently believed to be of too great
importance in female education; and on that account that too much time is
expended on their acquirement. It is perhaps more desirable, that young ladies
should play, sing, and dance, only so well as to amuse themselves and their
friends, than to practice those arts in so eminent a degree as to astonish the
public; because a great apparent attention to trivial accomplishments is liable
to give a suspicion, that more valuable acquisitions have been neglected. And,
as they consist in an exhibition of the person, they are liable to be attended
with vanity, and to extinguish the blush of youthful timidity; which is in
young ladies the most powerful of their exterior charms.

Such masters should be chosen to instruct young ladies in these
accomplishments, as are not only well qualified to sing and play, or to dance
themselves; but also who can teach with good temper and genteel behavior: they
should recollect, that vulgar manners, with the sharp gestures of anger, and
its disagreeable tones of voice, are unpardonable in those, who profess to
teach graceful motion, and melodious expression; and may affect the taste and
temper of their pupils, so as to be more injurious to their education; than any
thing, which they are able to teach them, can counterbalance.

SECTION III. READING.
AS reading is as much a language to the eye, as speaking is to the ear; it
requires much time and labor for children to acquire both these languages.
Such books should therefore be put into their hands, as join amusement with
instruction, and thus lighten the fatigue of continued application, as Sandford
and Merton, Parent's assistant, Evenings at home, and many others.

In learning to read aloud, a clear and distinct enunciation is seldom acquired
at schools; which is owing to the child standing close to the teacher, who
looks over the book along with it; and hence the pupil finds no difficulty in
being understood, even when she pronounces only half words. This however is
easily remedied by placing the reader at the distance of two yards or more from
the hearer; then the young scholar soon finds, that she is not understood,
unless she expresses herself with clear articulation. For this purpose the
teacher should always be provided with a duplicate of the book, she teaches;
that she may not be necessitated to look over the shoulder of her pupil.

As the young scholars advance in the knowledge of language, other books must
be taught them both in prose and poetry; such as may improve their minds in the
knowledge of things, in morality, religion, or which may form their taste. A
great number of books for the use of children has been published in late years;
many of them by very ingenious writers, and well adapted to the purpose
designed, of such of these, as have come to my knowledge, a catalogue shall be
given at the end of this treatise.

SECTION. IV. WRITING.
WRITING, as it keeps the body in a fixed posture, as well as drawing, and
needlework, should not be too long applied to at a time; since the body, and
even the countenance, may thus get a certain tendency to one attitude; as is
seen in children, who are brought up to some mechanic art, as in polishing
buttons or precious stones on a lathe. A proper manner of holding the pen, or
pencil, or needle, with an easy but graceful attitude of the person, and an
agreeable moderate attention of the countenance, should first be taught; for
which purposes an inclined desk has many advantages over an horizontal table
for the books, or working frames; as the body is thence less bent forwards; and
the light in general situations more vividly reflected to the eye.

If the desk be sixteen inches broad, the furthermost edge of it should rise
about three inches and half from the horizontal line; which produces the most
convenient inclination, and the table or frame, which supports it, for the use
of the taller children, should rise about two feet eight inches from the ground.

SECTION V. GRAMMAR,
WHICH is an abstract science teaching the texture of language, is too hard for
very young minds; and is therefore generally taught too early: and the same may
be said of Arithmetic. The English grammars in general use at schools are both
tedious and defective compositions; an epitome, or extract, from Lowth's
grammar, with the late improvements of Mr. Horn Took in the theory of
language, would well supply this branch of knowledge; and might be given to the
public under the name of a "rational English grammar."

Mrs. Devis has published a small and useful rudiment of grammar purposely for
the use of young ladies: which may be taught as an introduction to Lowth's
grammar. The Abbe Gaultier's Jeu de Grammaire may perhaps be rendered amusing
to children, and convey to them ideas of the French grammar.

SECTION VI. LANGUAGES.
THE necessity of learning some ancient or foreign languages imposes a
laborious task on the youth of both sexes; which consumes years of their
precious time, which might otherwise be employed in the acquisition of
sciences. The difficulty of obtaining a competent knowledge of the Greek or
Latin language is many times greater than that of obtaining any modern one; as
may be deduced from the innumerable changes of the termination of their nouns,
adjectives, and verbs; which to a beginner are all so many new words. And as
the works of the best writers in these languages have been translated into our
own, it is less necessary in the education of ladies to expend so much time and
labor in acquiring them. But as the French and Italian are less difficult to
learn, and contain new books of taste and knowledge, which are yearly published
in this age of literature; and as they are convenient for conversing with
foreigners, who come hither, or in our traveling into other countries; and
lastly, as they are agreeable as well as fashionable studies; the pupils of
boarding schools should be encouraged to attain one or both of them.

The method recommended by Mr. Lock in his treatise on education, sect. 162,
of teaching languages by conversation, will on trial be generally found
successful in respect to modern languages with even the youngest children.
Nevertheless a knowledge of grammar should afterward be taught with care, if
the child be too young at first to attend to it; for without the aid of grammar
not only the French or Italian languages, but even the English will not always
be spoken or written with perfect accuracy.

For this purpose of acquiring modern languages by conversation, a school
generally supplies better opportunities than a private family, besides the
advantage of some degree of emulation, which frequently exists, where children
converse together: another advantage of infantine society is, that they learn
many other things, as well as languages, by repeating them to each other; and
obtain, what is seldom to be acquired from adult companions, some knowledge of
physiognomy; as the passions of children are more legibly expressed on their
countenances than at a maturer age. This knowledge of physiognomy, which is
perhaps only to be acquired at schools, by giving a promptitude of
understanding the present approbation or dislike, and the good or bad designs,
of those whom we converse with, becomes of hourly use in almost every
department of life.

SECTION VII. ARITHMETIC
LIKE grammar is an abstract science, which is frequently attempted to be
taught too early; at the same time it may be observed, that the early
initiation of most children into card playing before they come to school, by
giving clear and visible ideas of the ten first numerals, seems greatly to
facilitate their acquirement of arithmetic; and if this fashionable amusement
could be so managed by the parents, who allow it to their children, as not to
excite a desire of gain along with a contest of ingenuity, it might be
rendered, in some measure, advantageous by exciting the mind to activity in
this branch of science; but in nevertheless not proper to be used in schools,
where its effects on the passions cannot be sufficiently watched, and
counteracted.

So much of the science of numbers as is in common use, as the numeration,
subtraction, multiplication, and division of money, should be learnt with
accuracy; to which should be added the rule of three, and decimal fractions;
which will abundantly repay the labor of acquiring them by the pleasure and
utility, which will perpetually result from the knowledge of them through life.
The higher parts of arithmetic, as algebra and fluxions, belong to the
abstruser sciences.

There are many introductory books to the science of arithmetic; those I have
heard most recommended are Vise's tutor's guide, Hutton's practical arithmetic,
and Wingate's arithmetic; but it is probable, that most of the introductory
treatises to arithmetic must be nearly of equal excellence.

SECTION VIII. GEOGRAPHY.
SO much of this science, as depends only on memory, may be taught to children
in their early years. They should be taught to point out on large maps the
counties of England, and then the principal divisions of Europe, and of the
other quarters of the world; and lastly to trace out the principal rivers and
mountains, which ingrave or imboss its surface, which is much to be preferred
to dissected maps; as it is the situations, rather than the exact forms of
counties and of countries, which should be attended to. Afterward the use of
the globes should be explained; and some short outline of astronomy ought to
accompany these lectures.

A compendious system of geography on cards, published by Mr. Newberry, in St.
Paul's church yard, supplies a very convenient method of instructing children.
Other geographical cards by Bowls, though they only mention the latitude and
longitude of important places, may also be used with advantage. The maps,
published by Mr. Faden, which have blank outlines to be filled up by the
student, are well designed, and not very expensive. The Abbe Gaultier's course
de Geographie formed into a game may, like his game at grammar, be rendered
amusing to children, and are tolerably well adapted both to private families,
where there are but few pupils, and to public seminaries of instruction.

Fairman's geography, a small octavo sold by Johnson, contains a short account
of the planets, and use of the globes. Brooks' gazetteer is an useful work; and
some other good geographical publications are mentioned in the catalogue of
books at the end of this work.

SECTION IX. HISTORY.
THE history of mankind is connected with the knowledge of the earth, which
they cultivate. A summary of the history of England should precede that of
other nations, as it may be more interesting, and more easily comprehended by
English children. Afterward an abridgment of the history of other nations both
ancient and modern may be collected from various writers, but are some of them
already made concise and agreeable by Dr. Goldsmith in his histories of Greece
and Rome, as well as of England and Scotland; which however cannot be well
remembered without a previous knowledge of geography, or by consulting maps
with every change of place in the account of transactions.

Afterward a brief, but correct knowledge of history still more ancient, and
of chronology, comprehending the four great empires of the world, with the rise
of the present kingdoms of Europe from the fall of the last, may be acquired
according to the plan of Mrs. Chapone in her letters on the improvement of the
mind. This outline of history and chronology may be readily and agreeably
learned from Priestley's chart of history; which with his chart of biography
should hang amongst a collection of large well-colored maps in the parlour of
a boarding school, that they may frequently encounter the eyes of the young
students.

SECTION X. NATURAL HISTORY.
THE history of the various other animals is also connected with our knowledge
of the various parts of the earth, which they inhabit. This is termed natural
history, and may be taught to children earlier than the histories of mankind,
as being easier to their comprehensions, and thence more interesting and
agreeable to them. Dr. Goldsmith in his history of animated nature has also
made this part of knowledge of easy access; and Mr. Bewick's account of
quadrupedes, with woodprints of the animals, and amusing talepieces to the
sections, are quite charming to children. To these should be added a treatise
on birds, with the scientific names admirably adapted for the use of schools by
Mr. Galton, published by Johnson in St. Paul's church yard, London, in three
small volumes. And besides these, children should be permitted occasionally to
inspect the collections of foreign animals, which are frequently exhibited in
this country; as an examination of the objects themselves conveys clearer ideas
than prints and descriptions, and at the same time adds to their knowledge, and
gratifies their curiosity.

SECTION XI. THE RUDIMENTS OF TASTE
ARE too much neglected in most boarding schools; these should be taught with
some care, as perhaps peculiarly belonging to Ladies; since taste enters into
their dress, their motions, their manners, as well as into all the fine arts,
which they have leisure to cultivate: as drawing, painting, modelling, making
artificial flowers, embroidery; writing letters, reading, speaking, and into
almost every circumstance of life.

The general rudiments of taste are to be acquired first by reading books,
which treat professedly on the subject; as the ten papers by Mr. Addison on the
power of imagination in the Spectator, vol. 6, No. 411; Akinside's pleasures of
imagination; Burke on the sublime and beautiful; Hogarth's analysis of beauty;
Mason's English garden; Wheatley's ornamental gardening; and Gilpin's
picturesque views. Secondly by selecting and explaining admired passages from
classical authors, as the Beauties of Shakespeare, of Johnson, and of Stern.
And lastly, by exhibiting and explaining the prints of beautiful objects, or
casts of the best antique gems and medallions.

The authors above mentioned have divided the objects of Taste into the
sublime, the beautiful, and the new; but a new sect of inquirers into this
subject have lately added the Picturesque; which is supposed to differ from the
beautiful by its want of smoothness, and from the sublime from its want of
size; but this circumstance has not yet perhaps undergone sufficient
examination. -- See essay on Picturesque, by U. Price.

Others have endeavored to make a distinction between beauty and grace; and
have esteemed them, as it were, rivals for the possession of the human heart.
But Grace may be defined Beauty in action; for a sleeping beauty can not be
called graceful, in whatever attitude she may recline; the muscles must be in
action to produce a graceful attitude, and the limbs to produce a graceful
motion. The supposed origin of our ideas of beauty acquired in our early
infancy from the curved lines, which form the female bosom, is delivered in
Zoonomia, vol. I. sect. xvi. 6; but is too metaphysical an investigation for
young ladies.

SECTION XII. DRAWING AND EMBROIDERY.
DRAWING as an elegant art belongs to the education of young ladies, and
greatly facilitates the acquirement of Taste. As this is generally taught by
masters, who profess it, I shall only observe, that though as an art it consists
of deceiving the eye, yet as a science it is capable of producing to the mind
the most sublime and beautiful images, or the most interesting scenes of life,
for our amusement, admiration, or instruction.

The same observation applies to Embroidery, which is painting with the needle
instead of the pencil, and seems to have been a fashionable employment of
ladies of the highest rank in the early ages of the world. As the ladies in
polite life have frequently much leisure time at their disposal, it is wise for
them to learn many elegant as well as useful arts in their early years; which
they may afterward cultivate for their amusement; and thus deprive solitude of
irksomeness: And by being able to entertain themselves, they may be less
solicitous to enter the circles of dissipation, and depend less for happiness
on the caprice of others.

Besides the amusement or accomplishment of possessing the talent of drawing,
there is another advantage resulting from it; which consists in using the
pencil as a language to express the forms of all visible objects, as of
flowers, machines, houses, landscapes; which can not in words alone be conveyed
to others with sufficient accuracy: For this end it may be sufficient to draw
in outlines alone the figures of natural things, without expending so much time
on this art, as is requisite to enable the learner to add the nice touches,
which form the delicate gradations of shade and color.

It may be supposed, that some knowledge of the science of perspective should
be previously acquired for the purpose of drawing the outlines of objects; but
I suspect, that this is not always necessary, since at our learning to see;
before we have compared the ideas received by the sense of sight with those
received by that of touch; any object placed before our eyes, as suppose the
face of a companion, must appear a flat colored or shaded surface, and not a
solid substance covered with eminences and depressions; as is so well proved by
Bishop Berkley in his theory of vision. Hence if any one could so far unlearn
the language of sight as to imagine the face of his companion to be a flat
colored surface only, (as it is really seen) he would draw from nature as
easily and exactly, as if he was copying a picture, as the inequalities would
appear lights and shades; and he would thus be enabled to take the likeness
with much greater facility and accuracy without the aid of the rules of
perspective.

SECTION XIII. THE HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY
IS connected with the study of taste, and should therefore be taught in
boarding schools; as without some knowledge of it the works of the painters,
statuarists, and poets, both ancient and modern, can not be understood. But as
a great part of this mythology consists of personified vices, much care should
be taken in female schools, as well as in male ones, to prevent any bad
impressions, which might be made on the mind by this kind of erudition; this is
to be accomplished by explaining the allegorical meaning of many of these
supposed actions of heathen deities, and by showing that they are at present
used only as emblems of certain powers, as Minerva of wisdom, and Bellona of
war, and thus constitute the language of painters; and are indeed almost the
whole language which that art possesses, besides the delineation of visible
objects in rest or in action.

These emblems however are not to be so easily acquired by descriptions alone,
nor so easily remembered by young pupils; as when prints of antique statues, or
medallions, or when cameos, or impressions of antique gems, are at the same
time shown and explained to them. For this purpose the prints of Spence's
Polymetis may be exhibited and explained; from which Bell's pantheon is
principally taken: And Dannet's dictionary of mythology, originally written in
French, may be occasionally consulted; and the notes on Mr. Pope's translations
of Homer.

There is also a little book entitled, "Instructions sur les Metamorphoses, par
M. Le Ragois," which, I am informed is an useful and unexceptionable work for
this purpose, containing a kind of summary of each story of fabulous mythology:
to which may be added a translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses, published by
Garth; which I am told, is the (...) work. Much agreeable knowledge of this
kind is to be found in Byrant's mythology; Abbe de Pluche's history of the
heavens; Warburton's essay on Eleusinian mysteries; to which I beg leave to add
the description of the Portland vase in the notes to the first volume of the
Botanic garden.

SECTION XIV. POLITE LITERATURE
MAY be divided into dissertations, plays, romances, poems; each of which, if
the works are properly selected, may afford amusement and instruction to young
persons; of some of the books of each of these classes of literature a
catalogue will be given at the end of the work.

Such dissertations, as have been generally admired, may be selected from the
Spectator, Tatler, Guardian, the World, the Rambler, Adventurer, Looker-on,
besides many others.

Plays are of three kinds, tragical, sentimental, and humourous; of the first,
Addison's Cato has been long admired; and the tragedies of Thompson consist of
fine language. Of the second kind Cumberland's comedies are instances; and of
the third Sheridan's comedies; some of which are entertaining and inoffensive,
and may be read by young ladies without injury to their morals, or much outrage
to their feelings.

There are many plays, which are better seen as exhibited on the stage, than as
read in the closet; because the objectionable passages are generally omitted in
the representation. But whether young ladies should be taught to act plays
themselves, as is done at some boy's schools, is a matter of doubt. The danger
consists in this, lest the acquisition of bolder action, and a more elevated
voice, should annihilate that retiring modesty, and blushing embarrassment, to
which young ladies owe one of their most powerful external charms.

If young ladies act plays amongst themselves only, or without admitting more
than two or three of their friends or parents; or if they repeat chosen scenes
of plays, or speeches only, much of the above objection ceases, and some
advantages may result to their attitudes or enunciation. Madam de Genlis'
Theater d'Education affords the least exceptionable whole plays, with the
sacred dramas of Miss Moore, and of Metastasio.

3. Novels or romances may be divided into the serious, the humourous, and the
amorous. Of these, the last should be entirely interdicted; but the first, when
well managed, may convey instruction in the most agreeable and forcible manner:
Such as Mr. Day's Sandford and Merton. The Children's Friend. Tales of the
Castle. Robinson Crusoe. Edward, by the author of Zelucco. And to these may be
added some other modern novels, the productions of ingenious ladies, which are
I believe less objectionable than many others; as the Evelina, Cecilia, and
Camilla of Miss Burney. The Emmeline and Ethelinda of Charlotte Smith;
Inchbald's simple story; Mrs. Brook's Emily Montague; and the female Quixote;
all which I have here introduced from the character given to me of them by a
very ingenious lady; not having myself read them with sufficient attention. And
lastly, the humorous novels, which are not written to inflame the passions,
convey instruction, as far as they are imitations of real life: Of these are Le
Sage's famous novel of Gil Blas; and Fielding's Tom Jones; neither of which
however are proper books for young readers.

There are many, who condemn the use of novels altogether; but what are epic
poems but novels in verse? -- It is difficult to draw the line of limit between
novels, and other works of imagination; unless the word novel be confined to
mean only the romances of love and chivalry.

It is true indeed, that almost all novels, as well as plays, and epic poems,
have some exceptional passages to be found in them; which might therefore be
expunged, before they are allowed to be read by young ladies. But are young
women therefore to be kept in entire ignorance of mankind, with whom they must
shortly associate, and from whom they are frequently to choose a partner for
life? This would be making them the slaves rather than the companions of men,
like the Sultanas of a Turkish Seraglio. And how can young women, who are
secluded from the other sex from their infancy, form any judgment of men, if
they are not to be assisted by such books, as delineate manners? -- A lady of
fortune, who was persuaded by her guardian to marry a disagreeable and selfish
man, speaking to her friend of the ill humor of her husband, lamented, that
she had been prohibited from reading novels. If I had read such books, said
she, before I was married, I should have chosen better; I was told, that all
men were alike except in respect to fortune.

We must however observe, that novels are perhaps more objectionable in schools
than in private education; as the comments of one bad mind may be dangerous to
the whole community: And as they are more amusing to young people than any
other books, if read too early, they may give a distaste to more useful
knowledge; which are good reasons for the total prohibition of them in schools:
And in private education, lest a preference of fiction to truth should be thus
instilled, the ridiculous passages, with which even the best novels abound,
should be carefully pointed out by a friend or governess: with their
exaggerations, improbabilities, and frequent deviations from nature.

There are indeed few books, which delineate manners, whether in prose or
poetry, however well chosen, which have not some objectionable passages in
them. In reading the fables of Esop, Mr. Rousseau well observes, that the
effect on the mind may frequently be totally different from that designed by
the author; as in the fable where the fox flatters the crow, and gains the
piece of cheese, the moral was designed to show the folly of attending to
flatterers; but may equally be supposed to applaud the cunning of the fox or
flatterer, who is rewarded. In the popular narrative of Robinson Crusoe a
childish superstition concerning intimations of future events, somewhat like
the second sight of the highlands of Scotland, is frequently inculcated; and
the use of rum or brandy is proposed as an infallible cure in all maladies;
which however I am told is corrected in the new Robinson Crusoe.

Pamela, and Joseph Andrews, and Clarissa Harlow, are recommended by Madame de
Genlis, and by Mrs. Macawley. -- Madame de Genlis in a note in one of her works
gives her reason for recommending Richardson's novels; because his heroines
retain a more considerable degree of command over their affections than those
of apparently less exceptionable romances. In this respect a novel called
"Plain Sense," lately published by Lane, and written by an ingenious Cheshire
lady, claims the preference to all others, and appears to me to carry this idea
to excess.

The works of Richardson are nevertheless not only too voluminous, and thence
would consume too much time, which might be better employed in schools: but in
these, and even in Mr. Pope's rape of the lock, and his Eloisa to Abelard, many
objectionable passages of another kind may be discovered. If these passages,
from which so few books are totally exempt, were expunged, it might raise
curiosity, and induce young people to examine different copies of the same
work, and to seek for other improper books themselves; it is therefore perhaps
better, when these books are read to a governess, that she should express
disapprobation in a plain and quiet way, of such passages, rather than to
expunge them; which would give a feeling of dislike to the pupil, and confirm
her delicacy, rather than give impurity to her ideas.

Much therefore depends on the conduct of the governess in this respect, so
long as they are under the eye of a judicious monitor, no real harm could
probably arise from their seeing human nature in all the classes of life, not
only as it should be, or as it may be imagined to be, but as it really exists,
since without comparison there can be no judgment, and consequently no real
knowledge.

It must nevertheless be observed, that the excessive study of novels is
universally an ill employment at any time of life; not only because such
readers are liable to acquire a romantic taste; and to return from the flowery
scenes of fiction to the common duties of life with a degree of regret; but
because the high-wrought scenes of elegant distress displayed in novels have
been found to blunt the feelings of such readers toward real objects of
misery; which awaken only disgust in their minds instead of sentiments of pity
or benevolence.

4. The works of the poets, as well as those of the writers of novels, require
to be selected with great caution. The same may be said of painting, sculpture,
and music; which by delighting the imagination influence the judgment, and may
thence be employed either to good or bad purposes: But as poetry, when thus
selected, like painting, sculpture, and music, its rival sisters, is an object
of refined taste, and affords an elegant amusement at least, it so far belongs
to the education of young ladies.

Gay's fables, Thomson's seasons, Gisborne's walk in a forest, are proper for
the younger classes of pupils; afterward Pope's Ethic epistles, and essay on
man, Gold-smith's poems, Akinside, Mason, Gray, and others, which are
enumerated in the catalogue. I forbear to mention the Botanic garden; as some
ladies have intimated to me, that the Loves of the plants are described in too
glowing colors; but as the descriptions are in general of female forms in
graceful attitudes, the objection is less forcible in respect to female
readers. And besides the celebrated poets of our own country, as Milton and
Shakespeare, translations from the ancients, as from Homer and Virgil; and from
the more modern poems of Tasso, and Camoens, may be read with pleasure and
improvement, though some objectionable passages may perhaps be found in all of
them.

5. For the purpose of forming a style in writing, a few well-chosen books
should be read often over; till the ear acquires, as it were, the music of the
sentences; and the imagination is thus enabled to copy it in our own
compositions; such as those papers of the Spectator, which are ascribed to
Addison, and are terminated with a capital letter of the word Clio; or some of
Lady Wortley Montague's letters from Turkey; or other works of chaste,
distinct, and expressive style, not overloaded with metaphors, which with
superabundance of ornament injure perspicuity.

But for other purposes of education it is perhaps better to teach young people
select parts of many books, than a few entire ones; not only because the pupils
will thus be acquainted with more authors in fashionable literature; but
because the business of polite education is to give the outlines of many
species of erudition, or branches of knowledge; which the young ladies may
cultivate further at their future leisure without the assistance of a teacher,
as may best suit their tastes or their situations.

I cannot conclude this section on polite learning without mentioning, that
some illiterate men have condemned the cultivation of the minds of the female
sex, and have called such in ridicule learned ladies; as if it was a reproach
to render themselves agreeable and useful. Where affectation is joined with
learning, it becomes pedantry, but this belongs oftener to the ignorant than to
the cultivated; as is so well elucidated in "Letters to literary ladies," a
small duodecimo published by Johnson, and written by one of the ingenious
family of E -- in Ireland.

SECTION XV. ARTS AND SCIENCES.
BESIDES the acquisition of grammar, languages, and common arithmetic; and
besides a knowledge of geography, civil history, and natural history, there are
other sciences, an outline of which might be taught to young ladies of the
higher classes of the school, or of more inquiring minds, before or after they
leave school; which might not only afford them present amusement, but might
enable them at any future time to prosecute any of them further, if inclination
and opportunity should coincide; and, by enlarging their sphere of taste and
knowledge, would occasion them to be interested in the conversation of a
greater number and of more ingenious men, and to interest them by their own
conversation in return.

1. An outline of Botany may be learnt from Lee's introduction to botany, and
from the translations of the works of Linnaeus by a society at Lichfield; to
which might be added Curtis's botanical magazine, which is a beautiful work,
and of no great expense. But there is a new treatise introductory to botany
called Botanic dialogues for the use of schools, well adapted to this purpose,
written by M. E. Jacson, a lady well skilled in botany, and published by
Johnson, London. And lastly I shall not forbear to mention, that the
philosophical part of botany may be agreeably learnt from the notes to the
second volume of the Botanic garden, whether the poetry be read or not.

2. An outline of Chemistry, which surprises and enchants us, may be learnt
from the Elements of chemistry by Lavoisier, originally published in French; to
which may be added a small work of Fourcroy called the philosophy of Chemistry.
The former of these illustrious chemists perished by the guillotine, an
irreparable loss to science and to mankind!

The acquirement of Chemistry should be preceded by a sketch of Mineralogy;
which is not only an interesting branch of science, as it teaches the knowledge
of diamonds and precious stones, and of the various mines of metals, coals, and
salt; but because it explains also the difference of soils, and is thus
concerned in the theory and practice of agriculture: But there is at present no
proper introductory book, that I know of, on this subject for the use of
children; as Cronstedt's and Bergman's, and Kirwan's mineralogy are too exact
and prolix; nor could be well understood without a small collection of fossils.

3. An outline of the sciences, to which Mathematics have generally been
applied, as of astronomy, mechanics, hydrostatics, and optics, with the curious
addition of electricity and magnetism, may best be acquired by attending the
lectures in experimental philosophy, which are occasionally exhibited by
itinerant philosophers; and which have almost exclusively acquired the name of
natural philosophy.

The books in common use for teaching these sciences are too difficult and
abstruse for the study of young persons. Some parts of natural philosophy are
rendered not unentertaining in the notes of the first volume of the Botanic
garden, as the theory of meteors, and of winds; and an account of the strata of
the earth; which nevertheless require too much attention for very young ladies;
but may be read with pleasure after leaving school by those, who possess
inquiring minds. It is to be wished that some writer of juvenile books would
endeavor easily to explain the structure and use of the barometer, and
thermometer, and of clocks and watches, which supply a part of the furniture of
our houses, and of our pockets.

4. In the same manner the various arts and manufactories, which adorn and
enrich this country, should occasionally be shown and explained to young
persons, as so many ingenious parts of experimental philosophy; as well as from
their immediately contributing to the convenience of life, and to the wealth of
the nations, which have invented or established them. Of these are the cotton
works on the river Derwent in Derbyshire; the potteries in Staffordshire; the
iron-founderies of Coalbrooke Dale in Shropshire; the manufactories of
Birmingham, Manchester, Nottingham; but these are not in the province of a
boarding school, but might be advantageously exhibited to young ladies by their
parents in the summer vacations.

5. In this section of arts and sciences it may be proper to mention the art of
producing a technical memory invented by Mr. Gray; which may be readily
acquired by consulting his book, and may perhaps be of advantage in remembering
dates or numbers; as they are expressed by letters, and formed into words. This
work I attended to in my youth, but found it an amusing trick, rather than an
useful art.

6. The art of writing Shorthand, which is said to be of English invention,
should also be mentioned in this place. The book I learned this art from was
published by Gurney, and said to be an improvement on Mason; other treatises of
shorthand I have also examined, but found them all nearly of equal excellence.
I can only add, that many volumes, which I wrote from medical lectures, I now
find difficult to decypher; and that as the words in shorthand are spelt from
their sound only; those scholars, who practice this art early in life, are
liable not afterward to spell our language correctly; and lastly, that I
believe, this art is still capable of improvement by first forming a more
accurate alphabet, than that in common use among all European nations.

7. This section on arts and sciences may perhaps be thought to include more
branches of them, than is necessary for female erudition. But as in male
education the tedicus acquirement of ancient languages for the purpose of
studying poetry and oratory is gradually giving way to the more useful
cultivation of modern sciences, it may be of advantage to ladies of the rising
generation to acquire an outline of similar knowledge; as they are in future
life to become companions; and one of the greatest pleasures received in
conversation consists in being reciprocally well understood. Botany is already
a fashionable study for ladies; and chemistry is ingeniously recommended to
them in the Letters to literary ladies.

SECTION XVI. MORALS.
THE criterion of moral duties has been variously delivered by different
writers: Expediency, by which is meant whatever increases the sum of public
happiness, is by some called the criterion of virtue; and whatever diminishes
that sum is termed vice. By others the happiness or misery of the individual,
if rightly understood, is said to be the bond of moral obligation. And lastly,
by others the will of God is said to constitute the sole criterion of virtue
and vice.

But besides systematic books of morality, which are generally too abstruse for
young minds, morals may be divided into five departments for the greater
convenience of the manner of instruction.

1. A sympathy with the pains and pleasures of others, or compassion. 2. A
strict regard to veracity. 3. Prudence, justice, chastity. 4. Fortitude. 5.
Temperance.
SECTION XVII. COMPASSION.
A SYMPATHY with the pains and pleasures of others is the foundation of all our
social virtues. "DO AS YOU WOULD BE DONE BY," is a precept which descended from
heaven. Whoever feels pain himself, when he sees others affected with it, will
not only never be liable to give pain, but will always be inclined to relieve
it. The lady, who possesses this christian virtue of compassion, cannot but be
a good daughter, a good wife, and a good mother, that is, an amiable character
in every department of life.

The manner of communicating this benevolent sympathy to children consists in
expressing our own sympathy, when any thing cruel presents itself; as in the
destruction of an insect; or when actions of cruelty are related in books or in
conversation. I once observed a lady with apparent expressions of sympathy say
to her little daughter, who was pulling off the legs of a fly, how should you
like to have your arms and legs pulled off? would it not give you great pain?
pray let it fly away out of the window: which I doubt not would make an
indelible impression on the child, and lay the foundation of an amiable
character.

This virtue of compassion is a certain foundation of benevolence; and on that
account renders children good to their own parents in the latter part of their
lives, as well as to all other people; an important circumstance to the
happiness of our latter years! Where cruelty or malevolence resides in the
breast, it is generally exercised most by the child upon the aged parent, with
whom in civilized society he frequently resides; and who often lives so long as
to stand in his way to the possession of a wished-for inheritance.

This compassion, or sympathy with the pains of others, ought also to extend to
the brute creation, as far as our necessities will admit; for we cannot exist
long without the destruction of other animal or vegetable beings either in
their nature or embryon state. Such is the condition of mortality, that the
first law of nature is "eat, or be eaten." Hence for the preservation of our
existence we may be supposed to have a natural right to kill those brute
creatures, which we want to eat, or which want to eat us; but to destroy even
insects wantonly shows an unreflecting mind, or a depraved heart.

A young gentleman once assured me, that he had lately fallen in love with a
young lady; but, on their walking out one evening in summer, she took two or
three steps out of her way on the gravel walk to tread upon an insect; and that
afterward whenever the idea of her came into his mind, it was attended with
this picture of active cruelty; till that of the lady ceased to be agreeable,
and he relinquished his design of courtship.

Nevertheless this sympathy, however amiable and necessary, may be carried to
an extreme, so as to render miserable the person, who possesses it; since many
pitiable objects must be seen in our journey through life, which we have not
power to relieve. This then furnishes us with a barrier or line, where to stop;
that is, we should endeavor to render our little pupils alive to sympathize
with all remediable evils; and at the same time to arm them with fortitude to
bear the sight of such irremediable evils, as the accidents of life must
frequently present before their eyes.

There should also be a plan in schools to promote the habit as well as the
principle of benevolence; each young lady might occasionally contribute a small
sum on seeing a needy naked child to purchase flannel or coarse linen for
clothes, which they might learn to cut out, and to make up themselves; and thus
the practice of industry might be united with that of liberality.

Another still more practical mode of producing a habit of benevolence in
children might be by inducing them to employ some leisure hours in little works
of taste, as in making artificial flowers, purses, fringes, and bestowing these
on poor people, in order that they might sell them for their support. Miss
Hartley at Bath, the daughter of the great medical philosopher of that name,
has lately exhibited an amiable example of this kind of philanthropy; she has
been long distinguished by her talents as an artist in painting; and has lately
distributed her elegant performances among the poor famished emigrants, who
reside in her neighborhood; who are thus greatly assisted by the sale of her
works.

Another channel, in which this sympathy should be taught to flow, is in the
observance of those attentions, which perpetually diffuse happiness by
promoting by courtesy of behavior the cheerfulness, or forwarding by ready
assistance the interests of those, whether equals, inferiors, or superiors;
with whom every one happens to associate or reside: which constitutes the
essential part of what is termed politeness of manners; and universally
indicates a benevolent disposition.

SECTION XVIII. VERACITY.
FOR the purpose of inculcating a love of truth early in life the love of
praise supplies the most certain means. This kind of honor has an honest pride
for it is basis: a story is related in one of the modern volumes of the
universal history of an inhabitant of Constantinople, who was brought to the
scaffold for denying the divine mission of Mahomet; and on having a pardon
offered him, if he would then declare his error, answered, that he would not
speak an untruth to save his life. And, I think, it is recorded, that one of
the fathers of the church used to affirm, that he would not tell a lie, were he
sure to gain heaven by it.

I once heard an ingenious lady say to a company of her friends, that her
daughter, a young girl, who stood by with a countenance flushed with pleasure,
never told her a lie in her life: This happy use of flattery was likely to
produce a love for veracity, which would never be destroyed by interested
motives.

The disgrace of telling a lie should be painted in vivid colors, as totally
destructive of the character of a lady or gentleman, rendering them
contemptible in the eyes of the world: And the inconvenience of this detestable
habit of lying should be explained from its preventing their being believed,
when they wish it; as is exemplified in the fable of the shepherd-boy; who
called out "the wolf, the wolf," so often to alarm his neighbors, and thus to
amuse himself, when no wolf was near; that when the real wolf attacked his
flock, he could by no vociferation prevail on any one to come to his
assistance: Or like the village-drunkard, who frequently amused himself with
crying out "fire," along the streets on his return from the alehouse in the
night, to the great alarm of the neighborhood; till at length, when his
cottage was really in flames, his distress was not believed, and he could gain
no assistance to extinguish them.

This sincerity of character should be confirmed by the example of the
governesses, who should themselves pay the most exact and scrupulous attention
to truth; they should not exaggerate trifling errors into reprehensible faults;
and, where reproof is necessary, should give it with kindness; and should not
only punctually fulfill their own promises, though to their inconvenience, but
exact the same from their pupils in return.

To these should be added the precepts of religion, as soon as their minds are
capable of receiving them, which uniformly inculcate truth and probity in all
our words and actions.

SECTION XIX. PRUDENCE, JUSTICE, CHASTITY.
THE impressions on the mind made by recent examples placed, as it were, before
our eyes have so much more durable effects, than the more abstracted ideas
delivered in systems of moral philosophy; that I believe the most efficacious
method of inculcating the virtue of prudence in respect to their own conduct is
by telling young people the ill consequences, which have lately happened to
others; whose persons or names they are acquainted with: so that a repetition
of the slander of a town, which always degrades the retailers, has sometimes
its advantage as a lesson to the hearers.

There is another kind of prudence, which it is necessary to acquire in some
degree, which arms the possessor against the ill designs of others; hence they
should be taught to beware of flatterers, gamesters, drunkards, and of all
ill-tempered persons. As this prudence is to be acquired by the knowledge of
mankind, such books as the maxims of Rochfoucault, and others, might be
recommended; but they give too gloomy a picture of human nature to be put into
the hands of young ladies.

"Know yourself" is a celebrated injunction, and may constitute one department
of Prudence, when any one undertakes some great action, or great change in the
condition of life; but "know other people" is equally necessary in passing
along this sublunary world, and may be inserted with propriety as another maxim
in the code of prudence. The facility of knowing others in the daily
intercourse of the world is produced by the knowledge of physiognomy, acquired
at schools in early life; while the passions continue to be impressed on the
countenances of children; and which is never so well acquired in private
tuition; and thus constitutes one of the great advantages of school-education.

JUSTICE and CHASTITY, which are the principal links, by which civilized
society is held together, are to be inculcated in young minds by similar
methods; that is by pointing out by examples the public punishment, or public
disgrace, which certainly accompanies the breach of either of these important
duties: and afterward to add the precepts of religion, when their minds are
capable of perceiving their force, to cooperate with the effect of the laws of
society, and of the opinion of the wise and virtuous.

SECTION XX. FORTITUDE.
IF female children are not treated with tenderness by a mother in their early
years of infancy, they are perhaps liable to acquire a harshness of character,
and an apparent unfeelingness, which afterward renders them less amiable;
though it may give them greater fortitude; which should therefore be inculcated
at their rather maturer years.

Neither the robust assailing courage, which prompts to the performance of
heroic actions, nor the ostentatious patience, which requires the flattery of
the public eye, for its support, belong to the female character. But that
serene strength of mind, which faces unavoidable danger with open eyes,
prepared to counteract or to bear the necessary evils of life, is equally
valuable as a male or female acquisition. This is termed presence of mind; it
depends on our judgment of the real value of things; and on our application of
those causes, which contribute to turn disagreeable circumstances to the best
advantage; and can therefore only be acquired by the general cultivation of
good sense and of knowledge.

An occasional effusion of tears has been thought an amiable weakness, and a
mark of delicacy of the sex. When tears are shed at the irremediable
misfortunes of others, it indicates an amiable sensibility; but when young
ladies indulge themselves in a promptitude of dissolving into incessant tears
at every trivial distress of their own, it shows a kind of infantine debility
of mind, and conveys an idea of their being unfit for the common duties of
life; and should therefore be discouraged by reasoning on the kind and quantity
of the evil, which disturbs them; and by reciting to them the examples of
fortitude exhibited by others in disasters much more calamitous, of which there
are examples in the letters of Lady Russel: And lastly by reminding them of the
consolations of religion.

A slight appearance of timidity has been esteemed another mark of delicacy of
the sex; but timidity is the companion of debility of mind rather than of
delicacy, and should not therefore be encouraged. In respect to the expressions
of fear the violent cries and distorted countenances of some ladies in
situations of danger exhibit them in no very amiable attitudes; while they
increase the confusion, and may be said "to help the storm;" but if to these be
added an affectation of fear without cause; as when a young lady screams
through the whole gamut at the sight of a spider, or a grass-hopper; the fault
becomes voluntary, and should be opposed and conquered by the shafts of
ridicule.

Impudence in common language has been termed boldness; and bashfulness has
been ascribed to timidity; but neither of them with sufficient precision; as
brave men have been known to be bashful, and cowards impudent. Assurance of
countenance arises from the possessor of it rather over-valuing his own
abilities; and impudence consists in this assurance with a total disregard of
the opinions of others; but neither of them bear any analogy to fortitude. On
the other hand modesty arises from the possessor of it rather undervaluing his
own abilities; and bashfulness consists in this modesty with great solicitude
about the opinions of others; but neither of them are attended with personal
fear. So charming is the appearance of this great sensibility by adding a blush
to the features of beauty, that no endeavors should be used to extinguish it
early in life. Nor should any means be contrived to increase it to excess, as
embarrassment both of thought and action, and even impediment of speech, is
then liable to attend the great anxiety it occasions.

SECTION XXI. TEMPERANCE.
INCLUDES the subjugation of the appetites and passions to reason and prudence;
it consists in our moderation in the use of all those things, which contribute
to the convenience, comfort, or enjoyment of life; as of food, dress,
pleasures; and in the restraining our licentious passions, as of anger, vanity,
love, ambition. The method to instill this virtue is by exhibiting the various
inconveniences, which attend unlimited indulgence; and thus to inculcate the
golden rule of "nothing to excess."

The example of the governess will have great effect in producing many of the
virtues above mentioned in the minds of her pupils. Justice in the most trivial
circumstance must be carefully and exactly done between children in respect to
each other in their little disputes at play. Moderation and self-government
should also constantly appear in the characters of those, who are to teach
these virtues to others.

SECTION XXII. RELIGION.
THE precepts of religion are best taught by requiring the young pupils
regularly to attend such places of divine worship as their parents direct; and
by reading on Sundays select parts of the holy scriptures, and some approved
books of sermons; as those of Blair, and a few others; and by inculating the
reasonableness of daily thanksgiving, and the duty of daily prayer, to the
great author of all good.

The divine morality delivered in the new testament should be repeatedly
inculcated to an infant audience, who cannot so well understand the
metaphysical parts of religion, such as the duty of doing to others as we would
they should do unto us: to love our neighbors as ourselves: to forgive
injuries, not to revenge them: and to be kind even to our enemies. For this
purpose the sermons of the old Whole duty of man are recommended; one of which
might be read every Sunday evening.

Ladies of more mature years, or who have finished their school-education, may
learn the necessity and usefulness of our excellent religion from Baron
Haller's letters to his daughter, from Lady Pennington's advice to her
daughter, and lastly from Mr. Gisborne's duties of the female sex: and the
defense of the truth of it may be learned from Mr. Payley's evidences of
christianity; but perhaps it is better for them not to perplex their minds with
many works of religious controversy.

SECTION XXIII. ADDRESS.
THERE is a fascinating manner in the address of some people, which almost
instantly conciliates the good will, and even the confidence of their
acquaintance. Machiavel in his history of Castruccio Castricani observes; that
his hero could assume such openness of countenance; that though he was known to
be a man practiced in every kind of fraud and treachery, yet in a few minutes
he gained the confidence of all, whom he conversed with; they went away
satisfied of his good will toward them, and were betrayed to their ruin.

This enviable address, which may be used for good purposes as well as for bad
ones, may be difficult to analize; but may possibly consist simply in a
countenance animated with pleasure at meeting and conversing with our
acquaintance; and which diffuses cheerfulness by pleasurable contagion into the
bosoms of others; and thus interests them in our behalf. It is not the smile of
flattery, nor the smile of self-approbation, nor the smile of habit, nor of
levity; but it is simply an expression of pleasure, which seems to arise at the
fight of our acquaintance; and which persuades them, that they possess our
love, and for which they barter their own in return.

However this conciliating manner may have been used, as above related, for bad
purposes; it probably proceeded originally from friendliness and openness of
heart, with cheerful benevolence; and that in those, who have in process of
time become bad characters, the appearance of those virtues has remained, after
the reality of them has vanished. What then is the method, by which this
enchantment of countenance can be taught? certainly by instilling cheerfulness
and benevolence into the minds of young ladies early in life, and at the same
time an animation of countenance in expressing them; and though this
pleasurable animation be at first only copied, it will in time have the
appearance of being natural; and will contribute to produce by association the
very cheerfulness and benevolence, which it at first only imitated. This is a
golden observation to those, who have the care of young children.

A very accomplished lady, who read the manuscript of this work, wrote the
sollowing with her pencil on the opposite page; "nothing can be more just and
interesting than the whole of this section; yet however desirable it may be to
mend an unpleasant abord, might one not suspect, since Nature has produced a
diversity of manner, that an attempt to engraft this beautiful cheerfulness on
a grave set of features might produce the worst of evil affectations? A natural
simplicity of manner, whether serious or gay, will always please; and probably
this amiable address may be rendered equally consistent with natural manners,
whether serious or gay?"

SECTION XXIV. CONVERSATION.
NEXT to the winning manners above described, the art of pleasing in
conversation seems to consist in two things; one of them to hear well; and the
other to speak well. The perpetual appearance of attention, and the varying
expression of the countenance of the hearer to the sentiments or passions of
the speaker; is a principal charm in conversation; to be well heard and
accurately understood encourages our companions to proceed with pleasure,
whatever may be the topics of their discourse.

Those, who have been educated at schools, and have learnt the knowledge of
physiognomy from their playfellows in their early years, understand the
pleasurable or painful fellings of all with whom they comverse, often even
before their words are finished; and, by thus immediately conforming the
expression of their own features to the sensations of the speaker, become the
interesting and animated companions above described, which is seldom seen in
those educated in private families; and which, as before observed, gives a
preference to school-education.

To speak agreeably in respect to manner consists in a voice clear, yet not
loud, soft, yet not plaintive; with distinct articulation, and with graceful
attitudes rather than with graceful actions; as almost every kind of
gesticulation is disagreeable. In respect to the matter it should be such as
coincides with the tastes or pursuits of those, to whom the conversation is
addressed. From hence it will appear, that both to hear well, and to speak
well, requires an extensive knowledge of things, as well as of the tastes and
pursuits of mankind; and must therefore ultimately be the effect of a good
education in general, rather than a particular article of it.

There are however faults to be avoided, and cautious to be observed, in the
conversation of young ladies; which should be pointed out to them by the
governess of a boarding school. Of these I shall mention first, that whenever
the thirst of shining in conversation seizes on the heart, the vanity of the
speaker becomes apparent; and we are disgusted with the manner, whatever may be
the matter of the discourse.

Secondly, that it is always childish, and generally ridiculous, when young
people boast of their follies, or when they accuse themselves of virtues;
neither of which they probably possess in the degree, which they describe. A
young lady was heard to say, "I am frightened to death at the sight of a bird:"
And another, that she was so inconsiderate, as to give her money to the poor
naked children, whom she saw in the streets in winter.

Thirdly, they should be apprized, that there is danger in speaking ill even of
a bad person; both because they may have been misinformed, and because they
should judge their neighbors with charity. A friend of mine was once asked by
a young man, how he could distinguish, whether the lady, whom he meant to
address, was good tempered; and gave this answer. "When any dubious accusation
is brought in conversation against an absent person; if she always inclines to
believe the worst side of the question, she is ill-tempered." There are some
nice distinctions on this subject of good nature delivered in Lady Pennington's
advice to her daughters, which are worth a young lady's attention.

Fourthly, that it is dangerous for a young lady to speak very highly in praise
even of a deserving man; for if she extols his actions, she will seem to give
herself the importance of a judge, and her determinations will sometimes be
called in question; and to commend highly the person of a man is in general
estimation inconsistent with the delicacy of the sex at any age.

Fifthly, young ladies should be advised not to accustom themselves to the use
of strong asseverations, or of a kind of petty oaths, such as "upon my honor,"
in their conversation; nor often to appeal to others for the truth of what they
affirm; since all such strong expressions and appeals derogate somewhat from
the character of the speaker: as they give an intimation, that she has not been
usually believed on her simple assertion.

Sixthly, laughing vehemently aloud, or tittering with short shrieks, in which
some young ladies, who have left school, indulge themselves at cards or other
amusements, are reprehensible; as their dignity of character must suffer by
appearing too violently agitated at trivial circumstances.

Seventhly, and uniform adherence to sincerity in conversation is of the first
importance; as without it our words are but empty sounds, and can no more
interest our companions than the tinkling of a bell. No artificial polish of
manners can compensate for the apparent want of this virtue, nor any
acquirements of knowledge for the reality of the want of it. Hence though the
excess of blame or praise of the actions of others may be imprudent or improper
in the conversation of young ladies; as mentioned in the third and fourth
articles of this section; yet in these, as in all other kinds of conversation,
their opinions should be given with truth, if given at all; but when the
character (...) are concerned, they should (...) with diffidence and modesty.

Lastly, if at any time any improper discourse should be addressed to young
ladies, which has a tendency to indecency, immorality, or irreligion, they
should be taught to express a marked disapprobation both in words and
countenance. So great is the power of the soster sex in meliorating the
characters of men; that, if such was their uniform behavior, I doubt not, but
that it would much contribute to reform the morals of the age; an event
devoutly to be wished, and which would contribute much to their own happiness.

To these might be added many other observations from the writers on female
education concerning a due respect in conversation to superiors, good temper to
equals, and condescension to inferiors. But as young ladies are not expected to
speak with the wisdom, or precision of philosophers; and as the careless
cheerfulness of their conversation, with simplicity of manner, and with the
grace, ease, and vivacity natural to youth, supplies it with its principal
charms; these should be particularly encouraged, as there are few artificial
accomplishments, which could compensate for the loss of them.

SECTION XXV. EXERCISE.
THE acquirements of literature, and of many arts, make the lives of young
people too sedentary; which impairs their strength, makes their countenances
pale and bloated, and lays the foundation of many diseases; hence some hours
should every day be appropriated to bodily exercises, and to relaxation of mind.

Such as tend to produce activity, and to promote the growth of the person in
respect to height, are preferred in the schools for young ladies to those,
which render the system more robust and muscular.

Of these playing at ball, at shuttlecock, swinging as they sit on a cord or
cushion, and dancing, in the open air in summer, and within doors in winter,
are to be preferred. To these some have recommended an exercise of the arms by
swinging leaden weights, which are called dumb bells; these should be very
light, if they be used at all, otherwise they load the spine of the back, and
render the shoulders thick and muscular, and rather impede than forward the
perpendicular growth of the person. The ringing of a real bell hung as is done
in churches, or the frequent drawing up of a weight by a cord over a pulley,
with a fly-wheel to prevent its too hasty descent, would be an exercise, which
might be used with great advantage by young people; as it both extends the
spine, and strengthens the muscles of the chest and arms.

Many other kinds of exercise have been recommended by authors: Madame Genlis
advises weights to be carried on the head, as milk-maids carry their
milk-pails; and even to add weights to the soles of the shoes of children to
strengthen, as she supposes, the muscles of locomotion in walking or running.
It is evident, that carrying weights on the head must be injurious to young
people, especially when there is a tendency to softness of the bones; as it may
contribute to bend the spine by their pressure, and to impede the perpendicular
growth of the body; and the walking in weighted shoes may induce awkward
gestures without any adequate advantage.

There are other modes of exertion, which, though graceful in themselves, are
not allowed to ladies by the fashion of this age and country; as skating on the
ice in winter, swimming in summer, funambulation, or dancing on the straight
rope: but walking with a stately measured step occasionally, like the march of
soldiers, and reading aloud frequently rather in a theatric manner, as well as
dancing and singing, will much contribute to give strength and grace to the
muscles of locomotion, and of vocality.

SECTION XXVI. AIR.
THE strength and activity of young people not only depends on the perpetual
exercise of their limbs, as described in the preceding sections, but on the
purity of the air, which they breathe, and even on the occasional coldness of
it. The cold air of winter acts on delicate people like a cold bath; as it
diminishes the action of the subcutaneous vessels for a time, and thus produces
an accumulation of animal power, whence an increased action of those vessels
and a consequent warmth of the surface of the body succeeds; and by this less
expenditure of animal power during immersion in cold air, and its consequent
accumulation, the person becomes stronger for a time and more animated; which
is termed in common language, "bracing the system." Hence to strengthen
delicate children they should be encouraged to go into the cold air of winter
frequently, but should not remain in it longer than a quarter or half an hour
at a time. In summer young people can scarcely continue too much in the air,
where they are shaded from the heat of the sun.

A constant immersion in pure air is now known to contribute much both to the
health of the system, and to the beautiful color of the complexion. And this
atmosphere should undergo a perpetual change and renovation; that the vital
air, which constitutes about one-fourth part of it, may not be too much
diminished by frequent respiration. Due attention should be given to this
important circumstance both by frequently urging the young ladies to amuse
themselves out of doors; and by the proper ventilation of the school-room,
dining room, bed-rooms, and their other apartments. For this purpose it is
convenient to saw off about one inch from the top of every door of these
crowded rooms, and opposite to this aperture to nail along the top of the door
a tin plate about two inches wide, rising at an angle of about forty-five
degrees; which will bend the current of air up toward the ceiling; where it
will be mixed with the warm air of the room, and sink down amongst the society
without the danger of giving cold to any one: And, besides these
door-ventilators, the upper sashes of every window should always be let down a
few inches, when the external weather will admit of it.

In respect to bed rooms, which have more than one bed, the doors should be
furnished with similar ventilators for the due admission of fresh air; and
during the summer-months a window should be kept a few inches open during the
night as well as the day; the sash of which should have a bolt or other proper
fastening for this purpose; nor should the fireplace be stopped up at any season
by a chimney-board, or a bag of straw; as many rooms are made to shut up so
close, that this is the only aperture, by which fresh air is admitted. To this
should be added, that the bed-curtains should never be drawn close round the
beds; which confine the air spoiled by frequent respiration, and the
perspirable matter, like a noxious atmosphere over the unconscious sleepers. At
the same time none of the beds should be placed very near either to an open
window, or to an open chimney, as a partial current of air might be injurious
by the coldness it might occasion.

In crowded bed-rooms, where children are close shut up for eight or nine hours
every night, not only the pale bloated complexion, which is seen in children of
crowded manufactories; but other diseases are produced by the impurity of the
air, such as indigestion, difficulty of breathing, and sometimes convulsive
fits, as mentioned in Zoonomia, vol. II. class. iii. 1.1.5. and lastly putrid
fevers; of which fatal instances frequently occur in the crowded habitations of
the poor. Hence parents cannot be too careful in inspecting the bed-rooms, and
the beds of the schools, to which they entrust their children; as not only
their present comfort, but their future health, and sometimes their lives
depend on this attention; as is further explained in the section on rheumatism.

Besides the due ventilation of rooms by a perpetual supply of pure air in
summer, something should be here said about the manner of warming them in
winter. As the quantity of air carried up a chimney is very great, owing to its
being rendered so much lighter than the external atmosphere by the heat of the
fire, strong currents of cold air press into the room at every chink of the
doors and windows passing toward the fire; and are liable to give catarrh,
rheumatism, kibed heels, and swelled fingers, to those scholars, who are
exposed to them. To lessen these currents of cold air setting in at every
aperture, the chimney should be so contracted over the fire-grate, as to admit
no more of the warm air to go up it, than is necessary to carry up the smoke;
and hence much more of the warm air near the fireplace will rise up to the
cieling; and descending, as it becomes cooler, in the distant parts of the
room, will form a kind of vertical eddy, and warm the whole apartment; adding
greatly to the heat produced by the radiation from the fire.

To effect this Doctor Franklin recommended an iron or tin plate to slide under
the mantle-piece over the fire, so as to contract the aperture of the chimney
to two or three inches in width, all the length over the fire-grate. And lately
Count Rumford has accomplished the same purpose by a flat stone about twelve
inches broad, and eighteen inches high; which is reared upon one end at the
back of the fireplace, about eight inches above the grate, and leans forward
toward the mantle-piece, so as to leave an aperture, three or four inches
wide, and twelve or fourteen inches long, over the front of the fireplace. The
use of both these contrivances is to contract the mouth of the chimney, and
thus to admit no more warm air up it, than is necessary to convey the smoke.
And the sliding iron plate in Franklin's plan, and the end-reared stone in
Rumford's plan, are designed to be occasionally withdrawn for the admittance of
the chimney-sweeper. These are described in detail in the essays of Doctor
Franklin, and Count Rumford; and it is believed, that one-third of the fuel may
be thus saved, and the rooms be kept more equally warm, and more salutary.

SECTION XXVII. CARE OF THE SHAPE.
DELICATE young ladies are very liable to become awry at many boarding schools,
this is occasioned principally by their being obliged too long to preserve an
erect attitude, by sitting on forms for many hours together. To prevent this,
the school-seats should either have backs, on which they may occasionally rest
themselves; or desks before them, on which they may occasionally lean. This is
a thing of greater consequence, than may appear to those, who have not attended
to it; and who wish their children to acquire a very erect attitude.

When the least tendency to become awry is observed, they should be advised to
lie down on a bed or sofa for an hour in the middle of the day for many months;
which generally prevents the increase of this deformity by taking off for a
time the pressure of the head and neck and shoulders on the spine of the back;
and it at the same time tends to make them grow taller.

Young persons, when nicely measured, are found to be half an inch higher in
the morning than at night; as is well known to those, who inlist very young men
for soldiers. This is owing to the cartilages between the bones of the back
becoming compressed by the weight of the head and shoulders on them during the
day. It is the same pressure, which produces curvitures and distortions of the
spine in growing children, where the bones are softer than usual; and which may
thus be relieved by an horizontal posture for an hour in the middle of the day,
or by being frequently allowed to lean on a chair, or to play on a carpet on
the ground.

Young ladies should also be directed, where two sleep in a bed, to change
every night, or every week, their sides of the bed; which will prevent their
tendency to sleep always on the same side; which is not only liable to produce
crookedness, but also to occasion diseases by the internal parts being so long
kept in uniform contact as to grow together. For the same reason they should
not be allowed to sit always on the same side of the fire or window: because
they will then be inclined too frequently to bend toward one side; which in
those constitutions, where the bones are too soft, is liable to produce
crookedness of the spine.

Another great cause of injury to the shape of young ladies is from the
pressure of stays, or other tight bandages; which at the same time cause other
diseases by changing the form or situation of the internal parts. If a hard
part of the stays, even a knot of the thread, with which they are sewed
together, is pressed upon one side more than the other; the child bends from
the side, which is uneasy, and thus occasions a curviture of the spine. To
counteract this effect such stays, as have fewest hard parts, and especially
such as can be daily or weekly turned, are preferable to others. A wise fashion
of wearing no stiff stays, which adds so much to the beauty of young ladies,
has commenced since the above was written; and long may it continue!

Where frequently lying down on a sofa in the day time, and swinging frequently
for a small time by the head, with loose dress, do not relieve a beginning
distortion of the back, I have used with some success a swing for children to
sleep in, as described in Zoonomia, vol. II. class. I 2.2.16. and also a
crutch-chair, as there delineated; and where these do not seem to succeed,
recourse may also be had to Mons. Vacher's spinal machine, first described in
the memoirs of the academy of Surgery in Paris, vol. III. with a good print of
it; and since made by Mr. Jones in London, at No. 6, North-street,
Tottenham-court Road; which suspends the head, and places the weight of it on
the hips.

It will be from hence easily perceived that all other methods of confining or
directing the growth of young people should be used with great skill, such as
backboards, or bandages; and that their application should not be continued too
long at a time; least worse consequences should ensue, than the deformity they
are designed to remove. Of these the stocks for the feet of children, for the
purpose of making them turn their toes quite out, and the frame for pressing in
their knees, as they stand erect, at the same time, I suspect, when carried to
excess, to be particularly injurious, and to have caused an irrecoverable
lameness of hip-joint; as explained in Zoonomia, vol. II. class I. 2.2.17.
These therefore should be used with proper caution, so as to give no pain or
uneasy feels, or not used at all.

To this it may be proper to add, that the stiff erect attitude, taught by some
modern dancing masters, does not contribute to the grace of person, but rather
militates against it; as is well seen in one of the prints in Hogarth's
analysis of beauty; and is exemplified by the easy grace of some of the ancient
statues, as of the Venus de Medici, and the Antinous; and in the works of some
modern artists, as in a beautiful print of Hebe feeding an eagle, painted by
Hamilton, and engraved by Eginton; and many of the figures of Angelica
Kauffman. And lastly, which is so eminently seen in many of the beauties of the
present day, since they have left off the constraint of whale-bone stays, and
assumed the graceful dress of the ancient Grecian statues.

In the tendency to curviture of the spine whatever strengthens the general
constitution is of service, as the use of the cold bath in the summer months.
This however requires some restriction both in respect to the degree of
coldness of the bath, the time of continuing in it, and the season of the year.
Common springs, which are of 48 degrees of heat, are too cold for tender
constitutions, whether of children or adults; and frequently do them great and
irreparable injury, as I have witnessed in three or four cases. The coldness of
river water in the summer months, which is about 65 degrees, or that of
Matlock, which is about 68, or of Buxton, which is 82, are much to be
preferred: The two latter are improperly called warm baths, comparing their
degree of heat with that of common springs; whereas they are in reality cold
baths, being of much lower degree of heat than that of the human body, which is
98. The time of continuing in a cold bath should be but a few minutes;
certainly not so long as to occasion a trembling of the limbs from cold. In
respect to the season of the year, delicate children should certainly only use
cold bathings in the summer months; as the going frequently into the cold air
in winter will answer all the purposes of the cold bath.

Other means of counteracting the debility of the system, or softness of bones,
which occasion crookedness, consist in taking internally from 10 to 20 grains
of extract of bark, with as much soda phosphorata, and mixed with from five to
ten drops of tincture of opium, twice a day for three or four weeks; as is
further treated of in Zoonomia, vol. II. class I. 2.2.14. and 16.

SECTION XXVIII. DRESS.
YOUNG Ladies should be instructed to show attention to their dress, as it
gives an idea of cleanliness of their persons; which has so great a charm, that
it may be reckoned amongst the inferior virtues; for this purpose an elegant
simplicity of dress is to be recommended in preference to that superabundance
of ornament, where the lady herself is the least part of her. The form of dress
must nevertheless perpetually vary with the fashion of the time; but a person
of taste may lessen those parts of a fashionable dress, which oppose beauty or
grace; and bring forwards those, which are more coincident with them; so as to
wear a dress in fashion, and yet not devoid of taste.

Thus when large hoops were in general use, which so totally militate with all
ideas of beauty and grace; ladies of taste wore them as small, as custom would
allow. So in respect to the earrings of the present day; since piercing the
tender part of the ear for the purpose of suspending a weight of gold, or of
precious stones, or of glass beads to it, reminds us of the savage state of
mankind; those ladies of taste, who think themselves obliged to comply with
this indecorous fashion, use the lightest materials, as a chain of small
pearls, to give a less distressing idea of the pain, they seem to suffer at
every motion of their heads. Hence also long pendant and complicated earrings,
however they may add to the dignity of riper years by their costliness, are
unbecoming to young ladies; as they seem to give pain in the quicker, though more
graceful, motions of juvenility.

Sir Joshua Reynolds, I think, observes in one of his addresses to the academy,
that hard curls of hair stiffened with the fat of hogs, and covered with the
flower of wheat, cannot be admitted into picture. The same may be observed of
that coat of mail, the whale-bone stays, the use of which is now so happily
discontinued. Both of these, however they may conceal the gray hairs and
waining figures of those, who are advanced in life, are highly injurious to the
flowing locks and graceful forms of young ladies.

As beauty consists of lines flowing in easy curves according to the analysis
of Hogarth; those parts of dress, which are composed of such lines, are always
agreeable. Thus a sash descending from one shoulder to the opposite hip, or a
grecian veil thrown back and winding carelessly down behind, are always
beautiful; but a few white ostrich feathers rising on the head before, and a
train of silk sweeping on the ground behind, add so much grace to a moving
female figure, as to attract all eyes with unceasing admiration.

In moving forwards the hair falls back, and in very swift motion floats upon
the air behind; hence by association of ideas, when the hair is made to retire
from the cheeks, it gives an intimation of the youthful agility of the person;
and when it is brought forwards over the cheeks, it may consent with unmoving
dignity, like the full wig of a judge, but diminishes our idea of the activity
of playful youth.

Where the appearance of use in dress can be given to ornaments, it suggests an
excuse for wearing them, and is therefore to be preferred; as diamond pins,
strings of pearl, and a comb of shell, to restrain the exuberant hair; or knots
of ribbons to fix the slipper on the foot, to contract the sleeve around the
arm, to unite the vest upon the bosom, or to attach the cap above the forehead.
And when these are similar in color, it gives an air of simplicity, and a kind
of pyramidal form to the dress; which the painters so much endeavor to exhibit
both in their landscapes, and their groups of figures.

Other ornaments, which bear no analogy to use in dress, should be sparingly
worn; lest they give an idea, that they were designed to display the pride of
the possessor, rather than to decorate her person. These are sometimes seen so
ill placed as to make deformities conspicuous, as a number of rings on singers
distorted with the gout, or splendid buckles on turned-in feet. Where there is
no appearance of use, all shining ornaments should be so disposed as to direct
the eye of the beholder to some beautiful feature of the lady, who wears them;
as diamond stars in the hair, and artificial flowers on the bosom.

Paint and perfumes are totally inadmissible in the dress of young ladies, as
they give a suspicion of natural defects in respect to color of the skin, and
odor of the breath. Where there exists but a mediocrity of beauty, and youth
is in the wain, a variety of pretty or of costly ornaments on the dress, and
even the whiteness of powder in the hair, may sometimes mingle with our idea of
the person, and seem to render the whole fairer, more pleasing, or more
respectable. But ornaments of every kind are useless or injurious to youthful
beauty; they add no power to the charm, but rather disenchant the beholder by
abstracting his attention; which dwells with undiminished rapture on beauty
arrayed by simplicity, and animated without affectation. Thus the majestic juno
of Homer is arrayed in variety of ornament, and with earrings, which have
three large pendant bobs to each, and commands universal homage. But his Queen
of Beauty is dressed with more simple elegance, in her magic sash, or cestus,
and charms all eyes.

The attention to taste in dress may nevertheless be carried into an extreme;
it should not seem to be the most important part of the education of a young
lady; or the principal object of her care; she should rather appear to follow
than to lead the fashion, according to the lines of Mr. Pope.

Be not the first, on which the new are tried, Nor yet the last to lay the old
aside.

SECTION XXIX. AMUSEMENTS
ARE generally distinguished from exercise, as they relieve or exhilerate the
mind. Cards may be occasionally used by children in private families, without
their gaming for money; and will in general facilitate their acquirement of
arithmetic; but cannot be allowed in schools, lest the young ladies should
expend too much time upon them, or should play for money clandestinely. But the
game of chess, from its bearing so great analogy to common life, is supposed
much to improve the most useful powers of the mind: It has the experience of
the remotest antiquity to recommend it, occasions no depraved passions, as it
is not played for money; and by the caution perpetually necessary to watch your
adversary, and the judgment required to contrive, arrange, and manage your own
affairs, employs and strengthens every part of the understanding.

Embroidery, drawing, music, as well as the exercises of dancing, swinging,
playing at ball, and shuttlecock, should be classed amongst the amusements of
young ladies; and should be reciprocally applied to, either in the house or in
the open air, for the purpose of relieving each other; and of producing by such
means an uninterrupted cheerfulness of mind; which is the principal charm, that
fits us for society, and the great source of earthly happiness.

SECTION XXX. PUNISHMENTS. REWARDS. MOTIVES.
IT is the custom of many schools to use some kinds of punishments, which
either give pain or disgrace to the delinquent, as a fool's cap, or a meal of
water gruel. The use of these are seldom if ever necessary in schools for young
ladies, and are always attended with disagreeable consequences, as they either
diminish the character of honor in the punished persons, sink their spirits,
or render them insensible to the opinions of others; or injure their health:
Insomuch that at some schools all that can be acquired can scarcely compensate
the loss of cheerfulness, and degradation of mind, or bad health, which their
punishments produce.

Thus the sitting in the public school for an hour in a cap with bells
diminishes the sensibility of a child to the opinions of her companions, and
thus gradually destroys one of the greatest motives to good actions, and of the
greatest restraints from bad ones. For the same reason reprimands and even
admonitions should be always applied in private, but applause or reward in
public.

A meal of water gruel, given as a punishment instead of a meal of animal food,
so frequently had recourse to in some boarding schools, I believe to have laid
the foundation of incurable debility. The diseases of debility, as scrophula,
bronchocele, softness of bones, and the consequent distortion of them, are very
common among the children of the poor in Derby, which on examination, I believe
to be owing to their food consisting chiefly of gruel; or sometimes with milk,
which has been twice skimmed, so that it is totally deprived of its most
nourishing part; at other times with weak salt broth, but seldom with solid
animal food. When broth is weak in respect to the quantity of fleshmeat boiled
in it, it is the custom of cooks to add much salt to it to increase the relish,
which renders it still more injurious to weak children; as salt contains no
nourishment, and by its stimulus increases the action of the system; and by
promoting great insensible or sensible perspiration diminishes the strength of
the child more, than the small quantity of meat dissolved in the broth can
counterbalance.

2. How then are refractory children to be governed? certainly by the
superiority of the mind of the teacher over that of the pupil. When a famous
lady in Italy was put to the torture, and questioned by what sorcery she had
governed a princess of the family of Medici; she answered "by no sorcery, but
by that power, which superior minds possess over inferior ones."

3. Besides the two circumstances, which so much govern the great world, I mean
hope of reward and fear of punishment; in the microscosm of a boarding school
blame and praise, if given very sparingly, will be found strong motives to the
little pupils to perform their tasks well, and of more efficacy ten times, than
the meal of water gruel, or the disgrace of a cap and bells. Esteem and
disgrace are observed by Mr. Lock to be of all others the most powerful
incentives to the mind, when once it is brought to regard them: And if once you
can communicate to children a love of credit, and an apprehension of shame, you
have instilled into them a principle, which will constantly act, and incline
them to do right, though it is not the true source from whence our actions ought
to spring; which should be from our duty to others and to ourseives. -- See
Essay on education, sect. 56, etc. where are many other valuable observations
on this subject.

4. Emulation at seeing others excel, if properly managed is another incitement
to industry. But as this is liable to degenerate into envy, it should rather be
left to its own operation, than be promoted by pointing out the examples, which
should be copied. It is better to say, "your task is not done to day so well as
you sometimes do it," than to say, "your task is not done so well as your
sister's." Since in the latter case envy, and its consequence hatred, may
succeed; a thing of tenfold worse consequence than the neglect of a thousand
tasks.

5. Though some degree of flattery may be used with success in teaching veracity
to very young children, as mentioned in sect. 18. of this work, yet I think it
should be used very rarely indeed, and only on very important occasions, lest
it should become a necessary motive of action, instead of moral duty; as
observed in Zoonomia, vol. II. class iii. 2.1.8. "The debility of the exertion
of voluntary efforts prevents the accomplishment of all the great purposes of
life. This often originates from a mistaken education; in which pleasure or
vanity is made the immediate motive of action, and not future advantage, or
what is termed duty. This observation is of great value to those, who attend to
the early education of their own children."

"I have seen one or two young married ladies of fortune, who perpetually
became uneasy, and believed themselves ill, a week after their arrival in the
country; and continued so uniformly during their stay; yet on their return to
London or to Bath immediately lost all their complaints; and this I observed to
happen to them repeatedly. All which I was led to ascribe to their being in
their infancy surrounded with menial attendants, who had slattered them into
the exertions, which they then used. And that in their mature years they became
torpid for the want of this stimulus, and could not amuse themselves by any
voluntary employment, but required ever after to be slattered into activity; or
to be amused by others."

6. Rewards have been given to children to excite their industry in the
performance of particular tasks; these are certainly less eligible motives to
action than the fear of disgrace, the love of reputation, and above all the
obligations of duty. Where nevertheless these are thought proper, the kind of
rewards requires some attention; which should consist of books, or maps, or
boxes of colors, or needle cases: but not of money, or of trinkets for
ornamental dress, or of a glass of wine. Where money is given as a reward for
industry in children, it may seem to them to be the proper motive of their
actions instead of reputation or of duty; and may thus induce the vice of
avarice or of extravagance. Where a fine cap or gown is given as a reward of
diligence, the pride of dress may be produced, and become their great motive of
action, instead of the love of reputation, or of duty. And lastly, where a
glass of wine is given as a reward for industry, a child is taught to believe
wine to be a most valuable acquisition, and a perpetual desire of it even to
intoxication may be the consequence. I remember a wealthy farmer, who had two
drunken sons, though he was a sober man himself, who told me, that he ascribed
this great misfortune to his having occasionally given them in their early life
a cup of ale as a reward for their exertious. -- See Lock on education, sect.
52, etc.

7. A very accurate observer, who has long had the conduct of schools of
various kinds for the instruction of the youth of both sexes, acquaints me,
"That he has often with extreme surprise observed a child make a greater
progress in some one branch of education in three months, than another of
similar age, opportunity, capacity, and even apparently of equal application,
has been able to effect in three years." The same observation has been made by
others, but he adds, "That this might probably arise from some trivial
circumstance, which determined the inclination of the fortunate student; and
that it is possible, that the means may sometime be discovered of governing
these incidents, and thus producing a new era in the art of education!"

Similar to this it has often been observed, that the first impressions made on
our infant minds by accidental disgust, admiration, or flattery, are the
frequent causes of our antipathies or aversions, and continue through life to
bias our affections or mislead our judgments. One of my acquaintance can trace
the origin of many of his own energies of action from some such remote sources;
which justifies the observation of M. Rousseau, that the seeds of future
virtues or vices are oftener sown by the mother than by the tutor.

SECTION XXXI. LISPING.
LISPING is a defect of pronunciation occasioned by children's making use of
the sound of the letter TH sibilant instead of the letter S; as instead of "is
it so," they say "ith it tho." To break this habit they must be taught to
pronounce the S, by putting the point of the tongue against the roots of the
upper teeth; and not to put it between their teeth as in pronouncing the TH.
This is easily accomplished by putting their own finger against the point of
the tongue, as it comes between their teeth, in attempting to pronounce the
letter S, and pushing it back into the mouth.

I once saw a young lady, who after she had left school, had the habit of using
occasionally, though not constantly, the gutteral CH instead of the letter S,
which was uncommonly disagreeable to English ears. She corrected this ill habit
by being taught, as above, how to place the tongue in pronouncing the S, but
not without many trials and much attention for some weeks; as great efforts and
pertinacious industry are required to break any habit, which has been long
esiablished.

Many children from the difficulty of speaking it are liable to a defective
pronunciation of the letter R; this in indeed almost general in some parts of
Northumberland, and is said to be a sound unknown in China; which obliged the
catholic missionaries sent thither by Louis the 14th to change the name of the
virgin Mary, from Maria into Malia, or from Mary into Mally. In speaking the
letter R the middle of the tongue is made to vibrate with semivocal air;
whereas in pronouncing L, the edges of the tongue only vibrate; the
Northumberland vernacular R is formed with sibilant air instead of semivocal
air, or differs from the true R, as S differs from Z. Both which should be
explained to those children, who have this imperfect pronunciation.

Among the lower orders of the people of London, who are called Cockneys, the
letter W is pronounced sibilant like the German W, and not semivocal like our
vernacular one; this seems to resemble the sound of V to inattentive ears; and
these Cockneys, are thence supposed to use V instead of W, as Vomen and Vine,
instead of Women and Wine. This defect is readily conquered by teaching such
children to give more vocal sound to their W, by sounding it at first like OO.

SECTION XXXII. STAMMERING.
THIS impediment of speech has generally for its remote cause a too great
diffidence, or bashfulness, joined with an ambition of shining in conversation;
and for its immediate cause an interruption of the association of the initial
letter of a word with the remainder of it. Which association is dissevered by
the ill-introduced sensation of awe, bashfulness, desire of shining, or fear of
not succeeding; and then violent voluntary efforts are in vain employed to
rejoin the broken association, and give rise to various distortions of
countenance, as explained in Zoonomia, vol. II. class iv. 2.3.1.

That this impediment of pronunciation is altogether a disease of the mind, and
not of the organs of speech, is shown by the stammerer being able to speak all
words with perfect facility, when alone, as in repeating a play; but begins to
hesitate, if any one approaches; or even if he imagines, that he is listened
to. Those words also are most difficult to him to pronounce, which he is
conscious, he cannot change for others, as when he is asked his own name, or
the names of other persons, or of places; and the more so if he is aware, that
the hearer is impatient to be informed, and that he cannot conjecture the name,
before it is spoken.

It requires great attention, and much time to overcome this bad habit; they
should be daily exercised in speaking single words as in spelling; and when
they hesitate or find difficulty in announcing the beginning of a word, they
should repeat it frequently aloud without the initial letter, and at length
repeat it with the initial letter in a soster tone.

Suppose the stammerer finds difficulty in speaking the word "Paper," and says
p, p, p, p, repeatedly, but cannot join the a after it. He must be taught to
pronounce aper, aper, aper, without the initial p, for many successive times;
and this aper should be spoken aloud with more breath than common, as if an h
preceded it; and at length he should add in a softer tone the letter p to it.

This, together with an hourly attention to speaking and reading slowly, and
practicing in this manner every word, which is not readily spoken, both in
private and in company, I am informed is the principle, on which those masters
cure this impediment, who make it a profession; and to this should be added a
frequent introduction to the society of strangers, in order to acquire less
agitation or anxiety about the opinions of others.

SECTION XXXIII. SQUINTING.
THIS defect of vision, which is termed strabismns, may frequently be conquered
in children, if it be attended to early, before it has been long established by
habit. In this deformity it generally happens, that one eye is better than the
other, which induces the child to view objects with the best eye, and to hide
the center of the nose. This greater irritability of one eye is often
occasioned, I suspect, in infancy, by tying a bandage for too long a time over
an eye, which has happened to be slightly inflamed, and thus decreasing its
power of action by disuse; in the same manner the large muscles of the body
become weakened by long inaction; and the right arm is generally stronger than
the left from its having been more frequently exercised.

In this case if the best eye be for an hour or two, or longer, covered every
day with gauze stretched upon a circular piece of whale-bone, so as to render
the vision of this eye as indistinct as that of the other, the child will
naturally turn them both to the same object, and in a little time the weak eye
will become stronger by being used, or the strong one weaker by disuse, and the
child will cease to squint.

Another kind of squinting is owing entirely to a bad habit, and consists in
looking at objects with one eye only at a time. The owl bends both his eyes
upon the object, which he observes; and by thus perpetually turning his head to
the thing he inspects, appears to have greater attention to it; and has thence
acquired the name of the bird of wisdom. All other birds, I believe, look at
objects with one eye only, but it is with the eye nearest the object attended
to; whereas in this kind of strabismns the person attends to objects with the
most distant eye only. This habit has probably been produced, by a cap worn in
infancy, which projected forward beyond the head on each side, like the bluffs
of a coach-horse, so as to make it easier for the child, as he lay in his
cradle, to view oblique objects with the eye most distant from them; which kind
of cap is therefore to be avoided.

A curious case of this ill habit of vision is related in the Philos. Transact.
vol. 68. by Dr. Darwin; which was relieved by fixing a parchment gnomon on the
nose of the little boy, which projected about an inch from the ridge of it, and
caused him for a time to view oblique objects with that eye, which was nearest
them.

SECTION XXXIV. INVOLUNTARY MOTIONS.
BY confinement in a school-room for many successive hours, and that without
being suffered to vary their posture, some of the more active and lively
children are liable to gain tricks of involuntary actions, as twitchings of the
face, restless gesticulations of the limbs, biting their nails, etc. which are
generally at first occasioned by the want of sufficient bodily exercise to
expend the superfluous animal power, like the jumping of a squirrel in a cage;
but are also liable to be caught by imitation of each other.

To prevent this kind of deformity children should be suffered to change their
attitudes and situations more frequently; or to walk about, as they get their
lessons. To counteract it the earliest attention is necessary; as a few weeks
frequently establish a bad habit, which cannot be removed without great
difficulty: This however may be effected early in the disease by a bandage
nicely applied on the moving muscles, or by adhesive plasters put tightly over
them; or by an issue placed over them, so as to give a little pain, when the
muscles are thrown into action under it.

SECTION XXXV. SWELLED FINGERS,
AND kibed heels, are inflammations liable to affect tender children in many
schools during the winter months. The latter of these complaints is generally
owing to the coldness of a brick or plaster floor to their feet, or to their
sitting in unchanged shoes and stockings, after walking in the wet; and the
former to their being kept too long from the fire in the cold parts of the
school-room without gloves.

Nothing prevents or cures these maladies but a due attention to keep the
extremities of delicate children warm, either by clothing, exercise, or fire.
The inflammation of the heels or toes may be sometimes removed by covering them
with a double linen rag moistened in a saturnine solution made by dissolving
half an ounce of sugar of lead in half a pint of water, to be renewed morning
and night. As the swelling of the fingers thus produced is liable to continue,
and to injure the shape of them, it becomes of greater importance; but may in
some measure be afterward diminished or removed by the frequent application of
vitriolic Either to them.

The skin of the lips, and of the hands and arms of children is liable to
become inflamed, and chopped, or rough, in frosty weather, owing both to the
coldness and dryness of the air. The former is relieved by the application of a
lip-salve made by mixing minium or red lead with spermaceti and oil to a proper
consistance; or by blue mercurial ointment. The latter by wearing leathern
gloves, the inside of which is smeared with spermaceti softened with a little
oil, or with pomatum; gloves thus prepared prevent too great exhalation from
the skin in frosty air, and the consequent too great dryness and roughness of
it.

SECTION XXXVI. BEDS.
THE rheumatism, and other inflammatory diseases, are frequently occasioned in
crowded schools by placing some of the beds with one side against a wall; where
the weaker child confined by a stronger bedfellow is liable to lie for hours
together with some part of it in contact with the cold wall; which in the
winter months has often been attended with fatal consequences; and especially
in those boarding schools, where the beds are small, and but one blanket
allowed to each of them, and a scanty feather-bed.

We are endued with a very accurate sense to distinguish heat and cold, which
should be nicely attended to; as the extremes of both of them are injurious to
health, and more so in our sleeping than in our waking hours. The extreme of
heat is not much experienced in this climate, except when it is artificially
produced; but that of cold is the cause of numerous diseases of the most fatal
tendency. A severe continued frost may may be borne by the strong, who can keep
themselves warm by their activity, but is destructive to the weak and
sedentary. In the year 1795 the weather in January, and in one week of February
was uncommonly severe; the same five weeks in January and February 1796 were
uncommonly mild; and it appears by the bills of mortality in London, that 2823
people died in these five weeks of frost in 1795; and that only 1471 died in
the same five weeks of mild weather in 1796, which is not much more than half
the number. -- See a paper by Dr. Heberden in Philos. Transact. for the year
1796.

Some misinformed parents have conceived, that a hard bed contributes to harden
their children in respect to their bearing cold, and have on that account laid
them on straw-mattresses, or on beds with boarded bottoms. The only difference
between lying on a soft or hard bed consists in this; the weight of the body in
the former case presses on a larger surface, and in the latter on a less;
neither of which has any reference to the habits of tenderness or hardiness in
respect to cold and heat; unless indeed a feather-bed is so soft, that, as the
child sinks down in the middle of it, the rising edges bend over him, and in
part cover him. Perhaps beds made of soft leather properly prepared, and
inflated with air, as the Emperor of Germany was said to use in camp, might be
preferable on this account to feather-beds.

The beds for young children cannot therefore be too soft, however they may
contribute to the indolence of grown people provided they do not keep them too
warm by bending over them as above described. But the too great hardness of
beds is, I believe, frequently injurious to the shape of infants by occasioning
them to rest on too few parts at a time; which hardens those parts by pressure,
and prevents their proportionate growth. It also occasions their sleep to be
less sound by the uneasiness it causes, and in consequence less refreshing.

The feet and knees and hands of weaker children are liable to become cold in
bed in winter, on which account it is more salutary for them to sleep with a
bedfellow, rather than alone; as they then naturally put their cold knees or
hands to their companion in bed, and thus frequently prevent rheumatic, and
other inflammatory diseases of fatal event. For the same reason it is better
for a new born infant to sleep with its mother in winter, or with a young
nurse, than in a solitary crib by her bedside; unless the artificial warmth of
the room be more nicely graduated, than is commonly done.

For the same reason, where children are too feeble from illness, a fire should
be allowed in their bedchamber in cold weather; as the cold air is otherwise
injurious to their lungs, which cannot be clothed so as to prevent the contact
of of the air, like the other parts of the body; a fire contributes also to
ventilate a room, and to circulate the air in it, and thence to render it more
salutary; but it should not warm it to more than 60 or 65 degrees, that its
temperature may not differ too much from that of the external atmosphere; as
those, who are kept generally too warm, are liable to take cold, at every blast
of air, not from (...) degree of cold, to which they happen to be exposed, but
to its difference from that, which they have been accustomed to. -- See sect.
xxvi.

The universal analogy derived from other animals, which produce a feeble
offspring, evinces the truth of this doctrine, both in respect to the softness,
and the due degree of warmth of their beds: Birds line the nests for their
young with feathers; the eider duck, and the rabbit, pluck the down from their
own breasts to increase the softness of the beds for their tender offspring;
and brood them with their wings, or clasp them to their bosoms for the sake of
warmth.

The number of hours required for salutary sleep is greater for younger
children, than for those more advanced; as during our progress through life we
acquire greater facility in using our voluntary power, and recruit it in less
time when exhausted. The younger classes of scholars may go to rest at seven,
or eight; but the elder should be allowed another hour for the purposes of
reading or other kinds of improvement; the hour of rising must vary with the
season.

SECTION XXXVII. DIET.
MILK is the food designed by nature for young animals, and should be given
them in its recent state. As the cream is the most nourishing part of the milk,
and is easier of digestion than the coagulable or cheesy part; and as milk
constitutes a principal portion of the aliment of children; to take off the
cream once, or even twice, as is practiced in some boarding schools, before it
is given to the children, is a shameful circumstance of parsimony, and very
injurious to their healths. -- See sect. xxx, on punishments.

Nor should the milk given to children be long kept in a boiling heat; because
much of its fragrant oil is then evaporated, as is evident from the fine odor
of the steam of it, when taken from the fire; and its further deterioration
from long boiling is shown by its then inducing constipation, which is contrary
to its effect in its recent and natural state.

Nevertheless even new milk does not always agree with children, after they
have passed the years of infancy. For milk taken into the stomach must be
always previously curdled or coagulated, before it can be digested, or
converted into nourishment: Hence milk is always found curdled in the stomachs
of calves, and the acid juice of their stomachs is used to coagulate their milk
in the process of cheesemaking: Now the stomachs of young children abound more
with this acid juice than in their riper years, and when a sufficient quantity
of it is not produced for the purpose of curdling the milk, which they drink,
it is liable to disagree.

To these few therefore, whose stomachs do not easily digest the coagulable
part of milk, other fluid sood should be allowed to breakfast, as gruel, or tea
with cream and sugar in it, and with bread and butter; and to supper, a slice
of cold meat, or of cheese, or tart, or bread and butter, with small beer or
water for drink; but it is probable, that milk might be made to agree with all
stomachs, if it was previously curdled by rennet, as I have often recommended
with success to elderly persons; or by letting it stand, till it becomes
spontaneously sour like buttermilk, as is the custom of the inferior people of
Scotland; except nevertheless where the distaste of the child is owing to
prejudice or caprice, which is then incurable but by time.

For dinner animal food plain dressed, with vegetables or bread, and pudding of
wheat flour, milk, and eggs, with sugar or butter, are more nourishing than
vegetable sustenance alone. Wheat flour contains more nutriment than that of
rice, or barley, or oats; as it possesses more starch in proportion to its
bulk, and a gluten approaching to animal matter. But much salt or spice should
not be allowed in the diet of children, as they are certainly unwholesome by
inducing a weakness of the capillary and absorbent systems of vessels in
consequence of their too great stimulus, and contain no nourishment.

As butter and sugar are perhaps the most nutritive of animal and vegetable
substances, they may be more easily taken to excess; on which account some
mistaken parents have totally prohibited the use of them; which is a great
disadvantage to weaker children, who require more nutritive diet in less bulk
than stronger ones.

For the drink of the more robust children water is preferable, and for the
weaker ones, small beer; but in this, as well as in the choice of solid food,
their palates should be consulted; for the nice discernment of this sense is
bestowed on us by nature to distinguish, what the stomach can best digest. It
should however be observed, that in artificial viands the taste cannot
distinguish, what is unwholesome; as sugar may be mixed with arsenic. So in the
drinking of fermented liquors, as ale or wine, which are chemical productions,
the palate is not to be consulted; a glass of mere wine should never be given
to children, as it injures their tender stomachs like a glass of brandy or rum
or gin to a grown person; and induces those diseases, which it is often
erroneously given to prevent; as weakness of digestion, with the production of
worms in consequence. Wine nevertheless diluted with thrice its quantity of
water may be allowed, if required, instead of small beer; or ale or cider
diluted with thrice their quantities of water.

Ripe fruits, or fruit pies, are peculiarly serviceable to the constitutions of
children, as well as agreeable to their palates; as they are known to prevent
biliary concretions, and consequent jaundice; and on the same account to render
the skin clearer and fairer, as well as to counteract the tendency to putrid
diseases. These should therefore be allowed to children at all seasons; and may
either occasionally constitute a part of their diet; or may be recommended to
them, when they lay out part of their pocket-money with hucksters, in
preference to seed-cakes, gingerbread, or sugar-plumbs; the former of which are
generally made of bad flour deteriorated by spice; and the latter are liable to
be colored with gamboge, vermillion, verdigrease, or other noxious drugs.

Too long fasting, or food of less nourishment than they have been accustomed
to, are peculiarly injurious to children; as they weaken their power of
digestion, impair their strength, and impede their growth. The children of the
inferior poor, and of families, which have adopted some ill-advised rules of
abstemious diet, are frequently starved into the scrophula, and become
pale-faced and bloated, owing to deficiency of the quantity of blood, and to
want of sufficient stimulus to the absorbent system.

If young people are thought to be too corpulent, a diminution of food with an
increase of exercise, when they have obtained their full growth, may be used
with advantage; but even then not without caution. Since young ladies, after
they have left school, who by ill advice use too great abstinence, are liable
to become pale and emaciated, and to fall into universal debility; which
remains through a diseased and comfortless life.

SECTION XXXVIII. ECONOMY.
1. A DUE regard to the prudent expenditure of their money, a proper care of
their clothes, and a parsimonious attention to the lapse of time, should be
inculcated into the minds of young ladies. To effect these purposes one
efficacious method, where the usual exhortations fail, may be to suffer their
imprudence to produce some inconvenience to themselves; which they should be
permitted to feel to a proper degree.

Thus a profuse unnecessary expenditure of their pocket money will shortly
induce poverty; which should by no means be alleviated by a fresh supply of
money; till the inconvenience produced has effected a conviction of the
impropriety of their conduct. Except when the expenditure has been made for
some laudable purpose, and then no time should be lost in restoring the power
of repeating it.

The same mean may be used in respect to their omission to take care of their
clothes; they should find the necessity of repairing them with their own hands,
or of foregoing some visiting amusements, till new ones can be procured; that
thus the consequent inconvenience may teach them economy, if they are otherwise
too inattentive to the usual admonitions on these subjects.

In respect to the economy of time the hours of amusement and of exercise
should be regularly counted; and the length of time young ladies employ in
dressing should be nicely attended to; as in adult life the hours consumed at
the toilet of some ladies is perfectly ridiculous, and detains them from more
important duties. Perhaps a stated time might be allowed the young ladies for
adjusting the articles of their dress, that they might acquire a habit of
disposing them with neatness, taste, and elegance, and yet with expedition.

2. Men are generally trained from their early years to the business or
profession, in which they are afterward to engage; but it most frequently
happens to ladies, that though destined to the superintendance of a future
family, they receive scarcely any previous instruction; but begin this
important office with a profound ignorance of the value of money, and of the
proper application of the things, which surround them.

Many young ladies destitute of mothers, and without a home, are continued at
school to a later age; such should be formed into a class, and properly
instructed in domestic economy; each of them superintending the business of the
family, a week or a month by turns; not only providing for the table, and
directing the cookery, but they should also be taught other parts of domestic
employment, as cutting out linens, and making them up with plain and strong
needle work, either for their own families, or to be given as clothing for
necessitous infants or mothers.

Such an addition of domestic knowledge and benevolent industry to ornamental
accomplishments would give the school, that procures it, a decided advantage
over other schools, which have no such institution.

SECTION XXXIX. SCHOOL-EDUCATION.
THE advantages of a school-education, where twenty or thirty children are
properly instructed, over that in a private family are derived from several
sources. First, it must be observed, that almost all our exertions in early
life are owing to our imitating others; in childhood we are most liable to
imitate the actions of those, who are somewhat older than ourselves; and in
manhood, of those who are in somewhat higher life; whence the general
prevalence of fashion in dress and manners. Now there are more examples to
cause imitative activity in well conducted schools, and the children in
consequence become more active in the pursuit of their studies, and in the
acquirement of their accomplishments.

It may be added, that not only children, before they have acquired the use of
reason or voluntary deliberation, but that the greatest part of adult mankind
learn all the common arts of life by imitating others; and that even dumb
creatures seem capable of acquiring knowledge with greater facility by
imitating each other, than by any methods, by which we can teach them. Thus
dogs, when they are sick, learn of each other to eat grass as an emetic; and
cats to moisten their paws for the purpose of washing their faces. And the
readiest way to instruct all brute animals is by practicing them with others of
the same species; which have already learnt the arts, we wish them to acquire,
as explained in Zoonomia, vol. I. sect. 22.3.

A second advantage of schools, when well conducted, is that children often
take pleasure in teaching each other, insomuch that at boy's schools I have
often observed, that the lower classes have learnt more from their
school-fellows of the higher classes, than even from their masters; which has
sometimes arisen from the friendship, or vanity of the elder boy, and sometimes
from the solicitation of the lower one; but has in all cases been advantageous
to both of them.

A third superiority of school education arises from an emulation, which
naturally exists, where many pursue the same studies, but which should not be
encouraged by rewards or degradations; as it then may degenerate into envy or
hatred; but should in general be left entirely to its own operation; as
mentioned in sect. xxx.

A fourth advantage of school-education is from the children acquiring a kind
of practical physiognomy; which renders them more intelligent, and more
interesting companions; and is of greater consequence in our passage through
life, than almost any single accomplishment, as explained in sect. vi. and
sect. xxiv. of this work.

Fifthly, where languages are learnt by conversation, as is generally practiced
in teaching the French language, a school-education properly conducted, is much
superior to that of a governess in a private family. And languages are so much
easier taught to children by conversation than by the abstract rules of
grammar, that Mr. Lock is solicitous to have the latin and greek languages
taught by conversation in boys' schools; and thinks the time of learning words
might thus be much shortened, which now occupies seven or eight years; part of
which might be much better employed in acquiring the knowledge of things.

The Philosopher, who despising the goods of fortune said, "he was rich, though
he carried about with him every thing, which he possessed," meant to assert,
that strength of mind joined with strength of body, were superior to any other
advantages of life. A good education furnishes us with this inestimable
treasure; it accompanies us at home, travels with us abroad; delights us in
solitude, graces us in society; comforts us in misfortune, guards us in
prosperity; contributes to the happiness of others, and ensures our own.

SECTION XL. CATALOGUE OF BOOKS.
I BEG leave to apprize the reader, that I have inserted a great part of the
following catalogue of books for the younger children, because they were
recommended to me by ladies, whose opinions I had reason to regard, and not
from my own attentive perusal of them; which has been prevented by my other
necessary occupations. Such of them therefore, as are less generally known, a
parent or governess will please to read, before they put them into the hands of
their children. And I can only add, that if I had myself been better acquainted
with them, the collection would probably have been less numerous.

LEARNING TO REAP. -- SEC. 3.
SPELLING-Book, by D. Fenning. Harry and Lucy. Mrs. Barbauld's Spelling-Books.
Mrs. Barbauld's Lessons. Fabulous History of Robins, by Mrs. Trimmer. Fairy
Spectator. Circuit of Human Life. Scenes for Children. Rational Sports.
Rational Dame. History of England, with cuts. 1 vol. Looking-Glass for the
Mind, with cuts by Bewick. Cobwebs to catch Flies. 2 vols. Little Truths. 2
vols. -- Little Mentor. Blind Child. -- Poor Child's Friend. Davenport Family.
-- Letitia Lively. Visit for a Week, or Hints on the Improvement of Time.
Village School. 2 vols. Prince Le Boo. Sandford and Merton. 3 vols. Parent's
Assistant. 3 vols. Evenings at Home, 6 vols. Leisure Hours, by P. Wakefield, 2
vols. Mental Improvement, by P. Wakefield, 2 vols. Juvenile Anecdotes. Pleasing
Instructor, 2 vols. Rudiments of Reason, 3 vols. Rural Walks, by Chapter Smith, 2
vols. Rambles farther, by Chapter Smith, 2 vols. Juvenile Magazine. Governess of an
Academy. Progress of Man and Society, by Trusler. Beauties of the Creation, by
Riley. Mentoria, by Ann Murry. Gay's Fables. -- Dodsley's Esop's Fables.
There are innumerable other books published for the use of children from one
penny to a shilling and upwards by almost every bookseller in London. Many of
the above are the works of reputable writers; and the others have been
recommended to me by those, who have perused them.

GRAMMAR. SECT. 5.
Grammatical Introduction. Mrs. Devis' Rudiments of Grammar. Lowth's
Introduction to English Grammar. Ash's Grammar. -- Smetham's practical Grammar.
Johnson's English Dictionary, Oct. edit. Entick's Spelling Dictionary. General
Grammar, by Messrs. Port Royal. Took's Epea Pteroenta, or Diversions of Purley.
Jeu de Grammaire, par de Gaultier.
These three last treat of Grammar too minutely and artificially, rather as a
science itself, than as an aid to facilitate the acquirement of languages, and
are therefore less adapted to schools.

FRENCH LANGUAGE. SECT. 6.
Chambaud's Grammar and Vocabulary. Course de Lectures pour Les Enfans, par Abbe
Gaultier. La Bagatelle, 2 vols. Petites Miscel. pour les Enfans. Le Magazin des
Enfans, par M. de Beaumont. Education complete, par M. de Beaumont. Instruction
pour les Jeunes Dames. Theater d'Education, par Mde. de Genlis. Les Veillies du
Chateau, par Mde. de Genlis. L'Ami des Enfans, par Berquin. L'Ami des
Adolescents, par Berquin. Mythologie des Jeunes Demoiselles, par M. de la
Mimardiere, 2 vols. 12 mo. Fr. and Eng. Conversations d'Emilie, French and
English. Lodoick, French and English, 6 vols. Idylles de Gesner. Oevres de
Florian. -- Les Petites Montagnards. La Campaign de la Jeunesse: -- Varietes
Historique. L'Eleve et son Instructrice. Drames et Dialogues de Mad, de la
Fite. Questions par Mad. de la Fite. Fables de Cambray. Letters de Mad. de
Lambert a son fills. Discourse fur l'Histoire universal, par Bossuet. Gil Blas.
-- Paul et Virginie, par St. Pierre. Letters d'une Peruvienne. -- Lettres de
Sevigne. Voyages de Cyrus. Numa Pompilius. Telemaque. Voyages de Jeune
Anacharsis, 6 vols. 12mo.
ITALIAN LANGUAGE. SEC. 6.
Tasso. -- Metastasio. -- Select Plays of Goldoni. Scelta Italiane. A selection
of Metastasio's Works, in 2 vols. small. Ganganelli. -- Bentivoglio. -- Pastor
Fido. Gil Blas, translated into Italian. Lettres d'une Peruvienne, translated
into Italian, with accents. Telemaco, a translation from Telemaque. Baretti's
Italian Grammar. Baretti's Italian Dictionary. Baretti's Italian Library, 8vo.
The greatest part of these French and Italian books for the use of children,
as well as very many English ones, may be had at Mr. Peacock's juvenile
library, Oxford-street, London.

ARITHMETIC. SEC. 7.
Vise's Tutor's Guide. -- Hutton's practical Arithmetic. Wingate's Arithmetic.
Walkingam's Tutor's Assistant.
GEOGRAPHY. SEC. 8.
Large well-colour'd four sheet Maps of the World, of Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, and of England. Geographical Cards by Newbury. Geographical Cards by
Bowls. Geographical Cards with prints of dresses. Fairman's Geography, 8vo.
Turner's Geography, 12mo. Faden's Maps with blank outlines. Moral System of
Geogrophy, 12mo. Harris on the Globes Guthrie's Geographical Grammar. Brookes'
Gazetteer. Abbe Gaultier's jeu de Geography.
CIVIL HISTORY. SEC. 9.
History of England, with prints. Characters of Kings of England, with heads by
Bewick. Trimmer's Histories of England, Greece, and Rome. Riley's historical
pocket Library, 6 vols. 12mo. Rollin's Ancient History. Goldsmith's Histories
of Greece, Rome, England, and Scotland. Millot's Elements of History. --
Plutarch's Lives. Priestley's Lectures on History. Priestley's Chart of
History. Priestley's Chart of Biography. Mrs. Chapone's Letter on Chronology.
Circle of Sciences, by Newberry, 7th v. on Chronology Voyages and Travels, by
Mavor, now publishing in Nos. Beauties of England. Beauties of Nature and Art,
13 vols. 12mo.
Hume's and Henry's Histories of England; Robertson's Histories of Charles the
5th, and of America; with Rollin's and Millot's ancient and modern Histories,
are too voluminous for school books.

NATURAL HISTORY. SEC. 10.
Galton's Treatise on Birds, 3 vols. 12mo. Natural History of Beasts and of
Birds, 2 vols. History of Quadrupeds, by Mrs. Teachwell, 2 vols. Rational Dame.
-- Bewick's account of Quadrupeds. Goldsmith's Animated Nature, 8 vols. 8vo.
Buffon's Natural History abridged, 2 vols. 8vo.
Dictionaire Raisonne, par Bomare, 6 vols. 8vo. is a very useful work on
Natural History to be occasionally referred to, rather than to be read as a
school book. Pennant's books of Zoology; Barbut's Histoire des Insects; White's
Natural History of Selbourn; and many other works with numerous plates, are too
voluminous or too expensive for the use of schools.

RUDIMENTS OF TASTE. SEC. 11.
Spectator, vol. 6, No. 411, to 422. -- Burke on Sublime and Beautiful. Blair's
Lectures. -- Hogarth's Analysis of Beauty. Akenside's Pleasures of Imagination,
8vo. Longinus on the Sublime, translated by Smith. Mason's English Garden. --
Wheatly on ornamental Gardening. Price's Essay on Picturesque. -- Gilpin's
Picturesque Views. Sir Joshua Reynolds' Discourses to the Academy. Clio on
Taste. -- Beauties of Shakespeare. -- Of Pope, 2 vols. -- Of Johnson, -- Of
Rambler, Adventurer, etc. 2 vols. -- Of Stern, -- Of Spectator, Tatler, etc. 2
vols. Warton's History of Poetry. -- Pope's Essay on Criticism. Addison's
Criticisms on Milton in the Spectator. Spence's Criticism on Pope's Odyssy. --
Mrs. Montague's Essay on Shakespeare. Warton's Essay on Pope, 2 vols. 8vo. Lord
Kaim's Elements of Criticism, 2 vols.
This last work is highly ingenious, but too abstruse for young ladies, who
might more easily improve their taste in respect to visible objects by
frequently being shown with proper remarks a select collection of the printe of
beautiful landscapes, or of beautiful figures.

HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY. SEC. 13.
Young Ladies Mythology, by Miss de la Mimardiere, 2 vols. 12mo. Bell's
Pantheon, 4to. -- The notes in Pope's translation of Homer. Dannet's
Dictionary, in French or English, 4to. Instruction sur le Metamorphoses d'
Ovide, par M. Ragois. Garth's Translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses. Spence's
Polymetis, folio. -- Bryant's Mythology, 3 vols. 4to. Abbe de Pluche's History
of the Heavens, 2 vols. 8vo
These three last works are too difficult or too voluminous for young ladies,
who might learn heathen mythology more casily and more agreeably from a select
collection of the impressions from antique gems and medallions, or of prints of
ancient statues.

DISSERTATIONS. SEC. 14.
Spectator, 8 vols. -- Guardian, 2 vols. Tatler, 6 vols. -- The World, 4 vols.
Rambler, 4 vols. -- Adventurer, 4 vols. Mirror, 3 vols. -- Anacharsis,
translated from the French, 7 vols. 8vo. Conversations of Emelia, 2 vols. --
Turkish Spy. Essays for young Ladies, by Miss H. Moore. Improvement of the
Mind, by Mrs. Chapone, Lambert's Advice to a Son and Daughter, Gregory's Advice
to a Daughter. -- Lock on Education. Miss Bowdler's Works, 2 vols. 8vo. --
Miss Talbot's Works, 2 vols. Calendar of Nature, by Dr. Akin, Introduction to
the Knowledge of Nature. Hallifax's Advice to a Daughter. -- Fitzosborn's
Letters, Con Phillips's Whole Duty of Woman. Lord Chesterfield's Letters; the
1st volume only, 4 vols. 8vo. Some of Lady W. Montague's Letters, 2 vols.
Rollin's Belles Lettres, 4 vols. 12mo. British Plutarch. -- Johnson's Lives of
the Poets. Aikin's Life of Howard. -- Keir's Life of Day. Franklin's Life, by
himself. -- Enfield's Speaker. Elegant Extracts, 3 vols. large octavo.
Preceptor, 2 vols.
The English and French prose translation of some of the ancient classics
should be added, as Mrs. Carter's Epictetus; Mrs. Fielding's Xenophon;
Melmouth's Epistles of Pliny, and of Cicero to his Friends; and the Abbe
Mongault's of those to Atticus; and many others.

PLAYS. SEC. 14.
Addison's Cato. -- Thomson's Tragedies. Caractacus and Elfrida, by Mr. Mason.
Edgar and Elfrida --.Cumberland's Comedies. Sheridan's Comedies. -- Beauties of
Shakespeare. Sacred Dramas, by Miss Moore. -- Sacred Dramas, by Mad. de Genlis.
Sacred Dramas, by Metastasio. L'Ami des Enfans. -- Theater of Education, by
Mad. de Genlis. Tragedies de Racine. -- Tragedies de Corneille.
NOVELS. SEC. 14.
Sandford and Merton, 3 vols. Children's Friend, by Berquin. New Robinson
Crusoe. Adelard and Theodore, by Mad. de Genlis. Tales of the Castle, by Mad.
de Genlis, 5 vols. Moral Tales, by Dr. Percival, Moral Tales, by Miss Mitchel,
2 vols. 8vo. Stories from Life, by M. Wolstencrost. Rasselas, by Dr. Johnson,
with Continuation. Agatha, 1 vol. 12mo. -- Plain Sense, 3 vols. 12mo.
Disobedience, 4 vols. 12mo. -- Edward, by the Author of Zelucco. Evelina, by
Miss Burney, 2 vols. -- Cecilia, by Miss Burney, 5 vols. Camilla, by Miss
Burny, 5 vols. Emmeline and Ethelinda, by Chapter Smith. Simple Story, by Mrs.
Inchbald. Emily Montague, by Miss Brooks. Female Quixotte, 2 vols. Belisarius,
by Marmontel, -- Caroline de Leitchfield, Les Romans de L'Abbe Prevot. Laure,
5vols. 12mo.
POEMS. SEC. 14.
Gay's Fables. -- Thomson's Seasons. Gisborne's Walks in a Forest. -- Moore's
Fable's for the Female Sex. Hayley's Serena, and his Epistles. -- Cowper's
Task. Gray's Poems, -- Collins' Poems. Goldsmith's Poems, 2 vols. -- Lord
Lyttleton's Poems. Addison's Poems. -- Carter's Poems. Aikin's Poems. --
Jerningham's Poems. Akenside's Pleasures of Imagination. Mason's Works, 3 vols.
8 vo. -- Milton's Poetical Works. Pope's translation of Homer's Iliad. Pope's
translation of Homer's Odyssey. Pope's Works, -- Dr. Warton's edition. Garth's
translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses. Dryden's, or Pitt's translation of Virgil.
Hoole's translation of Tasso's Jerusalem delivered, 2 vols. Mickle's
translation of Camoen's Lusiad. Botanic Garden, 2 vols. Dodsley's Collection of
Poems. Elegant Extracts, in verse. Henriade de Voltaire.
ARTS AND SCIENCES. SEC. 15.
Lee's Introduction to Botany. Botanical Dialogues, for the use of Schools, by
M. E. Jackson. Families of Plants, translated from Linneus, 2 vols. System of
Vegetables, from Linneus, 2 vols. Notes on vol. II. of Botanic Garden. Curtis's
Botanical Magazine, with colored prints; many volumes of which are already
published and which continues to be now published at one shilling a number,
1797. Martyn's translation of Rosseau's Letters on Botany. Lavoisier's Elements
of Chemistry, 2 vols. 8vo. Fourcroy's Philosophy of Chemistry, Watson's
Chemical Essays. Kirwan's Mineralogy, 2 vols. 8vo. Notes on Vol. I, of Botanic
Garden. Grey's Memoria Technica. Gurney's Shorthand. Ladies' Encyclopedia, by
Seally, 3 vols. 12mo. Circle of Sciences, 7 vols. small. Introduction to Arts
and Sciences, by Turner, 1 vol.
MORALITY. SEC. 21.
Elements of Morality, translated from Salzmann, 3 vols. Gisborne's Duties of
the Female Sex. Letters of Lady Russel, 8vo. Economy of Human Life. Old Whole
Duty of Man. Paley's System of Morality. Gisborne's Answer to Paley.
These two last works are too scientific for young minds to encounter.

RELIGION. SEC.
Select parts of Scripture. Barbauld's Hymns. Sacred Dramas, by Charl. Smith
Sacred Dramas, by Mad. de Genlis. Sacred Dramas, by Metastasio. Old Whole Duty
of Man. Blair's Sermons, 4 vols. Carr's Sermon's. -- Ogden's Sermons. Baron
Haller's Letter to his Daughter. Lady Pennington's Advice to her Daught.
Fashionable Religion, by Miss H. Moore. Wisdom of God in the Creation, by Ray.
Durham's Physico-Theology. Divine Benevolence asserted, by Dr. Balguy.
Trimmer's Sacred History, 6 vols. Butler's Analysis. Paley's Evidences of
Christianity, 2 vols. 8vo.
Books of controversial divinity are not recommended to Ladies.

RUDIMENTS OF TASTE IN A SERIES OF LETTERS FROM A MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTERS.

PREFACE.
CORNELIA, daughter of Scipio Africanus, and mother of the Gracchi, was not
more distinguished by the Nobility of her rank, than by the luster of those
virtues which adorned her character -- a most pleasing and amiable trait of
which shines in that little incident recorded to her immortal honor. A Lady of
Ionia coming one day to visit her, impatiently expected to be shown the
splendour and magnificence of her toilette, which she supposed, from her rank
and fortune, to be very superb. The illustrious Roman prolonged the
conversation till her children were at hand, and then introducing them to her
visitor -- "These, says she, are my jewels."

The writer of these Letters has so great a veneration for the domestic
character of this Lady, that she thinks she cannot do better than give them to
the public, under the signature of Cornelia. And whatever their other defects
may be, they have this at least to recommend them, that the same sentiments of
maternal tenderness which influenced the Roman Matron, gave rise to these
epistles, and prompted a fond Mother to become an Author.

RUDIMENTS OF TASTE.
LETTER I.
A DESIRE of happiness is the first propensity of the heart. -- It is born with
us, and to attempt its suppression were equally fruitless and wrong; for the
Author of Nature has done nothing in vain, and the happiness he has imprinted
on the mind so clear an idea of, has somewhere an existence.

Hitherto you have obeyed the impulse of nature in the artless pursuits of
childhood; but the time is at hand, when this sweet tranquillity will be
interrupted by the bustle of the world, which will not longer permit you to
repose in the simple amusements of dressing dolls, pursuing butterflies, or
plucking, daisies. Sweet dear delights of innocence: on which, as you climb the
rugged heights of life, you will look back with fond regret.

But we are not born for ourselves alone; and therefore have duties to perform,
obligations to discharge, and difficulties to encounter; in the course of
which, many a severe check is given to this happiness which we all so ardently
seek; yet the desire of it will even acquire strength by the repulse, and there
was never yet a wretch who had found it diminished by misfortune. I wish the
success of this passion could be shown as demonstrable as its existence.

But the truth is, all mankind are running after the same object, though in
such opposite directions, that if it were not for their concurrent testimony,
it would be scarcely credible that they had each the same view. Yet it is the
fate of most of them to sit down at last, in the very same disposition which
Solomon was in when he complained, rather peevishly it must be owned, that all
was vanity and vexation of spirit. Man walks indeed in a vain shadow, and it is
pitiable to reflect that a being of so transient a duration should yet waste
the trifling portion of time allotted him in vain and fruitless pursuits, and
after all the schemes of the sanguine, and the labors of the active, to find
the desired attainment as far off as ever.

But this has been the case of millions, and I am afraid will continue to be
so, at least till we are unanimous in deciding on that grand point wherein this
good, of which we have all so high an idea, consists: an agreement from which
alas, we are at the farthest distance imaginable. And here, my dearest girls,
lies the whole of the mistake. The Creator has not been wanting to provide a
happiness exalted as the mind itself can conceive; but man himself errs in the
pursuit of it; some placing it in riches, some in power, scarcely one in an age
supposing it to be where it really is -- in the practice of virtue.

But while the human heart is set on acquirements, in which it can find no
satisfaction if attained, the span of life must necessarily be passed in
restless anxieties and melancholy disappointment. It was the aim of philosophy,
to draw just estimates of things, and to prevent its pupils from being dazzled
with the splendour of wealth and power; it taught that the sovereign good was to
be found in rectitude of will. It would be a shame for us to be at a loss on
such an important subject, who have received lessons from a much better master
than ever gave lectures in the schools of Athens.

Rest assured that in the exercise of social and religious duties, the mind
will find her solid happiness. Wandering in restless search, like Noah's dove,
it is here she finds at length the welcome olive, the branch whose verdure
blooms for immortality. Should you doubt the assertion, be prevailed on at
least to try the experiment.

LETTER II.
PLEASURE has something so alluring in the very name, that it is not surprising
it finds so great a number of votaries. On no account would I have you
insensible to its attractions, but rather lead you to its flowery paths, and
conduct you to the most refined delights. These however you can never obtain,
except you are guided in the choice by taste and judgment. A taste in pleasure
is necessary for the selection of such as are above the enquiries of the
vulgar, suitable to delicate and refined minds, and correspondent to the
noblest sentiments; of course dependant more on intellectual, than on corporeal
faculties. Taste never fails to reject whatever is gross and sensual; yet even
among the more resined pleasures, a sound judgment is wanted, to discriminate
the solid and rational, from the frivolous and fastidious. The elegant hand of
fashionable dissipation has often given a polish to what, in its own nature,
can never deserve the name of pleasure.

Under this head must be comprehended the various species of fashionable
amusements, which are injurious either to health or fortune. One would scarcely
suppose such pursuits as these should ever be dignified with the name of
pleasure. Yet when numbers are daily seen hazarding, not only extravagant sums,
but peace of mind also, at the gaming-table -- When the order of nature is
inverted, and the refreshments of repose are bartered for midnight routs, we
must conclude that such valuable sacrifices are not made but with the
expectation of some supreme pleasure to reward them: how seldom such rewards
are found, can best be determined by the testimony of the dissipated and gay,
who after they have wasted the most valuable blessings of life, as time,
health, spirits, etc. will generally confess that they have never found the
satisfactions they sought after.

To be able to divest real enjoyment from the false glosses the world has put
upon it, is a piece of wisdom becoming a philosopher; but it is a piece of
wisdom, you my dear girls, must also acquire, if you expect to be happy.
Fashion has arrogated to itself the prerogative of fixing the criterion of
pleasure; but fashion is often a dangerous director, and is at best an
imperfect one; for who has a power of effectually biassing the natural
disposition of another; if therefore what is called amusement be not agreeable
to the real turn of the mind, it ceases to be viewed in that light, and can
only be considered as an irksome conformity to the tastes of others.

Yet, abject as such a submission undoubtedly is, there are thousands who
voluntarily yield to it who are content to live, move, and act, not as they
like themselves, but as the polite world thinks fit to dictate. I am no
advocate for affected singularity in things merely indifferent; but when the
idol fashion breaks in upon the rules of virtue, as it too often does, or the
true enjoyment of life, this is so mean a slavery that a rational being might
be expected to despise it.

When therefore reason and religion have given the clue to your pleasures,
resolve always to have them of your own choosing, and not of other people's. The
sanction of numbers is the cause that draws youth from virtue and happiness:
reason, when aided by a proper education, would, if left to herself, point out
the way to both.

There are pleasures, my dear girls, to be met with in this journey of life,
pure and sublime ones too, if we look for them through the medium of unvitiated
tasle. Did you ever discharge a social duty, but upon looking into your heart,
you there perceived a glow of satisfaction? But if you aim at more exalted,
more rapturous sensations, give full scope to the impulses of benevolence; try
what it is to heal the brokenhearted; diffuse joy through the mansions of
sorrow, and rescue merit from the pressure of indigence and misfortune. --
These employments are capable of yielding pleasures suitable to the most
exalted capacities, boundless as the most sanguine imagination can paint them.

But if so vast a multitude have erred in the pursuit of pleasure, through
levity, not an inconsiderable number, of a very opposite temper, are at equally
as great a distance from it: these are the morose and cynical, who will not
condescend to the sober satisfactions that are to be found in a domestic
circle, where the social affections are cultivated: if the gay and volatile
mistake the nature of pleasure, these seem to question its very existence, and
pass through life without stooping to pick up even one of the fair blossoms which
nature has scattered in the way.

Ever be your hearts open to the sweet emotions of social love, and you will
not have cause to complain that the path of human life affords nothing but
briars and thorns.

Nor is it from the relative duties alone we can derive happiness; the amusing,
the interesting book of nature is open to all who can read it: here you meet
with eternal variety, order, and beauty; a thousand charms await the mind which
possesses a taste for simple pleasures; to such the whole creation is a
boundless source of rational amusements. Happy, ineffably happy, they who can
be pleased with artless nature, and contemplate, with delight, the noble
imagery with which she abounds. For my part, I should desire no greater proof
of the purity and elegance of your taste, than to hear you speak in raptures of
the graceful foliage of a wood, the beauty of a lawn, or any of those charming
rural scenes which are so often over-looked, for the far less nobler
productions of art.

Esteem me ever the most affectionate of your friends.

LETTER III.
EVERY one knows that human life is exposed to various miseries; but every one
does not know, at least does not consider, that the far greater part of these
miseries spring from the passions: yet the passions, you reply, are implanted
in us by nature -- we cannot eradicate them.

That is true; you cannot eradicate the passions, nor is it expedient you
should; for as we are the workmanship of Infinite Wisdom, so doubtlessly the
propensities He has formed us with, are in themselves very good; but then their
good or ill tendency must be determined by this single question, Whether they
govern us, or we govern them? In the latter case they resemble those salutary
breezes, which waft health and sweetness on their wings: in the former they may
be compared to certain hurricanes, which tear up all before them, and deform
the beauteous aspect of the most luxuriant climates. There is more felicity to
be found in the world than is often supposed; but never let us pretend to look
for it before we have silenced the passions; the perpetual contention we must
have with them will else interrupt our successful search.

Pride, my dear girls, is a vice that springs up in the mind, almost without
her attending to it: its characters are an immoderate self-love, conceitedness,
and arrogance, with a profound contempt of every other person; ever insatiable
in its desire of respect, extremely susceptible of the slightest affronts, and
jealous of the least tribute of applause paid to another. Persons of this cast
cannot in the nature of things be happy, as they may be said to live in a state
of hostility with all the world; like Ishmael, they have their hands against
every man, and every man's hand is against them.

Ambition condemns its wretched votary to forego the sweets of content and
present ease, for the uneasy dreams of rank and power. It is happy for the
world when fate denies to the ambitious that power to which their desires are
perpetually aspiring. Innumerable are the horrid deeds, which the historic page
records, that have been perpetrated by the impulse of this restless passion;
yet if in pity to mankind, its direful effects are restrained, still the bosom
where it rages must be a prey to inexpressible agonies.

Envy is a natural attendant on pride and ambition: it has very aptly been
compared to a vulture preying on the vitals, and there could not possibly have
been devised a more expressive similitude. That mind which is capable of
regarding with the least degree of regret, the more fortunate acquirements of
another as a perpetual source of disquietude and must ever pine beneath the
inexpressible misery, which is both the consequence and the punishment of so
base a propensity. As envy is the meanest of all the passions, so in its own
nature it is the most opposite to happiness.

Covetousness is a vice that absorbs every finer feeling of the soul. Whatever
sordid satisfaction the miser may feel in amassing his treasures, yet the cares
which unavoidably attend it, and the solicitude the preservation of it demands,
more than balance the selfish gratification. He knows nothing of the sweet
emotions of charity and benevolence, and must be ever a stranger to the noble
sensations they excite. -- It is well if the suggestions of his boundless
avarice do not prompt him beyond the bounds of integrity. The honesty of a
covetous person can be but doubtful at the best.

A revengeful disposition is as dreadful to society as burdensome to itself: it
is the whirlwind of the soul, which under its dominion resembles a fury of the
infernal regions. What sad catastrophes have been effected by revenge! what
inexpressible torment overwhelms the heart, where that dreadful venom operates!

It is easy to perceive, by the slightest glance, that every one of the
passions here enumerated are totally destructive of peace: there can be no such
thing as tranquillity in the breast which they inhabit. Let it, then, be the
care of my dearest girls, to guard against the fatal ascendancy of either of
them. There cannot be a more lamentable object than a human being who submits
to become the sport of passions: a barque in a storm, driven by winds, and
shattered by the tempest, exhibits but a faint picture of such a wretch, whose
days pass in continual anguish; he looks for peace, but finds despair; casts
oblique reflections on the wisdom and goodness of Providence; distrusts his
attributes; cuffes his own being and dies if possible more wretched than he
lived.

The infinitely wise and good Creator saw the abundant evil that would accrue
to mankind from the degeneracy of the passions, and therefore in his goodness
determined at an appointed time to promulgate a religion, the aim of which
should be to regulate the passions, and direct them to their proper channel;
such is the Christian revelation; in its ends and nature an antidote to moral
evil.

Perhaps the natural passions of the human mind may be reduced to two -- the
love of pleasure and the love of praise; and from the corruptions of these may
be traced every irregular affection of the heart -- when men no longer knew the
true source from whence to look for happiness, or approbation, it is not much
wonder it should be sought in power, riches and preeminence; not that the love
of these should branch into self-love, vain glory, and all the other evil
passions, which cause so much misery in the world.

The regulation of the heart and its desires, is a point then of the utmost
importance, since on it depends your present peace and eternal glory. "Keep thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." And when you
have repelled the approach of any passion, guard still more effectually against
its entrance, by endeavoring to establish in your mind the contrary virtue; --
as for instance, subdue pride and cherish humility; guard against the desire of
power and riches, by attaining that poverty of spirit which is content with
little, and desires no applause but that of Heaven.

Never lose sight of this truth -- that there is no happiness adequate to the
capacities of the human soul, but what is found in the exercise of piety and
virtue; nor any praise worthy her regard, but what results immediately
therefrom.

LETTER IV.
THE most glorious conquest you can possibly obtain is that of yourselves.
Solomon was of opinion, that he who could govern his own spirit, had attained a
much higher point of dominion, than if he should rule a kingdom. It is
certainly much easier to give wise and upright laws to others, than to obey
them ourselves; and when you can control your own inclination, you will have
learned the whole essence of moral philosophy.

But a negative virtue is not all that is to be attained, although thousands
content with it, maintain through life the character of good sort of people. --
The epithet, however, contains no very high eulogium, those good kind of folks
seldom rise above a mediocrity in goodness. It certainly is not sufficient to
abstain from evil, a christian must be distinguished by active virtue.

The Christian religion is a beautiful comment on the moral law. The priest who
passed by the wounded Jew, was, for aught we are told to the contrary, a very
good sort of man, and had some sentiments of compassion, for he went and looked
on the poor creature, and no doubt kindly wished it had been in his power to
relieve him; but the good, the benevolent Samaritan, was the generous, active
friend, whose character will never be read without being admired. The lawyer
also possessed a tolerable share of negative merit, having always kept the
commandments; yet says our Savior, thou lackest one thing -- that heroic
benevolence, which disregards all attention to selfish gratification, in the
noble ardour with which it contributes to the necessities of mankind.

These instances are fine illustrations of the Mosaic dispensation, and
eminently tend to exalt human nature to the highest possible perfection. It is
not enough, say the gospel tenets, that ye refrain from actual violence to any
one -- you shall love your enemies, and do good to those that hate you. Severe
injunction! -- yet you see by it to how refined a pitch the virtue of a
christian must aspire.

Do not then rest satisfied with being as just or kind as the letter of the law
exacts -- be actively good, and seek occasions of exercising your kindness and
charity -- to administer as far as we are able to the wants of our fellow
creatures -- to reclaim the vicious -- to vindicate the character of the
injured -- assert the claims of the friendless and oppressed -- reconcile
differences, and be indefatigable in the promotion of peace and happiness to
all within the compass of our ability, are employments worthy of a rational
being.

There are many cases that occur in life, wherein those who will obey only the
rules of legal justice, must fall short of those notions of honesty, which
natural reason and conscience suggest; as a good mind wants not the bonds of
human laws, so on some occasions it rises to a generosity that is superior to
their narrow limits. Obey the innate ideas of rectitude which God himself has
stamped on the human soul -- and think it not sufficient to be just, except you
are generous also.

Let your conduct be regulated by the nicest rules of propriety and prudence;
and let your bosoms glow with the enthusiasm of virtue, that you may ever shine
forth the steady, zealous friend, the benevolently active neighbor, and the
truly useful member of society; considering yourselves as citizens of the
world, whose only business it is to do good.

LETTER V.
BUT so exalted and refined a turn of sentiment is never the production of
ignorance. It is only in cultivated minds we must look for it; for the prime
fruits of virtue grow not in the soil that has never been broken up by moral
instruction. A virtuous and intelligent friend is perhaps the most valuable
acquisition a young person can make; but as one of this description may never
sall to your lot, supply the want thereof, as well as you can, by books.

By all means cultivate a taste for reading, but take care that your taste be a
just one -- that is, be more desirous of instruction than amusement or you will
profit but little by literary pursuits. Those who read merely to please the
imagination, may be sure of not reading to advantage, and do seldom acquire a
relish for works of solid merit and utility. I have never known a young person
who was passionately fond of novels capable of relishing any thing superior to
them. For my own part, I had rather see a girl wholly ignorant of the alphabet,
than attached to that species of writing; for I am convinced that infinitely
more have erred in the conduct of life from that cause, than from any other.
The sentiments and ideas they impress, are fatal illusions to mislead the poor
reader, who, after wasting days and years in the study, is still an utter
stranger to the world she lives in -- and, what is worse, inspired with the
most erroneous notions of it, which commonly lead to some false step, or
ill-judged connection, that secures her a wretch for life. It cannot be
otherwise -- for the scenes, characters, and incidents, these books describe,
are to be found no where but in the author's romantic fancy. They have nothing
to do with the real knowledge of the world; and consequently, those who think
to steer through it by such guides, must, in the end, find themselves mistaken.
Just as well may a traveller think to make the tour of Europe by a chart of
Asia.

If curiosity must be amused, and the imagination pleased, why may not the
understanding be improved at the same time? This is very practicable, for there
are many works of genius extremely well calculated to answer each of these
ends; but they are not the histories of Sir such a one, Miss what do you call um,
or any of those futile productions, which the press daily emits, to vitiate the
taste, and corrupt the principles of the age.

There is a certain mental vigor necessary to virtue as well as to happiness,
but modern novels, under the specious mask of refined sentiments, introduce a
dangerous softness that has often destroyed both. True refinement is the glory
of a rational creature, but whatever enervates the mind, must debase it.
Lycurgus thought so, I suppose, when he banished the poets from his
commonwealth; yet surely he lived near enough to Athens to have learned to draw
a proper line between ferocity and effeminacy.

The passion for novelty, so inherent in youth, may be abundantly gratified, by
the study of history. Here you meet with new and uncommon events -- become
acquainted with a variety of characters, and are enabled to form a just
estimate of mankind; for except allowing for a few local customs or prejudices,
human nature was the same two thousand years ago as at this time. There is
something extremely agreeable to the mind in weighing and examining the actions
of celebrated personages, who, in their day, made the mighty tremble -- in
marking the rise or fall of empires, and to be able to determine the secret
causes of those revolutions which once astonished the world.

The ages appear as inconsiderable points, to those who are acquainted with
history -- they see the various nations of the earth pass in review before
them, and trace a more than human power busy in the affairs of men -- by taking
in at one comprehensive view so vast a tract of time, they discern the nice
connections of that scheme of Providence, which often appears broken and
irregular, when contemplated only through the medium of a few years.

It is almost impossible to be well versed in the characters of the politer
nations of antiquity, without watching something of that magnanimity which
distinguished them; and I know not why an acquaintance with their manners
should not be thought as necessary in the system of FEMALE EDUCATION, as it
usually is in that of the other sex. If the Greek and Roman veterans displayed
qualities which the heroes of the present day would be proud to imitate, their
wives and daughters were often patterns of such virtue, as would be allowed to
dignify a lady of the eighteenth century.

Read modern history as well as ancient -- the knowledge of the nations who
inhabit the globe as well as yourselves, is amusing and interesting -- the
heart, too, may be the better for it -- narrow prejudices are removed, and the
better mankind become acquainted with each other, the more the divine principle
of philanthropy must be extended. National enmity has no other parent but
ignorance -- the enlightened, the philosophic mind, even through the veil of
different tongues and customs, can discern a kindred being -- a member of that
universal family, whose head is the Deity.

Next to traveling itself, nothing tends more to enlarge the ideas than
journals of travels and voyages, if the writers have been faithful and
accurate; and you will read them with infinite pleasure, if you have been
careful to acquire a knowledge of geography. This renders you familiar with the
countries you read of -- You recollect their soil, climate, and productions --
know their respective boundaries, and can readily mark out their place on the
globe.

Having thus, my dear girls, pointed out to you so exhaustless a source of
amusement, I will only for the present add, that I am, etc.

LETTER VI.
AS long as curiosity continues a leading feature in the human character,
Biography will form a favorite species of reading. Every body is eager to pry
into the private character of a celebrated personage, and are better pleased to
know, how such an one acts in domestic life, than in the senate, or the field.
And, indeed, it is there that the best estimate of the real description can be
formed.

The private lives of famous persons afford much edification to the reader; the
vice or meanness too often there displayed, teaches us not to be dazzled by the
blaze of popularity or power; and to contemn that virtue which is built on the
desire of fame alone. If on the other hand, by following these darlings of fame
to the closet, or the fireside, we discover the same nobleness of heart that
distinguishes them with the multitude, justly they become patterns for our
example; the mind rejoices to find something about them that is imitable, for
though few are called forth as distinguished actors on the theater of the
world, all may, if they please, be great in private life: That is, may acquire
those amiable qualities of mind, which can only constitute real greatness;
without which the hero is no more than a hypocrite, and even the robe of
royalty, but a tinsel ornament to cover real meanness.

Your chief aim should be the knowledge of the human heart, and that is in
general more fully discovered in trifling traits and circumstances, than by
important actions performed under the public eye. But you no where find human
nature so impartially delineated, as in the sacred writings. There the
historians, neither influenced by passion nor prejudice, relate both actions
and their secret springs with unerring candor; never calumniating enemies, or
stooping to flatter the favorites of their nation.

The Jewish writers had the fairest opportunities imaginable for exaggerating
the virtues of their heroes, considering the miraculous powers so often exerted
in their behalf. Such an adventure as that of David with Goliath, would have
been thought by a Pagan writer, sufficient grounds for exalting his favorite to
a God: yet the inspired Biographer has drawn that Prince with all his frailties
about him; all the inequality of humanity; sometimes glowing with the rapturous
devotion of a Seraphim; -- at others, enslaved by the meanest passions. Such
instances of candor, considered with the national pride of the Jews, leave no
room to doubt the veracity of the sacred penman on any occasion.

The scriptures also finely illustrate many parts of profane history: we are
told of embattled armies, and cities levelled with the dust; but it is only in
holy writ we find those armies prophetically marshalled, and that destruction
denounced perhaps an hundred years before the event. These are instances which
impress the mind with reverence for the sacred records, and fill it with august
ideas of the eternal Providence.

The works of our best moralists will not be unentertaining to you, if your
taste for reading be as good as I wish it. Amongst the productions of this
kind, are the Spectator and the Rambler; as conspicuous for the elegance of
their language, as the soundness of their morality. But there are no better
rules for the moral conduct of life, than are found in the writings of Solomon,
and the Son of Sirach; which, though composed so many ages ago, may yet be read
to much advantage, by those who would pass through life happily and and respect.

If you are fond of poetry, be careful to read only what is good of it. There
is a kind of versification that tends to debase the mind; -- wherever
immortality or indelicacy is found, such must ever be the effect. Elegance of
numbers though a requisite, is yet the lowest recommendation of good poetry; --
its characteristics are dignity of thought, purity of expression, and, above
all, the best principles of piety and morality. For this reason, those poetical
pieces extant in the Bible, are by good judges, allowed to be truly sublime.
Poetry in its original state, being only the harmonious effusions of a mind
glowing with elevated sentiments of generosity, gratitude and devotion. Many of
the Psalms are noble compositions, and neither for beauty of figure, or energy
of expression, have ever been excelled.

Natural history affords a delightful study -- it is not however expected that
you should have a systematic idea of every vegetable, animal, or insect; but it
is unpardonable, for one who is blessed with leisure and opportunity, not to have
at least a general knowledge of the most conspicuous of Nature's works: -- to
be ignorant of the beauty and properties of those, is to wander over the fair
creation, as Thomson expresses it, "with brute unconscious gaze." The curious
and intelligent spectator finds the variegated face of nature, a source of
rational amusement, and reads in glowing characters the wisdom of the Deity. It
is not in such pursuits that the human mind acquires those illiberal sentiments
which so often disgrace it; -- all it here finds is noble and beneficent,
worthy that Divine Author, whom to know and adore, in the proper glory of an
intelligent being.

Akenside has so elegantly expressed the pleasures attending a taste for the
study and beauties of nature, that I will relieve you from the tediousness of
this epistle, by transcribing a few of his admired lines.

O! blessed of Heaven, whom not the languid songs
Of luxury, the siren! not the bribes
Of fordid wealth, nor all the gaudy spoils
Of pageant honor, can seduce to leave
Those ever blooming sweets, which from the store
Of Nature, fair Imagination culls
To charm the enlivened soul! What though not all
Of mortal offspring can attain the height
Of envied life; though only few possess
Patrician treasures, or imperial state;
Yet Nature's care, to all her children just,
Endows at large whatever happy man
Will deign to use them.
..................... For him the spring
Distills her dews, and from the silken gem
Its lucid leaves unfolds; for him the hand
Of Autumn tinges every fertile branch
With blooming gold, and blushes like the morn.
Each passing hour sheds tribute from her wings;
And still new beauties meet his lonely walk,
And loves unfelt attract him. -- Not a breeze
Flies over the meadow, not a cloud imbibes
The setting sun's effulgence, not a strain
From all the tenants of the warbling shade
Ascends, but whence his bosom can partake
Fresh pleasure unreprov'd: -- nor then partakes
Fresh pleasure only; for the attentive mind,
By this harmonious action on her powers,
Becomes herself harmonious; wont so often
In outward things to meditate the charm
Of sacred order, soon she seeks at home
To find a kindred order, to exert
Within herself this elegance of love,
This fair inspired delight; her tempered powers
Refine at length, and every passion wears
A chaster, milder, more attractive mein.
....................Thus the men
Whom nature's works can charm, with God himself
Hold converse; grow familar day by day
With his conceptions; act on his plan;
And form to his the relish of their souls.
LETTER VII.
AMONGST the accomplishments necessary to the female character, I think needle
work may claim the first place, it having so close a connection with neatness
which is indisputably requisite to render you comfortable to yourselves, or
amiable in the esteem of others. The ladies of the last century certainly held
needle work in much greater estimation than those of the present; witness the
many laborious performances that yet remain as proofs of their amazing industry
in this respect -- but the world is ever prone to extremes, and because this
art was then pursued to the exclusion of every intellectual accomplishment,
there are many in our days who seem to think it beneath their study or ambition.

The Mohammedan sentiment which prevailed some years ago, of the inferiority of
the female mind, seems exploded in this age of universal refinement: and a
woman of cultivated understanding is no longer a phenomenon. The paths of
knowledge are rendered accessible -- men of learning have stooped from the
elevations of science to accelerate the improvements of the other sex -- they
abridge, compile, explain for their assistance and advancement in polite
literature.

Make all the use you possibly can of such advantages, and be convinced that
the cultivation of the mind will exalt you in the estimation of rational beings
-- will open to you exhaustless sources of amusement and delight, of which the
ignorant can have no conception. Yet be careful, my dear girls, never to
overlook one feminine grace or accomplishment. There is a line of character
drawn between the sexes, which neither can pass without becoming contemptible.
It is not to make you despise those acquirements which have ever been
appropriated to the female sex, that you are incited to mental seize, but
to render you still more valuable as women; and the better your minds are
cultivated, the more you will see the propriety of attending to those minutiae
which become the condition in which Providence has placed you.

I do not see how you can acquit yourselves tolerably in domestic life, without
a knowledge of needle work; but granting your rank and fortune may place you
above the absolute necessity of learning that part of it which is called plain
work -- yet consider how far the ornamental kinds may be of use to amuse the
intervals of pleasures, or other pursuits, as well as to promote the display of
an elegant taste. Even our innocent amusements require variation, and the mind
may be agreeably relieved, by imitating with the needle the beautiful
productions of nature -- but there is something which places a skill in needle
work in a much more important point of view, and that is, the inconstancy of
fortune, which in her capricious moods has been often known to compel those,
whom once she smiled on, to procure their subsistence by those very arts which
were acquired only for amusement. -- Whatever may be a resource against that
mutability which marks all human affairs, becomes an object of importance.

A proficiency in the arts of domestic management and economy, ought justly to
be ranked among the accomplishments of a young lady. You must be unacquainted
with nothing that appertains to good housewifery. Some girls have I known
profess so violent an attachment to literary pursuits, that they are content to
remain ignorant of common seize. This shows a pitiable weakness --
elevated minds are attentive to every thing; and, believe me, it is very
possible to possess a competent knowledge of polite literature, and be well
versed in the methods of well governing a house at the same time -- the latter
qualifications have of themselves constituted many an useful character in
female life, which is more than can be said of the former. Blend, therefore, my
beloved girls, polite with useful acquirements, and you will be what I wish you.

In writing, acquire, if possible, a good hand, yet that is not so essentially
necessary as the being able to write grammatically -- the violation of the
common rules of grammar, is an indisputable mark of low breeding; and although
my Lord Chesterfield sarcastically said that bad spelling was only allowable in
a woman, it certainly is not allowable in any one, who pretends to an education
above the vulgar. Could you write as fine a hand as even A -- n himself, bad
spelling would disgrace the whole. The substituting have for has, are for is,
etc. infallibly sinks you in the estimation of well bred persons. In order to
avoid errors of this kind, habit is to be particularly guarded against. If in
your early years you are not careful to write and spell correctly, it is a
thousand to one if you ever do. You see, therefore, of what consequence it is
that you pay a present attention to these points.

I reckon among the useful seize, the ability of penning an epistle with
propriety and elegance -- many fortunate circumstances in life may be
facilitated thereby -- a well written letter has often effected what verbal
requests have sought in vain -- besides this consideration, how greatly must
the sweet intercourse of friendship be improved by a free and intelligent
correspondence! Two friends, though placed at the extremities of the globe, may
thus enjoy all the pleasures of such a connection; but except you attain the
desirable habit of expressing your sentiments without embarrassment, hope not
to enjoy any thing of so delicate a satisfaction. Letters should be the
pictures of the soul; and so they always would be if people acquired only the
skill of expressing their thoughts just as they arise. Write as you would
speak, were the persons you address immediately before you. There is no more
than this necessary to establish that easiness of style which is the chief
beauty of epistolary correspondence. That good breeding which I hope will be
habitual to you, will dictate those terms and forms of address, the condition
of those to whom you write requires. -- We do not always find the most learned
people write the most agreeable letters -- perhaps for no other reason than
that they take too much trouble about it, and, like the good Archbishop of
Benevento, reject the first thought that occurs. Some that I have known indite
an epistle in such a stiff and formal style, and load it so disgustfully with
tautology, that one would almost take it for an Act of Parliament. When you
write a letter, my dear girls, forget the idea of pen, ink and paper -- suppose
only you are speaking to the person, and you will write an agreeable, if not a
fine letter -- to effect the latter, something must have been effected by dame
Nature -- however, this I know -- that the most elevated sentiments would not
look graceful in such compositions, except accompanied by perfect ease and
expression, and have the appearance of flowing spontaneously from the heart.
Many excellent models of epistolary writing have been recommended to young
proficients. You cannot have better than those ascribed to Pope Ganganelli; --
whoever was the author, he has certainly hit on that ease, sprightliness and
elegance, which it is my earnest wish may characterise whatever falls from your
pen. Would to Heaven that all the world possessed the same candor and
liberality of sentiment which breathes through every one of those elegant
epistles.

LETTER VIII.
WHEN you compare the ankward motions of a rustic, with the genteel and
graceful movement of a person of education, you cannot but be assured of the
utility of dancing, but it should never be forgotten, that to give this
superiority of mein and air is the chief end of that polite accomplishment; --
to lose sight of this idea, is to take away the real worth of that branch of
genteel education: -- to reduce it to an unimportant, if not pernicious
attainment. However a knowledge of dancing may sometimes conduce to social
pleasure, and in that light be esteemed an agreeable and innocent recreation, I
cannot help thinking, that the same application that is requisite to form an
opera dancer, may very well be dispensed with in a young lady of a different
character. The extravagant leaps and gestures of some fashionable females, make
me think of the speech of Philip of Macedon to his son, on another occasion --
I am ready to ask if they "are not ashamed to dance so well."

There is scarcely a human soul, however apparently dead to sensibility, but is
in some measure alive to the extatic charms of music. The story of Orpheus is
more than a fable -- minds almost as inert and inanimate as trees themselves,
have been moved by the power of harmonious sounds: -- why else does the gaping
rustic, follow with such manifest delight, the itinerant musician; and why but
that the effect of music on the passions is so incontestibly proved, has the
army adopted the sons of Apollo with those of Mars? Since then this science has
so great an influence on the feelings of the soul, is it not surprising that
the polite world should not be more ambitions of enjoying those sublime
sensations, which the best pieces are so abundantly capable of exciting, and
not rest poorly satisfied with the luke warm pleasures of sing-song, while the
noble compositions of great masters, lie bye totally disregarded. Indulge, my
dear girls, a turn for music, if nature has given you such; but do not permit a
song tune, or an opera air to be the limits of your excellence in that
enchanting science.

Drawing, painting, etc. justly form a part of polite education, because they
furnish an agreeable, as well as rational amusement. They lead to a familiarity
with the beauties of nature, and that can scarcely fail to advance the mind a
degree higher, even to the contemplation of her Divine Author. But if it had
not this happy tendency, drawing is still a laudable amusement, because an
innocent one; and whatever furnishes a recreation of that character, may
certainly be deemed an auxiliary to virtue.

An acquaintance with the languages of polite nations, greatly enlarges the
mind. It is the property of ignorance to esteem nothing valuable that a foreign
country produces; and scarcely to allow that its inhabitants are human. Nothing
tends more immediately to remove such illiberal prejudices, than studying the
language of the people thus despised. The supercilious contemner is surprised
to find them rational, and expressing similar ideas with those of his own
country.

If necessity or inclination ever leads you from your native land, a previous
acquaintance with the language of those you reside among, would much facilitate
your pleasure and convenience; would open to you the avenues of social love and
friendship, and take off much from those comfortless sensations the mind is apt
to feel in the idea of being amongst a people it knows not. For this end,
perhaps it may be sufficient to acquire a knowledge of the French tongue, that
being generally understood by intelligent persons of every European nation. But
there is another advantage attending this branch of polite accomplishment, and
which probably to you, my dear girls will be the most useful -- I mean the
being able to read in their original, those beautiful compositions which lose
many of their excellencies by translation; for this reason become acquainted
also with the Itasian: but Homer and Virgil you tell me have beauties that can
never be translated -- true, yet these, I fancy, you must be content to taste
as pure as the labors of the learned afford them; the Greek and Latin tongues,
forming no part in the polite system of female education at present, nor
certainly ever can in the useful.

Arithmetic is a dry study, yet certainly a very useful one, to those who would
manage their affairs with economy and prudence; -- a thorough knowledge of the
four first rules, is sufficient to enable you to do it.

From a total ignorance of letters in female life, we are advanced to an age
which requires every girl to be made a grammarian; yet it unfortunately
happens, that of the numbers who profess to have studied the grammar of their
native tongue, few speak or write it with that accuracy which could be wished;
indeed the progress that women usually make in that science, is seldom of
itself sufficient to give an habitual elegance of expression; they are more
indebted for it to frequent reading of the best authors, and the conversation
of those who have themselves acquired it perfect; -- what you can, acquire of
grammar by such assistances of these. There is an indispensable necessity for
you to write and speak English correctly; acquire that qualification as easily
as you can, but nothing will more facilitate it than the methods I have
mentioned.

Geography is a study that will please you an hundred times better -- this is
not like the former, a set of dry rules, but almost every advance you make
therein, will abundantly repay your pains by the novelty of the information it
produces. Besides, I cannot imagine how the frequent relations that occur in
common discourse will be intelligible, without some acquaintance with this
study. I am sure if you are no geographer, even a newspaper will be as
inexplicable as an Egyptian hieroglyphic. Attain a competent knowledge of the
globe on which you live, that your apprehension of infinite wisdom may be
enlarged; which it will be in a much higher degree, if you take care to acquire
a general idea of the structure of the universe. It is not expected you should
become adepts in astronomy, but a knowledge of its leading principles you may
and ought to obtain. The French, with their usual attention to the sex, have
procured them a gentleman usher, if I may so speak, to the planetary orbs. --
Fontanelle introduces them to an acquaintance with that brilliant assembly --
it is not the first instance in which our agreeable neighbors have blended the
researches of the scholar, with the politeness of a fine gentleman.

Avail yourselves of such ingenious assistances, and be all your Cornelia
wishes.

LETTER IX.
AN accomplished character, has so many charms, that nothing needs be said to
induce you to wish, at least, for its attainment. Yet painful application must
render that wish effectual -- a reflection however that should excite your
emulation, rather than despondency -- trivial acquirements may content the
indolent and timid, but the arduous and difficult are the proper aim of
elevated minds. Courage belongs not to the warrior alone -- it is as often
found in the closet, as the field.

That resolution which is necessary for every valuable purpose of life, is the
fruit only of active minds, and was never found with indolence and sloth; --
determine therefore to conquer every tendency to an inactive temper. Whenever
you feel in yourselves an inaptitude for doing what necessarily ought to be
done, rouse that moment, or you will give ground to an enemy the most
destructive to happiness and virtue; and who once entrenched is hard to be
dislodged. Never defer to the next hour, that which should be the business of
the present. "Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it, with all thy might," said
a very wise man many hundred years ago; indeed there is no precept throughout
the sacred writings, inculcated with greater energy than this of diligence. It
is the soul of virtue -- the foundation of honor and affluence.

Many a bright and shining talent lies hid in a napkin, for want of activity to
unfold it; nor do we unfrequently meet with persons struggling with distresses,
which require only their own exertions to remove. Indolence takes hold of the
disposition much oftener than is acknowledged; it is possible to be wholly
under its dominion, and yet suspect nothing of it; and, what is yet more
strange, to believe one's self to be the most diligent person in the world at
the very time. You have seen numbers of bustling people, who are always in a
hurry, and so perplexed do they appear with business, as never to be able to
enjoy a friend or themselves. It would seem hard at first sight, to accuse them
of indolence, and yet they are of all people most commonly under its power: for
an habitual diligence would so comfortably arrange the affairs of life, that
none would be found to intrude on another. Consider the surprising dispatch
with which some in public stations, manage a multiplicity of the most important
concerns; -- to contemplate them, one would almost conclude, nothing too
extensive for the compass of the human mind; -- diligence is the charm which
effects it all.

In that dismal catalogue of diseases which imbitter mortality, not a few owe
their existence to indolence. The indigent labourer who toils for daily bread,
knows nothing of that sad train of nervous disorders which render life itself
burdensome to the wealthy. In some cases, poverty might justly be called a
blessing. Great are the achievements which resolution and diligence can
effect: -- in nothing is their power more conspicuously seen, than in the
cultivation of the mind; to reflect on the progress of the human understanding
-- to compare the refinements of philosophy with a state of savage nature -- a
Newton, with an inhabitant of New Holland, we should almost conclude some
supernatural power must have contributed to give the former so infinite a
superiority in the scale of beings. Without the quality I have recommended it
could never have been attained, for though much be owing to accidental
advantages, such as the being born in an enlightened country afford, yet no
inconsiderable portion of diligence is required to render these advantages
personally effectual. It is this, my dear girls, that makes them yours, and
without it, the soul will remain as uninformed as if destined to a land where
science never darts a cheering beam.

It may seem strange to tell you of old age, before you have scarcely passed
your infancy; yet I must not conceal from you, that a period will arrive, when
exterior attractions will be no more: -- when mental acquirements will prove
your highest luster and sublimest comfort. However despicable an ignorant woman
appears at any part of her life, in the decline of it she is sure to become far
more contemptible; at that time it is the improvements she has made in early
days, that give dignity of character. An old age of cards necessarily succeeds
a youth of folly. Pope could not have said any thing more destructive of the
insignificancy of those ancient habits, than he has expressed in that concise
satire. If you would avoid the contempt which never fails to attend a frivolous
old age, you must pass a youth of diligence and application.

But then the pleasures resulting from it surpass description, the
satisfactions of a rich cultivated mind are only fully known to the happy
possessor; one of them, we are assured, is a noble independence, which creates,
if I may so speak, its own happiness; is not indebted to dissipation, or the
caprice of others; but can derive from itself, exhaustless resources for
solitude or society. Ordinary persons are obliged to fly from Ennui to the
regions of amusement, but superior beings, who have traversed the fields of
useful and polite knowledge, can from themselves select materials for the most
exquisite enjoyment.

Do you think this an acquisition worth desiring -- then never forget that it
can be obtained only by diligence and active industry. Habits of indolence are
destructive of every valuable attainment, and they are as much so of happiness,
as they are known to be of virtue.

LETTER X.
CULTIVATED minds have pleasures which surpass the vulgar apprehension. They
have their pains as well -- for there is an evil peculiar to refined feeling,
of which the untaught rustic is happily ignorant. This happens when refinement,
or at least the affectation of it, is carried to such an extreme, that it
degenerates into false delicacy. The symptoms of the malady are a kind of
secret dissatisfaction with every thing -- the common blessings of life are
despised, as inadequate to the refinement of their ideas, and every petty
slight angmented by such a quickness of perception, as leads them to see
affronts, when none perhaps have been intended. And this peevishly irritable
temper they are pleased to dignify with the name of sensibility, and pique
themselves on a disposition that disqualifies them for social virtue or social
happiness. What pity, that a quality meant to highten every real blessing,
should be ascribed to the mere chimera of a sickly brain! Never may you, my
dears, by indulging these fictitious feelings, refine away the felicity, which
a kind Providence scatters in your path of life. Nourish in your bosoms
humility and good nature -- these will teach you to make the best of your lot,
whatever it be, and give a relish to every enjoyment -- all is serene where
they reside. Humility, by arrogating nothing to herself, remains unhurt at the
supercilious scorn of ignorance or pride; and goodnature, by casting a veil
over the foibles of others, presents to our view the best side of this motley
scene.

Without doubt, superior minds have a quicker sense of what is beautiful in
nature, or desirable in life, than a peasant, whose ideas extend not beyond his
daily occupations -- perhaps they feel also more acutely the evils of their
condition; yet the persons who suffer most by this affected sensicility are not
they who have the greatest share of afflictive events, but the idly
speculative, who being employed to no good purpose, have time to nourish those
artificial feelings which Nature knows nothing of.

Sensibility! -- What is it? -- Is it not that delicate perception of natural
and moral beauty, which the Creator has implanted in the soul to exalt its
happiness, and awaken its noblest passions? How greatly, then, do they err who
substitute in the room of this best gift of Heaven, that which is the very
weakness of humanity, pride and peevishness?

It is paying a very poor compliment to literary pursuits, to suppose they are
productive of that softness which unfits the mind for enduring the common
accidents of life. And those seize are of little value that serve no
better purpose than to barb the arrows of misfortune with stings which the
enlightened never feel. But probably they who dream of such effects are the
superficial, who never dived beyond the surface of literature, and whose feeble
intellects are unable to digest even the little they have imbibed.

If you have really made any advancement in mental improvement, it will
invigorate the powers of the soul, and inspire her with that magnanimity which
is certainly necessary to the happiness of a being, who is every moment exposed
to sorrow and disappointment. Value not yourselves on any refinements that are
short of this effect.

Some, I know, are even restrained from the exercise of benevolence by this
affectation of sensibility; their feelings are too tender to bear with scenes
of distress, and too refined for the duties of social life; they therefore keep
at an unfriendly distance from society, lest the ignorance or rudeness they
there may meet with, should wound their excessive delicacy; but how is this
obeying the injunction of the Apostle, who exhorts us to be kindly affectioned
one to another, bearing with each others infirmities?

In fine, my dear girls, come to the feast of social life, accompanied by the
virtues of humility and charity, and you will not arise dissatisfied from the
entertainment.

LETTER XI.
I HAVE often thought that the great prevalence of vice arises chiefly from a
culpable weakness of temper -- for there is nothing so amiable in it that it
should be followed for its own sake. It is the mere want of resolution that
betrays such numbers into the dreadful abyss of sin and misery.

"The world's dread laugh
"Scarce even the firm Philosopher can bear."
But, in my opinion he must be a poor philosopher who cannot, and would have
made but a sorry figure in the portico or lyceum.

It is not meant to inculcate to you a boisterous, imperious carriage. May my
girls possess every feminine grace and virtue, but these cannot be supported
without some portion of resolution. There is a proper firmness, without which
neither virtue, happiness, or dignity of character can be long maintained.
Distrust those who extol the soft irresolution of the sex -- it is the very
rock on which thousands of deluded females have been lost.

Be possessed of the true principles of honor and rectitude, and dare to
adhere to them in spite of solicitation, or that still more powerful means of
temptation, ridicule. Establish your opinions on truth and reason, and maintain
them, when necessary, with firmness; -- some people give up both their faith
and their friends, for want of resolution to defend them.

Too weak to think, too indolent to choose. In business, and the affairs of
life, a proper firmness is indispensably necessary. Those who can be influenced
by every adviser, or intimidated at every appearance of difficulty, must of
course be desultory and unsettled. They affect nothing of consequence, because
they know not how to persevere in any undertaking. Obstacles will attend the
best concerted schemes, and mankind will ever think differently about them; but
the truly wise will await with steady patience the issue of those measures they
have been careful to found in prudence and the moral fitness of things. Some
will undertake nothing, till they see the path smooth before them, and attain
almost a certainty of success. Such will find their lives wasted, before they
have determined on the plan of it. Those who best know the state of humanity,
will be convinced, that to design prudently and act firmly, is all that can be
done by mortals.

Without resolution, it will sometimes be impossible to act agreeably to the
dictates of right reason, and virtue, for these are not always the ton; and
when that is the case, no inconsiderable share of fortitude is requisite to
repel the attacks of ridicule or amusement -- nor can the treasures of
knowledge be explored, without a portion of it -- for, "there is nothing truly
valuable to be attained without pains and labor." Dismayed at the prospect,
the indolent, as described by Solomon, cry, "a lion is in the street" -- Rather
may my dear girls be animated with a nobler ardour, to surmount every
difficulty which would retard their acquisition of merit and selicity.
Parnassus itself was a craggy rock, but then the muses dwelt on its top.

But if resolution be necessary to the attaining whatever is valuable or
desirable in life, it is no less so to the supporting us under a deprivation of
it. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong -- hence it
follows, that the wisest measures do not always meet with suceess, nor can
virtue itself prevent the encroachments of affliction -- in such circumstances
fortitude gives a dignity to suffering, and tends also to alleviate the weight
of it. Every one knows the sentiment of the philosopher -- that a good man
struggling with adversity, is a sight on which the gods themselves might look
down with delight. However that be, it is certain that such a character never
fails to command the respect and veneration of mankind. Magnanimity, of all the
qualities of the mind, seems most secure of admiration. The Savior of the
world inculcated it, when having forwarned his disciples of their approaching
sufferings, he enjoined them to possess their souls in patience. Patience is
amongst the Christian duties, what magnanimity is in the list of heroic
virtues. They are synonimous terms -- both imply that calm, unshaken fortitude,
which is at once characteristic of the hero and the Christian.

But do not conclude this firmness of mind -- this laudable resolution is
calculated only to be admired. It is of the highest actual service to the
unfortunate, not only by enabling them to sustain the burden of their
sufferings, but by opening a way to better prospects. The timid and irresolute
sink at the approach of adversity, into a despondency the most unfriendly to
their affairs, by precluding that courageous industry which might render them
more tolerable; and therefore, by the nature of things, augment the very evils
of which they complain.

Cultivate in all circumstances this innate constancy -- it will aid you in the
attainment of every good and valuable end. In prosperity, will secure you from
the corruptions of vanity -- impart dignity and serenity to adversity. In fine,
you cannot, I think, but be steady in the practice of virtue, if you are firm
in the expectation of its rewards.

LETTER XII.
MY epistles to you, my dear girls, are written without the least attention to
method; their respective subjects have more the appearance of chance, than
design; and therefore, may be justly called cursory thoughts on various
subjects. Young folks, I know, do not love precise rules, and perhaps you deem
the irregularity of my letters their chief merit. Allow them, however, one more
-- that of sincerity, and believe that the sentiments they contain, flow from
the heart; I believe, I need not add the word spontaneously.

As I disclaim all methodical arrangement of my subjects, I will here give you
my thoughts, on that very important part of female study, dress. Be not afraid
that I am about to confine you to a primitive plainness, though probably, such
a mode may be found more advantageous to beauty and elegance, than modern
finery; yet I shall recommend that which is at once agreeable to fashion, and
your own rank and circumstances. To reconcile these three conditions, is no
easy task, yet herein lies a chief perfection of the female character; few
women possess the happy art; -- yet those who do, must be allowed a very
superior degree of merit. It is no inconsiderable trait in the character of an
amiable young lady, that she knows how to support a genteel appearance; and yet
pay a just regard to the frugality, which probably her limited circumstances
require.

A fantastical and expensive turn in dress, is the certain mark of a little
mind; but that attention to it, which principally regards neatness, is
extremely laudable. Resolve to be always neat, or you can never be
well-dressed: -- a dirty ruffle, a torn apron, etc. are sufficient to disgrace
the most splendid apparel. Neatness is always in your power, and will always
render you respectable in whatever rank of life you are placed; but finery
without it is nothing more than a ridiculous glare, which is never seen but
with disgust.

Fashion has imposed some general rules, which may innocently be followed under
the restrictions I have mentioned. Your clothes may be made according to the
mode, though the materials which compose thern, be less costly than if they
belonged to a duchess. An uncouth, ill-fashioned habit, derogates even from
the importance of a philosopher; and it is not till after a near acquaintance,
that merit is discovered through a shabby garment -- so much are mankind
governed by appearance.

"Prithee good Xenocrates (said Plato to his pupil) sacrifice to the graces."
That great man knew how much the mental accomplishments complishments might be
illustrated and adorned by a polished exterior; -- a wise person, it is true,
would not make this altogether the criterion of merit, yet perhaps, would not
readily look for worth beneath an ungraceful exterior.

After all, my dear girls, esteem the frivolous, though often troublesome arts
of dress, but as a tax you are in some sort obliged to pay to the folly of the
age. Remember on all occasions, that external ornaments cannot make you better
or happier women. Great minds, however they may have judged it necessary to
conform to insignificant customs, have always regarded them in their proper
light. The attention such are seen to show to the idol fashion, is only a good
natured condescension to the weakness of mankind, in points they judge of an
indifferent nature, and much too trifling to become the objects of their
serious cares. The silly and ignorant are they who love dress for its own sake.

LETTER XIII.
NEXT to our own principles, we are to regard those of our companions; for they
are almost of as much importance to us, as by long and intimate acquaintance
they generally become our own. Virtuous habits are strengthened by example --
so are vicious ones, but in a much higher degree; nothing therefore can be a
point of greater consequence than the choice of companions.

A great deal has been written on the subject, and every one who has the care
of youth, fails not to inculcate the keeping good company; -- the only
misfortune is, that the term has seldom been sufficiently explained, and the
young mind is left to annex to it the ideas of birth and fortune, till by
degrees the expression is supposed to imply both these qualifications.

The result has been the disturbance of all order in social life; -- each class
of people quitting their own sphere to associate with those of superior rank;
and these again, inspired by the same sentiment, repel with scorn the ambitious
attempt solicitous only to attract the notice of still greater folks than
themselves. Thus in the room of that social amity with which the human heart
should overflow, it is unhappily divided between the throbbings of ambition,
and the pangs of offended pride.

It is evident, that in this bustle, greater attention is paid to the
accidental circumstances of rank and affluence, than to real merit; we should
not else so often see people of the middling rank, when flattered by the notice
of a superior, so elated with the honor of keeping, what they call good
company; when perhaps, that superior is conspicuous for almost every vice and
meanness. This is a grand mistake surely -- as fatal to happiness, as to morals.

Good company can only mean persons of noble sentiments, refined manners, and
enlightened understandings. But these qualities are not to be expected, where
the scantiness of fortune, has absolutely excluded the means of education; for
the human mind becomes every thing by culture. It is therefore found, that in
the lower ranks of society, where poverty has denied time and abilities for
that happy employ, the worst habits, and most depraved morals prevail; for this
reason you are not to choose companions from such a class.

In fine, your associates must be those of a liberal and virtuous education. It
may happen you may find a friend of this description, whose relative or
necessary connection, may not be eligible for you. In this case she is by no
means a proper companion, as her own merit, however great, will not compensate
for the danger you incur in frequently mingling with persons of improper
character.

A cultivated mind is the proper soil for every moral and social virtue -- it
is most likely to be found where Heaven has bestowed an easy fortune,
consequently the genteeler ranks of life will be most likely to afford you
proper companions. But here let merit alone, and not adventitious
circumstances, influence your selection -- despise that contemptible weakness
which piques itself on the rank, rather than the mental value of an
acquaintance; and never let a principle of vanity lead you to the servile
imitation of vice or folly, however sanctioned by wealth or titles. Little
minds are ever dazzled by show and splendor -- it is the property of the
enlightened only to distinguish personal worth from external advantages. I
should think you disgraced by an acquaintance with an Empress, if she was not
as much distinguished by virtue as power.

Be careful not to form an acquaintance too hastily -- many a virtuous girl has
funk for ever in the esteem of the world, by being seen in company with those
of doubtful reputation. In vain she declares her ignorance of the real
character of her companions. She having admitted them to her society without
the requisite investigation of that point, infallibly renders her own prudence
suspected.

A very extensive acquaintance is not necessary to social happiness. A few
select friends will most conduce to that end; and it is among these that "The
free full converse of the friendly heart" flows with uninterruption and delight
-- unfeigned cheerfulness and real enjoyment exist much oftener in these little
circles, than in large and ceremonious assemblies. But should your station in
life render a large acquaintance unavoidable, you will observe to all, a free
unrestrained politeness, without admitting every one indiscriminately to your
confidence. Be ever frank and easy, without revealing your own secrets, or
those of your friends, and make none your intimates but those of worth and
honor.

Much, very much of human happiness depends on the proper choice of
acquaintance -- an ill chosen friend has power to mar our felicity as much as
an amiable and faithful one contributes to it. The heart is formed for social
intercourse; and when that intercourse is founded on the moral, and religious
virtues, it gives a zest to the other enjoyments of life.

LETTER XIV.
THERE are certain restrictions necessary to render the gift of speech what the
great Creator designed it -- a principal means of happiness to his rationl
creatures. The first of these is an habitual care never to violate the laws of
truth. The pleasures resulting from mutual conversation vanish entirely, when
no dependence can be placed in the speaker's veracity. Those who speak merely
from the suggestions of imagination, or, what is worse, malignity, are justly
chargeable with half the strife that disturbs the peace of society. Such
persons are the most dangerous companions, and need only to be known to be
generally despised and avoided. Indeed, so high a regard veracity obtains among
people of refinement, that you cannot offer a more gross affront than to accuse
them of the violation of it.

Of all that has been said in admiration of Cato's character, nothing reflects
so great a luster on it, as that striking, though tacit eulogium, bestowed on
him in one of the Roman Courts of Judicature, where a cause being to be tried
which required two witnesses, and one only appearing, the Judge declared he
could not dispense with the law, even though Cato himself were the witness.

Besides, as Archbishop Tillotson finely observes, a constant adherence to
truth has the least trouble and difficulty in it, it sits always upon the lips;
whereas a lie is troublesome, and needs a great many more to make it good.

Next to the character of a liar, that of the detracter is the most odious -- a
habit of traducing the reputation of others, by speaking all the ill we have
heard of them, or putting the worst constructions on their actions, is totally
opposite to the spirit of Christianity, which breathes nothing but candor and
charity. There is also something extremely mean in the practice, as the accused
persons have seldom an opportunity of refuting the charge. The cruel aspersion
is borne on the wings of scandal from circle to circle, nor perhaps reaches the
injured party till the wound given to reputation is too deep for cure.

Barbarous as such a custom is, I need not say how greatly it prevails in
almost all companies. I have, however, the charity to believe it does not
always proceed from malice or envy. When no knowledge has been treasured up in
the mind -- no useful information acquired, conversation cannot receive aid
from intellectual stores -- what then, must become of it? -- must it flag and
silence -- dreadful silence reign? -- No, something must re-kindle it; and when
no rational subject arises, that something must be scandal. This, though it may
be a palliation of the crime, is yet no excuse; for the wounds given by
unmeaning ignorance are as deep as those inflicted by premeditated rancour. How
shameful is it that an impertinent eagerness for talking should thus wantonly
explore the secret recesses of domestic life, and presume to judge of actions,
the motives of which cannot be scanned by these ignorant prattlers!

The most effectual way to secure yourselves from the commission of this vice,
will be the adorning your minds with such acquisitions of knowledge, and useful
intelligence, as will enable you to furnish subjects for conversation, without
descending to frivolity or detraction. But should you not be so happy as to
possess these desirable resources, I hope you will have so much candor and
goodnature as to be content with being accounted a dull and lifeless
companion, rather than indulge an eagerness for talking at the expense of other
people's good name.

Detraction is not only a violation of the rules of religion, but is also so
impolitic a crime, as no one who wishes to be well received in the world would
ever commit -- for a person who is addicted to scandal, is a terror to society;
the respect they receive, resembles the homage the Indians are said to pay to
the Devil, rather to evade his malignity, than procure his love. And however
curiosity may, for a while, listen to an ill-natured anecdote, yet be assured,
the relator is regarded with a secret disgust by every benevolent person, who
naturally expects to meet the same censorious fate, when opportunity serves.

Good policy will therefore correct a censorious disposition; yet, I trust your
restraint will be derived from a superior motive, namely, the obligations of
religion, which forbid to speak evil of any, or to judge uncharitably of
another. The consciousness of having always obeyed these divine injunctions,
will afford the consolation, under the pain you may perhaps feel from the
unjust aspersions of others -- for such, probably, you will meet with in your
journey of life, as no innocence can always be a defense from unmerited
censure; and when this chances to be your case, you will derive unspeakable
comfort, from the reflection of having treated the world more generously than
it has treated you.

Whatever you say, should be meant for the entertainment or instruction of the
company, rather than the gratification of vanity. Many are so much actuated by
self-love, that they never speak or act, but to be applauded. Hence arises
affectation -- the most disgusting quality in nature. Diliver your sentiments
as they occur, without affecting more graces in your tone or gesture than are
your own -- these, well managed, will be enough to render you amiable. All may
be agreeable in their natural sphere, but when they innovate on that of others,
the attempt is commonly frustrated.

Above all, never affect that kind of wit which aims at severe retorts and
repartee -- it has generally ill nature for its basis, and seldom makes a sally
but it procures an enemy, if it does not lose a friend. There is nothing in it
to be admired but the readiness of thought, which gives it birth -- but when
the quality seems aimed at, rather than possessed, it is absolutely
contemptible.

In fine -- sincerity, candor, and good sense, must be the ornaments of your
conversation. Politeness will give an agreeable luster to these qualities, but
remember, it can never be a substitute for them.

LETTER XV.
"HAIL politeness, power divine!" says the sonnet, and surely no necessary
invocation; for politeness, dear girls, is the friend of social happiness and
domestic peace; if it was the fashion, in this age, to have household gods, I
would surely give it a pre-eminent place amongst them.

I know not how it happens, but people seem to think, they are obliged to be
polite every where but at home -- and there it is they are most required to be
so; for the refined satisfaction of social intercourse, cannot long subsist
without it. I am convinced, that domestic quarrels and disgusts, would much
seldomer arise, if the parties were always as polite as affectionate.

But what is politeness -- is it the law of fashion, or a system of rules? --
No -- it is the divine principle of benevolence, branched into a thousand
little channels, and flowing through all the minutiae of human life. Education
may improve, but can never give it, for it must be founded in the soul, or is
never seen in full perfection. A painter may learn the rules of design, and the
compendium of colors; but if he possesses not the enthusiasm of the art, his
pictures will be lifeless and insipid.

Politeness is that a miable disposition, which delights in the happiness of
others -- consults their ease -- prevents their wants -- and yields them every
possible convenience. This is the source of those civilities and attentions,
which distinguish a well-bred person -- without it, etiquette dwindles into
unmeaning ceremony.

You perceive then, that not only an attention to external graces, but a
regulation of the disposition is necessary to constitute a polite person.
Acquire the amiable temper I have described, and you will infallibly please
with that native ease which is thought so requisite to be attained, that the
world has substituted in its room its wretched resemblance, effrontery: -- but
no more like the amiable original, than an ordinary statue to the Venus of
Medicis.

I have often thought, that the best Christian is likely to be the most polite
person. This is an assertion you have not been used to hear, yet may well
enough be warranted by the tenor of the gospel precepts, which inculcate the
being tender of another's weakness -- to prefer each other in honor -- to give
respect where due -- with others to the like purpose. Now if these excellent
lessons contain (as I think will be allowed) the substance of what, at this
day, is termed good breeding. St. Paul must be a better teacher than my lord
Chesterfield himself, since he breathes the enlivening spirit, without which
the ceremonial code is a lifeless system, calculated perhaps to disguise the
heart, but not to add one iota to the real happiness of social life.

LETTER XVI.
NOTHING is more talked of than religion -- nothing less understood -- without
comprehending what it really is, the spirit of bigotry would arrogate the
whole, nor allow of its being without the contracted pale of a particular sect.

I have juster notions of religion -- see it as it is -- not a mode of
ceremonies, but a divine principle influencing the whole moral conduct; its
simple, fixed and determinate sense, is briefly love of God, and good will to
mankind. This, dear girls, is the sum of all religion; without it, vain were
the oblations of the Jewish church -- vain are the ceremonials of the Christian.

The "love of God," is an expression that, of late years, has been as grossly
abused as the word religion. Strange as it may appear, there have been those,
who leading the most immoral lives, have styled themselves the lovers of the
God of purity -- whose tongues could utter a pious ejaculation, while their
hands were committing the most flagitious crimes. But be not deceived -- this
exalted character belongs neither to bigotry nor enthusiasm. The love of God is
not a passion, but a rational principle; it is those sentiments of reverence
and gratitude, which naturally arise in a generous mind when reflecting on one
supreme beneficent power, who is the immediate author of all good, and the
fountain of all perfection. This conviction is the parent of unaffected piety;
the soul cannot but adore the Being she believes to be all-wise, almighty, and
eternal; -- she cannot but love him who is the source of unnumbered blessings;
nor choose, but dread to offend him whose nature she believes to be holiness.
Hence the source of moral virtue -- sin is avoided, because displeasing to the
will of the Deity; and virtuous dispositions are acquired, because agreeable to
a Power who is able to reward every endeavor to please him, with eternal and
unspeakable happiness.

Such a filial, rational love, must be the fruit of every mind that is not
ignorant of the being and attributes of God; -- or that has not received from
bigotry or superstition, any mistaken notions of him. To prevent being
disturbed by the spiritual pride of hypocritical fanatics, remember there is an
invariable test by which you may know if you have the love of God. Ask your own
heart, if it seeks the favor of the Deity above every other consideration? If
it values this more than its dearest interests, and even life itself, a ready
affirmative puts the question out of all doubt.

Be assured, my dear girls, that nothing so highly elevates and adorns the
human character, as a steady rational piety -- nor is any thing capable of
yielding so pure and exalted a happiness to the soul, as an habit of devotion.
No one who has experienced the vicissitude of sublunary things, but must highly
value the privilege of possessing a friend, that would at all times be
acceptable -- ready to hear the complaints of affliction, and all powerful to
relieve them.

Such a friend you may enjoy in the Divine Being; of what consequence is it
then that you acquire a taste for the exercises of devotion; that you cultivate
a friendship with heaven, and accustom your hearts to talk with God. This is an
emphatical expression of David, and gives you an idea of rational and sincere
prayer -- which consists not in formal addresses, but is the genuine language
of the heart. Such a divine intimacy has something in it extremely suitable to
the noblest sensations of the soul; and therefore may well be sought after as a
source of refined and exquisite felicity. In trouble, you will find it more
precious than the balm of Gilead -- it will shed a ray of sacred peace when the
dark clouds of adversity obscure your path -- (...) death. But here my pen must
stop -- there can be no doubt but at that final, that awful period, the divine
attachment breaks forth into a seraphic flame.

LETTER XVII.
THE generality of people style themselves Christians, without understanding
the value or the necessity of christianity; and perhaps neither the one nor the
other can be seen in a proper light, without taking a comparative view of the
human soul before and after the fall.

It is not for my humble pen to illustrate the excellency of a system which has
God himself for its author -- nor is it my design to attempt a task so far
above my abilities: yet that you may not wholly take your religion upon trust,
I would call your attention to what man was when first created.

But a little inferior to angels, his reason was clear, his soul all purity,
and his mind all intelligence -- fit companion for natures wholly spiritual,
and enjoying the most familiar intercourse with them. That grand question which
has since agitated the schools of philosophy, of what was the chief good of
man, was all apparent to the first of the human race: he saw perfectly clear,
that it consisted in the entire assimilation of his will to that of the Deity
-- and in the pursuit found a full unmixed felicity. But he was created with
the power of doing otherwise, or where would have been the merit of obedience?
The duty of free agency, must be far preferable to that which arises from blind
necessity.

Adam continued a happy being as long as his will remained consonant to that of
his Maker; but at the instant it deviated therefrom, he fell from happiness and
perfection. The conciseness of the scripture history, leaves unthinking minds
in doubt as to the nature of Adam's transgression, but undoubtedly it
originated in the mere desire of doing contrary to the divine command; -- he
forgot that the Diety was his happiness, and he sought it in his own will. It
was herein he sinned, and not simply by eating the forbidden fruit, for at the
very moment Adam became capable of imagining there might be a good abstract
from the favor of God -- that moment he fell.

The Creator saw at one comprehensive view, the miseries which would accrue to
mankind, from the voluntary perversion of the intellectual and moral powers; --
then was the scheme of Christianity devised, as an effectual means of restoring
human nature to the happiness and perfection it originally possessed. The
purposed blessing was graciously announced in that prediction, that the
posterity of Eve should crush the serpent's head.

The human reason thus clouded, it is almost surprising to reflect by what
rapid steps the world became immersed in the worst ignorance and vice. Those
who still retained some idea of the Sovereign Creator, had recourse to a
visible symbol of his Majesty; for their intellectual faculties were too gross
to apprehend an immaterial Deity -- it soon happened that the symbol itself was
made the object of divine worship; and hence, doubtless, the origin of
idolatry, which in the time of Abraham had so generally spread over the earth,
that it appeared necessary to the Supreme Governor of the Universe to call that
good man from his country and his kindred to ordain him the father of a nation;
who being, by numerous and peculiar laws, separated from the rest of the would,
might preserve, incorrupt, the knowledge of the Divine Nature. The Bible will
convince you how ineffectual, not only these laws, but the frequent and signal
manifestations of Almighty power were to secure that people from the grossest
idolatry, the rights of which were now become so terrible to the imagination,
that they even burnt their children alive, in sacrifices to their horrid idols.
What a picture is here of human nature! that nature which once so nearly
approached the angelic! Do you not begin to see the necessity of a Redeemer?
Let us pursue the thread of history, and take a superficial view of the most
celebrated nations which peopled the earth before the glorious era of his
appearance.

The Egyptians were very early esteemed for learning, laws and arts -- they
were a numerous, powerful, and wealthy people, but so grossly idolatrous, that
they not only worshipped images, but beasts, insects, and even vegetables. The
manufactures and extensive commerce of Phoenicia, suppose some advance in
refinement -- but national intercourse in those wretched times served but to
promulgate national idolatries. Babylon, that mighty seat of empire surpassed
most other nations in the superb materials of her Gods. Astronomers there
observed the motions of the Heavens, and bowed in adoration to the splendid
hosts that adorned them. Cyrus, who erected the Persian on the ruins of the
Babylonish Monarchy, knew nothing of the Almighty Being who named him, an age
before he had existence, as the instrument of Liberty to his captive people.
Alexander, who in his turn subverted this extensive empire, could only blend
his Grecian idols with the Persian -- for dark, deplorably dark, was every
corner of the habitable earth, except the inconsiderable land of Jukea, where
only a few despised, enfeebled tribes, possessed the light of sacred knowledge.

What a spectacle for the Father of the universe! who produced a world to know
him and be happy! how much must his divine compassion be excited, on
contemplating his glorious work in ruins! -- to redeem it was an effort worthy
of himself.

We now come to the enlightened ages of Greece and Rome -- a period when I
fancy I see the human soul like a brilliant gem, illustrious in the dust. What
noble struggles did then the human reason make to free itself from the
incumbent load or darkness and error! Then lived those numerous worthies, whose
names are yet precious to posterity. What greatness of soul -- what a taste for
solid glory -- what elevated sentiments did they not discover? Yet these men,
so far superior to the rest of their species, acknowledged a multiplicity of
deities, whose moral characters were infinitely inferior to their own, and to
whom they scrupled not to ascribe actions which themselves would have blushed
to acknowledge. Every passion of the human mind was personified, and deified;
statues graced every corner of their streets. Yet were there not wanting some
among them who made bold advances in search of better information -- like
benighted travelers, they followed the most distant gleam of light, yet all
they could obtain was doubt and obscurity.

At this period, when reason had done all it could do to regain its native
rights and privileges -- the Savior of the world appeared, at whose sacred
presence idolatry fled, and the knowledge of the one true God began to
enlighten mankind. They were no longer compelled to enquire, "Where is God our
maker?" They knew him, and were instructed in his divine worship. The doctrines
which the divine Messiah taught, eminently tended to restore human nature to
the rectitude and happiness it had lost -- they were calculated to harmonize
the passions, regulate the affections, and exalt the soul to a sense of her own
dignity, by revealing in the clearest terms, the immortality of her nature -- a
point which philosophy had long sought to explore through the dim veil of
probable conjecture.

A cursory view of the tenets of Christianity is sufficient to evince, that
they are designed to establish the happiness of mankind even in the present
life. Consider the benevolence and charity they inculcate -- the patience,
meekness, moderation, contempt of worldly pleasures and enjoyments, the
generous clemency to enemies; with the rest of that bright assemblage of
virtues they enjoin, and you will confess it a matter of wonder that the
felicity of Eden is not already restored to those countries where the religion
of Christ is professed -- and the reason it is not so can be none other, than
that of the thousands who daily make profession of it, so few have a competent
knowledge of its nature and design. Born in a Christian land, they think such a
scrutiny superfluous. Thus they call themselves Christians, without having any
thing of the spirit of Christ. -- And thus the human race is still obnoxious to
a thousand miseries, for want of applying to themselves the remedy which alone
could put an end to moral evil.

May you, my dear girls, be effectually convinced of the inestimable value of
this divine dispensation, and think with Dr. Young, that "A Christian is the
highest style of man."

There are no virtuous dispositions -- no generous affections -- no truly noble
sentiments, that are not comprised in that sublime character. Possess it, my
young friends, for no higher distinction, or greater felicity, can possibly be
wished you by CORNELIA.

FINIS
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY J. ORMROD, No. 41, Chesnut-street.
The Looking-Glass for the Mind, or the Juvenile Friend; being a valuable
collection of interesting and miscellaneous incidents, calculated to exhibit to
young minds the happy effects of youthful innocence and filial affection. In
prose and verse, designed to improve and amuse the rising generation.
Embellished with an elegant frontispiece and seventy three cuts. Price 75
cents. The Looker-on, a new periodical work in the manner of the Spectator, by
the Rev. Simon Olive Branch A. M. Four vols. in two. Price 2 dolls. 50 cents.
Extract from the Analytical Review. "It appears from the dedication, that the
Editor of this pleasing publication, in the Rev. William Roberts, A. M. F. A.
S. Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford; and from the last Number, that the
labor, and consequently the merit of these Papers, have rested with the
Editor, excepting only a few contributions particularly mentioned. The Editor's
design has been, as he represents it, 'To substitute the forsaken topics of
morality, literature, and taste, in the room of shallow politic and newspaper
philosophy, and to betray men under the mask of amusement, into serious and
manly thoughts.' The design was laudable, and the execution was meritorious. As
literary productions, these periodical Papers are entitled to distinction; but
their highest praise is, that they are throughout calculated to promote virtue
and good manners."


The Visit for a Week, or Hints on the improvement of Time. Containing,
original tales, entertaining stories, interesting anecdotes, and sketches from
natural and moral history. To which is added, a poetical appendix. Designed for
the amusement of youth. Embellished with a handsome frontispiece. Price 75
cents. Camilla, or a Picture of Youth. By the Authoress of Evelina and Cecilia.
Five volumes in three. Price 3 dollars. Darwin's Plan of Female Education in
Boarding Schools, Private Families, and Public Seminaries. To which are added,
Rudiments of Taste, in a series of Letters from a Mother to her Daughters.
Embellished with an elegant frontispiece. Price 1 dollar. Chaptal's Elements of
Chemistry. Three volumes in one. Price 3 dollars. Cyrus' Travels, in French and
English. Two volumes. Embellished with a frontispiece. Price 2 dollars. The
Life, Travels and Philanthropic labors of the late John Howard Esquire Embellished
with his Portrait. By John Aikin, M. D. Price 75 cents. The Children's Friend,
by M. Berquin. Price 37 1-2 cents. Brown on the Natural Equality of Men; on the
Rights that result from it, and on the Duties which it imposes. To which a
Medal was adjudged by the Teylerian Society at Haarlem, 1792. Price 62 1-2
cents. Cullen's Practice of Physic, with notes by Rotheram, 2 vols, 8vo. 4
dollars. Hunter on the Venereal, with plates. 2 dollars. Haley's Triumphs of
Temper, with handsome plates. 1 dollar. Netley Abbey, a Gothic Story. Two
volumes in one. 75 cents. Homer's Iliad, translated by Pope. 1 dollar. M Ewen
on the Types. 75 cents. The Philadelphia Spelling Book, arranged upon a plan
entirely new, adapted to the capacities of Children, and designed as an
immediate improvement in Spelling and Reading the English language. Recommended
by SEVERAL EMINENT TEACHERS, as the most useful performance to expedite the
instruction of youth. 25 cents. J. Ormrod keeps constantly for sale, at his
wholesale and retail Bookstore, No. 41, Chesnut-street, Philadelphia, an
extensive assortment of valuable Books on various subjects and in sundry
languages. Likewise school-books of every description, and stationary of all
kinds. Printing in all its variety executed with elegance, accuracy and
dispatch. Orders from any part of the United States, or elsewhere, gratefully
received and punctually attended to.

