AN ORATION, SPOKEN AT HARTFORD, IN THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, ON THE
ANNIVERSARY of American Independence, JULY 4th, 1798.

BY THEODORE DWIGHT.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. 1798.

THE Committee of arrangements for the celebration of the 4 th of July, in
behalf of the Citizens of Hartford, return their Thanks to Theodore Dwight,
Esquire. for his Oration, delivered this Day, and request a Copy thereof that it
may be published.

THOMAS Y. SEYMOUR, ANDREW KINGSBURY, EZEKIEL WILLIAMS, JUN. DANIEL WADSWORTH.

City of Hartford, 4 th July, 1798.
AN ORATION.
IT is customary for persons, standing in the situation in which I am now
placed, to entertain their hearers with glowing eulogies on Liberty, and
Independence. This practice sprung from a laudable spirit; and has doubtless
produced very beneficial effects. But it becomes the friends of their country,
at the present period, to turn their attention to something of more importance.
It becomes us to enquire, whilst we are gazing with rapturous emotions, at this
idol, which our fancies have decorated with such splendid ornaments, whether we
are not in the utmost danger of being robbed of a more substantial blessing.
Childish indeed will our conduct be, if we suffer ourselves to be thus deluded.
I shall therefore leave such subjects for minds, more enthusiastic than my own;
while I direct your thoughts, for a few minutes, to one inconceivably more
interesting to us all. Our national Independence was achieved by a severe, and
painful struggle. Let us enquire, whether we are not in danger of being
deprived by fraud and violence, of that, which cost us so dear, the blessings
of which, we have for a short period so richly experienced, whose charms have
so often kindled our enthusiasm, and animated our hopes. On this topic, my
sentiments will be plain, and undisguised. Not accustomed to concealment on
political subjects, even in circumstances far less interesting than the
present, I should esteem my conduct very unworthy, if I were capable of
restraining my honest opinions, at a moment, when it becomes every man to range
himself on the side of his country, and to use every possible exertion for its
preservation and honor.

EVERY person who hears me, will readily perceive, that France is the source,
from whence I expect this danger. It has indeed been apprehended for years, by
many, whose minds were not blinded by the glare of the astonishing events,
which that nation has accomplished. I trust there are few at the present
moment, whose understandings are so benighted, as not to descry its rapid
approach. I beg, therefore, at the outset, to be understood to advance this
proposition -- THAT THE UNITED STATES ARE IN DANGER OF BEING ROBBED OF THEIR
INDEPENDENCE, BY THE FRAUD AND VIOLENCE OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC.

To establish the truth of this proposition, I remark -- That there has been
for many years, a steady effort on the part of France, to destroy the
Independence of this country.

WHEN Louis the sixteenth entered into an alliance with the United States, they
were engaged in a desperate warfare, with a powerful nation. That nation, was
Great Britain; between whom, and France, there had subsisted for centuries, the
most deadly animosity. This animosity, enkindled at first from the
circumstances of neighborhood, and rivalship, had been mutually fanned, and
perpetuated by the governments, until it had become altogether implacable. The
prosperity of one, was viewed as the adversity of the other; and the object of
the highest importance, in the view of either, was the humiliation of its
rival. When the American colonies, first showed a spirit of resistance against
British domination, the unequal contest excited universal attention among the
nations of Europe. But to none was it a matter of such interesting concern, as
to France. Her old, "natural enemy," had engaged in an enterprise of much more
difficulty, than she seemed to be aware of. Fully sensible, that the era
afforded an opportunity for humbling the pride of Great Britain, France
listened with pleasure to our entreaties, and threw her weight into our scale.
The alliance, though it must have been acknowledged highly incongruous when
coolly considered, was of the last importance to this country. The advantages
of it, to us, were immediate, and decisive. Its strength was too powerful for
Great Britain; and the contest ended by an acknowledgement of our Independence.
Thus, the first object which the French Court had in view -- the humiliation of
Great Britain -- was accomplished. In order, however, to improve the great
events which had passed, as far as possible to their own advantage, they bent
the whole force of their talents at intrigue, and negotiation, to reduce this
country under their absolute control, that they might seize the valuable
property, which Great Britain had lost. The attempt was accordingly made, at
the time of settling the treaty of peace, and would have succeeded, if Mr.
Adams, and Mr. Jay, had not possessed more integrity, firmness, and patriotism,
than their colleague. Had the treaty been concluded on the terms propounded by
France, and acceded to by Doctor Franklin, the Independence of the United
States would have been nothing more than a name. We should only have gained a
new master, with no other consolation, than a consciousness, that we were
immense losers by the exchange. Frustrated in this attempt, by the dignified
conduct of the illustrious characters I have named, we were suffered, for the
present, to enjoy the fruit of our labors, in the possession of real
Independence. No one, who is in any degree acquainted with the restless
ambition of France, will believe that she would sit down contented, when
disappointed of half her object. The attempt was only postponed to a more
convenient season; and from that time, to the commencement of her own
Revolution, every instrument in her possession, was employed to bring about her
favorite project. For this purpose, as an indispensible pre-requisite, she
made constant efforts to acquire our confidence, and affection. Her advantages,
it must be confessed, were singularly efficacious. The services which we had
received from the government, were all-important; and the motives which induced
her to lend us aid, were proudly acknowledged by us, to be disinterested. In
this situation, it would have been strange indeed, if the feelings of a nation,
too young to be vicious, and too inexperienced to indulge suspicion, were not
ardently grateful.

IT will be proper here to remark, that what has hitherto been said, respecting
the conduct, and views of France, is applicable only to the king, and his
councils. The voice of the people, was not heard, nor called for. The mandates
of the monarch, were the supreme law; and nothing was exacted of the subjects
but implicit obedience. If, therefore, the conduct of France, was in any degree
insidious, the guilt is imputable to the king; if praiseworthy, his is the
merit.

WHEN the French Revolution commenced, the events which took place for the
first two, or three years, were calculated to excite in the American bosom, the
sincerest sympathy. We found among its Leaders, Characters, who had fought for
our liberties, and whose amiableness and heroism, had excited our friendship,
and admiration. But, when the legitimate authority of the king was set at
defiance, his life destroyed, and the Constitution overturned, it became the
duty of the American people, to reflect coolly on their situation, and not to
suffer their enthusiasm in favor of freedom, to lead them into the most absurd,
and dangerous conduct. Though it was the true policy of this country, to
acknowledge the new French Government, in order to pursue a system of peace,
yet we ought not to have transferred our ideas of gratitude from the
unfortunate monarch, who had in truth rendered us important services, to his
ferocious subjects, who had never exercised toward us, the least act of
generosity, or friendship. But, however absurd such conduct may appear, far the
greater part of the people of the United States, after the death of the king,
professed the same lively sense of obligation to the Nation, as would have been
due to it, had the people voluntarily come over, and fought our battles.
Finding this spirit in full operation here, the Leaders in the Revolutionary
government, very justly concluded, that they might improve it to their own
advantage. Accordingly, professing the truest spirit of affection for their
"elder Sister in freedom," they sent over an ambassador, to carry into effect
their fatal purposes. This man, was well selected for the mission on which he
was sent. Capable of performing a double part, without any inconvenience, he
appeared as the messenger of good will to our nation, while he was charged with
a spirit of the deadliest hostility. Breathing nothing but peace, he meditated
nothing but war; and while he praised us for our spirit of neutrality, he used
every possible effort, to force us to make a common cause with France, against
all her enemies. The object which the French had in view, in this hypocritcal
policy, was not any serious assistance from our exertions in her favor. Her
wish was, to make us quarrel with the other nations of Europe, with whom we
were on friendly terms, that we might be forced to take shelter under her
protection; which would in effect, reduce us to a state of absolute vassalage.
Unluckily for the schemes of France, Genet plucked off his mask too suddenly.
His insidiousness became apparent; and his masters, finding themselves in
danger of being frustrated in their darling purpose, dismissed him from their
service. Before he quitted his post, he found it expedient to publish his
instructions; by which it appeared, that he was delegated for the express
purpose, of coupling us with France, in the war.

HIS successor assumed a different character, and pursued a different line of
conduct. Reserved, and, apparently, inefficient, he was obviously employed on
no great mischief, until, by a most providential discovery, it was proved, that
his reserve was studied, and his inefficiency, fatally potent. "The hand of
Joab" appeared too evident, in a most daring, and formidable Rebellion, against
the laws and government of the United States, the object of which was, the
destruction of our Constitution and Independence.(1)

WHEN the National Convention thought fit to dismiss this second incendiary
minister, they favored us with a third, if possible, more zealous, more
artful, and more determined, than either of his predecessors. His conduct must
be fresh in the recollection of all. He left no effort untried, to assert, and
establish the sovereignty of the French Republic, over the government of the
United States. His disappointment ended, in venting the most opprobrious
abuses, against all its virtuous, and dignified administrators. Every person,
will bear me witness, that his exertions were all directed to one favorite
point -- the ascendency of the French over our Councils, and Country.

IF any thing further be necessary, to prove, to the satisfaction of every
mind, the real objects of the French, in their conduct toward this country,
fortunately the evidence is at hand. It may be had, by resorting to the history
of their proceedings at home, for two or three years past. With a degree of
insolence, unparallelled in the annals of nations, that haughty Power, has
assumed the right of dictating to us, the line of conduct which we must pursue,
not only as it respects herself, but with other nations. The United States,
having ventured to make a treaty with Great Britain, without the permission of
France, the government of that country, immediately, by its public decrees,
sanctioned a system of piracy upon our commerce, which had been before more
clandestinely carried on, and in a short time, plundered our citizens of more
than twenty millions of dollars. At this time, the United States were
represented in France, by a man, (2) much better fitted, to be the tool of an
unprincipled Directory, than the Agent of a free, and virtuous people. This
degraded minion of a foreign court, had the baseness to declare, to the
plunderers of his country, that the people of the United States, would
cheerfully submit to the most licentious depredations on their property, if it
were necessary to the interests of their voracious Ally. Who can listen to such
a debasement of our national character, without the most lively indignation!
But, such is the necessary effect of what is called republicanism, by modern
politicians. Not a man who professes it, but is prepared, rather than check the
progress of those principles, which like a pestilence are sweeping away to
destructions, all the pleasures, and blessings of life, to invite the
plunderers of nations, the destroyers of human happiness, to turn their fatal
forces against the existence of his friends, and the peace of his country.

WHAT has been the conduct of our own government, in this trying situation?
Instead of plunging headlong into the miseries of war, they have exhausted the
whole system of negotiation, to preserve peace, and obtain something like
justice. Their efforts have met with such success, as ought to be expected by
all nations, who are obliged to transact business with those, who are destitute
of principle, and regardless of character. In the first instance, a most
respectable Envoy Extraordinary, has been treated with contempt, and rejected
with disdain. In the second, Commissioners, furnished with ample powers for
adjusting all the disputes between the countries, have been sent; who, after
experiencing a long series of the most mortifying insults, have, with
unparallelled insolence, been refused even an audience with the haughty
Directory. Instead of listening to our claims for compensation, they invite us
to become their tributary vassals. Without any other pretext, than that of
power, they demand a heavy contribution from us, as the price of negotiation;
and, to the disgrace of the Dey of Algiers, justify their conduct, by comparing
it with his. The particular history of these proceedings, is too mortifying to
be repeated. But, it has had its proper effect. The spirit of the country has
risen in opposition to such insolent demands, and I trust the "Grand Nation,"
as she modestly styles herself, will find, that she is not dealing with Venice,
nor Switzerland.

IT is not necessary, surely, to attempt to prove, that in every instance,
where the French nation gains the predominancy over any other, the liberties of
the latter expire in the fraternal embrace. It is more benumbing to national
happiness, than the touch of a Torpedo, to the functions of life -- it is the
Bohon Upaz of morals, of liberty, and religion. A long, and painful list of
nations, may be produced from Europe, to justify any conclusions, we may feel
disposed to make against them.

I THEREFORE remark, That we are peculiarly exposed to danger from France, for
several reasons. There is, in the hearts of the American people, an inherent
love of liberty. This spirit was brought into this country, by the first
inhabitants, and has been transmitted to their posterity with the most faithful
care. The first lesson which our venerable ancestors taught their children,
after their duty to God, was, to cherish, and defend their liberties. To these
instructions, we are indebted for the spirit, which rose in opposition to the
exactions of the British government, and which, by the blessing of Providence,
wrought out our Independence. It is not, therefore, at all surprising, that
there should exist in our bosoms, a sympathetic affection for any nation,
struggling for the same interesting end. When the French nation began their
Revolution, there was an universal anxiety for its success, throughout the
United States. Scarce a heart could be found, which did not fervently
supplicate the Supreme Arbiter of Events, to grant them freedom from
oppression. In this state of enthusiasm, it was not to be expected, that the
strong attachment of a nation, would be easily turned from a course, which it
had gloried in pursuing. Having long believed the French people, to be
sincerely engaged in vindicating their rights, and ascribing the crimes with
which their Revolution has been blackened, to causes, not incompatible with
that belief, it was not to be expected, that the public sentiment would
materially change, without being operated upon by the most irresistible
evidence. As long, therefore, as it is possible to trace out apologies for
their enormities, so long it will be done by zealous minds; and so long will
this country be exposed to danger from the effects of this misleading passion.

IN the next place, we are in hazard, from the effects of a mistaken idea,
which has been very prevalent, that we are indebted to the French Nation, for
the aid which their troops afforded us, in our own Revolution. Nothing has been
so often mentioned as this; and nothing ever was more unfounded. The king of
Great Britain, during the war in this country, employed German troops against
us. Did any person ever suppose, that the British nation ought to be grateful
to the Hessians for their assistance; or would have owed them gratitude, if the
war had terminated in their favor? Who sent those troops here? Their master,
the Landgrave of Hesse. If any debt was due for their services, it belonged to
him, who was the sole cause of their rendering those services; and not to the
troops, who had no volition to exercise, who merely obeyed the orders of their
sovereign. Was not this precisely the case with the French troops in this
country? Upon a contract between the United States, and the king of France,
they were sent here to aid us in the contest with Great Britain. He had the
supreme, and perfect command over the actions of his subjects, and employed
them in the manner he pleased. The contract has been faithfully fulfilled on
our part, and the debt discharged. Their services were no more their own
voluntary acts, than the labors of slaves are attributable to themselves. To
Louis the sixteenth, we were indebted, just so far as such interested services
could confer obligation, and to him alone. It would therefore be well for those
of our countrymen, who feel this singular sense of gratitude with such lively
emotions, to recollect, that their real benefactor, the amiable, the pious king
of that "terrible nation," has fallen a sacrifice to the most wanton,
unexampled injustice, and tyranny. Let them, if their hearts are as tender as
their professions would indicate, bewail the untimely death of a monarch, who
has not left among his subjects, an equal portion of virtue, with what he
himself possessed.

BUT a more important source of mischief to us, than all that I have mentioned,
is to be found, in the characters, dispositions, and practices, of many of our
own citizens. That there are two strong political parties in the United States,
will be acknowledged by all. That one of these parties, has been, almost from
the time of the adoption of the Constitution, endeavoring to subordinate this
country to France, I shall attempt to prove; and have no objection to their
attempting to establish their favorite dogma, viz. that the party in opposition
to them, is laboring, with equal zeal, to subject this country to
Great Britain. Proof of the first position, I believe to be attainable -- the
second, I venture to say, may defy their utmost exertions. The party which I am
about to mention, though it apparently has been under the direction of
different Leaders, I shall consider, as having been from the beginning,
implicitly guided by Mr. Jefferson. To him, then, we must look for the proofs,
of what his subordinates have uniformly endeavored to accomplish. I trust that
gentleman will suffer me to analyze his political character, without murmuring.
He stands on elevated ground -- a Beacon, to warn others of the soul, and
dangerous channel. The man, who takes upon himself the high offices of
government, assumes at the same moment, a weight of responsibility, which
requires caution at the outset, and integrity in the discharge. "THE MAN OF THE
PEOPLE," will surely not shrink from a scrutiny, by one of small importance
among his sovereigns.

WHEN Mr. Jefferson returned from his mission to France, fears were entertained
by many respectable persons, that he had imbibed no small portion of the
unfettered notions of the French, respecting philosophy, government, and
religion. This apprehension gave great uneasiness; because it required not the
spirit of prophecy to foresee, that so considerable a personage must have a
share in the Administration. As the office of Secretary of State fell to his
lot, he could have no concern with legislation; but his friend, Mr. Madison,
was, at the same time, the acknowledged Leader of his party in the House of
Representatives. From the perfect coincidence of opinion between them, and the
confessed superiority of Mr. Jefferson, we may justly consider the former, as
enlisted under the banners of the latter. The first fact which I shall notice,
as containing evidence of Mr. Jefferson's determination to subject this country
to France, is Mr. Madison's introduction of Mr. Jefferson's(3) celebrated
Resolutions, to the House of Representatives, in the year 1794. The professed
object of these Resolutions, was the regulation of Commerce. But, it was
perfectly obvious, that their real object was, to bind the United States so
closely to France, that they must inevitably be involved in her destiny. Mr.
Jefferson, from the moment he landed in this country, had fixed his eyes on
France, as the great Brazen Serpent of the world, which was to heal all the
maladies of nations. There the human mind was to start from its enchantment,
burst through the chains of ages, and freed from Superstition and Tyranny,
stalk with gigantic step, over Law, Government, and Religion. Yearning over the
novel scenes which a regenerated world would produce, he was solicitous that
his country should follow France, in her tremendous career. Considering our
freedom as mixed with alloy, he wished to plunge this country again into the
Revolutionary furnace, that it might be purified by fire. Aware of the
difficulty of changing the sober habits of Americans, into the wild, and
impious vagaries of philosophy, he contrived this artful mode of beginning the
public reformation. The unfriendly feelings of the people toward
Great Britain, were the auxiliary, and the regulation of Commerce, the mask, on
which he depended for the success of his schemes. Though the absurdity of this
attempt was exposed, yet the bait was swallowed by many. "Strange! Passing
strange!" That in settling a question, which had no other aim than the
acquisition of wealth to a particular class of citizens, resort should be had
to legislative coercion, when the plainest principles of common arithmetic,
were sufficient for every purpose. In all commercial regulations, the merchant
is the person who is interested. He alone can determine, where his trade can be
advantageously pursued; and for his conviction, will resort to his Ledger. All
the metaphysics of a Lock, will have no weight, when placed in opposition to
the demonstration of his figures. We must therefore search in some other
region, for the true cause of this mighty effort to chain down Commerce. This
reason I have already mentioned -- it was a wish to unite this country
inseparably to France.

IN this instance, Mr. Jefferson, and his co-operators, were happily
frustrated. But it was not to be expected, that people of their character, in
pursuit of their object, would easily loose sight of their favorite purpose.
Accordingly, in every stage of our political progress, we find them eagerly
pursuing those measures, which seemed to promise the greatest success.

IF any person is disposed still to doubt, whether Mr. Jefferson's wishes are
such as I have represented them, fortunately, we are furnished with some
corroborating circumstances, from his own "precious confessions." In the spring
of the year 1797, Mr. Jefferson's celebrated letter to Mazzei, made its
appearance in the United States. This letter, as might naturally be expected,
has been the text of many commentators. I trust, however, that I shall be
pardoned for making a few remarks upon it, as it contains a perfect compendium
of the French, and anti-federal policy, as exhibited in the United States. Mr.
Jefferson begins by saying that -- "Our political situation is prodigiously
changed since you left us. Instead of that noble love of liberty, and that
republican government, which carried us through the dangers of the war, an
Anglo-Monarchic-Aristocratic party has arisen. Their avowed object is, to
impose on us the substance, as they have already given us the form, of the
British Government. Nevertheless, the principal body of our citizens remain
faithful to republican principles, as also the men of talents. We have against
us (republicans) the Executive Power, the Judiciary (two of the three branches
of our government) all the officers of government, all who are seeking for
offices, all timid men, who prefer the calm of despotism, to the tempestuous
sea of liberty, the British merchants, and the Americans, who trade on British
Capitals, the speculators, persons interested in the Bank, and Public Funds.
[Establishments invented with views of corruption, and to assimilate us to the
British model in its corrupt parts.]" The first charge which Mr. Jefferson
brings against his country, is -- that "a party has arisen in it, whose avowed
object is, to impose on the people, the substance of the British government."
This assertion, has often been boldly made by the profligate printer of the
Aurora, and other tools of Sedition, in the country; but we should hope, that
so great a man as the present Vice President of the United States, would, at
least, pay a decent regard to truth in his writings. No man will say, that the
party of which Mr. Jefferson is speaking, ever had the hardihood to avow their
object to be, to impose a monarchical government on the people of the United
States, however much they may secretly wish such an event to take place. "The
form of this government," says this letter-writer, "they have already given
us." No one can misunderstand this expression. Mr. Jefferson means to be
understood, that the Constitution of the United States, possesses the form of
the British Government. If this is his opinion of our Constitution, what are we
to understand by the oaths he has repeatedly taken to support it? Is he willing
to swear to support a monarchy in the United States; or does he disregard the
obligations of an oath; and when he has a favorite object before him, like a
thorough disciple of the Illuminati,(4) rush boldly upon the thick bosses of
the buckler of God? But of whom is this party said to consist? Who are they,
that are avowedly attempting to impose upon us the substance of the British
government? "The Executive Power," says this philosopher. At the date of this
letter, the Executive Power of the United States, was in the hands of the
venerable, the illustrious WASHINGTON -- on whose virtues, the language of
panegyric has long since been exhausted -- on whose head, rest the benedictions
of a grateful country -- and who, after having performed the most important,
and difficult services, without the least diminution of honor, has retired from
public employment, amidst the applauses, the tears, and the prayers of the
people, with the affectionate, and dignified title, of THE FATHER OF HIS
COUNTRY. I shall notice but one other class of the characters who are said to
belong to this party -- viz. "ALL TIMID PERSONS, WHO PREFER THE CALM OF
DESPOTISM, TO THE TEMPESTUOUS SEA OF LIBERTY." This passage, I beg may be
attentively considered; as it furnishes a key, to unlock the Cabinet of Mr.
Jefferson's political opinions. It will be remembered, that Mr. Jefferson is
complaining of the Federal Constitution, of course, the party of whom he is
writing, are the friends of that Constitution. "THE CALM of Despotism," then,
in his view, was the peaceful, prosperous, happy condition of the United
States, under that Constitution, before the tranquillity of the country was
destroyed, and its interests sacrificed, at the shrine of anarchy; and the
"DESPOTISM," must (...), the coercion of the laws, which protected the people
in the quiet enjoyment of their lives, families, and estates, without fear of
molestation from the marauding spirit of modern republicanism. This was the
state, which this party, so obnoxious to Mr. Jefferson, preferred "TO THE
TEMPESTUOUS SEA OF LIBERTY" -- a sea, whose waves are waves of blood -- whose
storms are the conflicting passions of Man -- whose inhabitants are ferocious
monsters, roaming their sanguinary round for prey -- and whose shores are white
with the bones of murdered millions.

THE writer then remarks -- "I should give you a fever, if I should name the
apostates who have embraced these heresies; men, who were Solomon's in council,
and Sampsons in combat, but whose hair has been cut off by the whore England.

"THEY would wrest from us that liberty, which we have obtained by so much
labor and peril; but we shall preserve it. Our mass of weight and riches are
so powerful, that we have nothing to fear from any attempt against us by force.
It is sufficient that we guard ourselves, and THAT WE BREAK THE LILLIPUTIAN
TIES BY WHICH THEY HAVE BOUND US, in the first slumbers which have succeeded
our labors. It suffices that we arrest the progress of that system of
ingratitude, and injustice toward France, from which they would alienate us,
to bring us under British Influence," etc.

IT would almost seem, that the writer of this letter, was fearful, lest his
real sentiments would not be understood from the first part of it, and
therefore calculated the latter part, to extinguish any doubt that could arise
in any mind. After informing Mr. Mazzei, of the existence of the
Anglo-Monarchic-Aristocratic party in this country, and of what descriptions of
people that party consisted; he proceeds to point out the mode of avoiding
their machinations. He says -- "they would wrest from us our liberty, which we
have obtained by so much labor and peril." It will be recollected that Mr.
Jefferson has heretofore told us in this letter, in what manner this party was
endeavoring to destroy our liberties -- viz. "by giving us the substance, as
they had already the form, of the British government." This I have shown, is
applied to the Federal Constitution. It may then fairly be laid down, from this
letter, as Mr. Jefferson's opinion -- That the Federal Constitution is, in
form, a monarchy; and that the friends of that Constitution, are laboring to
give it the substance of the British monarchy, in its corrupt parts.
Notwithstanding the boldness of the designs of this party, and the strength
which they have acquired, Mr. Jefferson does not despair of frustrating them.
He says -- "they are endeavoring to wrest from us our liberty, but we shall
preserve it." What measure is to be adopted, to insure this success? "It is
sufficient that WE BREAK THE LILLIPUTIAN TIES BY WHICH THEY HAVE BOUND US."
With what chain has this party bound the United States? By adverting to the
former part of the letter, we shall make the discovery. "Instead of that
republican government which carried us through the war, (which must mean the
Confederation) a party has arisen, whose avowed object is, to impose on us the
substance, as they have already given us the form, of the British government."
As this refers alone to the Federal Constitution, that Constitution is the tie
which binds the country, and, of course, that is the tie which is to be broken
to save our liberty. The task seems to be a very easy one. It is a Lilliputian
tie, which an infant may sever. Destroy this trifling shackle, and your hands
will be free -- free for plunder, free for bloodshed, free for sacrilege.

MR. Jefferson then brings into view the great engine, by the aid of which,
every thing necessary to destroy our Constitution, and subject us to foreign
sway, is to be accomplished. "It suffices, that we arrest the progress of that
system of ingratitude and injustice toward France." This is the secret, by
which the passions of the people are to be kept enflamed, their understandings
and their conduct perverted. Keep alive this "will-o-wisp," and the country may
easily be led to perdition. Here then we find the source, from whence sprang
the ridiculous notion of gratitude to the French Nation; and here we also find,
for what purpose that notion has been propagated. The writer of this letter,
had no other way of saving the liberties of his country, than by destroying the
Constitution, and the great mean of destroying the Constitution, was, arresting
the progress of ingratitude to France. This may be compatible with the
allegiance of a Jacobin, or an Illuminatus, but in a well regulated government,
which possessed energy enough to protect the virtuous, and to punish the
vicious, it would be unadulterated treason -- a crime, to which there can be
but one aggravation, viz. perjury -- Swearing to support a Constitution, which
gives a man his bread, while he is laboring incessantly to destroy it.

IT will be observed, that thus far, I have taken one fact for granted, viz. --
That if the French Councils, by any means whatever, should gain such an
ascendency over our government, as to control its measures, our Independence
will be at an end. This proposition is too evident to be questioned.

I SHALL proceed to point out the means, by which, we may escape the calamities
with which we are threatened.

LET us not be seduced into an unsafe situation, by our love of liberty; or by
the false, and unfounded notions of friendship, and gratitude, which I have
already mentioned. It becomes us to rouse from the state of mental imbecility,
into which we are sunk, and to think for ourselves. Let us recollect the facts
which we are furnished with by the history of mankind, and we shall find, that
of all the nations on earth, there is none more distinguished for a selfish,
unprincipled, and destructive policy, as it respects other nations, than
France; that her projects are all calculated for her own aggrandizement; and
that there is no more real cause of sympathy between America and France, than
there is between America, and Algiers. When our attention to this subject is
once thoroughly awakened, there will be no cause to fear from this source, any
danger to our Independence.

LET us shut our Councils against those persons, who wish to barter our
freedom. One class of these men I have already mentioned. They are of a very
dangerous nature. No man, who is weak, or wicked enough, to be willing to
exchange the benign government of the United States, for the horrors of a
Revolutionary system, is fit to be a Legislator for this happy country.
Charity, with expanded wings, may possibly stretch her flight so far, as to
discover in some of these men, honest intentions; but I could almost as easily
persuade myself, that the midnight robber, or the murderer of sleeping
innocence, might wash himself free from guilt.

BUT there is another class, to which we are, if possible, indebted for more
serious misfortunes. This, is composed of foreigners.(5) I am ashamed for my
country, that so great a portion of her public Councils, should be made up of
foreigners. Where is our national spirit! Where is our pride! Where is our
dignity! Are we yet to be deluded by the artifices of worthless renegadoes!
Look at the rolls of Congress, ever since the adoption of our present
Constitution, and you will find, that the most celebrated "patriots" among
them, are emigrants from Europe. Escaping from their own country, embittered
against its government, probably because they had exposed themselves to its
penalties, they land on our shores with the most heartburning passion for
liberty; and holding the rights of man in one hand, and the seeds of Rebellion
in the other, they harangue the mob, preach against the oppression of the laws,
rail at all good men, and, by the assistance of the weak, ignorant, and
worthless part of the community, push themselves with undaunted assurance, into
the high departments of government. Where should these persons learn the
principles of rational liberty? Are they to be found among the savage hordes of
"United Irishmen," or in the Jesuitical schools of Geneva? From these regions,
we may justly expect the the foul disturbers of Legislative decorum, and the
authors of Whisky-Insurrections;(6) but not the framers of wholesome laws, nor
the supporters of our excellent Constitution.

LET us resolve to defend our Constitution, and Country, against every foreign
encroachment; and especially against the encroachments of France. This can be
done, only by a spirit of union. We have demonstrative evidence, that the
injuries which we have already suffered from France, have originated from an
idea, on her part, that we are a divided, and, of course, a feeble people.
Indeed, her agents in Paris have openly boasted, that their measures against us
were sure of success, from the circumstance of our divisions at home, and from
the efforts of their party here. (7) She is perfectly well assured, that
America, if united, is invincible. Our shores may indeed be ravaged, our towns
destroyed, and our vessels plundered; but the country can never be conquered.
Our resources are inexhaustible; our spirit, when thoroughly roused,
unconquerable. We have once hazarded all that is dear to the heart of man,
"when we were few men in number, yea very few," and in a truly feeble state.
Shall we now shrink from the force, even of all-conquering France, and yield
our freedom without a struggle? This never will happen, unless we are capable
of forgetting the mighty reasons, which call us to exert ourselves to the
utmost, to defend our liberties, and save our country.

LET me, then, call your attention to this most interesting subject. In the
consideration of it, let us first enquire, what we are to lose with our
Independence? And here, I am not about to entertain you with a declamation on
the glory of being a free, independent nation. My intention is, to call your
serious reflections, to your more substantial interests. Cast your eyes then
abroad, and see what you are in possession of. Look at your country, rich in
every blessing, that is necessary to the health, to the pleasure, and to the
happiness of men. Here every man is the sovereign proprietor of his little
farm, and the happy master of his peaceful dwelling. Free from the pomp, and
expense of courts, simplicity of manners, and oeconomical habits prevail,
unaided by sumptuary laws, and unmolested by envy and pride. Knowledge is the
birthright of every class of citizens, and truths moral and divine are taught
to all. Our rulers, are our neighbors, and friends, chosen by our free, and
unbiassed suffrages, educated in the same habits with ourselves, are acquainted
with our wants, and have every possible inducement to supply them Our
government was framed, and adopted by ourselves, without any other motive than
the conviction of its necessity, and without any other authority, than our own
reason, and understanding. Under its wise, and just Administration, we have
grown up, and flourished, "the joy of other nations, and the pride of the whole
earth;" while over all our concerns, has spread the influence of that religion,
which is pure, peaceful, and divine. Well may we exclaim in the language of
Inspiration -- "Happy art thou, O Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people,
saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency. The eternal GOD is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
arms; and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say,
DESTROY THEM. Israel then shall dwell in safety, alone; the fountain of Jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew.
THEN SHALL THINE ENEMIES BE FOUND LIARS UNTO THEE, AND THOU SHALL TREAD UPON
THEIR HIGH PLACES."(8)

BUT, it is much more important for us to enquire, what we are to gain by a
subordination to the French. Here, I confess my great incapacity to do justice
to a subject, which comprises nothing less, than a complete history of
Jacobinical government. It is however necessary to the plan with which I set
out, that I attempt it; for by tracing out the characters, and views, of the
authors of the French Revolution, we may be able to judge, whether the effects
which their government has produced, wherever it has operated, are not the
natural consequences of their cause.

IT is a fact well ascertained, that this Revolution was planned by a set of
men, whose avowed object was the overthrow of ALTARS and THRONES(9) -- that is,
the destruction of all Religion, and Government. This plan was conceived, and
nourished, at the midnight orgies of the modern "ILLUMINATI." The creed of this
society of demons, is, "That all means, however flagitious, are to be used for
the accomplishment of their favorite end. If, therefore, it becomes necessary,
in order to forward their main purpose, every member must be guilty of murder,
seduction, perjury, incest, and blasphemy. From such an association, actuated
by such turpitude of heart, we might rationally expect, would spring a
Jacobinical government. This is the government, which, for these six years
past, has directed the affairs of France, and which has produced in that
miserable country, a state of things, which, in the metaphoric language of Mr.
Jefferson, may be emphatically called, "THE TEMPESTUOUS SEA OF LIBERTY." Such a
government, France, and her votaries in this country, have wished to introduce
here, in the place of that just, and equitable system, which with so much pride
and felicity, we have established for ourselves. The fair mode of trying the
merits of this government, will be by its fruits. The same effects, which it
has produced in other countries, where its baleful influence has been
experienced, it will produce in ours, if ever adopted by us. Let us then
examine into those effects, as exhibited in France itself -- and in other
countries, which have been conquered by France.

IN surveying the events which have happened in France, since the establishment
of Republicanism, the mind recoils from scenes, sickening to the heart of man.
There we find simple murder set so low in the scale of crimes, as almost to
become a virtue. The ingenuity of a people, celebrated beyond all others, for
its quickness, and versatility, has been exhausted in discovering new species
of wickedness, more heinous than those heretofore known, and in adding
aggravations to those which had already been practiced. The common modes of
destroying lives, among a people, which seemed bent on becoming a nation of
murderers, soon became dull, and unpleasant; they therefore substituted the
Guillotine, as a more expeditious, and to their hearts, a more enlivening
engine of death. But, as the fashion became more general, (...) also was found
too slow in its operations, for the zeal of Jacobinism; and new methods were
invented, more cruel to the victims, and, of course, more exhilirating to their
executioners. By the invention of "republican marriages," and "republican
baptisms," hundreds, and thousands, of innocent men, women, and children, have
been chained together, and plunged into a watery grave. Instances, too
disgusting to hear, too horrid to relate, without number, have happened, in
which fathers and their sons, mothers and their infants, husbands and wives,
brothers and sisters, have been blown from the mouths of cannon, torn to pieces
in the streets, or sacrificed to the infernal fury of cannibal fishwomen.
Victims, whose hearts sunk at the prospect of the apparatus of death, have been
forced to kiss the bleeding heads of their fellow victims, as a preparative to
the awful change. Delegates from the National Convention, charged with the work
of general extermination, lest they should lose some part of their bloody
pleasure, have ordered the bodies of those butchered by their direction, to be
brought, and piled in heaps before their doors, that they might regale
themselves with "the trophies of their patriotism." And, as an encouragement to
this work of slaughter, it is said, that the Convention, ordered the Corpses of
the national victims to be flayed, in order to procure leather for the use of
the army.(10)

IT is worthy of observation, that the spirit of Jacobinism, differs very
essentially from all other spirits. The zeal of an enthusiast in religion,
though violent, and often pernicious, yet will stop short of acknowledged crime
-- it will shrink from cool deliberate murder. But the Jacobin is not satisfied
with guilt of a common dye. He delights in murdering the wife of his bosom, in
destroying the life of a smiling infant, in plunging a dagger into a parent's
heart.

ANOTHER very prominent feature in Jacobinism, is an avowed enmity against
religion. Sensible, that so long as any ideas of moral obligation should
remain, and the doctrine of future accountability be believed, it would be
impossible to introduce that universal system of depravity, which is
essentially necessary for their purposes, the Leaders of the Revolution early
laid the axe at the root of Religion. At a single effort of the Gigantic
Monster, the Temple was overthrown, and its ministers buried in the ruins.
Religion was hunted from her sacred retreats; and while her blaspheming foes
rolled in the splendor of her spoils, SHE "had not where to lay her head." The
poor, the infirm, and the pious, robbed of the only consolation on this side
the grave, were driven to take refuge in the cold arms of Despair, or the still
more bleak, and comfortless regions of Annihilation. Instead of the cheering
hopes of the Gospel, that sure and steadfast Anchor to the soul, they were
forced to listen -- WHILE Atheists preached THE ETERNAL SLEEP OF DEATH.


FROM this dreary spectacle, turn your eyes to the state of property. In
France, to be rich, is to be guilty. The bare suspicion of property is the
signal for denunciation; and denunciation is only the next stroke before death.

NOR does the administration of government, in its highest departments, afford
any brighter scenes to the wandering eye. A Directory, as profligate, as
insolent, without any other pretext, than, that the Republic was in danger,
have arrested, condemned, and banished, two of their number, and a large
proportion of the National Councils, confessedly, in open defiance of the
positive provisions of the Constitution, and the privileges it guarantees to
the "Representatives of the Sovereign People." Nor is even this the length, to
which they have stretched their despotic prerogatives. At the last Elections,
after having, in vain, used every possible artifice, to procure the return of
persons devoted to their interests, finding the Electors resolutely determined
to choose those, in whom they could place confidence, the Directory, with an
effrontery never equalled by the greatest tyrant on earth, informed them, that
the Executive had (in the instance I have just mentioned) already purged the
Legislature of the Traitors which it contained; and they were determined that a
new set should not enter; it would therefore be fruitless to elect characters,
obnoxious to the Directory.

I MIGHT easily waste the day in pursuing even these very general sketches. But
I will not weary your patience further, than to take a slight survey of the
effects of Jacobinism, in some of those countries, which have been conquered by
France. In their fate, we may learn our own. Let us then turn our eyes to
Holland. A few years since, Holland was rich in a commerce, which extended over
the globe, and one of the most industrious, opulent nations on earth. Charmed
with novelty, and deluded with the offers of Revolutionary affection, she
exchanged a government, under which she was prosperous, for the blessings of
French fraternization -- and where is she now! Sunk -- not into oblivion, but,
what is infinitely more deplorable -- into the most abject slavery -- her name
blotted out of the catalogue of Nations. Stripped of her Independence,
despoiled of her Commerce, and plundered of her Wealth, "In one hour is she
come to naught." Let other nations take warning by her example, that they
"receive not of her plagues." For they have "come upon her in one day, death,
and mourning, and famine."

FROM Holland, pass to Venice -- Venice, for many centuries, had been a
Republic, respectable, independent, and free. But, when the ferocious Conqueror
of Italy, found himself destitute of his favorite employment, the shedding of
blood, he turned his aching eyes to this peaceful nation. A pretext for
hostilities was soon created. In consequence of a trifling quarrel between some
insolent French soldiers, probably set at work by their Chief, and a few
Venetian Citizens, the vengeance of the haughty Republican was immediately
directed against an unoffending nation. The result is well known. Venice is no
more. The arms of "the Terrible Nation," were too powerful for her forces; she
fell a victim to an insidious, an exterminating foe; and this wretched country,
has been bartered away to an Imperial Master, by these "friends of the human
race," for another corner in the great ACELDAMA of Europe.

FROM Venice, let us follow this dreadful army to Switzerland. There,
surrounded by almost impassible mountains, inhabiting a territory, which
offered none of those charms by which the French seem to be attracted, lived,
in all the simplicity of innocence, a hardy, peaceable, and virtuous people.
With a government benign and just, with manners generous and hospitable, this
amiable, learned, and pious people, by a steady, upright, and heroic policy,
had for many ages maintained the respectability, and independence of their
happy Republic. Too poor to furnish any temptations to a nation of plunderers,
and too small ever to become formidable, it would seem that Switzerland might
be safe. But, she was free. When the enemies of France were crushed, and her
troops were growing clamorous, in order to furnish them with employment, the
fatal eyes of the Directory were turned to Switzerland. As the harbinger of
mischief, a faction was raised in the Councils of Berne. Requisitions, the most
unjust and oppressive, were made in a threatening, and insolent manner; while,
to the remonstrances of the Swiss, they turned a deaf, and sullen ear. Every
effort toward a system of defensive preparation, was benumbed by the agents of
the French, with the pusillanimous cry of "NEGOTIATION," and "THE TERRORS, AND
EXPENSES OF (...)" Determined at all events, to sell their country to France,
the Gileses, the Gallatins, and the Jeffersons of that devoted nation, induced
their countrymen to pause, until the hour of opposition was past. Their
"inaccessible mountains" proved no obstacle to the savage Republicans; who,
finding the Swiss in a divided, temporising, supplicating state, attacked,
defeated, and destroyed them. "Human nature shudders at the recollection of the
scenes which ensued. Reduced to despair at the loss of their freedom, the Swiss
fought with unexampled bravery. The field of battle, was a promiscuous scene of
confusion, of carnage, and of death. Four hundred women met their fate,
fighting by the sides of their husbands; near a thousand youths, of the most
respectable families, in a phalanx, were swept away by the besom of
destruction; while Age, tottering with the weight of arms, fell, and expired
with the liberties of his Country. The closing events, may be more easily
imagined, than described. The orders given to the French soldiery, by their
superiors are -- Let not thy sword skip one;
Pity not honored Age for his white beard;
Strike me the matron; let not the virgin's cheek
Make soft thy trenchant sword; spare not the babe,
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy,
Mince it without remorse.(11)


IN this catalogue of desolated Nations, I must be pardoned for mentioning a
part of Germany, through which the French troops marched in the year 1796. The
Circle of Suabia, was the highway for the army of General Moreau, as he
advanced toward the center of the Imperial dominions, with the full career of
Victory; and as he afterward retreated from the triumphant forces of the
Archduke Charles. In describing the progress of this army, it is impossible to
do justice to the subject, in any other mode, than by a simple narration of
facts. But decency, and humanity forbid, that I should enter on the detail. The
transactions which took place, would draw tears from the most obdurate eye, and
wring the flinty heart. Robbery, Conflagration, and Murder, were left out of
sight, in the list of enormities. Not only the villages were given up to
indiscriminate plunder by a brutal soldiery, but the female sex to universal
violation. The furrowed cheek of Age, and the tender years of Childhood, were
no security against this infernal band. Scenes, which would shock the heart of
a savage, were exhibited in the face of the sun. Husbands were forced to
witness the deflowering of their wives, parents of their daughters, and
children of their parents. No circumstances were sufficient to check their
profligacy, or to control their licentiousness. Diseases the most loathsome,
furnished no protection; even Death itself could not guard the lifeless female
from dishonor.

IF then, my fellow citizens, your country in danger, from the sources which I
have mentioned -- if the reasons I have advanced, are of sufficient importance
to rouse you to exertion -- I conjure you, in the name of that Country, and its
Independence, for which you, and your fathers, so often fought, and bled -- I
conjure you in the names of your parents, wives, and children, whose lives, and
honor, it is your duty to protect -- I conjure you in the name of that
Religion, on which all the consolations of life, and the hopes of future
felicity depend -- I conjure you in the presence of that GOD, whose name you
reverence, and whose perfections you adore -- to start from the deep sleep
which seems to have fallen upon our country, commit yourselves to HIM, who is
able to say, even to "the tempestuous sea" of France, "hitherto shall thou
come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed," and determine
to save your country from slavery, or to perish in its defense.

NOTES.
(1) SEE Fauchet's intercepted letter.

(2) JAMES MUNROE. (...) the fact alluded to in this passage, resort must be
had to his own book -- A work, happily calculated (like the other modern
"vindications") to consign its author to infamy.

(3) "FROM what I have detailed above, those men might indeed be supposed
numerous. The sessions of 1793 and 1794, had given importance to the Republican
party, and solidity to its accusations. The propositions of Mr. Madison, or his
project of a navigation act, OF WHICH MR. JEFFERSON WAS ORIGINALLY THE AUTHOR,
sapped the British interest, now an integral part of the financiering system."
Fauchet's intercepted letter.

(4) IN giving a list of the Lodges of the "ILLUMINATI," Professor Robison
says, that there were several in America as early as 1786. "Proofs of a
Conspiracy," etc. page 159. (Fourth Edition.) I know not who belonged to that
society, in this country; but if I were about to make proselytes to
Illuminatism in the United States, I should in the first place apply to Thomas
Jefferson, Albert Gallatin, and their political associates.

(5) THE following partial (...) of the foreigners, who have been in Congress,
since the adoption of the Constitution, is worthy of the attention, of all the
friends of their country. James Jackson, of Georgia, Edanus Burke, of
South Carolina, Albert Gallatin, William Findley, Blair M'Clenachan, John
Swanwick, and -- Smilie, of Pennsylvania, and Matthew Lion, of Vermont. Many
others might undoubtedly be enumerated; but these are sufficient. Every man who
has read the newspapers, from year to year, must know, that these men have been
uniformly the bitter foes of our government. It is to be hoped, that experience
will teach Americans the use of a national spirit -- a pride in being governed
by native citizens. With our own countrymen, we are acquainted, and run no
risque of being imposed upon by the patriotism of knaves. But of foreigners we
know nothing previous to their arrival. They may have been traitors, thieves,
and pickpockets, in their own country. In ours they are sowers of sedition,
disturbers of peace and good order, and the enemies of moral^^ and government.

(6) IF I mistake not, all the foreigners I have named in the preceding note,
except two, are Irishmen. It is presumed that the importation of patriots from
this island, is at an end. The dregs must have been drawn off in Matthew Lion.
It is reported of Gallatin, that he thought it expedient for his own safety, to
take advantage of the governmental pardon, which was proffered to the rebels in
the Western Counties of Pennsylvania. If many such characters escaped, it was
ill-timed mercy.

(7) SEE the Dispatches of our late Envoys to France.

(8) DEUTERONOMY xxxiii. 27, etc.

(9) BURKE'S "Two letters on the Conduct of Domestic parties," etc. Page 36,
(Preface.) See also Robinson's "Proofs of a Conspiracy," etc.

(10) THIS fact is taken from a newspaper. Whether it is authentic, or not, I
cannot say. It is mentioned here, merely on the strong probability, which the
character of the French Nation furnishes, that it is true. It seems to contain
exactly what was wanting, to finish the climax of their wickedness. The
government doubtless knew, that the measure of their guilt was not yet running
over, and therefore with great propriety poured in this drop, to consummate
their national character.

(11) SHAKESPEARE.


