DOCTOR DWIGHT's SERMONS TO THE CANDIDATES FOR THE BACCALAUREATE IN
YALE-COLLEGE, A. D. 1797.

THE NATURE, AND DANGER, OF INFIDEL PHILOSOPHY, EXHIBITED IN TWO DISCOURSES,
ADDRESSED TO THE CANDIDATES FOR THE BACCALAUREATE, IN YALE COLLEGE,

BY THE REV. TIMOTHY DWIGHT, D. D. PRESIDENT OF YALE COLLEGE; SEPTEMBER 9th,
1797.

NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY GEORGE BUNCE. M.DCC.XCVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN Yale College it is customary for the President, or the Professor of
Divinity, to address a discourse to the Candidates for the Baccalaureate, on
the Sabbath, preceding the public Commencement. The following Discourses were
delivered, on this occasion, to the class which was graduated the last year,
and are now published at their request. They were originally long, perhaps
longer than the reader would have wished. I have, however, considerably
enlarged them. For this I have no other apology, than, that the method, in
which the subject is pursued, appeared to me the best, which presented itself
at the time. If this apology should in the judgment of the Reader be
insufficient, I submit cheerfully to his censure.

YALE-COLLEGE, March 4th, 1798.
THE NATURE AND DANGER OF INFIDEL PHILOSOPHY.
COLOSSIANS ii. 8. BEWARE, LEST ANY MAN SPOIL YOU THROUGH PHILOSOPHY AND VAIN
DECEIT, AFTER THE TRADITION OF MEN, AFTER THE RUDIMENTS OF THE WORLD, AND NOT
AFTER CHRIST.
WHEN the Gospel was published by the Apostles, it was, according to the
prophetic declaration of its Author, vigorously opposed by the world. This
opposition originated from various sources; but, whencesoever derived, wore one
uniform character of industry, art, and bitterness. The bigotry of the Jews,
and the sword of the Gentiles, the learning of the wise, the persuasion of the
eloquent, and the force of the powerful, were alike exerted to crush the rising
enemy.

AMONG the kinds of opposition, which they were called to encounter, not the
least laborious, malignant, or dangerous, was the Philosophy of the age. A
large number of their first converts lived in countries, where the language of
the Greeks was spoken, and their Philosophy received. The things, which this
Philosophy professed to teach, were substantially the same with those which
were taught by the Apostles; viz. the Character and Will of God, and the Duty
and Supreme Interest of Men. Hence it naturally became an object of veneration,
assumed the station of a rival to the Gospel, and exhibited an imposing aspect,
especially to young and unsettled converts.

THE doctrines, and the spirit, of the Philosophers were, however, generally
direct counterparts to those of the Apostles. Some truths, and truths of high
importance, they undoubtedly taught; but they blended them with gross and
numberless errors. Some moral and commendable practices they, at times,
inculcated; but so interwoven with immoralities, that the parts of the web
could never be separated by the common hand. Covetous, self-sufficient, and
sensual, they looked down with supreme contempt on the poor, self-denying, and
humble followers of Christ, and on their artless, direct, undisguised, and
practical preaching. Notwithstanding this contempt, it, however, prevailed
against all their specious logic, pompous eloquence, and arrogant pretensions.
Their Philosophy, enveloped in sable and figures, perplexed with sophistry, and
wandering with perpetual excursion round about moral subjects, satisfied, in no
permanent degree the understanding, and affected in no useful degree the heart:
while the Gospel simple, plain, and powerful, gained the full assent of common
sense, and reduced all the affections under its control. Of course, the
contempt of Philosophers was changed into hatred, rivalry, and persecution; and
their ridicule of Christianity was succeeded by the serious efforts of violence
and malignity.

St. PAUL, who appears thoroughly to have comprehended the nature, and often to
have experienced the effects, of the existing Philosophy, has with great force
exposed its dangerous tendency. In the beginning of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, he has given an ample account of its inefficiency and emptiness,
and a full refutation of its insolent pretensions to be a rule of life and
salvation. The arguments of its weakness and mischievous tendency, furnished,
in various passages of Scripture by him and his companions, remain still
unrefuted; and, as they were at first, so they are at this day, effectual means
of preserving no small part of mankind from the destruction, of which it is the
natural and certain parent.

IN the text, this Philosophy is characterized in a most proper and forcible
manner. It is termed Philosophy and vain deceit; a Hebraism, of the same import
with vain and deceitful Philosophy; deceitful in its nature, doctrines, and
arguments, and vain in its efficacy to accomplish the ends, which it proposes.
It is asserted to be after the tradition of men, and after the rudiments of the
world; but not after Christ; in whom, the Apostle subjoins, dwelt all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: i. e. It is such a scheme of morals and
religion, as is suited to the character of the Inventors; Men, weak and wicked,
deceived and deceitful; unable to devise, to comprehend, or to teach, the
character of God, or the duty of mankind. It is such a scheme of morals and
religion, as accords with the principles and practices of the disciples, to
whom it is taught; formed not with a design to amend the heart, and reform the
life; but with a view to gain acceptance by flattering lust, and by justifying,
soothing, and quieting guilt. The tradition of men, and the rudiments of the
world, are phrases, which may be variously interpreted, but they admit, I
apprehend, of no interpretation, which will not support the paraphrase here
given.

To this Philosophy, and the teachers of it, the Apostle directs his followers
to beware lest they should become a prey. The Greek word here used, denotes
gathering and carrying finally off the spoils of a vanquished enemy; and
therefore strongly expresses the complete ruin, to which St. Paul considered
his converts as exposed.

THE Philosophy, which has opposed Christianity in every succeeding age, has
uniformly worn the same character with that, described in the text. It has
rested on the same foundations, proceeded from the same disposition, aimed at
the same ends, and pursued them by the same means. Equally remote has it been
from truth, equally unsupported by evidence, and equally fraught with danger
and ruin.

SATISFIED of the justice of these assertions, I feel it, Young Gentlemen, to
be my duty, on this occasion, to exhort you

To beware, lest you become a prey to the Philosophy, which opposes the Gospel.

To impress on your minds the propriety, and the importance, of this
exhortation, I shall endeavor, in the

First place, To prove to you, that this Philosophy is vain and deceitful;

Secondly, To show you, that you are in danger of becoming a prey to it; and

Thirdly, To dissuade you by several arguments from thus yielding yourselves a
prey.

First. I shall endeavor to prove to you, that this Philosophy is vain and
deceitful.

YOU will observe, that it is a particular kind of Philosophy, against which
all my arguments are directed. Philosophy at large, or the Use and the
Seize of our Reason, in the candid and careful examination of every
question, within the limits of our understanding, so far as it springs from a
real desire of investigating truth, and proceeds on satisfactory evidence, is
not only undeserving of censure, but deserving of the highest praise. It is the
interest, and the duty, of all men, so far as their condition will allow; and,
as you well know, has by me, in the office of an Instructor, been earnestly and
unconditionally urged on you, as peculiarly your interest and duty. That
Philosophy only, which is opposed to Christianity, is the subject of the
following observations. There is indeed much other Philosophy, which busies
itself with government, medicine, and various other subjects, which is equally
vain and deceitful; but with this I have, at present, no concern.

THE great object, professedly aimed at by the Philosophy in question, and on
the attainment of which all its value depends, is to determine what is the
Duty, and the supreme Interest, of man. This it is plain, must depend entirely
on the Will of God. To do whatever God chooses must be man's supreme interest,
and duty alike. It is his duty, both because God wills it, and because it is
right. As his whole well-being depends on God only, his supreme interest must
consist entirely in pleasing God. He can receive no good, when God will not
give it, and God will not give, unless he be pleased. In order, therefore, to
the discovery of man's supreme interest and duty, it is absolutely necessary to
discover, first, what is the preceptive will of God, or what God requires man
to do.

THIS, Philosophy can never accomplish; and hence I assert it to be vain and
deceitful in its Nature; vain with respect to the end, at which it aims, and
deceitful with respect to the means, which it employs, and the conclusions,
which it labors to establish.

THERE are three methods, in which, it has been supposed, mankind may obtain
the knowledge of the Preceptive Will of God, and, of course, of their own
interest and duty.

I. BY Immediate Revelation;

II. BY Arguing analogically from his Providential dispensations;

III. BY arguing from a supposed Character of God, either derived from his
works, or determined a priori.

THE first of these methods lies out of the present question. The two remaining
ones I propose now to examine; and assert

I. THAT Analogical Argumentation from the Providence of God can never teach us
his Preceptive Will, except in a manner greatly imperfect and unsatisfactory.

IN Philosophy, thus directed, we always argue from what God has done to what
he will do: i. e. from the past and present state of his Providence we
undertake to determine what his designs are, and how they will terminate; and
hence derive our conclusions concerning the Will of God, or that Law, by which
our conduct ought to be regulated. This method of Philosophizing is attended
with insuperable difficulties.

IN the 1st. place, we know but a very small number of the beings and events,
which have existed; but, to form just views of the real scope of Providence, we
ought to know every being and every event. To understand the true character of
a complicated machine, we must understand the nature, and the operations, of
every part. He who knows but one in a thousand of such parts, and has seen the
operations of that one part only, would be thought wholly destitute of common
sense, were he to boast of a thorough knowledge of the whole. The great machine
of Providence is infinitely more complex, the proportion of the parts unknown
to those which are known is infinitely greater, and the approximation to the
knowledge of the whole infinitely less, than in the machine supposed. What then
must be the character of him, who boasts of a thorough knowledge of Providence?

2. WE know not thoroughly the nature of those beings and events, with which we
are best acquainted. The nature of every being, and of every event, so far as
the present question is concerned, depends chiefly, or perhaps with more
propriety wholly, on its connections with others? What are the uses of this
being, or this event? What are the purposes, which it is designed to
accomplish? are the questions, which are ever intended to be solved, in our
enquiries of this nature. But these questions Philosophy can never
satisfactorily solve. The immediate uses and purposes are, indeed, frequently
obvious; but those, which lie at a very little distance, are, for the most
part, unknown. Bread, we know, will nourish man; and safely determine, that
bread was formed for this end; But why man exists at all, why he thus exists,
and why he is thus to be nourished, we know not. That, which we know, avails
not, therefore, to the purpose in view.

ALL intermediate and subordinate ends in Creation and Providence are capable
of being understood only by the knowledge of the ultimate end: i. e. the
purpose, in which all earthly things terminate. To this end all things directly
tend; with it all are indissolubly connected; and for it all are designed, and
brought into being. But this end is wholly unknown. If it exist on this side of
the grave, it has never been conjectured. If it exists beyond the grave it can
only be conjectured; for we can only conjecture whether man will exist beyond
the grave. The ultimate end of all earthly things being, therefore, wholly
unknown, the true nature of all preceding subordinate ends is also unknown, and
of course the real scope of Providence.

IN such a state of things Analogies must plainly be of little use. The
arguments, which they actually furnish, are all direct corroboratives of the
Scriptural system of Theology, and Morality. Without the Scriptures, they are a
labyrinth without a clue. No higher proof need be given of this, than the
discordant and contradictory explanations of them, adopted by Philosophers; no
two of whom, either ancient or modern, agree in their constructions of
Providence.

HOW ridiculous an employment would it be thought in a Clown, should he
undertake to interpret the designs of a Statesman, in the management of a great
empire; to determine from what he had done what he would hereafter do; and to
decide on his own duty, and that of his fellow subjects, from a construction of
the analogies, which he supposed himself to observe in the conduct of the
Ruler? Yet the Clown is infinitely nearer to the Statesman, in understanding,
than the Philosopher to the Supreme Ruler; and infinitely more able to
comprehend the analogies, visible in the government of an empire, than the
Philosopher those, which appear in the government of the Universe.

3. THE Character of God cannot be perfectly known from Creation and Providence.

OF the truth of this assertion I am entirely convinced; yet I shall decline
attempting a discussion of it, at this time; because the occasion will not
allow me to enter into so wide a field; and because you have, not long since,
heard my opinions and arguments at large, in discourses professedly formed on
this subject. Such a discussion, it ought further to be observed, is wholly
unnecessary for the present purpose; as Philosophers have totally disagreed
concerning that Character of God, which is supposed to be visible in his works;
and as the prevailing Philosophy wholly denies the existence of such a Being.

THE only possible means of discovering the Will, or Law, of God which can be
furnished by his works, are either his Designs, or his Character. I flatter
myself, that it has been proved, that his designs can never be learned from his
works. If his character be also undiscoverable from this source, the conclusion
is certain, that his Law must also undiscoverable. If his Character can be
learned imperfectly only, his Law must, at the utmost, be known in a degree
equally imperfect. If his character be uncertain, his law must be at least
equally uncertain: and that his character is uncertain, so far as his works
disclose it, and Philosophy has discovered it, cannot be denied by any one,
acquainted at all with the discordant opinions of Philosophers. Of course, the
conclusion must be admitted, that to Philosophy the Law of God, and the Duty,
and supreme Interest, of man, must, so far as this method of investigation is
relied on, be undiscoverable. Thus Man, as a subject of the divine government,
can not, by Philosophy, ever thoroughly know, from this source of proof, what
is that conduct, which he is bound to observe, in order to please God, and
obtain his favor.

THE view of this subject, here given, does, however, by no means exhibit the
greatest difficulty, under which Philosophy labors. Man is not only a subject
of the divine government, and, therefore, in the highest degree concerned to
know the divine Law, that he may obey it; but he is also a rebel subject, and,
therefore, in the highest degree concerned to discover the means of restoration
to the favor of God. Man has violated such precepts of the divine Law, as,
either by Revelation, or Common sense, are discovered and acknowledged: such
precepts, for instance, as require him to be thankful to his Maker, and
sincere, just, and kind, to his fellow men. These things may be considered,
here, as certainly known to be parts of the Law of God; because those
Philosophers, who acknowledge a God, generally agree, that these are plainly
duties of man. But all men have violated the precepts, which require these
things. The first interest of all men is, therefore, to obtain a knowledge of
the means, if there be any, of reconciliation to God, and reinstatement in the
character and privileges of faithful subjects. To be thus reconciled, and
reinstated, men must be pardoned; and pardon is an act of mere Mercy. But of
the Mercy of God there are no proofs in his providence. Could we then discover
the Law of God, by examining his works, the knowledge of it would avail nothing
to our future well being. That we are sinners cannot be disputed; and, so far
as Philosophy can discover, sinners must be condemned, and punished.

II. Arguments, drawn from a supposed character of God whether derived from his
works, or determined a priori, labor under difficulties equally great.

1. It is impossible to determine the character of God by arguments a priori.

THE celebrated Doctor Clarke has indeed attempted thus to prove the divine
character; and his attempt is a specimen of very respectable talents, and of
the most laudable designs. Yet I cannot but think it has failed. The very
words, necessary and necessity. which are so important to his scheme, are not,
I apprehend, used by him with any clear, precise meaning. Perhaps I ought
rather to say, that I cannot perceive any such meaning, in his manner of using
them. From his illustrations I should believe, that he means nothing more by
necessary existence, than existence merely. He does not appear to me to have
proved even the Unity of God; and unless this can be evinced, I am doubtful
whether it will be possible to prove the perfect character of the Godhead. As
his is the only respectable effort of this kind, which I have seen, it is
unnecessary for me to take notice of any other.

2. SHOULD the character of God be supposed completely ascertained from what he
has done, or fully determined a priori; still insurmountable difficulties would
attend every attempt to gain, from this source, the object aimed at by
Philosophy.

THE only character of God which can be here admitted is that of Infinite
Perfection. The designs of a Being infinitely perfect, must be formed to extend
through eternity and immensity; and must embrace all beings and all events,
together with all their relations and operations. That therefore, which, by
itself, would be a wholly improper part of Creation, or Providence, might, from
its relation to the whole great work, be entirely proper. In the sight of him,
who perfectly knows all things, that may be beautiful, excellent, and
necessary, as a part of the system, which to every one, who knows a part, and a
very small part only, of the whole number of things, would appear deformed and
useless. How many measures in Government, how many even in the private affairs
of an individual, appear to us to be necessary and useful, when we are
thoroughly informed of their necessity and use; which, when we are uninformed,
appear to be unnecessary and injurious? How much more must this fact exist in
the system of the universe? He, who sees all things perfectly, must decide
concerning all, according to their whole influence and tendency; we, according
to their insulated character, or their immediate consequences.

THESE observations are abundantly supported by the real state of Creation and
Providence. The existence of Moral and Natural evil; the death of hall mankind
under the age of five years; the uselessness, to the human eye, of most animals
and vegetables; the redundance of water on the globe; and the frozen, burnt, or
otherwise barren, state of the land; are all things wholly proper in the
Creation and Providence of God, because they exist; and his Agency in their
existence, in whatever degree exerted, is wholly worthy of his character. Yet,
so far as we are able to judge, few things could be more improper parts of a
work, formed by Infinite Perfection.

THUS in its Nature must this Philosophy be vain and deceitful. I shall now
attempt to show, that, in fact, it has, from the beginning, been of this
unhappy character. This will appear in the

I. Place in the discordance and contradictoriness of its doctrines.

ACCORDING to Themistius, there were more than three hundred sects of the
western Philosophers, differing greatly, on subjects of high importance.
According to Varro, there were two hundred and eighty eight different opinions,
entertained by them, concerning the summum bonum, or chief good; and three
hundred opinions concerning God; or, as Varro himself declares, three hundred
Jupiters, or supreme deities. Critias, Theodotus, Diagoras, the Pyrrhonists,
New Academics, and Epicureans, were generally either Skeptics, or Atheists.

Aristotle denied the Creation of the Universe, and the Providence of God, so
far as this world is concerned.

The Stoics, and various others, taught, that God was fire.

Parmenides held, that God was partly fire, and partly water.

Xenophanes, that Matter, generally considered, was God.

Others held, that God was the Anima mundi, the Soul of the world.

Socrates and Plato taught the existence of one God, and taught, and practiced,
the worship of the numerous Gods of their country.

Cicero and Plutarch held, that there were two supreme Gods, one good, the
other evil.

THESE instances are sufficient to show how the greatest and most accurate
Philosophers of Antiquity thought concerning this most important subject; and
to prove, that not the least reliance can be safely placed in our religious
concerns, on the conclusions of Philosophy.

THIS variety and discordance of doctrines, among Philosophers, exceedingly
perplexed and distressed, in many instances, the Philosophers themselves; while
it wholly destroyed their authority, as instructors, among the people at large.

Plato, in his Epinomis, says, under a strong conviction, as it would seem, of
the imperfection of his own Philosophy, "Let no man presume to teach, if God do
not lead the way."

CICERO, de not. deor. makes Cotta find fault with those, who labor to prove
the existence of the Gods, by arguments; declaring, that they thus make the
doctrine doubtful; whereas the traditions of their ancestors had rendered it
certain.

PLUTARCH declares, that no argument, respecting religious belief, is more to
be depended on, than the tradition of ancestors.

PLATO declares, that there are, by nature, no such things, as just things;
since men always differ about them, and contrive, continually, new standards of
right and wrong; and that therefore, there can be no law, unless God should
give it to us.

PORPHYRY confesses his conviction, that some universal method of delivering
men's souls was needed, which no sect of Philosophers had yet found out.

MODERN Philosophers, notwithstanding they have enjoyed the light of
Revelation, and have derived from the Scriptures all their defensible moral
tenets, are yet, when they leave the doctrines of Revelation, very little
better united.

LORD HERBERT of Cherbury, the first considerable English, Deistical
Philosopher, and clearly one of the greatest and best, declares the following
things: viz.

That Christianity is the best religion:

That his own Universal Religion of Nature agrees wholly with Christianity, and
contributes to its establishment:

That all Revealed Religion ( viz. Christianity) is absolutely uncertain, and
of little or no use:

That Men are not hastily, or on small grounds, to be condemned, who are led to
sin by bodily constitution:

That the indulgence of lust, and of anger, is no more to be blamed, than the
thirst, occasioned by the Dropsy; or the sleepiness, produced by the Lethargy.

That it is our duty to worship God by prayer and praise, by repentance and
holiness, by reformation of heart and of life; and that this is indispensably
necessary to our acceptance with God:

That the soul is immortal; that there will be a future, retribution, which
will be according to the works, and thoughts, of mankind; and that he, who
denies these truths, is scarcely to be accounted a reasonable creature:

That his own Universal Religion is, and ever has been, clearly known to all
men:

That to the Gentiles (i. e. to almost all men) it was principally unknown:

And, notwithstanding the declarations, already mentioned, in favor of
Christianity, he accuses all pretenses to Revelation of folly and
unreasonableness, and rejects with contempt its capital doctrines.

MR. HOBBES declares,

That the Scriptures are the Voice of God; and yet

That they are of no authority, except as enjoined by the Civil Magistrate:

That inspiration is a supernatural gift, and the immediate hand of God; and yet

That it is madness:

That the Scriptures are the foundation of all obligation; and yet

That they are of no obligatory force, except as enjoined by the Civil
Magistrate:

That a subject may believe Christ in his heart; and yet

May lawfully deny him before the Magistrate:

That God exists; and yet

That that, which is not Matter, is nothing:

That worship, prayers, and praise, are due to God: and yet

That all religion is ridiculous:

That the civil or municipal Law is the only foundation of right and wrong:

That, where there is no civil law, every, man's judgment is the only standard
of right and wrong:

That the Ruler is not bound by any obligation of truth, or justice; and can do
no wrong to his subjects:

That every man has a right to all things, and may lawfully get them, if he can:

That Man is a mere machine: and

That the Soul is material and mortal.

Mr. BLOUNT declares,

That there is one infinite and eternal God; and yet insinuates,

That there are two eternal, independent Beings:

That the one God is the Creator of all things; and yet insinuates,

That the world was not created, but eternal:

That God ought to be worshipped, with prayer and praise; yet,

He objects to prayer as a duty:

That Christianity is safer than Deism; and yet

That Revelation is not sufficiently supported, because men differ about it:
(Of course, no moral doctrine is sufficiently supported; for men differ about
every such doctrine.)

That the Soul is immortal, and will be rewarded hereafter, according to its
works done here; and yet,

That the Soul is probably material, and of course mortal:

Still he says, that we ought to obey God in the practice of virtue;

And that we ought to repent, and trust in the mercy of God for pardon.

LORD SHAFTESBURY declares,

That the belief of future rewards and punishments is noxious to virtue, and
takes away all motives to it;

That the hope of rewards, and the fear of punishments, makes virtue mercenary;

That to be influenced by rewards is disingenuous and servile; and

That the hope of reward cannot consist with virtue; and yet,

That the hope of rewards is not derogatory to virtue, but a proof, that we
love virtue;

That the hope of rewards, and the fear of punishments, however mercenary it
may be accounted, is, in many instances, a great advantage, security, and
support, of virtue; and

That all obligation to be virtuous arises from the advantages (i. e. the
rewards) of virtue, and from the disadvantages (i. e. the punishments) of vice:

That those are censurable, who represent the Gospel as a fraud (or imposition;)

That he hopes the discourses of Doctor Whichcot will reconcile the enemies of
Christianity to it, and make Christians prize it more highly than before; and

That he hopes Christians will be secured against the temper of the
irreconcilable enemies of the faith of the Gospel; and yet

He represents salvation as a ridiculous thing and insinuates,

That Christ was influenced, and directed, by deep designs of ambition, and
cherished a savage zeal and persecuting spirit; and

That the Scriptures were a mere artful invention to secure a profitable
monopoly (i. e. of sinister advantages to the inventors:)

That Man is born to religion, piety, and adoration, as well as to honor and
friendship;

That virtue is not complete without piety; yet

He labors to make virtue wholly independent of piety:

That all the warrant for the authority of Religious symbols (i. e. the
Institutions of Christianity) is the authority of the Magistrate:

That the Magistrate is the sole judge of Religious Truth, and of Revelation:

That miracles are ridiculous; and

That, if true, they would be no proof of the truth of Revelation:

That Ridicule is the test of truth; and yet

That Ridicule itself must be brought to the test of Reason:

That the Christian Religion ought to be received when established by the
Magistrate; yet

He grossly ridicules it, where it was thus established:

That Religion and Virtue appear to be so nearly connected, that they are
presumed to be inseparable companions; and yet

That Atheists often conduct so well, as to seem to force us to confess them
virtuous:

That he, who denies a God, sets up an opinion against the very well-being of
society; and yet

That Atheism has no direct natural tendency to take away a just sense of right
and wrong:

That Atheism is greatly deficient in promoting virtue; and

That the natural tendency of it is to take away a just sense of right and
wrong.

Mr. COLLINS, though chiefly a mere objector to Revelation, declares,

That Man is a mere machine:

That the Soul is material and mortal:

That Christ and his Apostles built on the predictions of fortune tellers and
divines;

That the Prophets were mere fortune tellers and discoverers of lost goods;

That Christianity stands wholly on a false foundation; yet

He speaks respectfully of Christianity; and also of the Epicureans, whom he at
the same time considers as Atheists.

Mr. WOOLSTON, also a mere objector, declares,

That he is the farthest of any man from being engaged in the cause of
Infidelity;

That Infidelity has no place in his heart;

That he writes for the honor of Jesus, and in defense of Christianity; and

That his design in writing is to advance the Messiahship, and Truth, of the
holy Jesus; "To whom," he says, "be glory for ever, amen." and yet,

That the Gospels are full of incredibilities, impossibilities, and absurdities;

That they resemble Gulliverian tales of persons and things, which out of
romance never had a being;

That the miracles, recorded in the Gospels, taken literally, will not abide
the Test of Reason and Commonsense; but must be rejected, and the authority of
Jesus along with them;

At the same time, he casts the most scurrilous reflections on Christ;

Dr. TINDAL declares,

That Christianity, stripped of the additions, which mistake, policy, and
circumstances, have made to it, is a most holy religion; and yet,

That the Scriptures are obscure, and fit only to perplex men, and that the two
great parts of them are contradictory:

That all the Doctrine of Christianity plainly speak themselves to be the will
of an infinitely wise and holy God; and yet,

That the Precepts of Christianity are loose, undetermined, incapable of being
understood by mankind at large, give wrong and unworthy apprehensions of God,
and are generally false and pernicious:

That Natural Religion is so plain to all, even the most ignorant, men, that
God could not make it plainer; even if he were to convey, miraculously, the
very same ideas to all men; and yet,

That almost all mankind have had very unworthy notions of God, and very wrong
apprehensions of Natural Religion:

That the principles of Natural Religion are so clear, that men cannot possibly
mistake them; and yet,

That almost all men have grossly mistaken them, and imbibed a superstition
worse than Atheism.

That Natural Religion is unalterable; that nothing can be either added, or
diminished; and that it is necessarily known to all men; and yet,

That the goodness, or wickedness, of all actions is wholly measured by their
tendency; that this tendency is wholly to be judged of by every man, according
to his circumstances; and that these circumstances are continually changing:

That one rule is formed by God for every man, and yet,

That every Man must form a rule for himself.

Mr. CHUBB declares,

That he hopes to share with his friends in the favor of God, in that peaceful
and happy state, which God has prepared for the virtuous and faithful, in some
other, future world; and yet,

That God does not interpose in the affairs of this world, at all, and has
nothing to do with the good, or evil, done by men here:

That Prayer my be useful, as a positive Institution, by introducing proper
thoughts, affections, and actions; and yet he intimates,

That it must be displeasing to God, and directly improper:

That a state of rewards and punishments, hereafter, is one of the truths,
which are of the highest concern to men; and yet,

That the arguments for the immortality of the Soul are wholly unsatisfactory;
and that the Soul is probably matter:

That men are accountable to God for all their conduct, and will certainly be
judged and dealt with, according to the truth and reality of their respective
cases; and yet,

That men will not be judged for their impiety or ingratitude to God, nor for
their injustice and unkindness to each other; but only for voluntary injuries
to the public; and that even this is unnecessary and useless:

That God may kindly reveal to the world, when greatly vitiated by error and
ignorance, truths necessary to be known, and precepts necessary to be obeyed;
and yet,

That such a Revelation would be, of course, uncertain and useless;

That Christ's Mission is, at least in his view, probably divine; and yet,

That Christ, in his opinion, was of no higher character, than the Founder of
the Christian sect (i. e. another Sadoc, Cerinthus, or Herbert:)

That Christ was sent into the world, to acquaint mankind with the Revelation
of the will of God; and yet,

That his birth and resurrection were ridiculous, and incredible; and that his
institutions and precepts were less excellent, than those of other teachers and
lawgivers:

That the New Testament, Particularly the Writings of the Apostles, contain
excellent cautions and instructions for our right conduct; and

That the New Testament yields much clearer light than any other traditionary
Revelation; and yet,

That the New Testament has contributed to the perplexity and confusion of
mankind, and exhibits doctrines heretical, dishonorary to God, and injurious to
men; and

That the Apostles were impostors; and that the Gospels and Acts of the
Apostles resemble Jewish, fables, and Popish legends, rather than accounts of
facts:

That, as, on the Christian scheme, Christ will be the Judge of the quick and
the dead, he has not on this account (i. e. admitting this to be true) any
disagreeable apprehensions on account of what he has written; and yet,

He ridicules the birth and resurrection of Christ, postpones his instructions
to those of the Heathen Philosophers and Lawgivers, asserts his doctrines to be
dishonorary to God and injurious to mankind, and allows him not to be sinless;
but merely not a gross sinner.

He further declares,

That the Resurrection of Christ, if true, proves not the immortality of the
Soul:

That the belief of a future state is of no advantage to society:

That all Religions are alike:

That it is of no consequence what Religion a man embraces:

AND he allows not any room for dependence on God's Providence, trust in him,
and resignation to his will, as parts of duty, or religion.

Mr. HUME declares,

That there is no perceptible connection between cause and effect;

That the belief of such connection is merely a matter of custom;

That experience can show us no such connection;

That we cannot with any reason conclude, that, because an effect has taken
place once, it will take place again;

That it is uncertain and useless to argue from the course of nature, and infer
an Intelligent Cause;

That we cannot, from any analogy of nature, argue the existence of an
Intelligent Cause of all things;

That there is no reason to believe that the Universe proceeded from a Cause;

That there are no solid arguments to prove the existence of a God;

That experience can furnish no argument concerning matters of fact, is in this
case useless, and can give rise to no inference; and

That there is no relation between cause and effect; and yet,

That Experience is our only guide in matters of fact and the existence of
objects;

That it is universally allowed, that nothing exists without a cause;

That every effect is so precisely determined, that no other effect could, in
such circumstances, have possibly resulted from the operation of its cause;

That the relation of cause is absolutely necessary to the propagation of our
species, and the regulation of our conduct;

That voluntary actions are necessary, and determined by a fixed connection
between cause and effect;

That motives are causes, operating necessarily on the will;

That Man is a mere machine (i. e. an object operated on necessarily by
external causes;)

That there is no contingency (i. e. nothing happening without a settled cause)
in the universe; and

That Matter and Motion may be regarded as the cause of thought (i. e. The Soul
is a Material Cause, and thought its effect:)

That God discovers to us only faint traces of his character, and that it would
be flattery, or presumption to ascribe to him any perfection, which is not
discovered to the full in his works (and of course, that it would be flattery
or presumption to ascribe any perfection to God:)

That it is unreasonable to believe God to be wise and good;

That what we believe to be a perfection in God may be a defect. (i. e.
Holiness, Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, and Truth, may be defects in God;)
Of consequence, Injustice, Folly, Malice, and Falsehood, may be excellencies in
his character;

That no reward, or punishment, can be rationally expected, beyond what is
already known by experience and observation:

That self-denial, self-mortification, and humility, are not virtues, but are
useless and mischievous; that they stupify the understanding, sour the temper,
and harden the heart (and of course are gross crimes:)

That pride and self-valuation, ingenuity, eloquence, quickness of thought,
easiness of expression, delicacy of taste, strength of body, health,
cleanliness, taper legs, and broad shoulders, are virtues:

That Suicide, or self-murder, is lawful and commendable (and of course
virtuous:)

That Adultery must be practiced, if we would obtain all the advantages of life:

That Female Infidelity (or Adultery) when known, is a small thing; when
unknown, nothing: and

That Skepticism is the true and only wisdom of man. The following summary of
Mr. Hume's doctrines, published some years before his death, Bishop Home says,
was never, so far as he could find, questioned, as to its fidelity or accuracy,
either by Mr. Hume, or his friends.

A Summary of Mr. Hume's Doctrines, Metaphysical and Moral.
Of the Soul.
That the soul of man is not the same this moment, that it was the last: that
we know not what it is; that it is not one, but many things, and that it is
nothing at all.

That in this soul is the agency of all the causes that operate throughout the
sensible creation; and yet that in this soul there is neither power nor agency,
nor any idea of either.

That matter and motion may often be regarded at the cause of thought.

Of the Universe.
That the external world does not exist, or at least, that it is existence may
reasonably be doubted.

That the universe exists in the mind, and that the mind does not exist.

That the universe is nothing but a heap of perceptions, without a substance.

That though a man could bring himself to believe, yea, and have reason to
believe, that every thing in the universe proceeds from some cause; yet it
would be unreasonable for him to believe, that the universe itself proceeds
from a cause.

Of Human Knowledge.
That the perfection of human knowledge is to doubt.

That we ought to doubt of every thing, yea, of our doubts themselves, and
therefore, the utmost that Philosophy can do, is to give us a doubtful solution
of doubtful doubts.

That the human understanding, acting alone, does entirely subvert itself, and
prove by argument that by argument, nothing can be proved.

That man, in all his perceptions, actions and volitions, is a mere passive
machine, and has no separate existence of his own, being entirely made up of
other things, of the existence of which he is by no means certain; and yet,
that the nature of all things depends so much upon man, that two and two could
not be equal to four, nor fire produce heat, nor the sun light, without an act
of the human understanding.

Of God.
That it is unreasonable to believe God to be infinitely wise and good, while
there is any evil or disorder in the universe.

That we have no good reason to think the universe proceeds from a cause.

That as the existence of the external world is questionable, we are at a loss
to find arguments by which we may prove the existence of the Supreme Being, or
any of his attributes.

That when we speak of Power, as an attribute of any being, God himself not
excepted, we use words without meaning.

That we can form no idea of power, nor of any being endued with power, much
less of one endued with infinite power; and that we can never have reason to
believe, that any object or quality of any object exists, of which we cannot
form an idea.

Of the Morality of Human Actions
That every human action is necessary, and could not have been different from
what it is.

That moral, intellectual, and corporeal virtues are nearly of the same kind --
In other words, that to want honesty, and to want understanding, and to want a
leg, are equally the objects of moral disapprobation.

That adultery must be practiced, if men would obtain all the advantages of
life; that, if generally practiced, it would in time cease to be scandalous;
and, that, if practiced secretly and frequently, it would by degrees come to be
thought no crime at all.

Lastly, as the soul of man, according to Mr. Hume, becomes every moment a
different being, the consequence must be, that the crimes committed by him at
one time cannot be imputable to him at another.




Lord BOLINGBROKE declares,

That Power and Wisdom are the only attributes of God, which can be discovered
by mankind; and yet,

That he is as far from denying the Justice, as the Power, of God; that his
Goodness is manifest: At the same time, he ascribes every other Perfection to
God, as well as Wisdom and Power, and says, this is rational:

That the Wisdom of God is merely a natural attribute, and in no sense moral;
and yet,

That the Wisdom of God operates in choosing what is fittest to be done; (Of
course, it is a moral attribute; involving perfect moral rectitude, as well as
perfect knowledge;).

That God is gracious and beneficent;

That whatever God has done is just and good;

That such moral perfections are in God, as Christians ascribe to him; yet

He censures divines for ascribing these perfections to God:

That we learn from our own Power and Wisdom, the Power and Wisdom of God; and
yet,

That it is profane, to ascribe the excellencies of our nature to God, although
without limit or imperfection:

He undertakes to defend the Righteousness of God against divines; and yet
asserts,

That Holiness and Righteousness in God are like nothing in men; that they
cannot be conceived of by men, nor argued about with any certainty; and that to
talk of imitating God in his moral attributes is blasphemy:

That God made all things; and yet,

That he did not determine the existence of particular men: (Of course, he did
not determine the existence of any man; all men being particular men.)

That he will not presume to deny, that there have been Particular Providence;
and yet,

That there is no foundation for the belief of any such providence; and that
it is absurd and profane to assert, or believe, them:

That God is just; and that justice requires, that rewards and punishment, be
measured to particular cases, according to their circumstances, in proportion
to the merit, or demerit, of every individual; and yet,

That God does not so measure out rewards, or punishments; and that, if he did,
he would subvert human affairs; that he concerns not himself with the affairs
of men at all; or, if he does, that he regards only collective bodies of men,
not individuals: that he punishes none except through the Magistrate; and that
there will be no state of future rewards, or punishments:

That divines are deserving of censure for saying, that God made Man to be
happy; and yet he asserts,

That God made Man to be happy here; and that the end of the human state is
happiness:

That the Religion of Nature is clear and obvious to all mankind; and yet,

That it has been unknown to the greatest part of mankind:

That we know Material substance, and are assured of it; and yet,

That we know nothing of either Matter, or Spirit:

That there is, undeniably, something in our constitution, beyond the known
properties of matter; and yet,

That the Soul is material and mortal; and that to say, the Soul is immaterial
is the same thing as to say, that two and two are five:

That Self-love is the great Law of our nature; and yet,

That Universal Benevolence is the great Law of our nature:

That Christianity is a republication of the Religion of Nature, and a
benevolent system; that its morals are pure; and that he is determined to seek
for genuine Christianity with the simplicity of spirit, with which Christ
himself taught it in the Gospel; and yet

A great part of his Works, particularly of his Philosophical Works, was
written for no other end, but to destroy Christianity.

He also declares,

That there is no conscience in Man; except artificially:

That it is more natural to believe many Gods than to believe One:

He teaches, that Ambition, the Lust of Power, Avarice, and Sensuality, may be
lawfully gratified, if they can be safely gratified.

That the sole foundation of Modesty is vanity, or a wish to show ourselves
superior to mere animals.

That Man lives only in the present world:

That Man is only a superior animal:

That Man's chief End is to gratify the appetites and inclinations of the flesh:

That Modesty is inspired by mere prejudice:

That Polygamy is a part of the Law, or Religion, of Nature. He intimates also,

That Adultery is no violation of the Law, or Religion of Nature:

That there is no wrong in Lewdness, except in the highest Incest:

That the Law or Religion of Nature forbids no Incest, except between the
nearest Relations: and plainly supposes,

That all Men and Women are unchaste, and that there is no such thing, as
Conjugal Fidelity:

These doctrines will serve as a specimen of the Philosophy, which actually
exists. Volumes would be necessary for even a summary account of all its
diversities. I need only observe further, that, with respect to the Existence,
Character, and Providence, of God, Philosophers differ wholly. Most of the
Infidels, of the present age, entirely deny his existence, and treat the belief
of it as a contemptible absurdity. Voltaire, at first, believed in a finite
God; but, in his old age, doubted of the existence of any God. Toland believed
the world to be God. Many of them suppose him to resemble the Gods of
Epicureans, to be totally absorbed in pleasure and quietude, and to be utterly
unconcerned with the creatures, which, nevertheless, he has thought proper to
make. Amid such a diversity, and discordance, whom are you to follow; and what
are you to believe?

2dly. IN the gross and monstrous Nature of its Doctrines.

Of this character were very many doctrines of the Ancient Philosophers.

ZENO taught, that all crimes were equal; that we ought never to forgive
injuries; and that the most abominable lewdness is lawful.

BOTH Zeno and Cleanthes taught, that Children may as lawfully roast and eat
their parents, as any other food.

DIOGENES, and the Cynics generally, taught, that Parents may lawfully
sacrifice and eat their Children; and that there is neither sin, nor shame, in
the grossest and most public acts of lewdness.

PLATO taught, that lewdness is justifiable; and

CICERO, that it is a crime of small magnitude.

LYCURGUS encouraged stealing by an express Law.

ARISTIPPUS taught, that both theft and adultery are lawful.

CICERO, that it is lawful to make war, for the sake of fame, provided it be
conducted without unnecessary cruelty.

CICERO also taught, that Virtue consists in the desire of fame. Of course
Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Charles the twelfth of Sweden, and Nadir
Kouli Khan, were among the most virtuous of mankind. For several of these
doctrines see Deism Revealed.


THE occasion will not allow me to swell the number of these specimens of the
ancient Philosophy. I proceed therefore to observe, that the moderns have
uttered numerous doctrines, of a similar character. Such is the Atheism, which
they now consider as the only rational and enlightened Philosophy. Such is the
Skepticism of Hume; the mortality and materiality of the Soul; the doctrine,
that Man is a mere animal; that animal gratification is the chief of end our
being; that right and wrong depend solely on the decisions of the magistrate;
that ridicule is the test of truth; that we may lawfully get all things, if we
can get them safely; that modesty is inspired only by prejudice, and has its
foundation in the mere desire of appearing to be superior to animals; that
Adultery is lawful according to the Religion of Nature; that there is no wrong
in lewdness, except in the highest Incest; That God exercises no Providence
over mankind; and that holiness, justice, goodness, and truth, may be defects
in the Divine character. All these, and many others already recited, are
doctrines as repugnant to Common sense, and Common good, and fraught with as
much impiety and irreverence to God, and as much evil to mankind, as any
doctrines, which can be proposed. When we view the pernicious tendency of these
Doctrines (and these are the substance of the modern Philosophy) we may safely
say, that, thoroughly practiced, they would overwhelm this world with that
misery, which the Scriptures exhibit as experienced only in hell. When we
contemplate the folly of these doctrines, we may with the utmost propriety
apply to the modern Philosophers what Cicero says of their predecessors; viz.
that he knows not how it comes to pass, that, when any man utters an absurdity
ever so gross, he presently finds the same absurdity to have been delivered by
some one of the Philosophers.

3. IN its total inefficacy to reform either themselves, or their Disciples.

CICERO declares, that the ancient Philosopher's never reformed either
themselves or their disciples; and that he knew not a single instance, in which
either the teacher, or the Disciple, was made virtuous by their principles. See
Deism Revealed.
Lucian declares them, as a body, to have been tyrants, adulterers, and
corrupters of youth. Plutarch declares Socrates and Plato to have been as
incontinent, and intemperate, as any slave; and Aristotle to have been a fop, a
debaucher, and a traitor. Dion Cassius gives no better character of Seneca.
Diogenes and Crates committed lewdness, without a blush, in the streets;
doubtless believing, with Lord Bolingbroke, that modesty was inspired by mere
prejudice. Speusippus, who appears to have believed, with Mr. Hume, that
adultery must be practiced, if we would obtain all the advantages of life, was
caught, and slain, in the act of adultery. Aristippus kept a seraglio of
strumpets and catamites, and perjured himself, to cheat a friend of a sum of
money, which that friend had left in his hands; and refused also to educate his
own children; styling them mere vermin. Menippus, because he had lost a sum of
money, murdered himself; as did also Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus Cleombrotus,
Cato the younger, and Brutus. Cato the elder parted with his wife to
Hortensius, and was accused of drunkenness. Xenophon was a notorious sodomite,
and said in the absence of a boy, whom he kept, "I would be blind to all things
else, so that I might see Clinias:" and again, "thanks to the sun, which
discloses to me the face of Clinias." The ancient Philosophers, indeed, were
generally noted for sodomy. Plutarch, acknowledging the fact, makes for them
this apology, that, though they corrupted their bodies, they made amends for it
by improving their souls. In truth, nothing better was to be expected from
them, than what is here recounted; for their doctrines warranted these, and
most other crimes.

THESE are among the most respectable of those men, whose theological and moral
systems modern Philosophers prefer to that of Christ and his Apostles. The
morals of the Moderns have, in some instances, been more decent; in others,
very little different.

THE true character of all men may be certainly known by their opinions. No man
is better than the moral opinions, which he holds, will make him, if drawn out
into life and practice. Few are in any measure so good. I do not deny, that men
may be more decent, before their fellow-men, than the tendency of their
doctrines would lead us to believe; but in this there is no principle, no
virtue. All is the result of wishing to live agreeably, and to possess
reputation. The worst of all men have this desire as really, and often as
strongly, as any others, even the most virtuous.

THE doctrines of these Philosophers, it will easily be seen, by even a slight
recourse to the account already given of them, forbids the belief, and the
existence, of virtue in those who embrace them.

LORD HERBERT declares, that the indulgence of lust and anger is no more to be
blamed, than the thirst of a fever, or the drowsiness of the Lethargy. In this
single sentence, by a sweeping stroke, the guilt of gluttony, sloth,
drunkenness, lewdness, wrath, contention, and revenge, is entirely blotted out.

Mr. HOBBES declares, that every man has a right to all things, and may
lawfully get them, if he can;

Again, "A subject may lawfully deny Christ before the Magistrate, although he
believes Christ in his heart;"

Again, "A Ruler is not bound by any obligation of truth, or justice, and can
do no wrong to his subjects;" and

Again, the Civil Law is the sole foundation of good and evil, of right and
wrong.

IN the first of these declarations, mankind are let loose upon each other, in
all the hideous ways of fraud, theft, plunder, robbery, peculation, oppressive
taxation, and piracy; in the second, lying and perjury are completely
authorized, as all such denials were customarily made under oath; the third is
an universal sanction of all the horrid evils of despotism; and the fourth an
entire annihilation of right and wrong, and of course of all morality.

TINDAL has, also, set morality wholly afloat, in declaring, that every man
must form a rule for himself, a rule to be changed as circumstances, always
varying, shall change. Nor has Chubb left the subject at all more settled, or
safe. He declares, that all religions are alike; that it is of no consequence,
what religion a man embraces; that the belief of a future state is of no use to
society; and that God does not interpose in the affairs of this world at all,
and has nothing to do with the good, or evil, done by men, here. The well-being
of society cannot be overthrown, nor morality destroyed, more effectually, than
by these opinions, should they be made rules of human conduct. If all
Religions, i. e. all systems of Moral and Theological doctrines, are alike it
is clearly either because all are wholly true or wholly false, or because all
are proportionably true and false, or because moral and theological truth is of
no importance. The two first are plainly false suppositions, Mr. Chubb being
the judge; for he has declared one system to be true, viz. his own; and another
to be false, viz. That of the Gospel, Of course, the last is the true
supposition as it stood in his mind. Of consequence no doctrines are of any
importance: in other words, Truth is of no use to man. Moral and theological
truth is plainly more important to man, than any other; if this be of no
significance, none else can be: an opinion fitter for the mouth of a fiend,
than for that of a man.

NOR are the two last declarations of his less fatal. No bond had ever holden
mankind, none ever will hold them, together, beside the belief of the presence,
and providence of God, and of an approaching state of Rewards and punishments.

SHAFTESBURY, Hume, and Bolingbroke, have labored, at least equally, to
destroy the belief of these doctrines, and have thus aimed the axe at the root
of human happiness.

SHAFTESBURY, also, when he asserts salvation to be ridiculous, the magistrate
to be the sole judge of religious truth, Atheism not to take away a just sense
of right and wrong, and to be no way deficient in promoting virtue, unhinges
all serious thinking, and all moral impressions, silences rational enquiry, and
obliterates every distinction, which can usefully regulate the conduct of
intelligent beings.

THE same confusion is introduced by Hume, when he ranks bodily and
intellectual endowments, and casual seize, with virtues, denies the
virtuous nature of humility and self-denial, and asserts that of pride,
self-valuation, and suicide.

BUT what shall be said of this celebrated writer, when he gravely informs us,
that Adultery must be practiced, if we would obtain all the advantages of life.
Must not plunder, falsehood, assassination, piracy, war, and tyranny, be also
practiced on the same principle. Were these or any other crimes ever practiced,
but for the sake of advantages either obtained, or expected? What shall we say
of him, when, from Rochefoucault, he repeats, and to show his fondness for it,
often, the maxim, that Female Infidelity, when known, is a small thing, when
unknown, nothing.

BOLINGBROKE has more openly and violently attacked every important truth and
serious duty. Particularly he has licensed lewdness, and cut up chastity and
decency by the roots:

WHAT idea must be entertained of the morals of men, who assert these things,
not in careless conversation, not in grave conversation, not in sportive
writings; but in solemn, didactic, Philosophical treatises, sitting in the
chair of moral and religious instruction, speaking to a world, uttering
oracular opinions, deciding the duty and happiness both temporal and eternal of
the whole human race, and unfolding professedly the will of the infinite God?
They either believed, or disbelieved, these doctrines. If they disbelieved
them, what apology can be made for so gross and so mischievous falsehood? If
they believed them, the conclusion is irresistibly forced upon us, that they
practiced as they believed. They have also labored to the utmost to persuade
mankind both to believe and practice them. If their labors prove successful,
if their wishes should be accomplished, the world will be converted into one
theater of falsehood, perjury, fraud, theft, piracy, robbery, oppression,
revenge, fornication, and adultery. What else is the hell of the Scriptures?
Lewdness alone, extended as their doctrines extend it, would exterminate every
moral feeling from the human breast, and every moral and virtuous action from
the human conduct Sodom would cease to be a proverbial name; and Gommorrha
would be remembered, only to wonder at her unhappy lot, and to drop the tear of
sympathy upon her ashes.

I know it is often said; it will probably be said in the present case: and
perhaps by no small number of persons; that, provided a man is honest in his
belief, he is to be considered as a virtuous man, unless his life disprove the
opinion of his virtue. If by this declaration it be intended, that the man in
question has faithfully sought for truth, and as faithfully collected, duly
weighed, and heartily admitted, all the evidence within his reach, I readily
acknowledge, that he has done his duty, and is therefore in this instance
undoubtedly virtuous. But that men who believe falsehood, and such gross and
palpable falsehood, have really thus done, is yet to be proved.

IF it be intended, that, when a man really believes error, he is, by the
reality of his belief, constituted virtuous, I deny the doctrine wholly; and
all those, who assert it, deny it also. The Arabians, who, under the standard
of Mohammed, butchered half mankind, believed that they were doing what was
right. Multitudes of Catholics, in the last century, unquestionably believed it
to be the will of God, that they should perjure themselves, in their
correspondence with Huguenots; and that they should roast, dislocate, and
assassinate, that unhappy class of men by thousands. Christians have, beyond
controversy, really believed, in many instances, that the persecution of
Infidels was agreeable to the will of God. Cicero believed it to be right to
have a civil war kindled in Rome, that he might return from exile. Numbers of
people in Copenhagen, at a certain time, believed it to be right to murder
their neighbors, that, under the horror of an approaching death, themselves
might be induced certainly to repent of sin, and to gain eternal life.
Alexander, with full conviction of the rectitude of his designs, wasted the
Persin empire, and demanded divine homage to himself.

NONE of those with whom I am disputing, will pretend, that all these persons
were justified in their designs and conduct by the reality of their belief of
its rectitude.

IT will be further said, as it often has been by others beside Mr. Chubb, that
what a man believes is of no importance. Infidel writers ought never to advance
this doctrine: for their conduct in laboring so earnestly to destroy the faith
of Christians, and to establish that of Infidels, gives the lie to the
declaration. If the assertion be true, a man may, according to the opinion of
the assertors themselves, as well be a Christian in his belief, as an Infidel.
But the assertion is not true; and they prove, by every page of their writings,
and by every sentence of their conversation, that they feel it to be false; for
they labor with the greatest industry, and ardour, to change the tenets of
their fellow-men.

ALL the volitions of the mind are of course accordant with the prevailing
dictates of the understanding; and all the actions of men spring from their
volitions. Such, then, as is the moral nature of the opinions of a man, will be
the nature of his moral conduct. Obedience to error is vice; obedience to truth
is virtue. All men hold errors; and all men hold probably some moral truths.
Good men obey, mainly, the truths which they receive, and not the errors.
Wicked men wholly obey, in their moral conduct, the errors which they adopt,
and reject truth as a rule of conduct.

COMPLETE virtue is formed by the reception and obedience of truth only. Such
is the virtue of the heavenly inhabitants. In the present world such virtue
does not exist; for truth is not received by any man unmixed with error; nor is
the truth, which is received, alone and perfectly obeyed. The most perfect
earthly orthodoxy is, therefore, mingled with error, and the most perfect
earthly virtue with vice. Hence extensive room is furnished for the exercise of
charitable regards to such, as differ from us in many moral doctrines.

BUT this charity has its limits. The truths holden must, in this case, be
fundamental truths; or those on which virtue can rest; and the errors must not
be fundamental errors; or opinions subversive of all virtue. The man, who
seriously believes in the rectitude of lying, cruelty, fraud, lewdness, and
impiety, cannot be virtuous.

THE man, who is pleased with error, is, in the exercise of that emotion,
guilty. To love the means of vice, or sin, is the same thing in a moral view as
to love sin. Error is the certain means of sin in every sense. As a rule of
conduct, it leads to nothing but sin; as a temptation to sin, it is of
incalculable power; as a justification of sin, it is of all opiates to the
conscience, and of all supports to the heart, beyond measure the greatest. The
man, who loves it, is therefore a guilty enemy to himself, a dishonourer of the
God of truth, and a destroyer of his own well-being. The man who devises,
publishes, and with ingenuity defends it, is the common enemy of God and
mankind. To the evil, which he does to the universe, no bounds can be fixed;
and with all this evil he is chargeable. The ravages of Alexander were probably
less injurious to the human race, and less guilty before God, than the ravages
of the moral world by Hume, or Voltaire.

Herbert, Hobbes, Shaftsbury, Woolston, Tindal, Chubb, and Bolingbroke, are all
guilty of the vile hypocrisy of professing to love and reverence Christianity,
while they are employed in no other design than to destroy it. Such faithless
professions, such gross violations of truth, in Christians, would have been
proclaimed to the universe by these very writers as infamous desertions of
principle and decency. Is it less infamous in themselves? All hypocrisy is
detestable; but I know of none so detestable as that, which is coolly written,
with full premeditation, by a man of talents, assuming the character of a moral
and religious instructor, a minister, a prophet, of the truth of the Infinite
God. Truth is a virtue perfectly defined, mathematically clear, and completely
understood by all men of common sense. There can be no haltings between
uttering truth and falsehood, no doubts, no mistakes; as between piety and
enthusiasm, frugality and parsimony, generosity, and profusion. Transgression,
therefore, is always a known, definite, deliberate villainy. In the sudden
moment of strong temptation, in the hour of unguarded attack, in the flutter
and trepidation of unexpected alarm, the best man may, perhaps, be surprised
into any sin; but he, who can coolly, of steady design, and with no unusual
impulse, utter falsehood, and vend hypocrisy, is not far from finished depravity.

THE morals of Rochester and Wharton need no comment. Woolston was a gross
blasphemer. Blount solicited his sister in law to marry him, and, being
refused, shot himself. Tindal was originally a protestant, then turned papist,
then protestant again, merely to suit the times; and was at the same time
infamous for vice in general, and the total want of principle. He is said to
have died with this prayer in his mouth. "If there is a God, I desire that he
may have mercy on me." Hobbes wrote his Leviathan, to serve the cause of
Charles I.; but, finding him fail of success, he turned it to the defense of
Cromwell, and made a merit of this fact to the Usurper: as Hobbes himself
unblushingly declared to Lord Clarendon. See Deism Revealed.
Morgan had no regard to truth; as is evident from his numerous falsifications
of Scripture, as well as from the vile hypocrisy of professing himself a
Christian in those very writings, in which he labors to destroy Christianity.
Voltaire, in a letter now remaining, requested his friend D'Alembert to tell
for him a direct and palpable lie, by denying, that he was the author of the
Philosophical Dictionary. D'Alembert in his answer informed him, that he had
told the lie. See Priestly On the Causes of the Increase of Infidelity.
Voltaire has, indeed, expressed his own moral character perfectly in the
following words "Monsieur Abbe, I must be read, no matter whether I am
believed, or not." He also solemnly professed to believe the Catholic Religion,
although at the fame time he doubted the existence of a God. Hume died, as a
fool dies. The day before his death he spent in a pitiful and affected
unconcern about this tremendous subject, playing at whist, reading Lucian's
dialogues, and making silly attempts at wit, concerning his interview with
Charon, the heathen ferry-man of Hades. Smith's life of Hume.


IT will easily be supposed that my information concerning the private lives of
these men must be distant and imperfect: What has been said will, however,
furnish any one at all acquainted with the human character, with just ideas of
their morality. I shall only add that Rousseau (Jean Jacques) is asserted to
have been guilty of gross theft, perjury, fornication, and adultery, and of
abjuring and assuming, alternately, the Catholic, and the Protestant, religion;
neither of which he believed.

THUS have I summarily exhibited to you the nature, and the actual state, of
this Philosophy. From this view of it, I think you will unite with me in a full
conviction, that, if the Gospel had been liable to so many and so serious
objections, it would, instead of exciting and sustaining a controversy through
eighteen centuries, have solicited the faith and obedience of mankind in vain,
would have been smothered in its birth, and only added one to the numerous
moral systems, which have, for ages, slept the sleep of death in the regions of
oblivion.

THE NATURE AND DANGER OF INFIDEL PHILOSOPHY. SERMON SECOND.
COLOSSIANS ii. 8. BEWARE, LEST ANY MAN SPOIL YOU THROUGH PHILOSOPHY AND VAIN
DECEIT, AFTER THE TRADITION OF MEN, AFTER THE RUDIMENTS OF THE WORLD, AND NOT
AFTER CHRIST.
Secondly. I SHALL now endeavor to show you, that, vain and deceitful as this
Philosophy is, both in its nature and in fact, you are still in danger of
becoming a prey to it.

THIS danger will arise from several sources, I shall specify those which
appear to me to be of chief importance.

I. You will be exposed to this danger from the arguments, brought by
Philosophers against the Scriptures.

INFIDELS will probably triumph, and you may be surprised, to find Arguments
mentioned as a source of danger. But your surprise and their triumph are both
without foundation.

WHEREVER arguments are fairly adduced, and questions thoroughly explored by
reasoning, there can be no danger to truth, or to the friends of truth; for in
every such investigation, truth must have decisive advantages over falsehood.
But questions are not always so explored, nor arguments always so adduced.
Ingenious and able men are not always candid men, nor always desirous of
investigation or establishing truth. Their ingenuity is not unfrequently
employed in obscuring, where it should illumine, and in perplexing, where it
should clear. Ignorant persons may always be embarrassed by the reasonings of
the learned and skilful, and those who are not versed in any subject of
controversy, by studied champions.

MANY readers of this Philosophy are ignorant; many impatient of thorough
investigation, and accustomed to depend for their opinions on others; to be
swayed by great and celebrated names, and implicitly to yield to high
authority; and all are by nature inclined to their side of the question.
Christianity is a system of restraint on every passion, and every appetite.
Some it forbids entirely: and all it confines within limits, which by the mass
of mankind, both learned and unlearned, will be esteemed narrow and severe.
Philosophy, on the contrary, holds out, as you have already seen, a general
license to every passion and appetite. Its doctrines therefore please of
course; and find a ready welcome in the heart.

MANKIND being thus prepared, it cannot be thought strange, that Infidel
Philosophy, although destitute of a basis in truth, and of support from
evidence, should present danger, even from arguments. Its great object is to
unsettle every thing moral and obligatory, and to settle nothing. Objection is,
therefore, its chief employment, and its only employment, in which danger can
be found. Had it been engaged merely in devising moral systems of its own, it
would have provoked no other answer from Commonsense, than a stare, or a smile.

AN objector will always find some advantages from the character, which he
assumes. He finds advantages with respect to labor. A sentence will often
express an obligation, which must be answered by a volume. He will find
advantages in the nature of his disputation. The plainest and most undoubted
truths may be forcibly assailed by objections, and by such as are obvious to a
very limited understanding.

THE objections against the Scriptures, which will be formidable, are chiefly
derived from two sources

1. THE doctrines of the Scriptures are, and in the nature of the case must be,
in several instances, mysterious. The doctrines of the Scriptures are chiefly
employed about the nature of Man, and the existence, character, designs, and
will, of God. The first of these subjects, notwithstanding the laborious and
ardent investigation of three thousand years, is still far from being
satisfactorily explained. The daily inquiries and voluminous treatises of these
very Philosophers, and the new views, which they continually attempt to
exhibit, of this subject, prove the assertion to be true, in their opinion at
least; and, were there a doubt remaining, a child could easily remove it; for a
child can ask questions concerning human nature, which no Philosopher can
answer. The last of these subjects, the existence, character, designs, and
will, of God, is more mysterious than any other. Of both these subjects
Revelation is a professed account; and as the subjects are in their nature
mysterious, so the Revelation must, to consist with truth, be, in many
respects, mysterious also. In such subjects difficulties may be easily and
always found. As it is impossible, that we should thoroughly understand them,
the parts, which we do not understand, will furnish difficulties respecting
those, which we do. Of the nature of existence, substances, causality, and the
mode of operation, we know little or nothing, even where creatures are the
subjects of investigation. Of the Creator it may well be supposed, and must be
acknowledged, that we know less than of creatures. Many particulars of these
great subjects of the Scriptures must be unknown. Wherever we are ignorant, we
cannot comprehend; and wherever we cannot comprehend, we can find many
difficulties, much perplexity, and much doubt. A man of moderate talents will
easily perceive, and forcibly represent, such difficulties; but no man can, in
many cases, remove them. They can be removed only by the attainment of perfect
knowledge of the subjects, and such knowledge can never be attained by man.

THE difficulties, objected to the Scriptures on this score, all arise from
what we know not, and not from what we know. Infidels do not show, that that,
which is disclosed, is contrary to any thing, which we know, but merely that
all is not disclosed, which we might wish to be disclosed, and which is
necessary to a thorough comprehension of the subject. They do not show, that
what is disclosed, and believed, is untrue, or improbable; but that it is
mysterious and incomprehensible (...) other words, that it contains things,
which lies beyond the human capacity. This, instead of being a solid objection
against the Revelation of the Scriptures, is a mere exposition of human
ignorance. In this part of their conclusions there is no controversy between
them and us.

THE mysteriousness of the Scriptures, in several particulars, has been often
directly as well as insidiously, objected against their divine origin. To me it
appears to be a plain and powerful argument in favor of that origin. Were
there nothing in Creation or Providence, which man could not comprehend, one
important proof that they were works of God would be taken away. Were there
nothing in Revelation, which man could not perfectly understand, a similar
proof of its reality would be destroyed. What man can thus understand, man
might, for ought that appears, have also devised.

OBJECTIONS of this nature must, to possess any real force, arise from
something which we know, and not from that of which we are ignorant. The things
objected to ought to be inconsistent with something seen and understood;
otherwise whatever perplexity they may occasion in those, who dwell upon them,
they can never produce rational conviction.

2. ANOTHER class of objects, against which similar objections have been made,
is composed of facts, manners, and other local circumstances. The Scriptures,
being written in a distant age, and country, record facts, which must in a
considerable measure be connected with facts and circumstances, necessarily
unknown by us; and appeal to manners, customs, and other local circumstances,
which must be equally unknown. The same difficulties may, therefore, be raised
in this, as in the former case, and with the same success. In both cases our
ignorance, and not the falsehood of the things declared, is the cause of the
difficulties specified. By this I intend that a person perfectly acquainted
with the things, stated in the Scriptures, and with all their appendages, would
not only clearly discern the truth and propriety of the statement, but be able
to explain its truth and propriety to our full satisfaction; while, at the same
time, the same person, being supposed to be as ignorant as ourselves, would
find all the difficulties in the statement, which are found by us. Still the
statement is the same, and neither more nor less true, but is more or less
explicable, as the person proposed is more or less informed.

HENCE it is clear, that, although Christians should not be able to show how
many facts, recorded in the Scriptures, took place, by what acts they were
preceded or followed, what were their causes, attendants, or consequences, this
furnishes no solid objection to the Scriptures as a Revelation. Every objection
of this nature must, to be solid, contradict some known fact, and be attended
with difficulties of some other nature than mere inexplicableness. If this be
admitted as a proof of falsehood in writings, no ancient history can be believed.

A HAPPY illustration of these sentiments and a strong proof of what may even
now be done to throw light on this class of objects in the Scriptures, may be
found in the first Volume of Lardner's Credibility of the Gospel history. In
this able and successful Work a system of facts impossible to be completely
understood, unless developed in some such method, is unanswerably proved to be
true.

THE very same difficulties are found, and to a greater degree, in the Works,
than in the Word, of God, Under the impressions, made by the former, the same
men become atheists, who under those made by the latter, became deists. Those,
on the contrary, who require proofs, and inconsistences with something known,
to support or destroy, their belief, will admit the world to be the work, and
the Scriptures to be the word, of God. So true is the declaration of the
Committee of Public Instruction to the National Convention of France, that a
Nation of Theists must of course become Revelationists.

THIS method of objecting to the Scriptures will make little impression no men
disposed impartially and thoroughly to examine, and possessed of the proper
means of examination. Still there is danger from it to you. Think not this a
censure, or a proof of disesteem. You are young; you will find difficulties;
you may be perplexed; you may doubt. Every difficulty you will not be able to
remove. Such as you would be able to remove you will not always find the
necessary time and means of removing. Inclination, industry, proper books, and
able friends, may not be easily found. Study, therefore, and in season, so far
as you can, the evidences, by which Revelation is supported, and suffer nothing
to destroy their force, or to unsettle your faith, unless it clearly opposes
something, which is really known.

II. ANOTHER source of danger to you is the Confidence, with which most
Philosophers assert their doctrines, and advance their arguments.

IT is an unjust, yet it is a common conclusion of the mind, that confidence in
asserting is as an argument of knowledge in the assertor. You have, doubtless,
often heard observations like this. "He must know; or he would not assert so
strongly and confidently." From the advantages of education, which you have
enjoyed, I presume you have, however, adopted an opinion directly contrary to
that above specified; and are all ready to say, that hold assertions, and
confident airs of knowledge and wisdom, are of course suspicious; and that,
instead of being influenced by them to believe the more readily, you should
only be induced to doubt. Still let me inform you, there is danger to you from
this source. Peremptory declarations, bold assurance, and that appearance of
knowledge, which defies opposition, have ever had no small influence in gaining
credit to the doctrines, which they were intended to support. Youths,
unacquainted with the world, and with the arts and address which are used in
it, and untaught, or taught only by books, that, usually, assertions are
roundly made, because they are faintly believed by the assertor, as lies are
commonly backed by oaths and curses, will not rarely imagine, that what is so
plumply said must be true, or at least highly probable. This will happen
especially, when the assertor is a man of talents and reputation. In such a man
vanity is not expected to rule, prejudice to decide, nor arrogance to dictate.
On the contrary, he is presupposed to examine with care, to assent only to
evidence, and to assert from rational conviction. It would be happy, were this
preconceived opinion verified by experience; but most unhappily no opinion is
more fallacious. All the prejudices, which are found in ordinary men are often
found in those of superior minds, and not unfrequently in higher degrees. To
these they superadd, in many instances, that pride of talents, which operates
to a groundless, deceitful, and let me add contemptible, confidence in their
own decisions, and a magisterial and oracular method of communicating them to
mankind. Suspect these appearances, therefore, wherever you find them, and
remember, that confidence of assertion, and airs of triumph, infer not any
certainty in the opinion declared.

III. ANOTHER source of the danger specified is found in the various methods,
used by Philosophers to persuade their readers, that their opinions are
embraced by the great body of mankind, especially of the ingenious and learned.

IT is a remarkable fact in the History of man, that vice has always claimed a
superiority over virtue, irreligion and unbelief over faith. In common life, no
sooner does a man enter boldly upon the practice of vice and licentiousness,
than he arrogates to himself a character superior to that of his sober
companions, and to his own former character. A loose man rarely speaks
concerning one, of more worth, without evident proofs of conscious superiority.
Virtue, itself, if you will take the pains to examine, will be found to be, in
his view, the weak and inferior part of his neighbor's character, and vice the
great and superior ingredient in his own. According to this method of
estimation, Satan, as described in the Scriptures, is the most respectable
being in the universe.

THE superiority, claimed by Infidels over Believers, is not less unfounded;
even if we admit what few Christians would probably admit, viz. that its
foundation is not exactly the same. Christians believe, that the Scriptures
are, and Infidels that they are not, a divine Revelation. Neither they, nor we,
know; both classes merely believe; for the case admits not of knowledge, nor
can it be determined with certainty. The only question, to be decided between
the contending parties, is-which believes on the best evidence. Infidels are
believers equally with Christians, and merely believe the contrary position.
That faith therefore, which is best supported, is the most rational, and ought
to confer the superiority of character.

AT the present time, a new engine is abundantly employed to establish this
distinction in favor of infidels. It is boldly asserted, that the world has
hitherto lain in a state of ignorance and infancy; that it has been chained by
authority, and influenced by superstition, but that it has, at the present
time, broken at once its bonds, roused itself into manly exertion, and seized
intuitively upon the whole system of truth, moral, political, and natural. Of
this mighty and propitious change in the affairs of man Infidel Philosophers
claim to be the sole authors. Hence the character of ingenious and learned is
challenged as being in a sense their exclusive property.

I cheerfully admit, Young Gentlemen, that many Infidels have been ingenious
men; that some of them have been learned men; and that a few of them have been
great men. Hume, Tindal, and a few others, have been distinguished for superior
strength of mind, Boling broke for eloquence of the pen, Voltaire for
brilliancy of imagination, and various others for respectable talents of
different kinds. But I am wholly unable to form a list of Infidels, which can,
without extreme disadvantage, be compared with the two Bacons, Erasmus,
Cumberland, Stillingfleet, Grotius. Lock, Butler, Newton, Boil, Berkeley,
Milton, Johnson, etc. In no walk of genius, in no path of knowledge, can
Infidels support a claim to superiority, or equality with Christians.

NOR am I less ready to acknowledge, that ingenious men have lately made, and
are still making, many improvements in science and in arts. Unhappy would it
indeed be, if, after all the advances of preceding ages, the present should be
unable to advance at all; if no additional truth should be discovered, and no
erroneous opinion detected. But what, let me ask, would have been our
situation, had these and many other able men, of past ages, never lived? How
much of all, which we know, is contained in their works, and derived solely
from their talents and labors? Can it be just, can it be decent, to forget the
hand that feeds us, and to treat with contempt those, without whose assistance
we should have been savages and blockheads.

THAT the world has materially changed, and is still changing, in many
important particulars, cannot be questioned; but whether these particulars are
either profitable, or honorable, may well be questioned. That the knowledge,
or the happiness, of mankind has been increased by the change is yet to be
proved. We have not yet put off the harness, and our time for rational boasting
is, therefore, not arrived. When some of the favorite dogmas of modern times
have been better supported by arguments, and received a more auspicious
sanction from experience, there will be evidence in their favor, which
hitherto has not appeared.

YOU will easily see, what has been said, that, when Infidel Philosophy is
asserted to be embraced by the great body of the learned and ingenious, nothing
more is intended, than to assert the superior character of Infidels to
Christians; not a superiority arising from native talents, or from seize,
but from Infidelity. It is not intended, that learned and ingenious Christians
have been convinced and become Infidels, but that Christians are of course
destitute of learning and Ingenuity; and Infidels of course possessed of both.
The real weight of this argument I leave to your decision.

ALLOWING, however, the whole of what is thus asserted, no argument will be
furnished by it against Christianity. The most extensive prevalence of a system
is no proof of its truth. Heathenism formerly overspread the world, and
numbered, as its votaries, nearly all the learned and unlearned of the human
race. Was it therefore, a system of truth? The Aristotelian Philosophy
prevailed among all the learned men in Europe, for two thousand years. Would
you, therefore, embrace it? When Galileo received the Copernican system, almost
all the learned and unlearned disbelieved it. Was it therefore false?

WHEN Christianity first began its progress, it could boast of only twelve
poor, uneducated men as its champions, with perhaps less than one thousand
followers. By the labors of this little band it overturned, in less than three
centuries, most of the superstition, power, policy, learning, and philosophy,
of the known world. By the labors of Luther, Melancthon, Zuingle, and Calvin,
it rose again from extreme depression, in the face, and against the strength,
of the most formidable power, which the world has ever seen. Should it again
return to the same depression, it will again rise on the ruins of all its
enemies. Every promise, made to Christians, has been hitherto exactly
fulfilled. Those, which respect periods yet to come, will receive the same
faithful completion.

YET such is the character of man, and especially in his youth, that you will
feel the influence of this triumphant assertion. You will feel, at times, in
danger of being left alone, and at least of being deserted and opposed by
genius and knowledge; and will naturally shrink from a combat, in which skill,
strength, and numbers are imagined to be enrolled on the side of the enemy. I
have only to observe further, that your choice of Christianity will not be less
wise, because numbers oppose it, nor your salvation less complete, because it
is not obtained by Infidels. To young men inclining to Infidelity I beg leave
to recommend a careful, and serious consideration, of two passages of
Scripture; one, Heb, vi. 4 -- 8, the other, Heb. x. 26 -- 31.


IV. ANOTHER source of this danger is the Contempt and Ridicule, with which
Christianity is opposed.

CONTEMPT is the spirit, and ridicule the weapon, with which Christianity has
long been principally opposed. In this Lord Shaftsbury led the way; or, perhaps
more properly, he gave a peculiar countenance and support to this method of
attacking Christianity, by advancing the remarkable opinion, that Ridicule is
the test of Truth. In pursuing this doctrine he himself is unwarily led to
declare, that this very Ridicule must be brought to the test of Reason, or
Argument. The whole train of Infidel Philosophers, whatever may have been their
opinion, have harmonized with him in the practice. Voltaire, who regarded all
means alike, provided they would aid the accomplishment of his own ends, writes
thus to his friend, D'Alembert. "Render those pedants, (i. e. divines) as
enormously ridiculous as you can. Ridicule will do every thing. It is the
strongest of all weapons. A bon mot is as good a thing as a good book."

I DON'T deny, that ridicule may be properly used in certain cases; but I wholly
deny the propriety of using it to decide any serious concern of mankind. A
proud and vain man will always affect and express contempt for all, who differ
from him, and especially for those, who oppose him; and for all the arguments,
adduced against his opinions, especially for those, which he is unable to
confront with arguments of superior force. But pride and vanity are foolish
passions, and uniformly lessen the ability of a man either to discover, or to
receive, moral truth. Prejudice is proverbially acknowledged to be a potent
hindrance to the discovery, and the reception, of truth; and pride begets the
strongest of all prejuries. In itself it is gross misjudging, mistake, and
folly; and in its effects it involves a host of follies and mistakes. Hence the
Wisest of all men, from profound acquaintance with the nature of man, has
declared, that "the Rod of pride is in the mouth of the foolish."

THE cause, which needs these weapons, cannot be just; the doctrine, which
cannot be supported without them, must be false. All men, when pressed with
argument, and trembling through fear of being convicted of error, resort, of
course, to such means of defense, or of attack, as are in their power. When
reasons fail, ridicule is still left; and he who cannot disprove, can still
inquire with arrogance and disdain "What will this Babbler say." Over the cool
and modest opponent he will feel a superiority of spirit, if not of argument;
and will quit the field with the stride of triumph, and the consciousness of
that victory, for which he contended. His capital object is attained. He has
not, it is true, repelled his adversary; but he has claimed a triumph over him;
he has not defended his own ground; but he has not been forced to acknowledge
himself defeated.

UNWORTHY and unsatisfying as this method of attacking Christianity appears,
and in spite of the strong presumptions against a cause, which has ever needed
and resorted to it, you will find no small danger from these very weapons. You
will dread to become the objects of scorn, and to be wounded by the shafts of
derision. You will be afraid to declare yourselves friends to a cause, which
has been the standing jest of so many men of wit, and which has been so often
and so publicly holden up to systematized contempt; to which insult is merit,
and mockery a fashion.

YOUNG, novices in human affairs, doubtful of your own strength, partially
acquainted with this great controversy, ardently covering esteem, and trembling
at the approach of disreputation, you will need no common share of fortitude,
no frequent degree of self-command, to stand the shock, to examine the true
character of the contending parties, and to discern the real nature of the
conflicting causes. Could you assume this fortitude, and accomplish this
examination, the danger would vanish; but you will be assailed so often, and so
powerfully, that, perplexed before by the arguments, which I have mentioned,
you will be in imminent hazard of yielding yourselves a prey, to avoid the
fatigues of an arduous and unremitted contest, and to shun the assaults of an
enemy, who, not only points his arrows with steel, but dips them in poison.

V. ANOTHER source of this danger is the actual Bias of the world toward
Infidelity.

THE natural propensity of man, as exhibited by the Scriptures, and as proved
by all experience, is a propensity to sin. The conviction of this truth has
spread through mankind, in every age, and in every country. Their religions
have all been steadily employed to expiate it, their laws and education to
restrain it, their conversation and their histories to recount its effects. Sin
and Infidelity are mutually causes and effects. Sin demands and prompts to
Infidelity, as its justification; Infidelity warrants, encourages, and defends
sin. Sin derives its peace and security from Infidelity; Infidelity its
reception, support, and friends, from sin. Thus, in every age, there is a
natural bias in man to infidelity.

THIS bias possesses, at different periods, different degrees of strength.
Numbers, men in power, men of popular characters, men of great talents,
contribute, by turns, to the general currency of vice, or virtue, of truth, or
falsehood. From these and various other causes, it becomes fashionable, at
times, to be grave, decent, moral, and even religious; and, at times, to be
dissolute, licentious, and gross.

THE fashionable bias of the present time will be readily acknowledged to be
unfavourable to Christianity. Beside the influence of a long progress invice,
since the Reformation, and the revival of Religion consequent upon it, a
progress loudly proclaimed by Infidels, as well as by Christians; beside the
influence of all the incessant attacks, made upon Religion and Virtue by
Philosophers; the present singular convulsion of Europe has had a most
malignant efficacy on this subject. At no period has the human mind discovered
such impatience of moral restraint, broken with so bold a hand the bonds of
duty, or defied in such haughty terms morals, religion, and the government of
God. Were the present a proper occasion, it would be easy to show the
connection between such a convulsion and the general demoralization of the
human race, the depression of virtue, and the subversion of human happiness.
Suffice it to say, here, that, did not the evil furnish a cure, from its own
bowels, did it not prove, by what it has already effected, that, within a
little period of its progress, it will, if unrestrained, convert man into a
savage, and the world into a desert, its final mischief to the cause of
Christianity could not be calculated. Circumstanced as it is, it has filled
every Christian, every friend of the human race, every sober man, with serious
alarms, not for the permanence of Christianity, but for the continuance of
peace, the safety of every right, and the existence of every valuable interest.

IN your own country the effects of this convulsion, and the strength of this
bias, are less perceived. Here the friends of Revelation greatly outnumber its
enemies. But even here the evil in a degree exists. Nor will its influence
probably be small. The report will, in some measure, affect you from abroad. At
home, you will see one decent or doubtful person, and another, sliding slowly
down the declivity of irreligion, and many, more heedless, or more daring,
leaping at once into the gulf beneath. Here, a companion will turn his back,
and walk no more with Christ. There, a Parent, or Instructor, will forsake him,
having loved the present world. Among these will frequently be found the gay,
the pleasing, and the accomplished; and in some instances, the grave, the
learned, and the honorable. On one side, the temptation will charm; on the
other it will sanction. Allured, awed, supported, perhaps without a friend at
hand to pluck you by the arm, or to point to you either the danger or the means
of escaping it, it can scarcely be hoped, that none of you will be destroyed.
Most of the Infidels, whom I have known, have fallen a sacrifice to this cause,
or to the fear of ridicule.

VI. A GREATER source of this danger, than any which has been mentioned, is a
natural Bias in your own hearts against Christianity.

YOU, like the rest of men, are naturally attached to the pleasures of sin, to
the unlawful gratifications of passion and appetite. Whatever indulges this
attachment will be regarded by you with complacency; whatever restrains it,
however necessarily, or usefully, will be viewed with pain. The most powerful,
the most universal, the most constantly felt, the most difficult to be escaped,
of all such restraints, is the system of doctrines, contained in the
Scriptures. Civil Government, in a different manner, is employed in promoting
the same end, and, at times, operates with a superior efficacy. But its
influence is felt only within certain limits, and on particular occasions;
whereas the Scriptures extend their influence to every place, time, and action,
seek out the offender in solitude, as well as in crowds, sound the alarm at
midnight, as well as in the open day, enter into the recesses of the bosom,
watch the rising sin, and threaten the guilty purpose, while it is yet a
shapeless embryo. Hence, more than Civil Government itself, it has been
maligned, and combated, by licentious men.

THE restraints of Christianity you, like others, will, at times, feel with
impatience and pain. From this impatience will naturally spring wishes to free
yourselves from companions so intrusive and troublesome; and such wishes will
naturally terminate in attempts to accomplish this freedom. Of all means to
this end the most obvious, the most easy, the most effectual, is disbelief. To
disbelief, therefore, you will be strongly inclined; and much care, resolution,
and fidelity to yourselves, will be necessary to resist the influence, and
avert the danger, of this inclination.

IN this and in every case, in which man is placed, assistance may be given,
the mind may be strengthened, and safety may be obtained, by the proper use of
such means, as are furnished by the Providence of God. From me, with more
propriety than from most others, you may justly expect such assistance. To you
I stand in a near, important, and parental relation. I have gone before you
through the same course, have felt the same danger, and have been strongly
tempted by means of them to yield myself a prey to this unhappy Philosophy. I
cannot, therefore, be indifferent to the dangers of others, especially of you,
my pupils, my children. Nor can I be more properly employed, on this the last
opportunity allowed me of rendering to you my official duty, than in
endeavoring in so interesting a case to communicate to you the means of
strength and safety. This, you will remember, was the

THIRD thing, proposed in this discourse, viz. to attempt to dissuade you from
yielding yourselves a prey to this Philosophy.

MANY dissuasives from this conduct are, I trust, already suggested to you in
the account, already given of this Philosophy. A reception of such doctrines,
and an union with such men, cannot be supposed as rational, or expedient. No
one of you would, in a cool moment of deliberation, consent either to such
belief, or to such conduct. It will be yours to decide, that your judgment
shall not bow to inclination and prejudice.

IN addition to the dissuasives already suggested let me urge, in the

I. PLACE, as a strong reason to prevent you from embracing Infidel Philosophy,
its continually changing character.

TRUTH is, at all times, and with respect to all things, of an unchangeable
nature. Every change of doctrines furnishes intuitive certainty, that either
the doctrine which is renounced, or the doctrine which is assumed, is false.
This changeable character is eminently the character of this Philosophy. Among
the ancients it was a mere wind of doctrine, varying through all the points of
the compass. Among the moderns, also, it has, cameleon like, appeared of many
colors, Lord Herbert published it under the form of Natural Religion. This he
insisted on, in strong and solemn terms, as a sum of duties indispensible; and
declared, that men were wholly accountable for the discharge of them, and that
according to their fulfillment, or neglect, of them they would be judged and
rewarded. Yet even he sapped the foundation of his whole system, by undermining
moral obligation, and removing guilt from sin. Him several succeeding writers
appeared, in a degree, and at times, disposed to follow; but even they, with
most others, fell speedily into mere Infidelity: i. e. They believed neither
Natural nor Revealed Religion. Of course, they left themselves without law,
obligation, or duty. The system, now became a system of mere objection.
According to it, Christianity was false, and nothing else was true: i. e. they
substituted nothing, as a rule of duty, in its place. In the mean time, they in
a degree, and their followers in a greater degree, by insinuation, assertion,
and argument, justified the indulgencies of passion and appetite, and exhibited
them as the true, the chief, and even the only, good of man. From this, which
may be called the Animal system of Morals, the next gradation was the doctrine
of the Pyrrhonists and New Academics, usually termed Skepticism. This was the
favorite doctrine of Mr. Hume, and is exhibited by him as the summit of human
seize. Nor did the contradiction, which attends the very reception of
this doctrine, at all startle his sagacious mind, shocked as it was by the bare
idea of a miracle. From this step but one advancement remained, viz. downright
Atheism. This is now the most general, and the most approved, Infidel
Philosophy. "Deism," says a modern Infidel writer, "is but the first step of
Reason out of Superstition (i. e. out of Revealed Religion.) No person remains
a Deist, but through want of Reflection, timidity, passion, or obstinacy. Time,
experience, and an impartial examination of our ideas, will undeceive us," (i.
e. make us Atheists.) "The Supreme Being" says Anacharsis Cloots (the Reporter
of the Committee of Public Instruction to the French National Convention) in an
official Report of that Committee, "the Eternal Being, is no other than Nature
uncreated and uncreatable; and the only Providence is the Association of
mankind in freedom and equality. Man, when free, wants no other Divinity than
himself. Reason dethrones both the Kings of the earth, and the Kings of heaven.
No Monarchy above, if we wish to preserve our republic below. Volumes have been
written to determine whether a republic of Atheists could exist. I maintain,
that every other republic is a chimera. If you once admit the existence of a
heavenly Sovereign, you introduce the wooden horse within your walls! What you
adore by day will be your destruction at night. A people of Theists will
necessarily become Revelationists." Thus the great body of Lord Herbert's
followers espouse and maintain doctrines, which he declared to be incapable of
being received by any man, who deserved the name of a rational being.

BUT all these things cannot be true. If Natural Religion be truth, then
Skepticism cannot be truth: the Animal system cannot be truth; mere Infidelity
cannot be truth; Atheism cannot be truth. The very face of this Philosophy is,
therefore, suspicious. The features are not parts of the same countenance, and,
when seen together, present even to the glancing eye, instead of beauty and
loveliness, an incongruous and forbidding deformity.

THE variance of this Philosophy is by no means confined to the account,
already given. Each of these forms furnishes many diversities and changes.
Atheism itself is exhibited under many appearances. As a total denial of God,
it is now the atomic, or Epicurean system of things brought together by an
eternal conatus, or endeavor, toward exertion, casually acting at a
particular unknown period. It is the eternal existence of the world in its
present form, and an eternal succession of human generations. It is a system of
chemical and mechanical operations of matter on such an eternal world, which by
a happy and mysterious energy, at some lucky moment, gave birth to thought and
volition, which, by a concurrence of circumstances equally lucky, have since
continued themselves. It is the volcanic system, by which suns were emitted
from a distant unknown mass, the matrix of the Universe; worlds from suns, and
continents and their furniture from worlds. As partial Atheism, it is
Skepticism. It is an admission of the being of God, and a denial of his
Attributes. It is an admission of his being, and denial of his Providence. It
is a denial of a future state to Man. It is an acknowledgement of the world, or
of fire, or of all the elements, or of an unknown Anima mundi, or soul of the
Universe, as God. In a word, it is any thing, and every thing, rather than an
acknowledgement of the One, Infinite, and All-perfect JEHOVAH.

IN all these, and in all other, systems of Infidel Philosophy, the
difficulties and embarrassments to faith are lessened neither in number, nor in
degree. On the contrary, they are multiplied, and enhanced, beyond calculation.
The usual course of the controversy has been this. Infidels have uniformly
attacked, and Christians merely defended; Infidels have found difficulties, and
Christians have employed themselves merely, or chiefly, in removing them. Hence
Infidels have naturally felt, and written, as if the difficulties lay solely on
the Christian side of the debate. Had Christians, with more worldly wisdom,
carried their arms into the fortresses of their antagonists, they would long
since, and very easily, have proved them to be every where weak and untenable,
the sheds only, and pens, of occasional marauders.

IN embracing such a Philosophy what satisfaction can be found, what resting
place for the mind? To Philosophers it has plainly furnished none; for they
have retreated, and wandered, from one residence to another; and have thus
proved, that they have discovered no place, where they could permanently and
comfortably abide. You will feel even more unsettled. You feel that you are
rational and immortal, that your interests are therefore immense and
inestimable, and that an effectual provision for them demands, and will repay,
every care, and every exertion. To a mind, thus circumstanced, uncertainty is
corroding and intolerable; and from a system thus fluctuating nothing but
uncertainty can be gained, or hoped. Wretched must be the condition of that
mind, which, laboring with intense anxiety to discover a peaceful rest for an
unsatisfied conscience, and a final home at the close of a weary pilgrimage,
finds within the horizon of its view nothing but a structure built of clouds,
variable in its form, and shadowy in its substance, gay indeed with a thousand
brilliant colors, and romantic with all the fantastical diversities of shape,
but bleak, desolate, and incapable of being inhabited.

II. THIS Philosophy presents no efficacious means of restraining Vice, or
promoting Virtue; but on the contrary encourages Vice and discourages Virtue.

I HAVE already considered this subject at some length, as the Philosophers
themselves and their disciples were concerned. As every person may not transfer
the argument from them to himself, or to others, it may be useful to see this
application made, and with a degree of particularity.

ALL Virtue is summed up in Piety to God, Justice, truth, and kindness to our
fellow-men, and the government of our own passions and appetites, commonly
called self-government, or self-denial. All Vice is comprised in the
dispositions and conduct, opposite to these. The only possible encouragements
to Virtue are either the pleasure which Virtue gives, or the rewards which it
promises. The only restrainsts upon Vice are the pain which it produces, or the
punishment with which it is threatened.

THAT Piety is not encouraged by this Philosophy will scarcely need to be
proved. A great proportion of Infidel Philosophers deny the existence of God,
and thus expunge not only the obligation, but the possibility, of being pious.

Mr. HOBBES says that all Religion is ridiculous.

MR. BLOUNT objects to prayer as a duty.

LORD SHAFTSBURY asserts that Salvation is a ridiculous thing.

DOCTOR TINDAL, that every Man must form rules of duty for himself, and that
these must vary as circumstances vary.

Mr. CHUBB, that all Religions are alike, and that it is of no consequence what
Religion a man embraces; and he allows not the least room to believe,

That dependence on God's Providence, trust in him, and resignation to him, are
any parts of duty, or Religion.

Mr. HOBBES asserts, that that, which is not matter, is nothing.

Mr. BLOUNT insinuates, that there are two independent and eternal Beings; one
good, the other evil.

Mr. HUME, that there is no reason to believe that the Universe proceeded from
a Cause;

That it is unreasonable to believe God infinitely wise and good;

That what we believe to be a perfection in God may be a defect.

Lord BOLINGBROKE, that God is possessed of no moral Attribute discoverable by
us;

That God did not determine the existence of particular men; and

That God concerns not himself with the affairs of men; or, if he does, he only
regards collective bodies of men, and not individuals.

HERE we see it directly taught, that if there be a God, matter is the only
God; that there is no evidence, that the Universe proceeded from a Cause; and
that it is unreasonable to believe it; that God has no discoverable moral
perfection; that what we call moral perfections, such as holiness, truth,
justice, and goodness, may be mere defects; that God concerns not himself with
the affairs or conduct of individual men, and of course not with the affairs of
communities; that he does not even determine their existence; and of course as
we came into existence without him, we have nothing to do with him. We are also
taught, that Salvation is ridiculous, that prayer is a fault, or sin, that
dependence, trust, and resignation, are no parts of Religion, and that all
Religions are alike. Of course we are taught, that there is rationally no such
thing as piety; no such thing as a God, the object of piety; or if there is,
that there is no evidence to prove his existence; and, if this be given up,
that he is not a moral being; neither just, sincere, good, or holy; of course
that he is destitute of all amiableness, all desert of love, or veneration. To
close the scheme, we are informed that all religions are alike, equally
estimable, equally rational, equally useful: that the Religion of Carthage, and
of all other Heathen countries, which demanded and sanctioned the butchery of
human hecatombs; the Religion of Egypt, which prostrated millions of reasonable
beings before a calf, a cat, a crocodile, a duck, a frog, a rat, a leek, or an
onion; the Religion of Babylon, of Paphos, and of Hindostan, which prostituted
annually, as an act of solemn public worship, virgins and matrons innumerable
to the casual lust of every traveller, or to the stated brutism of a herd of
leachers, selected for the pollution; that the worship of an adulterer, a
strumpet, a butcher, or a thief; is the same with the pure and spiritual
worship of the Infinite and Eternal Jehovah, the only Great, the only Wise, the
only Good, and with the Religion, which prompts to love him with all the heart
and soul, and strength, and understanding, and to love our neighbor as
ourselves.

THE manner, in which Infidel Philosophy has regarded truth, justice, and
kindness to our fellow men, will be easily shown from their own declarations
also.

Mr. HOBBES asserts, that a Ruler is not bound by any obligation of truth, or
justice, to his subjects, and that he can do no wrong;

That a man, believing Christ in his heart, may lawfully deny him before the
magistrate;

That every Man has a right to all things, and may lawfully get them by force
if he can.

Lord SHAFTSBURY, that the hope of rewards and the fear of punishments, is
noxious to virtue, and takes away all motives to it (Of course, so far as civil
government operates on man, it is noxious to virtue, and takes away all motives
to it. Yet Mr. Hobbes makes obedience to Government, through fear, the only
virtue, or right conduct.)

Mr. HUME supports the lawfulness of suicide on this, as one principal ground,
that it cannot be opposed to the will of God, because it takes place. Of
course, whatever takes place is conformable to the will of God. Falsehood,
therefore, injustice, murder, revenge, tyranny, fraud, and every other crime,
are conformable to the will of God, for they all take place.

Lord BOLINGBROKE teaches, that Ambition, the Lust of Power, Avarice, and
Sensuality, may all be lawfully gratified, if they can be safely gratified.

VOLTAIRE requests D'Alembert to tell in his behalf a direct falsehood.

D'ALEMBERT informs Voltaire, that he has told this falsehood.

IN these opinions, truth, justice, and kindness, to our fellow men, are
plainly destroyed, the obligation to them wholly removed, and every violation
of them justified. If a man may utter falsehood, where Religion, or a friend, is
concerned, he may lawfully utter it on every occasion, and to every person. If
all have a right to all things, none can do any wrong. If that which takes
place, is right because it takes place, wrong cannot take place. If ambition,
the lust of power, avarice, and sensuality, may be law fully gatified, when
they can be safely gratified, all crimes against our fellow men may be lawfully
perpetrated, because all, which are called crimes of this nature, are merely
gratifications of one or other of these passions.

LET us now examine the manner, in which these Philosophers have considered
self-government.

Lord HERBERT declares, that men are not hastily, or on small grounds, to be
condemned, who sin by bodily constitution; and

That the indulgence of lust and anger is no more to be blamed, than the thirst
occasioned by the dropsy, or the sleepiness produced by the Lethargy.

Mr. HOBBES, that a man may lawfully get all things if he can.

Doctor TINDAL, that every man must form for himself his rule of moral conduct,
and change it as his circumstances change.

Mr. HUME, that Female Infidelity, when known, is a small thing, when unknown,
nothing;

That Adultery must be practiced, if we would obtain all the advantages of life;

That pride and self valuation are virtues;

That self-denial and humility are not virtues, but useless and mischievous;
that they harden the heart, stupefy the understanding, and sour the temper.

Lord BOLINGBROKE teaches that the sole foundation of modesty, is a vain desire
of showing ourselves superior to mere animals.

That Adultery, Incest, Polygamy, and lewdness of every kind and degree, except
incest between the nearest relations, are warranted by the Law, or Religion,
which he considers as the only Religion, or Law, of mankind. etc. etc.

THESE and the preceding declarations clearly and directly authorize the full
indulgence of every passion and appetite, and annihilate the existence of
crime, and the possibility of virtue. Yet all these are solemnly taught as
rules of life, and as parts of the will of the Infinite God.

BUT this is not all. They have eventually taught the same things, in
assertions less direct, and yet by irresistible implication supporting the same
conduct. The doctrine, that a Man is an animal, or that he is a machine, is a
complete subversion of morality. No man ever believed an ox, a mill, or a coach
wheel, to be a moral being. The same effects are produced by the light and
indifferent manner, in which moral subjects are regarded in many doctrines of
these Philosophers: as, when civil law is made the sole foundation of right and
wrong, the magistrate the sole judge of religious truth, and the sole source of
religious obligation, as by Hobbes and Shaftsbury; and when health, taper legs,
and broad shoulders are declared to be virtues by Hume.

IN these and other similar declarations Philosophers clearly prove, that they
are wholly indifferent to vice and virtue, sin and holiness, and to all their
amazing effects. This indifference they hold out in a thousand forms, and with
respect to the great body of moral principles. No sentiment is more insinuating
than this. None more insensibly, or surely, steals upon the heart; none more
thoroughly depraves the character; none more certainly conducts to misery and
ruin.

THE same wretched consequence is fatally derived from the ridicule, which they
cast upon every thing religious, virtuous, or serious.

UNSATISFIED, however, with all these efforts, and convinced, that a future
state of man must, if it exist, be a state of reward to virtue, and of
punishment to sin; that, if there be a God, he must be present to see every
sin, and every virtue, and disposed to reward the one, and punish the other;
and that, of course, there must be a judgment, and a recompense; they have
applied themselves, with an industry worthy of a better cause, to overthrow the
belief, and terminate the existence, of these truths.

THUS Mr. Hobbes declares, that that, which is not matter, is nothing.

Mr. BLOUNT, that the Soul is probably material.

Lord SHAFTSBURY, that the hope of reward, and the fear of punishment, cannot
consist with virtue.

Mr. COLLINS, that the Soul is material and mortal.

Mr. CHUBB, that the arguments for the immortality of the Soul are wholly
unsatisfactory, and that it is probably material; and

That men will not be judged for their impiety, or ingratitude, to God; nor for
their injustice, or unkindness, to each other; but only for injuries to the
public; and

That even this is uncertain, and useless;

Mr. HUME, that the Soul of man is a machine; and that it is unreasonable to
believe an Intelligent cause of all things. etc.

Lord BOLINGBROKE, that God does not concern himself with the affairs of men at
all; or if he does, he regards only collective bodies of men;

That he punishes none but through the magistrate; and

That the Soul is material and mortal.

And the National Convention of France,

That death is an eternal sleep.

THUS by Infidel Philosophy is every hope taken away from Virtue, and every
fear from Vice, however multiplied, or abandoned. This has indeed been the sum
of all the purposes of this Philosophy. The belief and the hope of future
rewards, and the belief and the dread of future punishments, are the substance
of all which they call superstition. To remove these from men, and especially
the latter, they have studied and labored most assiduously for ages.

SHOULD they succeed to the extent of their wishes, what must be the
consequences? Men will be left with all the instructions concerning the
lawfulness of vice, which have been recited, and innumerable others of the same
nature, given by these, and the whole train of Philosophers; with all the
proofs of the insignificance and the nonexistence of virtue; with the general
license to plunder, to defraud, to deceive, and to pollute; and with no other
restraint out civil law, or private honor: Law, which cannot know one, in a
hundred, of the crimes, which men commit: Honor, which even in a Christian
state of society, sustained by many virtuous men, and strengthened by
prevailing moral opinions auspicious to virtue and alarming to vice, will not
either restrain, or regard, one crime in a thousand: Honor, which, in the
state of Society thus accomplished, amidst rulers, Philosophers, and other men
of influence, thoroughly initiated in these doctrines, and amidst the universal
depravity of communities, would know no distinction between virtue and
convenience, between crimes and disagreeables. How soon would law and
government lose that authority and energy which are now chiefly sustained by
appeals to the presence, the will, and the agency, of a Ruler all present, all
powerful, and unchangeably and infinitely opposed to every iniquity? How soon
would man, ceasing to reverence his God, cease to regard his neighbor? How
soon would every moral, every natural, tie be dissolved, every motive to
justice, truth, and benevolence, be lost, and every attempt to confine passion
and appetite within any bounds be forgotten? Virtue and Vice, as objects of
human esteem, would change their places, and their characters. Pride would then
be real virtue, the Lust of power real greatness, and Avarice real honor. The
seat of Justice would be the nest of plunder and robbery, and the edifices of
learning cells of studied iniquity, where methodized fin would be the science,
and sagacious perpetration the art. The private dwelling would be converted
into a brothel, and the venerable matron and the snowy virgin would change
characters with the bawd and the strumpet; and the purity, the happiness, and
the hopes, of mankind, would be buried under a promiscuous and universal
concubinage.

WERE Philosophy less exceptionable in its doctrines, and less favorably
inclined to vice, still, in its attempts to restrain vice, and encourage
virtue, it would be totally weak and inefficacious. Every Individual
Philosopher utters many errors with the same breath and in the same discourse,
in which he utters also some truths. Every individual contradicts, ridicules,
and calumniates, every other individual; and every sect every other sect. Thus
truth and falsehood come from the same mouth with equal gravity and force; and
the contrary systems of the combatants, are on the one hand, derived from
sources equally respectable, and, on the other, are equally the objects of
obloquy and derision, mutually and successfully employed. As teachers, they
have no authority, possess no power, can employ no sanction, and promise no
reward. The only support of their systems is argument; often so abstruse, as to
be understood imperfectly by themselves, and not at all by most men; often so
weak and futile, as to produce no effect, beside contempt and ridicule; often
so opposed by contrary arguments, as to be left without force, or influence;
and always so uninteresting as to be neither read, nor regarded, by the body of
mankind. This support their example effectually destroys: for no man will
believe, that the Philosophy, which when heartily embraced does not render its
author better, but leaves him worse, than multitudes of those, who are without
it, can be either useful or true.

THE single phrase -- Thus says the Lord, -- comes home to every serious man,
with a force infinitely greater than that of all which Philosophers have ever
said, or will ever say. The Teacher, here, can neither be deceived, nor
deceive. His authority to enjoin, his knowledge to discern, his disposition and
his power to reward obedience is immutable and boundless. Here something is
presented to the mind, of sufficient importance to arrest its attention, to
rouse its hopes, and to command its efforts. To disobedience the same
attributes present a combination of motives, efficacious to alarm, and to
deter. In the full view of these attributes, sin is perpetrated only with a
trembling hand, and an aching heart.

BUT in spite of all the efforts, which Philosophy can make to dissuade men
from vice, the single human conclusion will ever be, "Let us eat and drink, for
tomorrow we die." Some of the ancients, at times, made efforts of this nature;
but they were sickly in their origin, and momentary in their operations;
without energy, and without effect; an amusement to the fancy, but not a
melioration of the heart. The modern Philosophy, uninterested in the subject,
or discouraged by the attempts of its predecessors, has joined in the general
cry, and determined to encourage and sanction this limited pursuit of good. Its
doctrines, its arguments, its examples, have licensed and defended guilty
pleasure, pleasure confined to the present life, the pleasure of sinners, the
pleasure of animals. Before its pestilential breath, as man before the Simoom
of Nubia, truth, virtue, and happiness, have sickened, fallen, and died; while
vice, like the fabled Upaz of Java, has in the same rank atmosphere vigorously
diffused its branches, shot up its infant stems, and corrupted and destroyed,
around it, whatever had the principles or the promise of life.

3. INFIDEL Philosophy has not hitherto been able to support itself, nor to
make any serious impression on the evidence of the Divine Origin of Scriptures.

THE great proofs of the divine origin of the Scriptures have not, I apprehend,
been at all seriously affected by the attacks of Infidels. The Necessity of
admitting the History of the Scriptures, and the necessity of admitting the
Revelation of the Scriptures, arising from the admission of the Scriptural
History; The Arguments from Prophecy; from Miracles; from the Character of
Christ; from the Origination of the New Testament by uneducated men; from the
Character and Conduct of the Apostles; from the erection and progress of
Christianity; from the Authenticity and Genuineness of the Scriptures; from
their pure, harmonious, and sublime Character; and from the present state of
the Jews; have in no instance been solidly answered.

THERE is not, so far as I have been informed, any answer of any Infidel to a
capital argument in support of Revelation, which has gained so great applause,
or received, for the time, so general and confident reliance from Philosophers,
as Mr. Hume's celebrated Essay on Miracles. In the Introduction to it, Mr. Hume
says -- " He flatters himself, he has discovered an argument, which will prove
an everlasting check to all kinds of superstitious delusion." But since the
Essays on the same subject by Adams, Campbell, Farmar and Price, have been
published, and read, the applause and the reliance appear to be in a great
measure withdrawn. I have been informed, that Mr. Hume himself considered
Doctor Campbell's Answer to him as conclusive against him. If this most
ingenious performance of the ablest Infidel, by far the ablest, who has
hitherto appeared, has been so impotent to its purpose, the sufficiency of the
rest may be easily determined.

THERE is, also, another argument, drawn from the comparative character of
Christians, and Infidels, which may be alleged with a force, incapable of being
obviated. The weight of virtue has been wholly on the side of Christianity. All
moral truth is fairly tried by its influence on mankind. Nothing can be more
properly or more forcibly contrasted, than the tendency of the doctrines of the
Scriptures, and the tendency of Infidel Philosophy; and nothing can more
strongly illustrate this contrast, than the opposite lives of Christians and
Infidels. The life of St. Paul, alone, puts all Infidelity out of countenance.
The early Christians, in general, even as represented by many of their most
respectable enemies, have no parallels in the annals of Infidelity. From the
infancy of the Christian church to the present time, in all periods some, and
in most periods many, Christians have worn the same character. In our own
land, and in every neighborhood, may be found daily those, who adorn the human
name with all the virtues, which Infidels have at any time professed, and with
many of a superior kind, to which they have never formed a pretension. So
evident is the want of morals on the part of Infidels, in this country,
generally, that to say -- "A man is an Infidel" -- is understood, course, as a
declaration, that he is a plainly immoral man. On the contrary, to say -- "A
man is a true or real Christian" -- is universally understood as a declaration,
that he is a man distinguishedly virtuous. This phraseology has its origin in
the experience, and common-sense, of mankind, and may be fairly assumed as
complete evidence of the sentiment alleged.

THAT this Philosophy is unable to support itself, is evident from its
progress. Philosophers, as has been remarked, have, from the beginning, changed
continually the Infidel system. The doctrines, which Herbert and Tindal
declared to be so evident, that God could not make them more evident, were
wholly given up, as untenable, by Hume; and the Skepticism of Hume sustained no
higher character in the mind of D'Alembert. Mere Infidelity gave up Natural
Religion, and Atheism mere Infidelity. Atheism is the system, at present in
vogue. What will succeed it cannot be foreseen. One consolation, however,
attends the subject; and that is -- No other system can be so groundless, so
despicable, or so completely ruinous to the morals and happiness of mankind.

THE conduct of Philosophers in opposing their antagonists, and in supporting
themselves, has been alike, and has alike evinced the weakness of their cause,
in both respects. Each effort has had, as was to be expected, its day of
applause and adoption, and has then given up its place, and importance, to a
succeeding effort. Succeeding Philosophers, instead of relying on the
arguments, or systems, of their predecessors, have laboriously devised new
ones. Each relies apparently, and perhaps firmly, upon his own; but is of
course forsaken by those, who come after him. The weight, which they have had,
for a time, has been therefore casual; the weight of novelty, fashion, and
currency, and the result of ingenuity and celebrity; not the weight of truth
and evidence, nor the result of serious and permanent conviction. Were
succeeding Philosophers satisfied with either the opposition, or the doctrines
of their predecessors, they would of course have insisted anew on their
arguments, and systems; explained more fully the parts and nature of each, and
obviated the answers of their adversaries. Convinced of the truth and rectitude
of what had been done before, they would have felt themselves bound to exert
themselves in its defense. Natural Religion, or Theism, would now have been the
great reliance of Infidels, and all their arguments would have been directed to
its support. The Atheists feel, at the present time, a triumphant confidence in
the permanency of their system; the Theists, a few years since, felt equally
satisfied of the continuance of theirs. This confidence in both was equally
well founded. There is now all the probability, that those, who are to come,
will desert Atheism, which there was a little while since, that the present
system would desert Theism. Yet now the French Committee of Public Instruction
declare, that a people of Theists will necessarily become Revelationists.

THE insolence and ridicule, exhibited universally by Infidel Writers, is at
least to my view, a strong indication of the consciousness of the weakness of
their cause, and of the insufficiency of their arguments. Men who feel their
cause to be good, and their means of support to be strong, usually discover
moderation and decency in the management. A strong man is usually mild, and
civil; a weak one, to conceal his weakness, is often petulant and blustering.
Were Infidels satisfied of the goodness of their cause, and the soundness of
their arguments, they would not, it is presumed, so often resort to ridicule
instead of reasoning, nor entrench themselves behind insolence and contempt,
instead of facts and evidence. In any other case, this conduct would be deemed
a proof of weakness in the cause, and of doubt in its advocates.

AS the great arguments in support of Christianity remain in full force, it is
rationally concluded, that they will ever so remain. Infidel Philosophers, in
great numbers, of the utmost enmity to the Christian cause, of eminent
industry, and of as considerable ingenuity as will probably be found hereafter,
have already exhausted their strength in their attacks on Revelation. As they
have hitherto failed of success, it is fairly presumed, that they will finally
fail. Almost all the topics of opposition have been thoroughly explored, and
the most effectual use made of them, which is practicable. Hence they will
probably gain little additional strength on the side of argument. More
influence, and more converts, they may not improbably gain. The present time is
supposed to be marked in Prophecy, as an eminent season of delusion; and the
delusion has not, hitherto, reached the bounds predicted. But to gain these is
a very different thing from acquiring additional strength from reason and
evidence.

TO a serious and candid man the fact, above recited, must appear of high
importance. He cannot but see, that Christianity has been attacked by a
numerous host of enemies, ardent, industrious, and ingenious, through a long
period, with unremitted efforts, and on every side, No measure has been left
untried, no means of success unexplored, and no kind of hostility scrupled. Its
strength has therefore been proved. Such a man will feel of course, that
Christianity must resist successfully every future assault, and that it will be
early enough to doubt of its firmness, when its pillars shall begin to be
shaken, and its foundation to be undermined.

4. PHILOSOPHY will not, and Christianity will, increase your comfort, and
lessen your distresses here, and save you from misery, and confer on you
happiness, hereafter.

FROM the observations already made, you must have clearly perceived, that
Philosophy furnishes you with no directory to regulate your moral conduct, no
scheme of the duties of life. As pure Theism, or Natural Religion, it teaches
not a duty, which is not unspeakably better taught by the Scriptures; while it
is wholly ignorant of very many, which, when taught, are seen to be of the
highest importance. It knows not, it cannot know, what service, what worship,
is acceptable to God, or whether any can be accepted. It sees all men to be
sinners, and yet knows not, that sinners can be forgiven, or reinstated in the
character and condition of faithful subjects of the government of God. If this
be possible, it knows not how, when, or where. Of sanctions to enforce, and
motives to encourage obedience, it is destitute and beggared. To the peace,
which springs from the conscious performance of duty it is a stranger; and in
the joy, which flows from hopeful acceptance with God, it shares, not even as a
guest. Under these disadvantages, you will not wonder, that it lingers and
languishes in its course, and halts at a distance from the gate of virtue.

AS mere Infidelity, it teaches nothing but to contest all principles, and to
adopt none. As Skepticism, it is an ocean of doubt and agitation, in which
there are no soundings, and to which there is no shore. As Animalism and
Atheism it completes the ravage and ruin of man, which, in its preceding forms,
it had so successfully begun. It now holds out the rank Circoean draught, and
sends the deluded wretches, who are allured to taste, to bristle and wallow
with the swine, to play tricks with the monkey, to rage and rend with the
tiger, and to purify into nothing with the herd of kindred brutes.

CHRISTIANITY, with an influence infinitely more benevolent, enhances the value
of your present life beyond the search of calculation. It informs you, that you
are the intelligent and moral creatures of the All-perfect JEHOVAH, who made,
who preserves, who rules the Universe, who is present in all places, who
beholds all things; who is eternal and immutable; infinitely benevolent,
infinitely beneficent; the faithful friend of the virtuous; the unchanging
enemy of sin; the rewarder, and the reward, of all returning sinners, who
diligently seek him. In this character it presents to you a direct, clear, and
perfect system of rules for all your moral conduct; rules of thinking,
speaking, and acting; rules, reaching every possible case, and removing every
rational doubt. Here is no uncertainty, no wavering, no tossing on the billows
of anxiety, no plunging into the gulf of despair. Your path is a straight and
beaten way, and, were you way faring men, and fools, you need not err therein.

AS you pass through the various stages of your journey, you are furnished with
aids and motives infinite, to check your delays, to recall your wanderings, to
cheer fatigue, to refresh your languor, to lessen your difficulties, to renew
your strength, and to prolong your perseverance to the end. Should you at any
time, through ignorance, inattention, or allurement, dangerously diverge from
your course, a sweet and charming Voice behind you cries "This is the way, walk
ye therein."

IN the sublime character of moral subjects of the All-ruling God, you are
called to a life of obedience and virtue. Sinners, indeed, you are: and as
such, in the eye of Natural Religion are condemned and lost; but in the
Scriptures you are taught, that most delightful of all truths, that you may
rise again to the character, and the blessing, of those, who have never fallen;
and may thus rise upon conditions, which, if guided by wisdom, you would
yourselves have chosen, as the most easy, the most reasonable, the most
desirable, of all conditions; upon conditions which are distinguished blessings
in themselves, and the beginning of blessings, which will multiply forever. A
scheme of duty is proposed to you, and required of you; but every part of it is
at once useful and delightful. From the performance of it will daily and
infallibly spring the peace of an approving mind, the dignity of conscious
virtue, the retreat of gloomy apprehension, and the dawn of radiant hope, the
day star of endless life.

SHOULD you hereafter have families, your communication of the principles, and
your practice of the duties, of Christianity will beyond all things else,
insure to you domestic peace and prosperity. Your households will assume the
same dignified character, and share in the same requisite enjoyments. All will
love, esteem, and befriend, and be loved, esteemed, and befriended. Your
interests, designs, and pursuits, will be noble and virtuous, the parents of
concord and happiness. To the ties of natural affection will be superadded the
benevolence, and the brotherly love, of the Gospel; and these will animate,
refine, and exalt every affection, and every purpose, will bring daily
consolation and enduring joy, and will prove the delightful forerunners of
future beatitude.

THE Friends, who visit you, will esteem and love you, for they will find in
your character something to be esteemed and loved. They will also be friends,
of the best character, will most cordially return your kind offices, and will
most richly merit and lastingly retain your confidence. They will be friends
here, and friends forever.

TO the Neighbourhoods around you you will be, and will be esteemed,
benefactors and blessings. The poor, the sick, the outcast, the friendless, and
the disconsolate, will especially, acknowledge you as their patrons, Enemies
you will find; for the performance of your duty will oppose lust, and restrain
corruption but they will be such enemies, as, without a total change of their
character, a good man would not wish to be his friend. Every vicious man will
feel his inferiority to you with pain, and experience deep mortification in
knowing, that he cannot look you in the face with a composed countenance, and
steady eye. Compare your friends with your enemies, and you will find nothing
to be regretted.

NOR will you be less useful to your Country. Rational Freedom cannot be
preserved without the aid of Christianity. Not a proof is found in the
experience, not a probability is presented to the judgment, of man, that
Infidelity can support a free, and at the same time an efficient, government.
In this country, the freest, and the happiest, which the world has hitherto
seen, the whole system of policy originated, has continued, and stands, on the
single basis of Christianity. Good subjects have been formed here by forming
good men; and none but good subjects can long be governed by persuasion. The
learning, peace, mild intercourse, and universally happy state of society,
enjoyed here, all own the same origin. Would you preserve these blessings
during your own lives, would you hand them down to posterity, increasing
multitudes of those who are not Christians, and all those who are, with one
voice tell you "Embrace Christianity."

IT is by no means my intention, or my wish, to flatter you with hopes of
unmingled happiness on this side of the grave. This world has ever been and
still is, a vale of tears. Want, pain, sorrow, disease, and death, are constant
tenants of this unhappy soil, and frequent inmates of every human dwelling. To
aid the sufferer to sustain, and to vanquish, these unfriendly visitors,
Christianity furnishes the peace, the patience, and the fortitude of virtue,
the consciousness of forgiven sin, and Infinite complacency, and the supporting
hope of endless and evergrowing sanctity, happiness, and glory. In every
throbbing bosom she sings "This light affliction, which is but for a moment, is
not worthy to be compared with the glory, that shall be revealed hereafter".
The song is the song of Angels; the voice is the voice of God.

ALL these alleviations are, at a stroke, swept away by the besom of
Philosophy. Like a rude, unfeeling nurse, she approaches the bed of pain and
sickness, and tells the groaning sufferer, that he is indeed miserable; and
that he may quietly resolve to bear his calamities, for they are irremediable
and hopeless. To the despairing victims of want, infamy, and oppression, she
extends her hand, empty of comfort, and passes by on the other side. The
Parent, overwhelmed by woe for the loss of his only son, she coolly informs,
that his tears and his sighs are useless, for his favorite has ceased from the
light of the living, and vanished forever. To the failing eye of the poor,
desponding, and expiring wretch she holds out her dark lantern, and as the only
consolation which she can give, shows him the sullen region of annihilation,
destined to receive and wrap him in eternal and ablivious night.

YOU, with the rest of men, must suffer woe. Poverty may betide, shame may
arrest, pain may agonize, sorrow may sink, disease may waste, and death will
befall you. In all these evils you will seek for consolation, support, and hope.
From Philosophy you will find none. On that solemn day, which is fast
approaching, when you will be extended upon the bed of death, when the
physician has bidden you adieu, and your friends are watching for the parting
gasp, your souls will cling to existence, will pant for relief, and will search
the Universe for a glimmering of hope. Should Philosophy have been your bosom
companion, and the arm on which you have finally rested, you will then know
what it is to have renounced Religion, to look back on a life of sin with
agony, and forward to a world of suspense with horror. Christianity, sighing
her last farewell, and dropping her parting tear, will retire in silence and
sorrow, and will mourn with deep compassion, that, forlorn and dreadful as was
your lot, you would not suffer her to allay your misery, and with the lamp of
hope light you through your melancholy path into the world of future being.

Religion, on the contrary, feels, and proves, a regard for the sorrows of man,
infinitely more tender, soothing, and supporting. Like the fabled power of
Enchantment, she changes the thorny couch into a bed of down, closes with a
touch the wounds of the soul, and converts a wilderness of woe into the borders
of Paradise. Whenever you are forced to drink the cup of bitterness, Mercy, at
her call, will stand by your side, and mingle sweetness with the draught; while
with a voice of mildness and consolation she will whisper to you, that the
potion, though unpleasant, is necessary and balsamic; that you have diseases to
be removed, and morbid principles to be exterminated; and that the unpalatable
administration will assuredly establish in you health immortal. The same
sweetener of life will accompany you to the end, and, seating herself by your
dying bed, will draw aside the curtains of eternity, will bid you lift your
closing eyes on the end of sorrow, pain, and care, and in the opened gates of
peace and glory will point to you, in full view, the friends of Christ, waiting
to hail your arrival.

THAT Christianity gives all these blessings, and gives them certainly; that it
produces no loss, and great gain, in the present world; that it makes nothing
worse, and every thing better, is clearly evident from the nature of the
Christian system. The doctrines, precepts, and promises, contain and secure all
this, and much more. At the same time, every Christian is a witness to this
truth. Every Christian has, by experience, known the pleasures of sin, and, by
the same experience also, has known the pleasures of religion. To whatever
degree, therefore, his experience has extended, he is a complete judge of both.
Many, very many Christians have also fully enjoyed the highest pleasures of
science and intellect, and are of course unexceptionable judges of these
pleasures. But no Christian was ever found, who for a moment admitted, that any
pleasures were to be compared with those of religion; not one, who would not
say, that for the loss of religion worlds would be a poor compensation. In
every other case this evidence would be acknowledged as complete. Nor is it
balanced, or lessened, by any contrary evidence. Infidels have never tasted the
pleasures of religion, and, in the decision of this question, are, therefore,
without a voice.

WITH these blessings in view, you will, I trust without a sigh, leave to the
Infidel his peculiar gratifications. In every innocent enjoyment you can
partake at least as largely as he. You will not, therefore, repine, that you
cannot shine, at a horserace, but at a cockpit, win at a gaming-table, riot at
the board of intemperance, drink deep at the midnight debauch, or steal to
infamous enjoyments at the brothel.

BUT the most important consideration is yet to be suggested; a consideration
infinitely awful and glorious. There may be an Hereafter. There may be a future
Judgment, a future Retribution. The course of Sin, begun here, may continue
forever. The seed of virtue, sown in the present world, and raised to a young
and feeble stem, may be destined to growth immortal. The misery, produced here
by Sin, may be unceasingly generated by the same wretched cause, through ages
which cannot end. The peace and joy, which virtue creates, during this
transient life, the same illustrious power may expand, and prolong, through an
ever-enlarging progress.

WHAT the natural eye thus sees with dim and probable vision, Christianity,
possessed of superior optics, discerns, and promises, with clear, prophetic
certainty. Endless death and endless life are written in full and glowing
characters in the book, sealed to unenlightened and unassisted man with seven
seals. That book a hand infinite and supreme unrolls to every humble, penitent,
believing mind, and discloses to the enraptured view the page of eternity, on
which things divine and immortal are pencilled with sunbeams. A residence
finished with infinite workmanship, employments pure and ravishing, a character
completely dignified and lovely, companions the first and best in the universe,
a system of Providence, composed wholly of good, refining, ascending, and
brightening forever, and a God seen, known, and enjoyed, in all his combined
perfection, are there drawn in colors of light and life.

In the same volume is disclosed by the same hand the immense woe, destined to
reward the perpetration of iniquity, voluntary blindness, and immovable
impenitence. Allured and charmed by supreme endearments, on the one hand, the
mind is, on the other, equally awakened and alarmed. Good and evil passing
conception, passing limits, are offered to the choice; and by that choice alone
the good may be secured, and evil avoided, forever.

WITH respect to these amazing things, Philosophy knows nothing, threatens
nothing, promises nothing. To Philosophy the invisible world is an unknown
vast, over which, like the raven sent out of the ark, she wanders with a
wearied wing, seeking rest, and finding none. To her exploring eye, the
universe is one immense, unfathomable ocean. Above, around, beneath, all is
doubt, anxiety, and despair. Her accounts are, like her views, uncertain and
conjectural only, the foundations of no assent, no satisfaction. If you adhere
to them, you cannot lose, and you may infinitely gain. An infinite difference
of possible good and evil, therefore, demands your adoption of Christianity. I
need not place the subject on higher ground. To every thinking man there is,
here, a motive infinite to embrace Christianity, and reject Infidel Philosophy.

If there is a God (and that there is, is more certain, and evident, than that
there is any being beside one's self) he is doubtless perfect in holiness, as
well as in power and knowledge. With holy or virtuous creatures he must of
course be pleased: because holiness is obedience to his will, and because it is
a resemblance to his character. As he must be pleased with his own character,
so be must be pleased with his creatures, whenever they possess a character
similar to his own. That he should not be pleased to have his will obeyed is
impossible. The very supposition, that the Ruler has a will, involves in it
necessarily, that he must be pleased to be obeyed. All the doctrines of
Revelation, all the precepts, are summed up in this memorable sentence, "Be ye
holy, as I the Lord your God am holy." To accomplish holiness, or virtue, in
man is the single end of the Christian system. Christianity therefore teaches,
enjoins, and with infinite motives pursues, what reason dictates as the highest
wisdom of man. But, in all this, Infidel Philosophy has no part, nor lot, nor
memorial.

THUS, in every view, the state and the prospects of the Christian are full of
comfort, peace, and hope, of medicines for grief, and seasonings for joy. The
present state of the Infidel is destitute of both, and prospects he has none.
Here, the religion of the Christian brings with it, in hand, worth, usefulness,
and dignity; and hereafter, in bright reversion, and through an interminable
progress, life, wisdom, virtue, happiness, and glory. Philosophy, on the
contrary, adds to him, here, no enjoyment, and robs him of the chief support of
suffering; and, beyond the grave, plunders him of heaven, and consigns him to
annihilation and despair. Since these discourse were sent to the press, I have
seen a Work lately published in Great Britain, and republished in America,
written by J. Robison, Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of
Edinburgh, and Secretary of the Royal Society in that city, and entitled A
Conspiracy against all the Governments and Religions in Europe. In this work
the reader may see the dangers of Infidel Philosophy set in the strongest light
possible. He may see a plan formed, and to an alarming degree executed, for
exterminating Christianity, Natural Religion, the belief of a God, of the
immortality of the Soul, and Moral obligation; for rooting out of the world
civil and domestic government, the right of property, marriage, natural
affection, chastity, and decency; and in a word for destroying whatever is
virtuous, refined or desirable, and introducing again universal savageness and
brutism. All this is to be done under the pretense of enlarged Philanthropy,
and of giving mankind liberty and equality. By this mask is carefully concealed
the true end, which is no less than to reduce the whole human race under a
complete subjugation to these Philosophers; a subjugation of mind as well as of
body.


COPY RIGHT SECURED.


