AN ORATION, ON THE IMPORTANCE OF SCIENCE and RELIGION, PARTICULARLY TO
AMERICAN YOUTH. PRONOUNCED IN THE BAPTIST MEETING HOUSE IN PROVIDENCE, AT THE
COMMENCEMENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 5, A. D. 1798.

BY ANDREW DEXTER, JUN. A.B.

Published at the Request of the Students.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY CARTER AND WILKINS. 1798.

AN ORATION.
WHATEVER creates love of our country, and obedience to its laws, cannot be
uninteresting to Americans. Impressed with this sentiment, we shall attempt to
show the political importance of Science and Religion, and infer their peculiar
necessity to the youth of America.

An ignorant people, blinded by passion, and deluded by the intrigues of
ambition, are jealous under the freest government, and discontented under the
mildest laws. Animated with enthusiastic frenzy, they hurry into tumult and
insurrection, trample upon law, and set civil authority at defiance.
Experience, dreadful experience, has deeply engraven the truth of these remarks
upon the annals of all free governments. Every republic has seen and felt the
importance of having the whole circle of society illuminated with the beams of
science. Whenever we attain to such an era, every one, whose heart feels the
least glow of sensibility, must kneel, and thank the great Parent of nature
that he was born an American. When we stand upon the eminence of knowledge, and
survey all the nations that ever shone in the ancient or modern worlds; when we
examine the complicated principles of their governments, and trace the causes
which gradually raised them to glory, or sunk them into obscurity, we shall
gaze upon the American Constitution with rapture and astonishment. Viewing it
as the immortal monument of genius and wisdom, as the phenomenon of the
present age, we shall exclaim, blessed, thrice blessed is America. Blessed indeed, if
she always preserves her rights unimpaired.

This cannot be effected by Science alone. Science shows the beauty, majesty
and grandeur of our temple; but public virtue only will guard it from
profanation. Imagine that dissipation, profligacy and corruption, should
annihilate all manliness of character, extinguish all public spirit, and if
possible all American virtue. How, and by whom, will then be filled those
public offices, now so dignified with patriotism and wisdom? Will not all
elections be carried on by bribery and venality? Will not every office be
disgraced by ambition and depravity? Without public support, will not our
Constitution dwindle into mere insignificance? Amid the general slumber and
insensibility, an American Caesar starts up, unsheaths the sword of civil war,
and deluges our country in blood and desolation. Thus the throne of despotism
is erected. Heaven avert the blow! Patriotism banish the thought! If ever this
time comes, come with it death! But destruction is inevitable, should we
degenerate from the morality of our fathers. Our bark sails upon a boisterous
ocean, convulsed with storms, and if we become inebriated with the poisonous
bowls of sensuality, it is instantly dashed to pieces, and we are buried
beneath the billows.

The necessity of morality implies the necessity of Religion. Without this, in
vain should we boast of being one of the most enlightened nations upon earth.
The hand of Science, however, naturally conducts to the altar of Religion. A
contemplation of the beauty, harmony and grandeur pervading the universe,
swells the mind with wonder, and insensibly hurries it to the object of all
adoration: the wisest men are generally the most religious. Religion is the
great luminary of America and the world: if extinguished, all morality is
extinguished; we are involved in night, and changed into demons of darkness.
Atheism appears: a horrid monster, without shape, without substance; black he
stands as night, fierce as his native hell. See how he tears asunder all the
tender affections of the soul. The passions swell into irresistible torrents,
and bear away the props of society. Society becomes an agitated ocean, property
a shattered bark, and man an exhausted swimmer amid the contending billows.
These pictures cannot be called delusions of the imagination. The abolishment
of Religion in France, produced scenes still more dreadful; scenes, the bare
thought of which is sufficient to make the blood of a canibal freeze with
horror. Boiling with tiger ferocity, her fanatics plunged the dagger into the
hearts of friend, brother, son and parent, with the calm serenity of a smile.
Even the tomb afforded no sanctuary. Society was converted into a charnel
house, covered with bones and mutilated carcases. We beheld her prisons echoing
with groans, her streets swelling with carnage, her rivers reddening with
blood, her cities sinking in flames. Behold that once flourishing nation,
covered with the funeral pall of desolation! Did such horrors ever blacken the
history of the most abominable superstition? But Religion is a sun, which
though it may sometimes generate the clouds of superstition, yet shines far
above them, and retains all its native splendor. Religion expands the soul,
and warms it with patriotism and universal philanthropy. It unnerves the
malevolent passions, creates and invigorates the social affections, and
cherishes all those noble sentiments of natural relationship, that lay the
foundation of political freedom.

Called by the voice of Religion, Americans, like the children of Israel, fled
from oppression, and settled in a land of strangers. When famine and death
stared them in the face, heaven interposed, shielded from danger, and long
crowned them with prosperity and happiness. When we their sons were falling
beneath the sword of war, the great God of armies gave us a Joshua to subdue
our foes, and conduct us to victory and glory. Now, when again threatened with
destruction, the same overruling Power has not only preserved this venerable
patriot a second time to head our armies, but has raised up a Solomon to direct
our councils.

Thus miraculously favored, let our breasts always glow with piety and
devotion to the supreme Arbiter of nations, and Ruler of the universe. Then
shall the trees of Science and Religion, naturally interweaving their branches,
and supporting each other, rise above the clouds, and overshadow the whole
Union. Mild concord shall reign, and silence the clamor of faction. The
hatchet of industry, wielded by the strong arm of freedom, shall resound from
the shores of the Atlantic to the banks of the Missisippi. Americans shall
become one great family of brothers, all animated with the same virtue, with
the same patriotism, with the same irresistible ardour for independence.

Such, ye Youth of America, is the importance of Science and Religion. Soon,
alas! too soon, will our fathers be translated to the starry mansions of their
God. Then will be deposited in our hands the Constitution framed by their
wisdom, and the independence won by their blood. By us alone can the invaluable
legacies be transmitted to posterity. Yes, upon us depend the freedom and
happiness of millions yet unborn. The voice of our fathers, the voice of
posterity, therefore, call upon us always to venerate Science and Religion; and
at this awful crisis in particular, they exhort us to cling to them, as to the
pillars of our political salvation.

Behold! that fell demon, Atheism, issues from night and chaos, demolishes the
government of France, and erects his throne upon its ruins. While he
vociferates liberty and equality, he brandishes the thunderbolts of despotism,
and stains the charter of freedom with the blood of its martyrs. Unsatiated
with the spoils of one kingdom, with giant strides he encompasses Europe,
destroys the monuments of art, tramples upon the sons of Science, tears down
the altars of Religion, and deluges the world in blood. The earth trembles, the
sky blackens -- the monster approaches, and extends his arms to America. She,
secure in native innocence, averts with scorn his foul embrace, and reposes her
confidence in heaven and the unanimity of her sons. The voice of Science and
Religion cries, to arms, to arms. Great WASHINGTON leaves the shades of
retirement, draws the sword of death, and points to victory. The indignant
shades of WARREN and MONTGOMERY start from their tombs, point at the wounds of
their country, and cry aloud, revenge for our injured rights! My Brothers,
swear to guard from profanation the altars of your Religion and Liberty. Rally
with your fathers around the fortress of independence, and nobly resolve to
defend it -- or die. Alas! should you fall, your tomb would be the tomb of
Science, of Religion, of Liberty, of America, and Man.

FINIS.

