A MEMOIR ON THE ONONDAGA SALT SPRINGS AND SALT MANUFACTORIES IN THE WESTERN
PART OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK; DESCRIBING THE SITUATION AND APPEARANCE OF THE
SPRINGS, THE NATURE AND CONTENTS OF THE WATERS, AND THE PROCESS BY WHICH THE
SALT IS PROCURED, etc.

BY BENJAMIN DE WIT, M. D.

CORRESPONDING AND HONORARY MEMBER OF SEVERAL LEARNED MEDICAL, CHEMICAL AND
PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETIES.

Read before the Society for the promotion of AGRICULTURE, ARTS and
MANUFACTURES of the State of New York, held at the city of Albany, February 28,
1798.

ALBANY: PRINTED BY LORING ANDREWS. 1798.

N. B. THE following MEMOIR appears in the form in which it is printed by the
Society, under the patronage of the Legislature of the State, in PART III. of
their Transactions, now in the press. But as only a small number of these
Transactions are printed, and directed to be distributed principally among the
Members of the Society, the Members of the Legislature and the Officers of
Government, it was thought proper to have some additional copies of this paper
pressed off, to supply those who may wish an acquaintance with the subject
which it embraces, and who of course cannot procure the Transactions.

ALBANY, October, 1798.
A MEMOIR ON THE ONONDAGA SALT SPRINGS AND SALT MANUFACTORIES, IN THE STATE OF
NEW YORK.
BY BENJAMIN DE WIT. M. D. Secretary to the Society.
TALES SUNT AQUAE QUALIS TERRA PER QUAM FLUUNT. (...).
INTRODUCTION.
THE remarkable Salt Springs in the western part of our State, present a
subject for investigation equally curious, interesting and important: it is
therefore surprising that they have hitherto almost escaped the notice of
naturalists and philosophers. Nothing of consequence I believe has yet been
published concerning them; and it would hardly be known that they had an
existence, were it not for the verbal accounts of a few, who have had the
curiosity to visit them as they passed through the country. They appeared to me
worthy of some attention, and accordingly I have made a number of observations
and experiments concerning them; some of which I propose to communicate to the
Society in the present paper.

These salt springs from their general importance might deserve to be
considered in several points of view; for instance,

1st. As an object of natural history. Being one of those singular and valuable
productions with which bountiful nature has enriched our country; it would be
interesting to have a minute and accurate description of their situation and
appearance; of the various phenomena which they exhibit, and of the nature and
origin of the waters.

2dly. As an object of chemistry. It would be equally interesting to have an
accurate analysis of the waters, ascertaining the various heterogeneous
substances which they hold in solution, and the just proportion of each;
together with an enquiry into the manner of their formation, and by what
processes in nature they become thus impregnated. It is much to be regretted,
that whilst we are well acquainted with most of the famous mineral waters in
the European world, we should hitherto have had such a very imperfect knowledge
of those which immediately surround us in our own country, equally, if not more
valuable and useful.

3dly. In a medical point of view. An inquiry into the nature and cause of that
malignant fever which every autumn prevails in the vicinity of the springs, and
proves uncommonly mortal to the inhabitants, The disorder which prevails about
the salt springs is a remitting bilious fever. It affects so universally that
very few who remain near them escape an attack. This obliges the inhabitants
and manufacturers to remove, during the two or three warmest summer months. It
appears to be particularly mortal to young children, for I am informed that one
summer nine out of ten died. Those who reside there for some time become less
liable to the attacks of the fever than strangers.
most probably produced by some aerial exhalations which they emit, might
possibly lead to a method of prevention, which would be an object of primary
importance to the success and increase of the manufactories. Such an
investigation might further lead to a developement of facts that would throw
some sparks of light upon the nature of pestilential fluids and the causes of
malignant diseases.

4thly. In a political point of view; as affording a source of revenue to the
State, under the regulations established by the Legislature, and supplying our
country with salt of its own manufacturing, so much cheaper than it can be
imported.

5thly. As an object of manufactory. It would doubtless be pleasing to every
member of this Society, at least to be acquainted with these infant
manufactories, which promise so much future importance and usefulness, to
examine into the method and the apparatus by which the salt is procured from
the waters, and to enquire whether there is not room for many useful
improvements.

In all these respects it is presumed they are not unworthy the notice of the
naturalist, the chemist, the physician, the statesman and the manufacturer; and
as they are capable of affording a large supply of this necessary article of
subsistence, to the inhabitants of a vast tract of country, they will become a
mine of incalculable value to the community at large

But however interesting it might be to take such a general view of the
subject; it would be too extensive for the limits of a single communication,
and perhaps in some measure foreign to the business of the Society. I shall
therefore content myself at present with considering them principally in the
last point of view, as an object of manufactory; being a branch of the subject
more immediately embraced by this institution. It will be necessary, however,
in order to render the account more intelligible, to prefix a description of
the situation and appearance of the springs, and the nature and contents of the
waters.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SALT SPRINGS.
THE Salt Springs, which I propose now to examine, are situated in the north
western part of the State of Newyork, in the country of Onondaga, at the head
of the Onondaga, or Salt Lake, about 150 miles from the city of Albany, in lat.
43 4 30 N. long. 1 5 W. of Philadelphia.

The Onondaga Lake is about six miles long, and on an average one mile wide. It
is supplied with water by a number of rivulets, and empties itself by a short
outlet into the Seneca river, sufficiently large to be navigated with batteaux.
The water is transparent and abounds with fish; its taste is perfectly fresh,
notwithstanding the numerous salt springs which continually flow into it. This
is the case however only on its surface for I am informed that by sinking a
corked bottle to the bottom of the lake, and then withdrawing the cork, salt
water is brought up. Water impregnated with salt being specifically heavier
than fresh would naturally move along the bottom and continue there, unless
brought up and mixed by some great commotion of the waters. This can plainly be
discerned, where the salt water issues from the springs into the fresh water of
the surrounding marsh; various light substances may be seen swimming some
distance below the surface between the salt and fresh water; these substances
being of a specific gravity, lighter than the one and heavier than the other.
The bottom of the lake where it can be seen in shallow places, has a white
appearance almost peculiar to itself, except the spots which are covered with a
singular species of moss, growing there in abundance. This white appearance is
most probably produced by the precipitation of a calcareous earth from the
water; and this conjecture is confirmed by the circumstance of the salt water
holding a larger quantity of lime in solution.

The head of the lake is surrounded for some distance by marshy and swampy
ground, interspersed with a few large trees and bushes, but abounds most with
flag and wild grass. The Salt Springs issue for the most part from this marsh,
near the banks by which it is bounded, at various distances from the waters of
the lake. The principal springs, which are most highly impregnated with salt,
and which supply the greater number of the manufactories at present
established, issue from the marsh in a group at the foot of the declivity
formed by the upland on which the village of Salina is situated, commonly
called the Salt Point, near the place where the Onondaga Creek empties itself
into the lake. There are however numerous other salt springs discovered in
different parts of the marsh; some along the shores of the lake, several miles
down, others a considerable distance up the Onondaga Creek; and what is
remarkable, they have been found to rise in shallow places from the bottom of
the lake, at some distance from the shores. All these however are not so
strongly impregnated with salt as those before mentioned at the Salt Point.

The springs issue from the black mud which composes the marsh, by small
orifices, apparently in a perpendicular direction. The manufacturers, for the
convenience of pumping the water into conductors which lead to the evaporating
pots, construct cisterns or reservoirs where the springs appear. The
superfluous water from these as well as that from the surrounding marsh, is
emptied into a small bay or harbor a few yards from the springs, large enough
to contain fifty or sixty boats at once, as if designed by nature for the
express convenience of exporting salt. This bay communicates with the lake by a
short outlet, but sufficiently deep to be navigated with the flat boats and
batteaux which are usually employed.

The marsh surrounding the springs for a few yards, is entirely destitute of
grass and all other (...), except (...) samphire, ( Cr^^hmum of Linnaeus;) and
when the sun shines, the water is evaporated from the surface of the mud,
leaving it covered with christalized salt, resembling hoar frost.

It is remarkable that all the dead vegetable substances which happen to be
within the reach of the salt waters, assume a reddish brown color; hence all
the brushes, old sticks and various kinds of timber scattered about the
springs, and even the troughs (generally made of white cedar) through which the
water is conducted to the boilers, in a short time acquire this color: not
only dead vegetable substances, but even growing vegetables and stones are thus
changed in appearance. I have observed, however, that this red color extends
no farther than the surface of both vegetables and stones. The internal part of
old wood being invariably black, and that of the stones natural. It may
therefore be produced merely by the deposition of a red, earthy matter, upon
these various substances.

Salt springs are discovered and characterised by those who search for them, by
the absence of grass and flags, by the red color of the mud, and old wood
which may happen to be scattered there; if the marsh be covered with water, by
its temperature being much colder than the stagnant water; and also by the
appearance of a continual bubbling from the bottom, in consequence of the air
which is perpetually extricated from them.

Vegetable substances appear to putrefy much sooner in the vicinity of the salt
waters than in any other places; hence, even when the weather is but moderately
warm, there is always a very disagreeable putrid smell near the springs, and in
mid-summer I am informed it becomes almost intolerable. We could very plainly
observe this disagreeable odor as soon as we approached near the outlet of the
lake, in going up the Seneca river in the month of June. On account of the
shallowness of this outlet, it is probable that the salt water which had been
gliding along the bottom of the lake, became there mixed with the fresh, and by
exposure to air, excited an incipient putrefaction in the various substances
capable of undergoing that process. Nothing of the offensive smell was
perceived while we were crossing the lake, but it recurred again in a much
higher degree as soon as we approached the shore near the salt springs. This
may perhaps be accounted for by the well known experiments, which prove that a
small quantity of salt dissolved in water, accelerates and promotes
putrefaction; whereas a stronger impregnation becomes highly antiseptic. This
putrefactive process takes place in an extraordinary degree, only in those
situations where the salt waters mix with the fresh; for the undiluted waters
of the springs themselves are sufficiently impregnated with salt effectually to
preserve both vegetable and animal substances; being stronger than the pickle
usually made to preserve beef. As a proof of this I need only mention, that in
almost every spring there are occasionally found several dead frogs, that have
accidentally plunged into them instead of fresh water, and instantly died.
These frequently remain there for a long time, perfectly preserved, without any
putrid smell.

The bottoms of the springs appear to be composed of solid rock, for by running
down an iron instrument into them, it uniformly proceeds six or seven feet
through the mud, and then is obstructed by a solid obstacle, which can plainly
be felt to be stone; I am informed by those who have dug into the springs, that
the streams of salt water appeared to rise perpendicularly from the bottom,
whereas those of fresh water where they happen to occur in these places have a
horizontal direction, and are more superficial. This observation confirms the
supposition that the salt water is forced directly upwards, through the
interstices of the calcareous rock, which probably covers a large body of salt;
and that the veins of fresh water, being entirely separate, make their way in a
horizontal direction from the springy ridge at a small distance; this too will
explain how it happens that several good fresh springs without a particle of
salt are found at the foot of this ridge, not ten yards from some of the salt
springs. Sticks of wood have been dug up from the bottom of some of the salt
springs, which have been found incrusted with a substance of a metallic
appearance; I could not procure any of these for examination.

The reservoirs and springs of salt water are usually covered with a pellicle
of extreme tenuity, reflecting the rays of light in variegated colors, similar
to that which occurs upon the surface of the water in ^ar vats: this is
probably a bituminous oil which rises with the water from the bowels of the
earth.

There is continually emitted from the bottom of the springs a large quantity
of an aerial fluid which bubbles from the surface of the water. By inverting a
bell glass in the springs, I collected in a very short time a considerable
quantity. As it rises from the bottom it appears to be entangled by the mud,
for by running down a stick repeatedly it is disengaged, so fast, as to cover
the water with bubbles, resembling a boiling pot. A burning candle being put
into this air, thus procured, was extinguished in an instant of time, and that
after the vessel had stood open for a little while. From this experiment I
conclude it to be fixed air, This air has received a number or different names
by different authors, it is the spiritus mineralis of Hoffman, the aerial acid
of Derghman, the cretacious acid of Fourcroy, the fixed air of Priestly and
Black, and the carlonic acid gas of the French chemists.
(carbonic acid gas;) characterised, by its being totally incapable of
supporting combustion, and by its greater specific gravity than atmospheric
air, in remaining for some time at the bottom of the vessel although it was
open. It is no uncommon thing to find this air generated in the bowels of the
earth in great abundance. It frequently manifests itself in deep mines, and
sometimes proves fatal to the miners: hence they call it choke damp, to
distinguish it from the inflammable air which also sometimes occurs, this is
called fire damp; it is supposed also that it is this same air which issues
from the famous Grotto del Cani in Italy, and is so noxious to animal life.

This air as it rises through the water does not however appear to incorporate
with it, at least not in any perceptible degree; for the water has none of that
sparkling brightness, nor the pungent odor, which is characteristic of this
gas when united with common water; on the contrary it appears flat and heavy.
The air in this instance is probably produced by the decomposition of
limestone, which we know contains it in abundance, and the salt water holds a
considerable portion of lime in solution. It is probably partly dissolved by
means of the muriatic acid, (spirit of sea salt,) this having a stronger
attraction for lime than the aerial acid, would displace it, and set it at
liberty to be dissipated in the form of air.

Of the Nature of the WATER.
THE appearance of the salt water when viewed in a glass, is nearly transparent
and colorless, though not perfectly so; for when compared with common pure
water, it appears to have a perceptible bluish tinge, probably owing to its
greater density. When poured from one glass into another, it has somewhat of an
oily aspect, being similar to the vitriolic (sulphuric) acid, which latter from
this peculiarity has been improperly denominated an oil. The water taken pure
from the springs, is destitute of any odor. Its taste is extremely salt, and
leaves a very slight bitter impression upon the tongue; but it is much less
nauseous than seawater. If it be true, as Professor Berghman supposes, that
the peculiar nauseous taste of seawater, which is often attended with
vomiting, and which is not found at all, or but very little in water taken up
at the depth of sixty fathoms, is produced by the putrefaction of the immense
number of fish, worms, insects and vegetables that grow, live and perish in the
sea, and quickly putrefy on the surface, by exposition to the air, assisted by
the saltness of the water; then it is evident that the water of these springs
must be entirely destitute of it; for it issues clear and pure immediately from
the earth, and is of itself sufficiently strong to prevent putrefaction.

The temperature of the different springs, which I examined by an accurate
thermometer of Farenheit's scale, was from 50 to 53 degrees, as will appear
more particularly from the subsequent table of specific gravities of the
different springs to which their temperatures are severally annexed. This is
the usual heat of most springs of every kind, and hence has been deduced the
interior temperature of our earth, which is supposed to be uniformly and
invariably the same, except where it may be altered by local causes. But it
ought to be remembered that the temperature of the waters issuing from the
bowels of the earth, may be considerably influenced by the superficial acquired
heat of its surface as they approach toward it, particularly in the summer
season; and hence the true internal temperature is probably some degrees
colder. In the course of my tour through the western part of the State, I had
frequent opportunities of examining the temperature of a variety of springs,
favorably situated to ascertain the interior heat of the earth as accurately
as possible; the coldest which occurred to my observation was 47 (of
Farenheit's scale.) The water of the spring in which this experiment was made
issued immediately from the foot of a ridge of rocks about 150 feet high,
nearly perpendicular; so that the temperature could have been influenced but
very little (if at all) by the superficial acquired heat of the earth's
surface. I mention this more particularly, because it may perhaps tend to
correct some experiments made by Dr. Franklin upon the same subject: they were
made I think in the waters of different wells, in and about Philadelphia, which
he found to be 52. This to be sure is nearly the usual temperature of springs
and wells here, as well as in Philadelphia, and perhaps most parts of the
world; but the stagnation of the water in which these experiments are usually
made, their exposition for a length of time to the air, and other analogous
circumstances, would most probably raise the temperature very considerably.
Without however making any allowance on this account, it has been taken for
granted by Philosophers, and amongst others by Dr. Darwin, that this was the
real heat of the earth here; and comparing it with that of England which is
found to be 48 i. e. 4 degrees colder, they have puzzled themselves to account
for this supposed difference. Dr. Darwin, I think resorts to the hypothesis of
internal fires, but the more probable idea is, that generally no such
difference exists; most of the springs which I examined were from 48 to 50
degrees.


The specific gravity of the water of a number of distinct springs was
ascertained by a hydrostatic balance constructed with mathematical accuracy and
sensible to the least variation in the weight of the water, as exhibited in the
following table.

A TABLE of the specific gravities and temperatures of different salt springs.
Springs. Specific gravity. Temperature. Standard rain water 1,000. No. 1 1,110
51 2 1,078 51 3 1,088 50 4 1,107 51 5 1,101 50 6 7 1,100 52 8 1,079 9 (...) 50
10 Mr. Geddis's 1,052 Mr. Corey's 1,069 Mr. O. Blennis's 1,045 Mr. J.
Danforth's 1,060

The gravity of the water of Mr. Geddis's spring was ascertained after a shower
of rain, which perhaps, diluted it a little. Mr. O. Blennis's and Danforth's
being on the verge of the waters of the lake, appeared to be mixed with a
portion of fresh water. The quantity of impregnation of the water of these
springs or any other salt water, may be ascertained with tolerable accuracy,
merely by comparing their specific gravities with the known specific gravity of
water holding in solution definite proportions of common salt, as shown in the
following table, which I believe is nearly accurate, being the result of a
number of repeated experiments.

A TABLE of the specific gravities of salt water, made by dissolving decimal
parts of an ounce of salt, in half a pint of water, corresponding to pounds and
their parts of salt to a gallon of water.

Decimal parts of 1 oz. to the half pint or lb. to the gallon. Specific
gravity. 0,05 1,006 0,1 1,011 0,2 1,020 0,3 1,029 0,4 1,037 0,5 1,045 0,6 1,053
1,7 1,061 0,8 1,069 0,9 1,077 1, 1,084 1,1 1,091 1,2 1,098 1,3 1,105 1,4 1,112
1,5 1,119 1,6 1,126 1,7 1,133 1,8 1,140 1,9 1,147 2, 1,153 2,1 1,159 2,2 1,165
2,3 1,171 2,4 1,177 2,5 1,183 3, 1,209




It will be unnecessary from the design of this essay to give a minute analysis
of the waters of these springs, and equally so to recount the experiments or
describe the processes which were used to ascertain their contents. It will be
sufficient barely to mention that I obtained from half a pint of this water 551
grs. or about 1 oz. avoirdupoise, of salt, and 26 grs. of calcareous earth
(line;) equal to 8816 grs. or 30 oz, and 76 grs. of salt to the gallon, and 416
grs. or nearly 1 oz. of calcareous earth. It contains also a very minute
portion of vitriolic (sulphuric) acid, probably united with the fossil alkali
in the form of Glauber's salt (sulphat of soda;) but it is not impregnated with
any iron as might be supposed from the color which it imparts to substances
with which it comes in contact; for neither the Prussian alkali nor the
tincture of galls produce any change when mixed with the water, both being
accurate tests to discover the smallest quantity of this metal. From the
foregoing analysis it appears that the proportion of salt held in solution by
the water of these springs amounts to more than 1-6 of its own weight: this far
exceeds every salt spring that we have ever heard of, and sea water I believe,
usually contains no more than about 1-30.

With respect to the origin of the salt water we have nothing but conjecture.
It is very probable, however, that it proceeds from a solid body of salt, at no
great distance from the place where it issues from the earth; or else it would
be difficult to conceive how it becomes so strongly impregnated, almost to
saturation. The rocky bottom of the springs and the apparent gushing of the
water through its apertures, affords a presumption that the body of salt may be
immediately below, covered only by a stratum of calcareous rock; for salt mines
are most frequently found covered and interspersed with (...) of limestone. At
the distance of about half a mile from the salt point, there is a (...) lately
sunk (...) the earth; it is four or five feet wide, descends twenty feet
perpendicularly, and then appears to take an oblique direction downwards. This
is supposed by some to have been caused by a vacuity underneath, produced by
the dissolution of a body of salt in the waters which lead to the springs. If
it had any communication with them, I supposed there would issue from it an air
of the same nature. To ascertain this I let down a burning candle into the pit,
but it continued to burn without any diminution of its luster; a sufficient
proof that it contained none of the fixed air which the springs emit in such
abundance.

Of the SALT MANUFACTORIES.
THE marsh from which the principal springs proceed, is bounded, as I have
before observed, by a steep bank of clayey ground, about thirty or forty feet
above the level of the lake, forming the up-land on which the village of Salina
stands. From this there is a gradual ascent for a considerable distance back,
commanding a beautiful prospect of nearly the whole lake. The soil is clay,
destitute of stones, and for the most part, oak timbered. Immediately below the
declivity, on the borders of the marsh, and as near the springs as the ground
will admit, are situated the buildings which are destined for the manufacturing
of salt. They are constructed of wood, generally about twenty feet wide, and of
various lengths, according to the number of furnaces they are intended to
contain; in one of them there are forty evaporating pots: The furnaces are
placed along one side of the building, with their mouths opening into it. The
other side is generally made use of to deposit the salt for the purpose of
draining off the brine, and allowing it to dry, immediately after it is emptied
out of the evaporating vessels. The furnaces are built of stone, and two or
three pots or kettles (such as are used to boil pot-ash) containing each about
eighty gallons, are usually placed over each of them. Between each two furnaces
a large trough is placed, from which the water is drawn into the boilers as
often as it is required. These troughs are kept continually filled with water
by means of gutters, into which it is pumped out of the springs. The furnaces
being supplied with fuel, and the pots filled with water, they are allowed to
boil briskly, and after a little while the powder scratch (as it is called)
consisting of calcareous earth, begins to precipitate to the bottom; this is
taken out as fast as it is formed, by means of large iron ladles. By the time
this has all fallen down, the salt begins to chrystalize; the pots are then
suffered to boil gently, till nearly all the water is dissipated. The salt is
afterward taken out and deposited in proper places to drain off the brine and
suffer it to dry. Nothing now remains in the pot but a small quantity of
bittem, which is thrown away, and the same process is repeated. Part of the
calcareous matter which is precipitated in the operation of boiling, adheres
firmly to the bottom of the kettles, and becomes nearly as hard as stone, hence
it is called stone scratch. It is necessary to separate this every few days, by
means of a sharp iron pick; for if suffered to remain too long, it becomes so
thick as to retard the boiling. Thus simple is the whole process which is used
in manufacturing a beautiful white granulated salt from the water of these
valuable springs. Each boiling of a ninety gallon pot, yields about a bushel
and a peck of salt; but there are many in use of a much smaller size; they may
therefore be allowed on an average to make one bushed each by every boiling;
they may be boiled down two or three times in twenty-four hours. The whole
number which have lately been employed in the different manufactories, is one
hundred and fifty-seven; with these of course about 70,000 bushels of salt may
be manufactured yearly. From the report of the Superintendant to the
Legislature, it appears that the quantity of salt made, fold and delivered from
the 20th day of June, 1797, to the 3d day of February, 1798, being six months
and fourteen days, (in which period of time is included the sickly season of
said place) being manufactured in 157 kettles of different sizes, is 25,474
bushels. From the above statement he calculates that the probable proceeds of
all the kettles now occupied at the different salt-works, may be estimated at
about 60,000 bushels of salt per year. Sixty thousand bushels of salt made
annually, at the rate of four cents per bushel, (the duty imposed by law) will
afford a revenue to the State of 2,400 dollars; this will increase in time,
with the increase of the manufactories, to a very handsome sum. The price of
salt is regulated not to exceed sixty cents for a bushel.


By reason of the immediate mixing of the waters of the salt springs with the
waters of the marsh, it was impossible to make any computation of the quantity
which they yield, or the amount of salt that may be made from them; but it must
be very great; for one of the springs alone, judging from the stream which it
emits, it is supposed could scarcely be lowered by the operation of an ordinary
pump. Of many of the springs now used by the manufacturers, but a small part of
the water is consumed; besides a great many others that remain unoccupied: and
it may be presumed that many more will be discovered from time to time. This
abundant quantity of the water will permit a very great increase of the
manufactories; and a production of salt to an immense amount.

We come now to examine whether the present method of manufacturing salt admits
of IMPROVEMENT, and whether other means might not be devised, that would be
attended with superior advantage. But this important branch of the subject
cannot be fully discussed within the limits of this memoir: I have perhaps
already trespassed upon the time of the Society; it must therefore be left at
present in a great measure to the ingenious manufacturers, who are more
immediately interested. To them it is recommended as a subject well worth their
greatest attention. They will doubtless strive to obtain every information
respecting the various methods and different instruments that have been used
from time to time in foreign countries, where this article has been
manufactured. They will likewise enjoy all the advantage to be derived from
their own experience; and it is especially by information and experience that
manufactures and arts of every kind can be brought to the greatest perfection.
I shall take the liberty, however, to suggest only one or two improvements,
which now occur to me as of primary importance. The first is, to substitute
large flat pans, in the place of the pots which are now altogether used. The
most approved pans of this kind employed in foreign manufactories, a model of
which I have now before me, are made of an oblong form, flat at the bottom,
with the sides erected at right angles; the length of some of them are 15 feet,
the breadth 12, and the depth 16 inches. They are commonly made of plates of
sheet-iron about one-third of an inch thick, joined together with nails, and
the joints are filled with a strong cement. A pan of these dimensions will
contain more than 1,400 gallons, and 4,200 gallons of water may be evaporated
in 24 hours, which would produce at least 60 bushels of salt. It is probable
that it would require no more fuel for this purpose than is required to boil
down six of the pots now used, which yield only about 12 bushels.

Another improvement which would probably be attended with great advantage, is
the erecting partition walls between the openings of the furnaces and the
boilers, by these means the dust and ashes which is continually dispersed
through the air from the flues of the furnaces, would be prevented from falling
into the water, and impairing the beauty and quality of the salt. Very little
attention is given to this circumstance, as the works are conducted at present:
not only the boilers are continually exposed to impurities, but the salt also
after it is manufactured is frequently left in the same rooms with the
furnaces, and by these means becomes almost covered with ashes before it is
taken away.

I might mention several other things tending to facilitate and improve the
operation of extracting salt from the water of these springs; but they will
readily occur upon a little reflection, to those who are engaged in the works.

Notwithstanding however all the improvements which can be suggested and the
inventions that can be had recourse to, these manufactories will still be
attended with considerable labor and expense, and probably will become more so
in course of time with the scarcity of wood for fuel. At present the salt is
afforded for sixty cents per bushel with ample profit; but it is not to be
expected that this will be of long duration, for the increasing distance of
carrying the wood to supply the furnaces will proportionally increase the
expense of manufacturing, and of course the price of the salt. At some future
time necessity will perhaps compel us to resort to some other means of
evaporating the water, without the aid of fire. But before this period arrives,
the hardy sons of industry may possibly penetrate into the bowels of the earth,
and possess themselves of that solid body of salt which is buried beneath: and
who knows but there may be concealed such an immense mine of this valuable
article, that in process of time, when a large portion of it shall have been
consumed, there may be sufficient room (like in the salt mines of Cracow in
Poland) for a subterranean town, with a market place, a church, a river and a
famous statue, so beautifully described by the poetic Darwin.

"Thus cavern'd round in CRACOW's mighty mines,
With crystal walls a gorgeous city shines;
Scoop'd in the briny rock long streets extend
Their hoary course, and glittering domes ascend;
Down the bright steeps, emerging into day,
Impetuous fountains burst their headlong way,
Over milk white vales in ivory channels spread,
And wandering seek their subterraneous bed." etc.
Dr. Hutson in his theory of the earth, supposes that these immense masses of
rock salt may have been produced by the evaporation of sea water, in the early
ages of the world, by means of subterranean fires. Dr. Darwin seems to be of
the same opinion, and observes that this idea is confirmed by a fact mentioned
in M. Macquarts Essais sur Mineralogie, who found a great quantity of fossil
shells principally bi-valves and madre-pores in the salt mines of Wialiczka,
near Cracow. If we apply this theory to the objects under consideration, we may
naturally suppose that the large cavity in the earth now occupied by the waters
of the Onondaga Lake, on the borders of which the salt springs appear, has at
some early period been the mouth of a tremendous volcanic eruption, producing
by its intense heat a sudden evaporation of a large quantity of sea water,
which it happened to meet in the interior parts of the earth. This idea, if
admitted, will at once account for the formation of a lake, and the production
of a salt mine; at the same time that it leads the mind with more facility to
conceive of the probable magnitude of the latter. Great indeed must be that
body of salt, which we may suppose to be produced by a torrent of heat near six
miles in diameter, volatilizing and dissipating the waters, and leaving the
fixed and solid materials in accumulated heaps. Or is there some still
undiscovered chemistry of nature, that elaborates salt from the materials of
this earth, and collects it in such huge masses as to be proof against the
wastes and depredation of time. For in whatever way it may be produced, our
idea of the quantity remains undiminished, when we consider that it has
probably for ages since, impregnated the copious streams that flow from these
springs, almost to complete saturation.


