AN ORATION, ON PARTY SPIRIT, PRONOUNCED BEFORE THE CONNECTICUT SOCIETY OF
CINCINNATI, CONVENED AT HARTFORD, FOR THE CELEBRATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE,
ON THE 4th of JULY, 1798.

BY THOMAS DAY.

PRINTED AT LITCHFIELD BY T. COLLIER.

Several passages, omitted in the delivery, on account of the indisposition of
the Speaker, are here preserved.

TO Colonel BENJAMIN TALLMADGE, PRESIDENT OF THE CONNECTICUT SOCIETY OF
CINCINNATI, THIS ORATION, WRITTEN AND SPOKEN AT YOUR REQUEST, IS INSCRIBED,

In Testimony of Esteem and Respect,
Too sincere to be burlesqued,
By the painful Efforts at Adulation,
Usual on Occasions like the present.
The Author.
LITCHFIELD, JULY 6, 1798.
At a Meeting of the Connecticut State Society of the Cincinnati, at Hartford,
on the Fourth Day of July, 1798.

VOTED, That the Secretary present the Thanks of this Society to Thomas Day,
Esquire. for the Oration spoken by him this Day, before the Society, and that he
request a Copy of the same for Publication, at the Expense of the Society.

Extracted from the Minutes, -- attest, THOMAS Y. SEYMOUR, Secretary of the
Connecticut Society of the Cincinnati.

AN ORATION.
A MOURNFUL pleasure, like that experienced by the Bard of Caledonia, on the
review of past joys, swells every breast, at the remembrance of the day, which
we are now convened to celebrate. The train of ideas being once awaked,
reflection traces back the long-shared toils, dangers, and glories, of a
seven-years war. It traces, also, the triumph of liberty over oppression, and
the acclamations of millions, at the birth of our empire. The events of the
past, connected with the prospect of the future, diffuse a pleasing melancholy
over the soul, elevate it above every mean and selfish passion; above the
ordinary scenes of amusement, or the common concerns of life; and temper it for
the contemplation of those objects, in which our national welfare is more
immediately interested.

To draw the descriptive pencil over those illustrious deeds, by which our
independence was achieved, would be a pleasing, but unnecessary employment.
They already live on the glowing canvas; they roll in the Poet's numbers, and
give rapture to his song; they shine on the Historian's page, and reflect their
light into future ages.

To contemplate the superior excellence of our Constitution, and our national
prosperity since its adoption, would be equally pleasing, -- and perhaps
equally unnecessary. If our Constitution is, in fact, as we believe it is, the
most perfect fabric, which human wisdom could raise, and, at the same time,
human frailties support, its perpetuity, and happy influence on its subjects,
will confer on it the most complete eulogium. And if, as a nation, we are
prosperous, beyond our most sanguine expectations, unless we prove ourselves
worthy of that prosperity, it will only afford us the greater reason for
humiliation.

The works of Creation cast a brighter light on the page of sacred history, and
strike the mind with more astonishment, than the works of Providence: Yet it is
certain, that the latter cost the same efforts of Almighty power as the former.
The preservation of the world is but a perpetual creation of it. In a similar
manner, the train of events, which gave political existence to our nation, --
which produced, from the chaos of oppression, amid the conflict of contending
principles, a beautiful and harmonious system of republican government, pours a
greater effulgence on the mental eye, than the most arduous labors of wise
statesmen to perpetuate its existence: Yet it is as certain, in this case, as
in the other, and it is our duty, as citizens, to remember it, that the
preservation of our government requires no less exertions, than were required
to establish it.

Among those means, which are calculated to destroy a free government, none
will be found more efficient than PARTY SPIRIT. It has long been said, and
sanctioned by the authority of Heaven, that, "A HOUSE DIVIDED AGAINST ITSELF
CANNOT STAND."

The first stroke, which a division of sentiment in the people directs at a
government like ours, is, to discourage public officers in the execution of
their duty. Good men in office are influenced in the outlines of their conduct,
by a sense of duty; but it is the general confidence of their constituents
alone, which can animate and support them, through difficulty and danger. We
can be at no loss on this subject, when we hear the great WASHINGTON declare to
his fellow citizens, If benefits have resulted to our country from my services,
let it always be remembered to your praise, and as an instructive example in
our annals, that under circumstances in which the passions, agitated in every
direction, were liable to mislead, amidst appearances sometimes dubious, --
vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging, -- in situations in which not
unfrequently want of success has countenanced the spirit of criticism, -- the
constancy of your support was the essential prop of the efforts, and a
guarantee of the plans by which they were effected. -- But among a divided
people, the best and wisest magistrate can hope for no more, at most, than the
confidence and support of the largest party.

As party spirit tends to discourage public officers in the execution of their
duty, so also it equally tends to diminish a sense of their responsibility. The
reputation of men, in office, is a pledge to the people, for the faithful
discharge of the trust committed to their hands. But, with the party in
opposition to them, and their measures, they have no reputation to lose, no
approbation to secure.

In public councils, party spirit is attended with consequences still more
ruinous. The minds of its votaries are so completely engrossed in projects for
defeating their rivals, that they become blind to the light of reason, and deaf
to the calls of duty. Engaged in the accomplishment of this object, they lose
sight of the public good. A measure of universal utility is frequently
abandoned, by one party, for no other reason, than that it must embrace the
other party also, within the circle of its benefits. Sometimes, even the
personal advantages of one party are sacrificed, in order to involve the other
party, in the same sacrifice. The reins of government are thus committed to the
sport of chance. As different parties prevail, different measures succeed,
which, by their repugnancy to measures already adopted, defeat their own
objects. Or, to make the most favorable supposition; let the same party
invariably compose the majority, and hold, of course, the ascendancy, still the
opposite party are capable of effecting infinite mischief. Though they may not
be able ultimately to defeat the measures of the majority; yet, by their
opposition, they may retard those measures, and, in this way, destroy the
effects, which they were designed to produce. Such has ever been the line of
policy pursued by the Jacobinic party, in this country; and, by a strict
adherence to it, have their treacherous plots been attended with a degree of
success, alarming to every friend of American liberty.

All subordination depends upon opinion. There exists not a government on
earth, where the physical strength does not reside in the governed. Some obey
from reason, and some from self-interest: But it is a reverence, founded in
prescription, for the laws and magistrates of their country, which alone
prevents a large majority of the subjects, from exercising their natural
powers, and trampling those laws, with their authors, under foot. Party spirit
always weakens, and not unfrequently destroys, this reverence. The next step is
a riot, and then an insurrection. These evils the United States have already
experienced. They have indeed been suppressed, but the cause remains; and
unless the most vigorous exertions are made to exterminate it, our nation,
bright as its prospects have appeared, will, in all probability, soon be
convulsed with a civil war. When once that class of people, who have neither
character, property, nor Religion, and are, of course, in no way responsible,
have begun to assume the rights of sovereignty, and dictate law to those, who
have character, property and religion, we may rest assured, that a state of
anarchy, the worst kind of civil war, is at no great distance. It is already
commenced.

Party spirit, where its influence is less operative, destroys the tranquillity
of society. It excites terrifying apprehensions, in the fearful; exhibits
visionary scenes of danger, to the credulous, and perplexes the most firm and
enlightened, with doubt and anxiety. It raises false alarms to serve its own
views, and, aided by the lying breath of interested demagogues, agitates the
whole community with "strifes and animosities." It occasions ill founded
jealousies between citizen and citizen; it awakens the remembrance of injuries
once forgiven, and 'till now forgotten; it engenders distrust, in the bosom of
friendship; and ripens that distrust into confirmed hatred. It produces, in the
lower ranks of society, club-fighting; in the higher ranks, duelling. It is the
parent of contention, and the nurse of disorder.

Among other evils, which it produces, small compared with destruction of
government, but of infinite importance, as they respect individual happiness,
that of slander is not the least. It is a remark of the late President
Washington, that, One of the expedients of party to acquire influence within
particular districts, is to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other
districts. It is the great characteristic of all partisans, to labor for their
own advancement, on the ruins of their adversaries; to endeavor to promote
their own views, and extend their own (...), by thwarting the views, and
contracting the influence, of others. In the pursuit of this object, they
unfeelingly stain the fairest characters with reproach. To the most upright
line of conduct, they attribute the (...) motives. They hurl promiscuously, on
all opposed to them, shafts of calumny, which no purity of sentiment, no
sanctity of manners, no benevolence of soul, can avert; and whose points, the
virtues of angels could not blunt. The common argument in palliation of
slander, that the press in this country, is free from restraints, and through
that medium, the slandered character may recover to itself its primitive
luster, is too contemptible, to require a serious refutation. Let me ask any
one, but a fool or a madman, if he will suffer me to plunge a dagger in his
breast, because it is possible, that, by medical assistance, he may heal the
wound? The man of upright conduct, and ingenuous sentiments, spurns at the idea
of having his character called in question.

The effects of party spirit, in calling off the attention of the people, from
their proper employments, to political speculations, are of too great
importance to pass unnoticed. No sooner does the mind, among the lower classes
of society, persuade itself that it belongs to a party, than it swells, in its
own estimation, to an uncommon size. The farmer quits his plough, and the
mechanic his tools, to discuss subjects of national importance in a grog-shop.
A few draughts inspire them with the wisdom of sages, and qualify them to move
in higher spheres, than those marked out for them by the illiberal hand of
fortune. The farm and the factory soon become unworthy of their attention; a
distressed wife and family of children are unfeelingly reduced from competence
to beggary; every habit of industry and private usefulness is expelled their
own breasts; they live on the plunder of their neighbors; and, "idle to do
good," are prepared for any enterprise, which originates in wickedness, and has
for its object the subversion of religion and government.

In the higher classes of society, the evil, though of a different nature, is
no less extensive. It is always incident to the human mind, whenever it is
engaged in the attainment of any object, to consider that as the only object of
importance. Hence, among political partisans, there will ever exist a restless
ambition for political preferment. Passing over the vile arts which are too
often practiced in order to accomplish their wishes, we are led to a scene,
more painful to the philanthropist, because the happiness of more generations
is involved in it. For the acquisition of personal interest, and the extension
of personal power, the arts and sciences are neglected, the great duties of
morality and religion cease to be explained and enforced; and literary merit,
if it happens to exist, "wants even the cheap reward of empty praise."

The tumults, which party spirit produces at elections, may, with propriety, be
registered in the catalogue of its evils. If party spirit, on common occasions,
disturbs the peace of society, it is to be expected, that when the interests of
the parties are put to issue, the disturbances will rise higher proportionably
to the greater agitation of their passions. -- In those parts of the country,
where unanimity of sentiment prevails, the inhabitants can form no just
conception of the rancour, billingsgate and violence attendant on elections,
under the influence of party spirit.

These are serious evils: And yet they are of little consequence, because of
short duration, compared with that arising from the tendency, which party
spirit has, to prevent the introduction of wise, moderate and independent men,
into the councils of government. In a period of civil dissentions, the business
of legislation is not to apply the general principles of justice and policy, as
they exist in the nature of things, to the exigencies of society; but to carry
into execution an artificial, pre-determined system. The part, which
legislators are to act, is settled upon, before they are chosen. They are only
required to go upon the stage, and play it off from the prompt-book of their
constituents. Instead of regulating their conduct by uniform principles, they
are to bend principles to a line of conduct already marked out. It follows,
that he, who has the best address, who has the most zeal and practical skill in
the arts of intrigue, who, in short, can play his part to the best advantage,
will be certain of success: -- While the man of extensive knowledge, of sober
though it, of clear discernment, and a disposition for impassionate investigation,
will be treated with neglect.

"Well may they venture on the mimick's art,
"Who play from morn to night a borrowed part;
"Practiced their master's notions to embrace,
"Repeat his maxims, and reflect his face;
"With every wild absurdity comply,
"And view each object with a mother's eye;
"To shake with laughter ere the jest they hear,
"To pour at will the counterfeited tear;
"And as their patron hints the cold or heat,
"To shake in dog days, in December sweat.
"How when competitors like these contend;
"Can surly VIRTUE hope to fix a friend?"
Party spirit opens the avenues to foreign influence. -- While the passions of
the parties are excited, any nation, which will flatter their views, may be
secure of their favors. Hence originate passionate attachments for particular
nations, and inveterate antipathies against others. The evils arising from
these attachments, and these antipathies, are of the most alarming nature. To
adopt better language than my own, -- The nation, which indulges toward
another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in some degree a slave.
Antipathy in one nation against another disposes each more readily to offer
insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty
and intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur. --
Hence frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed, and bloody contests. The
nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion
what reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility instigated by pride, ambition and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes the liberty, of
nations has been the victim.

So likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation, facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no real common interest exists,
and infusing into one, the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the nation
making the concessions; by unnecessary parting with what ought to have been
retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to retaliate,
in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: -- And it gives to
ambitious, corrupted or deluded citizens, who devote themselves to the favorite
nation, facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own country,
without odium, sometimes even with popularity, guilding with the appearances of
a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for public opinion, or
a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish compliances of ambition,
corruption or infatuation. President WASHINGTON'S Farewell Address.


It is a property ever attendant on party spirit to precipitate its victories
into extremes. The different parties, according to their natures and
dispositions, conceive a predilection for some system of measures and opinions;
and the opposition, with which they meet, in the accomplishment of their
favorite object, soon plunges them into an excessive attachment for it.

The two extremes to which the present faction leads, are, a too great
adherence to ancient opinions, habits and institutions, on the one hand, and,
innovation on the other. The former prevents all future improvements in the
arts and sciences; in agriculture, commerce and manufactures; in religion, and
politics. If our ancestors had gone fully into this extreme, we should, at this
time, have been grouping in ignorance and superstition. We should have been
chtined to the same dull round of employments, from age to age; our eyes would
never have opened on the sun of liberty; our minds would never have been warmed
with the beams of science. The other extreme is attended with consequences
still more pernicious. The former, although it prevents all future
improvements, effectually secures our present enjoyments; but the latter
loosens, from the foundation, every settled principle, upon which the happiness
of past ages has been supported, and upon which the happiness of posterity
depends; gives to the sport of winds our dearest rights; and introduces
confusion to the bosom of peace.

The leading principle of the innovating party, is, to attack every thing
ancient and venerable, with a degree of rage proportionable to its antiquity,
and the veneration attached to it. Religion has, of course, become the first
object of their vengeance. France murdered her religion, before she dared to
murder her king, and the innocent inhabitants of half of Europe. The partisans
of France in America banished the precepts of the gospel from their breasts,
before they ventured to conspire against the country, which gave them birth.
For the benevolent principles of Christianity, they substituted the wild dogmas
of infidel philosophy, a philosophy, originating in wickedness, founded in
error, and subversive of the peace and happiness of society. It not only
strikes at the root of all morality, but shakes the very foundation of the law
of the land. It undermines the judicial system, and the whole fabric, reared by
the work of ages, totters at once to the ground. Under what obligations are
Judges to decree with justice, witnesses to testify the truth, or ministerial
officers to exercise their duty, unless influenced by the hopes and fears of
that state, which the philosophy of France teaches us to deride? Unless
influenced, by the hopes of gaining the approbation, or the fears of incurring
the displeasure, of that Being, whom the philosophy of France teaches us to
disregard, to despise, to insult? -- Extinguish the light of revelation, or
divert its influence from the hearts of men, -- the forms of Courts become but
solemn mockeries, and SO HELP ME GOD serves only for the chorus to an oath.
Happy for France, for America* and for the world, did the demoralizing
principles of this philosophy extend their baneful influence no farther. They
snatch from afflicted minds the balm of comfort, they cloud the cheerful heart,
with terrifying apprehensions; they take away the solace of declining years;
and present the youthful imagination, with the gloomy prospect of temporary
woe, and final annihilation. They scatter thorns in the path of the rich; they
enter the poor man's cottage, and destroy his only consolation amidst the
distresses of life. "I can conceive a distressed but virtuous man," says a
British Orator of the present day, surrounded by children looking up to him for
bread, when he has none to give them, sinking under the last day's labor, and
unequal to the next; yet still looking up with confidence to the hour, when all
tears shall be wiped from the eyes of affliction, bearing the burden laid upon
him by a mysterious providence which he adores, and looking forward with
exultation to the revealed promises of his Creator, when he shall be greater
than the greatest, and happier than the happiest of mankind. ERSKINE.
But the wretched philosophy of France blots every consideration of this
nature, from the mind; "for the book of knowledge" presents it "with an
universal blank."

To complete the group of evils, which are the legitimate offspring of party
spirit, let me add a mutilated commerce, and a sullied reputation. In the train
of this group, will appear every possible injury and insult, which the
versatility of Frenchmen could invent, and which the most unbounded ambition
and avarice could carry into execution.

I shall but repeat a truth, with which every American is, by sad experience,
acquainted, when I observe, that the United States have lately received
injuries, from the hands of France, greater in degree; and of a more pernicious
tendency in their nature, than any other nation has dared to offer, since our
forefathers fled from the oppression of European Courts, and sought, in this
then uncultivated country, an asylum for peace and independence. She has
perseveringly infringed the most essential rights of our sovereignty, and has,
at least implicitly, if not directly, demanded a surrender of our independence.
She has spurned at the most solemn obligations, which compact could create; and
has violated treaties, with the indifference of a child, in demolishing his
puerile constructions. From the passing of the decree of the ninth of May,
1793, to the present day, she has, with the exception of a few weeks, while
that decree lay repealed, invariably made our commerce the object of her
plunder. She has unblushingly committed, on our vessels, piracies which would
disgrace a nation of Algerines. She has unfeelingly inflicted, on our seamen,
cruelties, which would cast a darker shade on the character of savages. She has
treated our nation, through its official organs, with a degree of contempt,
which stands without a parallel, on the history of diplomatic intercourse.

The important question now arises, To what cause is the production of these
evils to be attributed? I boldly pronounce, and the proposition is too capable
of proof, that they are principally to be attributed to the traitorous efforts
of the partisans of France in America.

In opposition to the sentiment, which I advance, it has been asserted, that
our treaty with Great Britain was the real cause of the injuries, which we have
received from France; and, also, that it afforded a sufficient justification of
the conduct of France, in inflicting those injuries.

Neither of these assertions is true. The latter has been most amply refuted,
in the late memorial of our Envoys Extraordinary, to the minister of foreign
relations. The most offensive part of the British Treaty is that article, which
permits British cruizers and ships of war to take the property of French
citizens, out of American bottoms. The propriety of this measure was fully
warranted, by the right of the captors, under the circumstances of the case, to
exercise such a power. The treaty of commerce made between France and the
United States, in 1778, stipulated, that neither party should take out of the
vessels of the other, the goods of its enemy. But with England, no such
stipulation had been made; and of course, the rights of that nation remained
precisely in the situation, in which the laws of nations place them. What then
is the doctrine of the laws of nations on this subject? There is perhaps no one
point more luminous, than that war gives, to a belligerent power, a right to
seize and confiscate the goods of its enemy. It follows, that the conduct of
the American Government, in forming the treaty with Great Britain, furnished no
just cause of umbrage to the French nation.

The other assertion, that the British Treaty did, in fact, occasion the
injuries, which we have received from France, is equally false. The British
Treaty was concluded, at London, on the 19th Nov. 1794. In a short time
afterward, Mr. Jay communicated one of the most important articles, as it
respected France, to our minister at Paris. Before the 17th Aug. 1795, the
whole Treaty was published in France, with the proceedings of the Senate upon
it. On the 20th October following, our minister declared officially to our
government, in express terms, that no complaint had then been made to him
against the Treaty. About two months afterward, he wrote again to our
Secretary of State, and informed him, that, with regard to the effect, which
the Treaty had produced in the councils of the French government, he had
nothing material new to add. So that, at the expiration of four months from the
publication of the Treaty, in France, and of more than a year from the signing
of it, at London, no discontents had been excited in the French Government,
which our minister deemed of sufficient importance, to be worth communicating
to our Secretary of State.

In America, the discontents arose against the Treaty, merely on the ground of
its operating against the interests of France, even before it was published.
Those who had been disappointed, in the attainment of the first offices of
government, and, as a natural consequence, soured at the administration of
their successful competitors; those who had been violently opposed to the
President's Proclamation of Neutrality, and still more opposed to the
appointment of an Envoy Extraordinary to the Court of Great Britain, were
prepared to arraign and condemn the justice and policy of the Treaty, without
knowing its contents. They accordingly published partial extracts from it, as
soon as it arrived, and gave those extracts a false coloring, with a view to
prepossess the public mind against the instrument. The object of the Treaty was
misrepresented, and every important article, especially such as any stretch of
the imagination could possibly connect with the interests of France, was
slandered in the vilest manner. All the passions of America were roused, before
the people had opportunity to examine the Treaty, and reflect upon its
operation. The minister of the French Republic was, at this time, in the midst
of the scene of action. He became personally acquainted with most of the
leaders of the French faction, and possessed their confidence, in the highest
degree. He acquired a thorough knowledge of all the objections which they had
been able to invent, in the national councils, and in private clubs. He knew
the exact force of the opposition, and understood the means of fomenting and
increasing it. With this information, Fauchet returned to France. He
communicated the information to his government. It had been almost ingratitude,
in the Directory, not to have seconded the endeavors of their devoted
partisans, in America. Influenced, as they have ever been, by motives of
ambition and avarice, it had formed a new trait in their character, had they
not, at least, accepted the opposition to the Treaty, as a pretext for the
depredations which they had, at times, been committing, and which they wished
to continue, upon our commerce. Hence, we discover the true grounds of all
discontents, which have ever arisen, in France, against the British Treaty.

It is a serious fact, capable of proof from authentic documents, that certain
characters in the United States, have inculcated, with matchless industry, an
opinion, that the great body of the American people are so blindly attached to
the French Republic, and their glorious cause, that they will submit to any
measures which France may think proper to adopt for the accomplishment of her
ambitious views.

The depredations of France, on our commerce, commenced with the operation of
the Decree of the 9th of May, 1793. Our Minister, in France, at that time Mr.
Morris, remonstrated against that Decree, as it would be attended with the most
ruinous effects upon our commercial interests; and was endeavoring to obtain a
repeal of it, when he was superceded, on account of some imprudent conduct, by
Mr. Monroe. The official conduct of this Minister furnishes the highest
evidence of a disposition to sacrifice the interests of America, to those of
France. Instead of pursuing the line of policy, marked out by our Executive,
and adopted, in part, by his predecessor, he went forward, of his own accord,
and informed the Committee of Public Safety, in his first written
communication, that, he was not instructed to complain of the Decree
authorizing a departure from the 23d and 24th articles of the "Treaty of Amity
and Commerce," and declared further, that, "He well knew on the contrary that
if upon consideration, after the experiment made, they should be of opinion,
that it produced any solid benefit to the Republic, THE AMERICAN GOVERNMENT,
AND HIS COUNTRYMEN IN GENERAL, WOULD NOT ONLY BEAR THE DEPARTURE WITH PATIENCE
BUT WITH PLEASURE." See Monroe's first State Paper, published in his "View of
the Conduct of the Executive," p. 34.
The Committee soon informed him that -- "They were persuaded their COMPLIANCE
with the articles alluded to would be USEFUL TO US, but VERY DETRIMENTAL TO
THEM." Mr. Monroe immediately replied, that, "HE HAD NOTHING NEW TO ADD TO WHAT
HE HAD ALREADY SAID ON THAT HEAD." See Monroe's Letter to the Secretary of
State, dated 7th November* 1798.
What else does this amount to, than an agreement with the French Republic,
that certain articles of a solemn Treaty might, on their part, be disregarded?
How directly is the sentiment enforced, that, "THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES
WILL BEAR WITH PATIENCE, AND EVEN WITH PLEASURE," any measures however
oppressive and injurious to their interests, provided only the good of France
may be promoted? Is it any thing less than telling the French Republic,
"Trample on our commerce, and we will smile under the injury; prostrate our
Independence, and we will kiss the hand that offers the insult."

I shall notice but one other part of Mr. Monroe's official conduct, which
evinces a disposition in him to subject his country, to the will of France. In
contempt of his instructions, which were positive and unequivocal on that head,
he encouraged the French Republic, in a project, to obtain by loans, from the
United States, a sum of money, to enable it to prosecute the war. In a Note to
the Committee of Public Safety, he observes, It is the wish of the French
Republic to obtain, by loan, a sum of money, from the United States, TO ENABLE
IT TO PROSECUTE THE WAR. This is to be expected from three sources; the general
government, the state government, and from individuals. The French cause, and
the French nation, are greatly regarded in America, and I AM PERSUADED SOME
MONEY, AND PERHAPS A VERY RESPECTABLE SUM, MAY BE OBTAINED FROM THE THREE
SOURCES ABOVE MENTIONED. In a letter Dated 2d December, 1794.
to the Secretary of State, a short time afterward, he writes, -- I AM
PERSUADED THE AMOUNT EXPECTED MIGHT BE OBTAINED BY LOAN, AND I AM EQUALLY SO,
THAT THE PEOPLE WOULD CHEERFULLY BEAR A TAX, THE PRODUCT OF WHICH WAS TO BE
APPLIED IN AID OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC. We are elsewhere informed, that the
"AMOUNT EXPECTED" was FIVE MILLIONS of Dollars. As the money, was to be lent
for the express purpose of ENABLING FRANCE TO PROSECUTE THE WAR, a grant of the
loan would not have been merely a departure from neutrality; it would have been
taking an active part in the war, -- the only active part, which it was
possible for us, under our circumstances, to take. -- If this project of our
Minister had been attended with success, it would have involved the United
States, like Batavia, and the other provinces of France, in the most deplorable
slavery. We should have trembled at the frowns, and depended for our very
existence on the smiles, of an imperious master. The United States would have
been "a republic without a will," and our citizens "freemen without a power
over their persons or property."

When the late Dispatches arrived, a degree of surprise was every where
expressed, at the insolence of the French Republic, in their enormous demands
upon our government: but when we consider that these very demands were
encouraged, by our own minister, more than three years ago, and have been
encouraged, by multitudes of the French faction, in this country, ever since,
our surprise, at the conduct of France, ought to change into indignation, at
the perfidy of our own citizens.

The line of conduct pursued by the present Vice President of the United
States, since his return from his embassy to France, evinces a disposition to
sacrifice the interests of his own nation, to those of a foreign Power. Though
he has had the address to conceal the greater part of his measures, behind the
scenes of office, it is well known, that he has ever been the great Manager of
the Gallieo-Anarchic-Democratic Farce, which has, for some time past, been
played in this country, with so much success. Glory to the God of Peace, the
taste of the Spectators has changed, and its Patrons are now falling into
contempt! Soon after he was appointed to the office of Secretary of State, he
patronized a Gazette, Edited by Freneau.
the avowed object of which was to exhibit the measures of the Executive and of
Congress, in an odious light to the people. Through this medium, he then sowed
the seeds of civil discord, and is now inviting the Despots of France to reap
the harvest. While he held one language with the Ministers of the French
Republic in his official capacity, he, at the same time, held a directly
opposite language, in his private capacity. When the posture of our affairs
became so critical, that he could no longer hold his office, and retain the
confidence of France, he retired. Since he has been elected to his present
office, he has countenanced and recommended a Gazette, Edited by Bache.
teeming with all that is virulent and abusive against the government, and its
administration. But, it is unnecessary to cite these facts, to prove, that he
possesses a disposition, hostile to the government, and the true interests of
America. His own words condemn him. In a letter See Mr. Jefferson's Letter to
Mazzei, dated 1st Jan. '97.
to a correspondent in Europe, he inveighs against the government, in the
bitterest terms. He laments the change, from the old Confederation, to the new
Constitution. He declares, That we have already the form of the British
government, and that it is the avowed object of the party in opposition to him,
(among whom are, as he observes, the "Executive power, the Judiciary power, all
the Officers of government,") etc. to impose upon us its substance.

In our National Legislature, especially in the lower branch, an unjustifiable
partiality for France, to the exclusion of a regard for the interests of our
own country, is still more manifest. We there hear, in open, solemn debate, one
Member unblushingly declare, that, let France oppress, injure and insult us, as
much as she pleases; "all we have to do is to draw ourselves within our shell."
Giles.
Another observes, that, We had better suffer the French to go on with their
depredations, unjust and enormous as they are, than to take any step which may
lead to war. Gallatin.
-- The language, indeed, of the whole party, as appears from the debates, is
in the same strain.

The long and uninterrupted harmony between the measures of the French
government, and those of their partisans, in America, were there no other
proof, furnishes a sufficient presumption of a combination between them. It is
notorious, that, for a long time past, whatever has been done in France by the
ruling power of the day, has been approved and justified so soon as it was
known by the French faction here; and whatever the French faction has, from
time to time, attempted or avowed here, has been maintained and advocated by
the ruling power there. -- I should as soon believe in the production of the
world, by a fortuitous concourse of atoms, as that this harmony of measures and
sentiment proceeded from accident. It is a system, which has been maturing for
years, and has, for its foundation, ambition, on the one hand, and party
spirit, on the other. France, ambitious of regulating the affairs of America,
as well as of Europe, is willing to bestow her aid, on men, who are expected to
be devoted to her will; while the Jacobinic faction, in this country,
precipitated by the blind impulse of party spirit, are willing, rather than not
accomplish their views, to fly for aid, to a foreign nation.

Such, then, are the evils of party spirit: -- It discourages public officers
in the execution of their duty; it diminishes a sense of their responsibility;
it distracts the public councils, and renders the measures of government slow
and ineffectual; it always weakens, and frequently destroys that reverence for
the laws and magistrates, by which alone good order in society is maintained;
it disturbs the happiness of the citizens, by occasioning ill-founded
jealousies, false alarms, and animosities of one party against the other; it
opens a flood-gate to slander; it precipitates its votaries into extremes, and
renders them deaf to the voice of reason, and blind to the consequences of
their actions; it diverts the attention of the people, among the middle ranks
of society, from their proper employments, to political speculations; in the
higher classes, it creates a restless ambition for political preferment, to the
neglect of more lasting fame; it excites tumults and violence at elections; it
prevents the introduction of wise, moderate and independent men into the
councils of government; it opens the avenues to foreign influence; and, it has
already produced the most lawless depredations, on our commerce, and the most
abusive insults, to our government, which were ever offered, by any power, but
the Despots of France, to a neutral and independent nation.

Yet even these evils, if duly improved, may lay the foundation for lasting
advantages. The storms of faction may purify the political atmosphere. We may
be roused from that lethargy, into which a long and uninterrupted state of
peace and prosperity might have sunk us. We may be awakened to discern our true
interests, to discriminate between the friends and foes to our government, to
discover latent sources of danger, to take proper measures of defense against
foreign enemies; to call forth public spirit, and to enlarge our views of
national greatness.

If union of sentiment and measures was ever necessary, the present period
demands it. By our own dissentions, we have brought ourselves to the brink of
ruin. France, intoxicated with the victories of her arms, and the success of
her diplomatic intrigues, now aims at the universal subjugation of the human
race. Most of the surrounding nations, who had neither strength to repel her
force, nor wisdom to resist her arts of seduction, have already fallen victims
to her lawless ambition. Encouraged by the unhappy divisions, which have, for a
long time, distracted our citizens, and enervated our councils; confiding
equally in the greatness of her power, and the efforts of her partisans here,
she has, at length, assailed the Independence of the United States. The
wretched catastrophe of Holland, Genoa, Venice, the States of Italy, and the
Swiss Cantons, afford us a solemn momento, to shun, like the arrows of death,
the intrigues of Frenchmen; to resist, with an energy worthy of the American
character, the least invasion of our rights. We deprecate the evils of war. We
have felt them, and, from contrasting them with the blessings of peace, we know
what they are, as well as any nation upon earth. At the same time, we still
more deprecate the evils of oppression. To maintain our Independence, is the
most sacred of duties. Its price was too great, its value is too inestimable,
to be surrendered, while we have life to enjoy it, or nerves to defend it.
Gratitude to the God of armies, for having rescued us from the oppression of
one foreign power, forbids us tamely to submit to another. Reverence for the
^^ral Governor of the Universe, forbids us to bow the knee to those, who have
conspired to subvert his eternal throne. The glory of the American empire, the
happiness of future generations, demand the most vigorous exertions, in the
defense of our rights.

The Youth of our country are emphatically called upon to unite. While we were
dandled in the nurses arms, or, perhaps, before we awoke into existence, our
fathers fought and bled, for the establishment of peace, liberty, and
independence. To perpetuate these invaluable privileges, is a solemn charge,
which peculiarly devolves upon us. If by our dissentions, or pusillanimity, we
suffer them to be impaired, the toils and sufferings of the venerable band, on
whose account we are this day assembled, will rise against us; the blood of
those, who have fallen martyrs in the cause of Freedom, will reproach us; the
voices of oppressed millions, through future ages, will condemn us. Unite,
then, and prepare for the defense of all that is sacred, -- all that is dear.
Let it never be told, in future story, that the SONS of FREEMEN were DASTARDS.

End.

