AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT CONWAY, Before a respectable number of the
Inhabitants of CONWAY, EATON, and BARTLETT, On the Fourth day of July, 1798,
BEING THE 21st ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY Caleb Page Fessenden.

-- How many ages hence,
Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
In States unborn, and accents yet unknown.
SHAKESPEARE. [Published at the request of the Committee of the Day.]

PRINTED AT FRYEBURG. 1798.

THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
-- BE CANDID, where you can.
POPE. WHO does the best his circumstance allows,
Does well, acts nobly -- ANGELS can no more.
YOUNG. Fryeburg Academy, July 10, 1798.

ORATION.
IF we take a comprehensive view of the order of nature, we find that man
possesses a distinguished rank in the great scale of beings -- his mind is
capacious, and fitted for rational enquiries: hence his researches contribute
to the happiness of society, and redound to the glory of GOD.

IN examining the annals of the world, we find revolutions in almost every
page: the principles implanted in our breasts, impel us forward, and stimulate
us to be continually forming new projects to gratify our selflove, which, when
uncontroled by reason, produces disorder and tumult. When societies were young,
each Patriarch sat judge of his own household; each one contributed his share to
the general good, and each was rewarded according to his merit -- all was order
and harmony, the horrors of war had not then deformed the moral picture, nor
had tyranny reared her baleful head to curse the Sons of GOD -- in that golden
age we see man happy -- but the scene is soon reversed: -- Some one, prompted
by ambition and assisted by intrigue, gained a conquest over his fellows, and
they were compelled to acknowledge "the enormous faith of many made for one;"
which is repugnant to the eternal laws of nature, and the dictates of reason --
[Man, when possessed of absolute power, is generally puffed up with pride; and
the passions assume the reins of government -- being flattered by his
courtiers, he thinks himself infallible, and is determined to have implicit
obedience to his commands.] -- The world then first began to feel the scourge
of despotism -- the father bemoaned the death of his son, and the fond mother
the unhappy fate of her daughter, torn from her bosom by the imperious command
of a licentious despot: for, in arbitrary governments, how often have thousands
fallen victims to the whim of a favorite, the capricious cruelty of a consort,
and even to the smiles of an abandoned prostitute! But the sparks of Liberty,
though they may be smothered for a season, yet they cannot be extinguished. We
behold the firm patriot, the father of his country, arise to avenge his
slaughtered brethren; we behold the tyrant rolling in the dust, and biting the
ground for remorse and anguish -- and Liberty once more triumphant.

AMONG those various revolutions, which have astonished the world in all ages,
there is no one which exceeds the revolution in America; if we consider the
greatness of the cause, the characters exhibited in the contest, or the event
which ensued. The emancipation of four millions of people from the yoke of
tyranny, the prudent, wise and steady conduct of the American Congress, the
martial toils of our brethren, and the glorious termination of a long and
arduous conflict, stand unexampled in the annals of mankind. To perpetuate the
remembrance of this grand scene, through the long tracts of future time, in
anniversary commemorations, must be delightful to the enlightened posterity of
heroes. As it has been the custom of all nations (even the most barbarous) to
celebrate their warlike atchievments, and commit them unimpaired from father to
son, surely Americans will not hesitate to engage in a work of such dignified
feelings, as the celebration of the birth day of their liberties, and which has
so much in view the happiness of succeeding generations: then let our
imaginations give full force to the generous impression, and expand on the
wings of benevolence and philanthropy; and as this day is recorded by the
registering angel above, as one of the brightest days of humanity. so let it be
held by us in everlasting remembrance. I should feel much reluctance in
speaking on this important occasion, (well knowing my inability to do honor to
the day) were I not sensible, that Liberty, established on the broad basis of
Independence and the virtues of the People, needs not the aid of rhetoric to
enhance her value, nor fine-turn'd periods to exalt her worth. Those who are
alive to the feelings of humanity and to the electric name of Liberty, must
feel infinitely more pleasure in the words WE ARE FREE, uttered by the tongue
of simple truth, than that a DEMOSTHENES or a CICERO* assisted by all the
powers of eloquence and description, should pronounce them slaves. Liberty
needs no arguments to prove her beauty, or to convince mankind of her worth;
she offers herself unadorned, and is accepted, instead of slavery in chains of
gold -- I am Free! what sounds more acceptable could be uttered by the tongue,
even of an Angel of Light. All our eloquence is contained in them; nor can the
mind of man conceive of an expression better adapted to the genius of an
AMERICAN -- Therefore, (as it is my part this day to lead in the celebration of
that event which severed us from the control of Albion, and gave us a rank
among nations) I must beg your patience and candid consideration to be
exercised toward the speaker, who, indeed, wishes for the presence of a
CICERO, to do honor to a day so memorable, and to this venerable and
respectable audience before whom he is called to speak.

THE calm which succeeds hurry and confusion, seems to be the season most
proper for meditation; and if we behold ourselves in affluent circumstances, we
are naturally led back to contemplate the first cause of the events which we
experience: It is thus the mariner, having escaped the ravages of the sea,
seats himself on the beach, and with calmness views the beating surge, the
regular succession of the waves, and recollects that lucid star, which guided
him safe through storms and tempests, and restored him to his country, to his
family and friends. No nation on the globe can trace their origin, and the time
they became a people, with so great precision as America. According to history,
other existing nations and kingdoms have, by slow and almost imperceptible
degrees, advanced toward refinement; after revolutions and counter-revolutions,
the maturing hand of TIME has brought them to that degree of consistency which
they now enjoy; -- while America, in less than two centuries, has become a
great and powerful nation. Eventful indeed has been the period; neither history
nor fiction, can produce a parallel! Less than two hundred years ago, our
fathers sought in this country (then the haunt of the prowling beast, and
solitary savage) an asylum from their woes and persecutions -- with unremitting
labor, and through innumerable hardships, they procured this glorious patrimony
for us -- which* as we have once defended it from the encroachments of a
powerful and haughty nation, we are determined never to have taken from us.

AS this is an age of reason, in which all vulgar prejudices should be
discarded, and as it is dishonorable to insult the fallen, no one will expect to
hear the language of invective against Greatbritain; and since our measures
have been crowned with complete success, and we are now on an amicable and
equal footing with that nation, let us forbear such complainings as might befit
a conquered people, who could effect nothing, but was forced to be content with
the poor consolation of execrating and uttering obloquy against their usurpers.
America, my friends, abounding in all the blessings of nature, a fertile clime,
and wisdom and education sufficient to frame good forms of government, wanted
nothing* but the infernal machinations of NORTH, and the oppressive measures of
the tyrant of Albion, to rouse her to throw off her yoke, to assert her Rights,
and "press her fortunes to a destination." And from that day, in which the
blood of our citizens flowed through our streets in rivers, and the cursed
emissaries of slaughter threatened to lay waste our land* we may begin to date
our importance; for then was it that the American Congress, (wearied with
petitioning for a redress of grievances) pronounced that famous declaration of
Independence, which has arrested the attention, and commanded the admiration of
every nation and people under heaven. Yes, Citizens, it was on the memorable
Fourth of July, 1776, (22 years ago this day) that the Genius of America
assumed a glorious countenance; Liberty erected her standard in this country;
the people flocked to it in crowds, enlisted under her banner, and swore to
live and die with her. -- Though the dagger was held to our throats ere we
thought of resistance, though we had to contend with the most powerful nation
in Europe, assisted by the mercenary Hessian, and the fierce biped of the
wilderness; though untaught in tactics and military discipline, and destitute
of resources, yet naught could damp the ardor of Columbia's sons, whose souls
were firm and determined, and whose breasts glowed with a generous love of
Liberty. As the efforts of our countrymen were great, the event was glorious:
Britain acknowledged our Independence, the world wondered, and America became a
NATION. In all dangers, the GOD of Heaven was nigh, and turned the machinations
of tyrants to our benefit; even the war, in which we expended so much property*
and lost so many lives, was necessary, and in the end proved to us, a blessing:
-- it was a necessary school for our Soldiers and Statesmen; it showed to us
our own consequence in the scale; it united us; it taught us the value of the
blessings of Liberty and Peace; and, in short, it was necessary to our
existence as a nation. Should this retrospective view, bring to the remembrance
of any present, the death of a son, father, or brother, slain in the defense of
his country, and cause them to shed the tear of nature, for their loss; let
such remember, that they fell in a glorious cause, the cause of Liberty and
Independence; -- and though their remains now lie unburied on a distant land,
exposed to the ravages of hungry wolves, and screaming ravens; though no friend
was nigh to close their dying eyes; yet the tears of Angels were shed to bathe
their unburied limbs; nor shall time obliterate from the breasts of posterity,
the remembrance of their patriotism, nor the trump of fame ever cease to sound
their praise. -- Though the rivers, hills, and dales, (which were the scenes of
slaughter in the late war) now reverberate the groans of butchered citizens;
and though Concord, Bunker's-Hill, Monmouth, and those towns ravaged by the
stern God of War, obtrude themselves on our imaginations; yet, if possible, let
recollection, the faithful monitor of past sufferings, retire behind the
curtain of oblivion, nor damp the joys of this festive day with unavailing
tears. Exercise is necessary: for man is enervated by sloth, and effeminated by
continual prosperity -- The toils, the sorrows of our countrymen, enabled them
to enjoy their consequent good fortune with a better dignity; -- and we find
that those who have been most inured to hardships, those who have been
exercised in the hard school of adversity, make the best of fathers, husbands
and citizens. But if we view the day of carnage, without repining, surely our
hearts ought to glow with gratitude to those Heroes, who fanned the flame of
Freedom in America, who braved all dangers, and engaged in actual service in
the field, for the Liberty and Rights of their country -- among which venerable
and truly respectable and honorable characters, the name of WASHINGTON must
hold the most distinguished rank in the bright catalogue, and be repeated with
transports of gratitude, when the great Original lies cold beneath the turf.
Fain would I frame an eulogy on this most illustrious character, but the powers
of description fail me in the attempt, and oblige me to "let expressive silence
muse his praise." This day, Citizens, we have distinguished as a JUBILEE -- and
believe me, we have great reason to rejoice; to rejoice that we are Americans:
for while we behold other nations of the earth groaning under the hard yoke of
tyranny, ignorance and superstition, and while we drop a tear on the miseries
of the Asians and Africans, whose fertile fields lie uncultivated, whose
fruitage is buried in the furrows, and whose agriculture sleeps as in the
cradle of creation, whose sons, under the lash of despotism, have become
slaves, and dead to the feelings of humanity; and while Europe is bleeding at
every vein, America (stretching from the equinoctial line to the arctic circle)
boasts of a climate having the salubriousness of the Frigid zone, with all the
necessaries of the Temperate, and superfluities of the Torrid; a Constitution
which secures to all their rights and liberties, and equally embraces all ranks
of people, from the gownman vested with judicial authority, to the peasant who,
with laborious toil, turns up the earth for a scanty subsistence. -- No
hereditary distinctions, cause obscure merit to wrestle with poverty, "the
pride of fools, and man's insulting scorn" -- the dignity of human nature is
here asserted; no one is taught to shudder at the approach of his neighbor,
though Fortune ("the changling deity of fools") may have assisted him in the
accumulation of wealth, or exalted him in the scale of promotion; but Virtue
and Integrity are made the criterion of esteem. The horrors of a prison assail
not here the minds of the virtuous, nor does the father anticipate the wretched
fate of being torn from the bosom of his family, and condemned to drag out a
miserable existence in the gloomy depths of a dungeon -- but peace, plenty,
Liberty, education, order, and good government, are the happy characteristics
of Americans -- Liberty inspires with noble sentiments, Education refines them;
Security and Peace prompt us to fulfill all the social and moral duties of life;
-- Government secures to us these inestimable blessings. Our excellent
constitution, citizens, as it is our greatest blessing, so it ought to be our
greatest boast; -- by ten years experience, America has evinced to the world,
that an Elective Republican Government can exist; a truth, which the
philosophers of old allowed to be beautiful in theory, but denied its
reducibility to practice -- Splendid monument of the wisdom and moderation of
my country! which has secured to us the esteem of the world.

IN literature and literary acquirements, we also hold a distinguished rank in
the world; and from our excellent institutions, we cannot but anticipate the
period when the American genius shall soar as high and produce as many shining
lights, on the horizon of Science, as have been produced by any nation under
heaven.

IT IS with regret, Citizens, that I divert your attention from these pleasing
contemplations of our national happiness, (the critical situation of our
country obliges me) to reflect on the conduct of that haughty and profligate
junto in France, called the Directory -- and though it is not a pleasing task
to anticipate adversity, yet it is at present very necessary; for too great
security relaxes the springs of our minds, and lays us open to invasion: Then
let a retrospect of the conduct of that haughty nation, inspire us with a noble
indignation and fortitude to oppose any measures which tend to the subversion
of our rights and dear bought liberties. -- Fain would I draw a veil over
transactions so derogatory, not only to the honor of those who profess to be
contending for liberty, but to human nature itself, as are exhibited by France;
but they will not be hidden -- they "flash conviction" on those who are most
infatuated, and they rouse the most torpid to indignation; even the sacred dust
of those heroes who fought and bled for liberty, trembles in its urn.
AMERICANS! what honor is it to you, that you are free from the control of
Britain, if you are to be controled by France? or what does it profit, that you
have once bled for your Liberties, if they are to be given up at the demand of
a foreign power? Is the name of America to be erased from the annals of
history, and the United States again become colonies? Immortal Gods! -- [But
this can never be.] -- France has meddled in our government* has abused our
generous friendship; she has broken the laws of nations, and ought to be
considered by the people of this country as an enemy to their existence as a
nation. -- What an adder have we nourished in our bosoms! for when France first
burst her chains, and engaged in a war with all Europe, America, with an ardor
of friendship which evinced her good wishes to the cause of the Republic,
immediately acknowledged her Independence, and the whole country rang with
thanksgivings and jubilee for her successes. But when we take a dispassionate
view of their conduct, (exhibiting in quick succession the ruthless barbarism
of the savage, and the riot of intoxicated success) we start back, with horror,
from the precipice, into which we were about to be plunged, partly from motives
of a too amiable hospitality, and an enthusiastic love of liberty, and partly
from the concealed conduct of her nefareous emissaries of false friendship. The
Directory have abandoned the cause in which France first engaged, and have
determined on Universal Domination; astride which hobby horse, they have lost
sight of consistency; and having stripped the pillars of their national
character of their fairest inscriptions, have left them the dismantled
monuments of an edifice, according to appearance, soon to be swallowed up in
the Charybdis of anarchy. Their hostile treatment of America, (the only
existing republic, and whose duration was essentially necessary to their
existence) has completely filled up their measure of iniquity, and added to the
history of their political blunders and national intrigues, the greatest, and
we hope the last, instance of their detested and barbarous policy. The first
instance of her sororial affection which presents itself to our view, (as she
was well read in the history of Machiavilianism, and knew the advantage America
would be to her in the prosecution of her designs, could she engage us in the
contest) is her dispatching GENET to this country; whose artful and atrocious
attempts, not only to engage us in the European war, but, when he could not
well accomplish those designs, to subvert the constitution, determined
government to have him recalled -- as the measures of France were not yet ripe
for the master stroke, that request was readily granted -- His successor,
FAUCHET, seems to have trodden the same steps with GENET, and "was only obliged
to retire when the true nature of his mission was discovered in an intercepted
letter;" so that it was left to ADET, the last French minister, to complete the
edifice reared by his predecessors, and put the finishing hand to this
masterpiece of infernal machinations; the cup of iniquity, which was almost
then drained, was left for this man to exhaust -- which he has done to the
lowest and foulest lees! GENET, ADET, FAUCHET -- these are the immaculate
ministers who have "felt the pulse" of every needy Senator, and if indignant
virtue spurned the proffered bribe, have threatened us with the resentment of
the Terrible Republic -- These are they, whose names, in a regular climax, so
stand on the black volume of infamy, that the last has the honor of being a ne
plus ultra of audacity and impudence, on this side the infernal shades! The
whole conduct of France, exhibited in our intercourse with that nation, evinces
to us their real designs; which are by dividing the people from the government,
to take away our liberties; and their plans, at one time, (it cannot be denied)
went on too well for the honor of this country -- but thanks to our President,
our Executive, and to our patriotic citizens, whose firmness obliged the
avaricious Frenchman to throw off the mask too soon for the execution of their
machinations; we have escaped the snare which was laid for us. That black train
of spies and seducers, who have all along supplied pabulum to those who have
been in the French interest, have slunk away in hopeless dejection -- and their
spoliations on our commerce have caused those honest minds who, through a
mistaken sympathy, were sinking with them in the vortex of anarchy, to rise
"buoyant from the gulf," and to attach themselves to the real interests of
their country. The spawn dropped by each retiring French minister, which had
hatched, and increased beyond endurance, and which had infested every
department, have almost all vanished away, or perished with the last struggles
of France to disorganize us -- and if any now remain, under the lash of honest
and "indignant virtue," they must shrink abashed, and in the end, conscious of
their own insignificancy, and the diminution of their honor and respect from
their citizens, they will leave the stage to better actors, and retire to the
grave of infamy with remorse, and the curses of all good men on their heads.
AMERICANS! do not your bosoms glow with indignation at the concealed, nefareous
and inimical conduct of that artful, intriguing and designing nation? And does
not the blood burn your cheeks, and every fiery particle with which nature has
endued you wake at once, when you reflect on the demands of her Directory by
ADET, and to our late Ministers Plenipotentiary and Envoys Extraordinary?
demands, which must rouse the sleeping dust of our patriotic sires to complain,
should we now lie torpid, and call us cowards!! -- But, it is impossible that
we should have much to fear from that haughty power: For, does not the greatest
unanimity prevail among all ranks of people who are determined to support their
government, and to repel, with true American firmness, any invasion of their
rights, and any infringement on their constitution? And believe me, Citizens,
while these sentiments are cherished, all the powers of France joined with the
power of her allies, (the grim court of Pandemonium) shall not prevail against
us. We have maintained our Independence through one struggle, and, thank God*
we shall have an hundred, before one particle of our freedom is given up to any
power on earth. Though the terrible republic has made rapid strides toward the
subversion of the liberties of those States, bordering on her frontiers, yet
all her power shall never appal the freeborn sons of America, or induce them to
make any concessions derogatory to their national dignity and character. Though
Venice and Switzerland have yielded to the conqueror; and though the fate of
those countries is held up, with a view to intimidate us to accept the
degrading proposals of the Directory, yet shall it teach us a far different
lesson, shall instruct us to throw off foreign influence, to unite, and stand
firm; and to swear* all, by the blood of our heroic sires, that we will see our
country submerged, our friends and relations butchered, and every object, which
induces us to love life, sunk in eternal oblivion, before we will submit to the
humiliating condition of being dictated by France, or any other foreign power.

AT a time like the present, when all Europe is in arms, and surprising
revolutions (formerly the production of centuries) now arise every day, and
while a powerful and fierce nation are endeavoring to tread our liberties under
their feet, and blot out the name of our nation from the earth, the interest of
America is to stand firm, and be prepared for the worst. The desperate efforts
of an intoxicated junto, "goaded by rashness and led on by folly," must be
opposed with steadiness and strength; and this band of unprincipled ruffians,
who have abandoned reason, and lost sight of the high road to national honor,
must at last yield to the united efforts of the powers of reason, virtue and
GOD. -- The principles on which government is founded it is not my province to
define; but this must be obvious to any thinking person, for a nation to be
prosperous, her government must be such that each citizen may feel it to be his
own advantage to support that government; for it is impossible that any one can
be induced to render free homage to the beauty of the whole, when he can see
nothing for himself but abjectness and contempt; but where there is a
government, in which the people can confide, and which secures to them the free
enjoyment of their rights and liberties, the sole interest of that people is*
to support their government against any and every invasion; and as america
possesses as much liberty as is in any wise necessary to her happiness, her
citizens must support their government, by striking at which, they strike at
their own existence. Order is Heaven's first law, and is most essential to the
happiness of man. Nature herself teaches us that there should be some
subordination; and that the happiness of society, and consequently of
individuals, may be promoted, the governors and governed must each fulfill the
circle marked by Heaven. It cannot be denied that a republican government is
the best; and we pray God, that it may be the only form of government for
America -- yet the most despotic government is better than anarchy; -- and the
disorganization of these United States must produce a state hydra which, after
having destroyed all around, would, scorpion like, destroy itself. The present
constitution of this country, is the only one by which we can support a
republican government; and by infringing on and fighting against this, we shall
manifest to the world that we have not wisdom sufficient to govern ourselves,
and that we are unworthy the glorious privileges of Independence. It is
presumed, that this language is not necessary for this audience, who have given
so many ample proofs of their Federalism, and determination to support their
government; and charity strongly induces me to think that there are but a
contemptible few in America, who are so callous to every sentiment of honor and
even of humanity, as not to execrate the measures of the French directory to
disorganize us, and cheerfully bestow their last mite in defense of that
government which secures to them their Liberty; -- Yet, perhaps it might have
been better for America, had some of her citizens before considered these
truths, for the eye of a candid observer cannot but trace a part of our
contentions with France, from our own citizens; and never had she dared to
behave in that affrontive manner to America, which has shone so conspicuous in
all our intercourse, had she not thought that a party in our own territories
would declare on her side; how much then, Citizens, does it behove us, for the
preservation of our national dignity, to act in concert, to manifest a spirit
to resist France in all her attempts against us; that the world may be
convinced that we are not that divided and degraded people, which the whole
conduct of the terrible republic implies that she dares to think us!

IN addressing this respectable audience, on this important occasion, let me
not forget to pay the tribute of gratitude to those Heroes, who dared, in the
face of arbitrary power, to sound the blast which freed us from the yoke of
tyranny; and to those who submitted their bosoms to the shafts of death in
defense of our Independence. Those of you, my countrymen, who were actors in
those scenes, whose patriotism has been fully proved in the "times which tried
men's souls," must be sensible how feeble are any attempts of mine to describe
the emotions of your souls in the day of battle, or to express the gratitude
which must pervade the breast of each one who enjoys the prize, which you and
they so dearly purchased -- Our present circumstances do not demand the
exertions, from us your offspring, which you were called upon to make; yet it
must be some satisfaction to you to reflect that the same heroic sentiments,
which impelled you to the field, remain in our bosoms, and that we here promise
in the name of those heroes who were immolated on the altar of liberty, in the
name of WASHINGTON and the surviving Patriots, that, should the clouds which
now hang round our horizon, thicken to a tempest, should our country's calamity
ever call us to her relief, we will not act unworthy the brave example
presented to us; but that we are ready to abandon all the pleasures of a rural
life, to march dauntless to the mouth of the cannon, and cheerfully resign up
our lives in defense of our coutry's rights. And here suffer me, Fathers, to
recommend to your attention, the education of your children; for on their minds
being well-formed, depends their future happiness, and the happiness of the
country to which they belong. The benefits and the necessity of a people's
being well informed, need not here be labored; suffice it to say, that it is the
life and soul of Independence. In a government like ours, where the people fill
all branches of sovereignty, so much information as may enable him to see the
beauty of his constitution is absolutely necessary for every person. From
ignorance proceed all our troubles and difficulties: enlightened minds will
never wear the yoke of slavery, nor be the factious and flagitious band to rise
up in opposition to all order and government. And you, my young friends, who
are happy to be the sons of America, as you may one day be called to be
important actors on the stage, study to improve; let the love of your country,
education and virtue, fire your generous bosoms. In this country, no hereditary
distinctions obstruct the passage to eminence, or damp the ardor of the obscure
youth; for Merit may raise him from the humble scenes of a country life, to act
his part on a theater, where not thousands but millions must sound his name
with applause. Behold! the annals of fame lie open on the temple of
immortality, inviting us to step forward with a becoming dignity, and enrol our
names; let us seize the glorious occasion, and command the admiration of a
world! -- And, ye fair daughters of this western world, "heaven's last best
gift," whose charms add grace and dignity to this assembly; you have great
inducements to join with us in celebrating this birth day of your happiness.
The important and distinguished rank in life, of the Fair Sex* is acknowledged
in this country, and the rewards due to their merit are cheerfully bestowed by
the Sons of America. Here, no avaricious sire (as is the custom in other
nations) condemns you to wed the man you hate, or to drag out a miserable
existence in the recesses of a cloister; but freedom of choice under the
discipline of a virtuous and refined education, constitutes a principal part of
your happiness. Your soft bosoms will therefore glow with gratitude, and your
countenances bloom with joy, when you reflect that you are the Daughters of
America. May education and virtue prompt you to reward merit and valor with
your smiles, which are sufficient to alleviate any cares to which we may be
called, in defense of our liberties, and which enhance, if not create, every
blessing of life.

WHEN we cast round our eyes and behold this enlightened and flourishing
people, spread over so extensive and fertile a region, whose gloomy forests are
daily divested of some part of their rude attire, to make room for the splendid
dome and lofty column, where we behold liberty, order, and all the blessings of
life to be ours -- Can we forbear, my countrymen, to sound the full paean of
praise, and all with one accord join, in celebrating this birth day of Liberty
-- Twenty two full years have we experienced the utility, the excellence of the
measure, which declared us free, and the prudence and wisdom of those who
adopted it. Though some gloomy clouds now hang over our political horizon, yet
if we learn to distinguish between the sophistry which has assailed our
constitution, under the false forms of patriotism, and those sentiments of
federalism, which form the true criterion of real patriotism, if we continue in
the habits of industry, unnanimity, virtue, and valor, and if we strive to
support our government in all cases, the storm will at length blow over, and
the fair sunshine of peace again illume our hemisphere. Let the anticipation of
this event, so ardently wished for, fit us to quaff the social bowl, to indulge
the glow of friendly intercourse and social harmony; and round this altar of
freedom to offer to the GOD of Heaven our thankful acknowledgements -- and let
the consideration, that the world are now spectators of our conduct, stimulate
us to fulfill every duty -- for if we do not defend these privileges, which we
enjoy, our names will be handed down to endless posterity, in colors of the
blackest dye, and our graves be made the graves of eternal infamy. But we are
not to be enslaved; this enlightened people never will so much degenerate as to
forget every feeling of humanity, and tamely lie down on the cold bosom of
slavery! -- Our Liberties and existence, Citizens, must and will be
commensurate! -- If we look forward into futurity, the prospect brightens to
our view; and what mind but will expand to meet the glorious period. We behold
America, (having subdued her enemies, and established the freedom of her
citizens on firm foundations) rising like a phoenix, from the ruin of all
monarchies, and convincing mankind, that it is under a republican government
only that the arts of life are brought to perfection. Nor will the
philanthropic heart forbear to anticipate the period, when the name of Liberty
shall be known and held sacred in Europe and the Isles; and when the tawny
inhabitants of Asia and Africa shall bow the knee at her sacred shrine, and
worship in her temple. Then shall all mankind cause incense to aspire to the
GOD of Heaven, from an altar, whose foundation is the whole earth, and whose
arch, the vault of heaven.

FINIS.

