FIDELITY REWARDED: OR, THE HISTORY OF POLLY GRANVILLE.

IN A SERIES OF LETTERS; Giving an account of her sufferings for her steadfast
adherance to her promise; and also of her deliverance from her troubles, and
her marriage, in consequence of her father's commencing a virtuous and
religious course of life.

Boston: FROM THE PRESS OF YOUNG AND MINNS, STATE STREET, -- 1796.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE credentials of Miss Polly Granville being only in the hands of the author,
who, at first, threw the following sheets together, without any further design
than for his own amusement: But, as they are founded on truth, and nature, and
those who have perused them, have solicited the author to send them to the
press, he now consents they may appear in public.

For certain reasons, the names of each person in the following letters are
(...) and the place of their abode concealed: but Miss Polly visiting her uncle
at Philadelphia, will plainly show that they were inhabitants of America, and
lived within these United States.

The drift of the subject is to show the preference of virtue, to riches and
grandeur, with some remarks on domestic regulations.

Perhaps some may think, in reading some of the first letters, that there
appears too great a degree of contumacy in the heroine of the story; but if
they will read the whole, with care, they will find, that her seeming obstinacy
is founded on reason. As the author aimed to inculcate virtue, and discourage
vice, he hopes it will be kindly received. And vice being so predominant in the
present age; if it should be the means of reforming a single person from any of
their vicious practices, he thinks he shall be richly repaid for his labor.
That it may have a beneficial effect, and thereby obtain some degree of
approbation from the public, is the wish of your humble servant,

THE AUTHOR.

LETTER I. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
Dear Miss Sophia,
YOU know that Mr. Danford, of late, has paid his addresses to me; and you
know, likewise, that he is a man worthy of any body's esteem. I am sure he had
engaged all my affections; and we had got so far in our courtship, that we had
promised marriage to each other: But my father, for some family convenience,
has engaged Mr. Stapleton to address me. Now Mr. Stapleton is very wealthy,
but he is quite ill looking: I believe you never saw him. Well, I will try to
let you know how he looks. He is a tall figure of a man; has very large coarse
features, and a dead looking eye; with hollow cheeks, large irregular teeth,
and a mouth no ways bespeaking approbation. Indeed he is a frightful looking
man as to his person. He is, besides, of a violent temper, and has no
consideration in any matter whatsoever. He speaks quick, and talks much,
without sense, or method; is quite a libertine; is very fond of company; and no
company comes amiss to him. And, indeed, he is altogether a debauchee. Now
could you think your Polly could be fond of such an alliance? No. What, to
exchange Mr. Danford, who has every personal qualification, for such a creature
as this? No, I will not! for I will die first! Besides, I would not break my
promise, that is of such a nature, for all the world* and there is nothing
shall tempt me to break it!

My mother and I have had a long discourse on the subject, and I find I am not
to expect much favor from my father in this affair; and my mother seems to
side with him, at present. I will send you the discourse I had with my mother;
which was nearly as follows:

My mother called me to her, and upon my seating myself by her, said, Polly, do
you intend to favor the addresses of Mr. Danford any longer, or have you
dismissed him already? Dear mamma, said I, I have not dismissed him at present;
and why should I? I hope you have no objections to his visits; have you? Yes,
Polly, said my mother, I have: and if I should only tell you that it is
disagreeable to me, it ought to be a sufficient reason for you to dismiss him.
But I will give you some reasons why I wish you to break with him. It is high
time that you knew your own importance. For prithee, child, don't you know that
you are nobly descended; that our family is one of the oldest in the country;
and that your father is very wealthy, having a large estate in his hands; is
immensely rich in money and lands; and carries on an extensive trade at sea;
and is called one of the first men on the continent? Now Mr. Danford's
circumstances being but moderate, no ways equal to yours, it cannot be thought
that you will stoop so low as to receive his visits; much less to encourage any
further alliance with him. It is therefore your father's pleasure that you
break with him; and so it is mine. For your sister Jenny married a man that was
exceeding wealthy, and you was always looked upon above her, both in beauty and
accomplishments of mind, and it is in your power to make the richest man in the
country happy: So I hope you will not displease your father nor vex me, for I
never had a child that I set more by than I do by you. Neither should try
harder to make any child happier in a wealthy marriage, than I should you. And
now, I think I have given you sufficient reasons, why I think it will be best
for you to break with him. And I am sure I would not advise you to any thing
that is not for your good.

Dear ma'am, said I, you greatly surprise me; for I had not the least thought
that Mr. Danford was disgustful to you; for you never hinted a syllable of it
to me before -- and he engrosses all my attention. And my inclination is too
strongly biassed in his favor to admit of an alteration. Neither can I see why
you should despise him: For Mr. Danford is every thing that I could possibly
wish for in a man. He is of a noble mind, is above every little action -- is of
a kind and affable disposition, and has a heart not ungenerous. He seems to be
formed both to defend and love the other sex; and indeed there is nothing of
meanness in him: For he has acquired great honor in the service of his
country, as a public officer; and is in possession of a good estate, his
circumstances being quite easy. And indeed great riches never had such charms
with me! It Is true, where there is riches, it enables one to be kind and
benevolent to the poor and needy. But to love riches for the sake of grandeur,
and that only, characterizes a low and little mind, and borders on selfish
stupidity. But, ma'am, you know that I always was of a serious turn of mind,
and I think I have some love for religion; nor do I confine my ideas of
happiness to this world; but my schemes of happiness are chiefly beyond the
grave. Now, Mr. Danford is of a consonant turn of mind, being a great lover of
religion, which is beautifully mixed in all his discourse; and, in my mind,
sets him above the richest man on earth, who is void of his qualifications. And
then, when he talks of love, or marriage, it is with that open frankness, that
ever denotes the noble mind. And from him, you never hear any of that frantic
disorder of speech: but persuasion seems to dwell on his tongue, in a just and
noble manner. And can you think, that such an alliance as this can be
disagreeable to me? An alliance that will not end at death, but will endure
when the sun and moon shall forget to shine? O what a rich thought is this;
that we may be mutual helps to each other in this world, and then be removed to
the realms of joy and happiness, never to be parted again! And would you
deprive me of the anticipation of all this happiness, and sink me below the
dust? For I never shall be happy with any other man; because we have pledged
ourselves to each other. And as for Mr. Murfee, who married Jenny, it is true,
he is in possession of a large estate; but then, he is altogether a man of this
world. And indeed he is nothing more than a fashionable rake -- a professed
libertine. If she feels herself happy with him, it is well. But it is hardly
supposable that she does? But if we may judge by appearances, she is very
uneasy in her mind; and does not rejoice in her noble marriage: And now, would
you have me tied to another, such as Mr. Murfee is? If I was, I should bid
farewell to all enjoyments in this world; and most set down miserable for life:
And then, what avail would riches and grandeur be to me? Why, they would only
serve to heighten my misery, and augment the troubles of life to a greater
degree.

Polly, said my mother, you seem to branch out very largely; but I hope you are
not in earnest: for your father, of late, had some overtures made to him by Mr.
Stapleton on your account; which I think cannot be disagreeable to you. For he
is a very wealthy man, indeed; there is hardly any end to his riches. And he is
a man well enough as to other qualifications. And now what objections can you
have to him?

Dear mamma, said I, don't mention Mr. Stapleton to me for such an alliance;
for he is a frightful looking man, and has nothing attractive in his behavior;
being quite void of that tenderness to be found in many others. And then there
is nothing noble in his mind, or generous in his temper. And indeed, he seems
to be formed by nature for a mere tyrant. For having a churlish ungovernable
temper, and not having sense enough to know right from wrong; he is many times
in a passion, without knowing what he is angry at. And, above all, he is a
great libertine, caring for nothing but debauchery. Now, could you have a
single thought of such a man for your Polly? Dear ma'am, you cannot! For I had
rather live a single life all my days, or marry a man without any estate at
all, provided he is endowed with personal qualifications, than to have him. For
it is easier for a poor man, thus qualified, to attain to an estate, than for a
rich, selfish clown, to attain to those qualifications. So I hope you will not
mention him to me any more.

Well, Polly, said my mother, you had better think seriously of the matter; for
your father is determined that Mr. Danford shall not continue his visits; and
has wrote him a line to forbid him our house. I I think you had better
encourage the addresses of Mr. Stapleton; for your father is set upon it, to
give him all the aid in his power. For there is to be some exchange of property
between your father and Mr. Stapleton, in consequence of your marriage, which
will be very advantageous to our family. And so, I fear, he is too much set to
be turned. For Mr. Stapleton being very wealthy, he thinks 'twill reflect great
honor on the family. But I shall not say any more to you at present.

Dear ma'am, said I, let me just answer you before you withdraw. Then the
matter is concluded already, I find. And I am to be sold to Mr. Stapleton, to
be his slave. For if I am married to him, no other shall I be, I warrant. But I
never will be neither his wife, nor slave! For if I cannot have a man of my own
choosing, I had rather never alter my condition. But if I am ever married, Mr.
Danford must be the man: indeed he must! Dear mamma, do stand my friend! And
don't insist on my breaking with Mr. Danford, for my life depends upon it! and
if you are not my friend, I am wholly destitute of any except Mr. Danford. And
you say I am not to see him again. O shocking! Then I am to be plunged into
distress and misery at an early age. And how can you say that you love me above
any of your relations, when you do not care what befalls me? Which denotes you
don't love me at all. But you will love your Polly yet, will you not? And will
you not try to persuade my father to deal otherwise by me? -- But if you will
forsake me, I have no where to go but to a merciful God; on whose care and
protection I will ever venture myself, hoping he will not lay more on me, than
I am able to bear.

At this my mother withdrew, and now what have I to expect but hard treatment?
Well, it is hard to disobey parents; but, as for my marrying Mr. Stapleton, I
never will, let what will come of it. Neither will I marry any other man whilst
Mr. Danford is living. For how can I, we having promised each other not to?
which promises I hold to be sacred; and that no body has a right to revoke
them. And so you see, that I am steadfastly set, to hold my promise with Mr.
Danford. But I cannot tell yet how it will be brought about.

By this time you will think it is time for me to conclude, which I do by
sending you my kind regards.

POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER II. From Mr. DANFORD, to Miss POLLY GRANVILLE.
My dear Miss Polly,
AND am I forbidden to visit you? Yes, I received a line from your father,
which forbids me his house. On what account I cannot tell; but have heard, by
the bye, that it is because my estate is not large enough. And I hear farther,
that Mr. Stapleton is encouraged to visit you; and I suppose his estate is
sufficient, and that is all he has to recommend him. But I should not think
that my Polly (you see that I call you mine yet) would take up with such a
wretch as Mr. Stapleton, who is void of every good quality. And then, my dear,
what have I done to your father? For if I am guilty of any enormity that is
offensive to him, if he will but hint it to me, I will amend; and shall be very
proud to gain his affections at any rate, let it cost me what it will. And
indeed, I should be willing to seek danger in the face of stubborn foes, if
that would reconcile him to me. But I fear his disgust is of another nature.
For I believe that nothing but money is wanting. As for an estate, I have
enough of that to make us comfortable, and I don't think we ought to let the
world engross all our desires.

And now, my dear, are your affections alienated from me? Or have you forgot
me? You used to say that you had some esteem for me, and that I was delightful
to you. And indeed you promised to be mine, let what would be the consequence.
And may not I expect a line from you to inform me of the state of your mind
toward me. As to myself, my love to you is, and ever will be, the same it ever
was. Don't think that absence will, or can efface it. No; but if the sun should
forget to shine, or the rivers forget to flow, then might I forget my Polly
Granville, but not otherwise. Nor will the trials and troubles of this world
make me unmindful of you. And I am resolved never to marry any other whilst you
are living. But how you will behave yourself to me, is yet uncertain. But I
always did depend on your word and promise, and think I may yet.

As for an estate, don't let that trouble you; for if your father should
disinherit you, yet I have a competence of this world; and if I can but have
your person, I do not care whether your father gives you any thing or not. For
riches, abstractly of themselves, will never make a person happy; and I ever
loved you more for the beauties of your mind, than any thing else. Your being
of an open temper, that ever sets the noble above the low minded, and having a
love for virtue and religion, and not confining your ideas of happiness wholly
to this world, greatly heightened you in my esteem, for I am myself, of a
consonant turn of mind. How pleasing was the anticipation of these things to
me; that we should be able to give advice and counsel to one another, which
would mutually heighten the thoughts of heaven, even whilst in this state of
change and vicissitude; and finally, that our friendship should not end at
death, but that we should be partakers of that blessedness which is laid up for
those who make virtue their chief aim. -- But I cannot, and will not give you
up as lost to me yet, For there are many intricate windings in life, which
appear to us to be wholly against us; yet at the same time are working together
for our good. And the person that puts his trust wholly in a divine Providence,
is seldom disappointed. For Providence can overcome all these seemingly
untoward obstacles, and make them all turn to our advantage; and then we can
can look back with delight on those seeming afflictions, and can see how they
did work together for our good.

I shall depend upon a letter from you: and pray write whether your affections
are unalterable to me or not; and at the same time you may assure yourself,
that I am unalterably yours,

JAMES DANFORD.

LETTER III. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Mr. DANFORD.
Dear Sir,
IS it possible that you should distrust the love and fidelity of your Polly?
No, I Will not harbor such a thought -- I think you are not capable of such a
thing. And do you ask whether my love is the same toward you? I answer, no;
for the unthought-of trials that I have met with of late, have greatly
heightened my love and affection to you. My esteem for you is altogether
unalterable, and my heart is fixed. Neither is there any thing in this world
that shall alienate my affections from you; and you may assure yourself that I
am unalterably yours, and never will I marry any other man whilst you are
living: Let the trials and trouble I meet with be ever so great, yet I will
never break this resolution. For you cannot think that I set so light by the
promise I made you as to break it, for any consideration whatsoever. But I have
experienced great troubles, and heavy trials, since I saw you, which are on
your account: and I expect they are not at an end yet. But this consideration
makes them the lighter, that they are on your account: and I am willing to
suffer greater trials for your sake, if I can but obtain your person. So you
may see by this that you are no ways indifferent to me; but that you engross my
whole attention, as to the things of this world; my worldly happiness being
wholly centered in you.

I would give you, if I could, a sketch of my troubles. My father has forbid
my receiving your visits, and I suppose forbidden you his house, and has
likewise proposed Mr. Stapleton to me as a suitor; but I have utterly refused
to have any thing to say to Mr. Stapleton on such an account. And have
peremtorily declared, that if I could not be favored with an alliance with you,
I would never alter my condition: which seems to raise great anger in my
father: for it seems (though it is hard to say it of one's parents) that my
father sets more by riches, than he does by the peace and quiet of his
children. It seems that Mr. Stapleton is to pay me a visit; but it will be
labor lost; I can tell them that: for I am determined not to have any thing to
say to him on the subject; and I will warrant, he will get nothing but frowns
from me. For if my affections were not fixed already, I could not think of Mr.
Stapleton for a companion -- indeed I could not; for he is no ways engaging to
me, neither in person or behavior. And then his mind is altogether naughty;
and, in my view, he is not in possession of one good quality. So, if I was not
biassed in your favor, you may see he would not be likely to make a conquest
of me. But to return; my father has not confined me to my chamber yet; though
he says he will, if I don't comply with his proposal. But I have liberty of the
garden, and to visit, having one of the family with me, to see that I am not in
your company. I am also allowed to write; and my maid being wholly on my side,
I can convey my letters when, and where I please: So you may leave your
letters, and she will call for them.

Your letter to me revived my spirits greatly. To think, that you don't
despise, nor forget me in this trouble, is a great consolation to me. And your
hint, that "they who put their trust in Providence, will not be disappointed,"
gave me great encouragement; for my whole dependence is on a kind indulgent
Providence; in whose hands I am willing to venture myself, and all my concerns.
Ever praying that he will not lay greater trials on me than he shall enable me
to bear, and that I may, in some measure, be blameless.

Sir, you may assure yourself I am yours, etc. POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER IV. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
Dear Miss Sophia,
I MUST write to you, because to my Miss Sophia I can write without the least
reserve. Perhaps you will think that I write without sense or method. But then,
when I write to you, I wish to unbosom my whole mind; knowing that you will
make proper allowances for my imperfections. Well, I have a great many strange
things to tell you, for I am used with great severity by my parents; who try
all in their power to make me break with Mr. Danford, and favor Mr. Stapleton*
but I utterly refuse to do either, which vexes them greatly.

Mr. Stapleton has paid us a visit, and you will wish to know how I behaved
myself with my new lover, and how he conducted in the business. Why, I believe
that we both behaved quite aukwardly. I am sure he did; and I have not much to
say for myself. Well, as my mother and I were sitting in the parlour, who
should enter but my papa, and Mr. Stapleton with him, which put me in a
terrible slutter. My papa introduced him to my mother, and then to me; and I
arose to receive him -- but tremble, tremble, went my feet, so that I could
hardly stand. I hope, said he, I see you well, Miss Polly: very well, Sir, said
I; but did not say, at your service, you may well think. Well, he seated
himself not far from me, and seemed as if his seat was uneasy to him. Now
turning to this side, now to that; and seemed to be at a loss what to say. But
my father and mother put him out of his pain, by withdrawing: my father saying,
as he went out, well, Polly, I have engaged Mr. Stapleton to visit you, and I
hope you will receive him kindly; and that you will be agreeable to him, and he
to you. While my father addressed himself to me, I stood up, and when he had
done, I courtesied, and set down again; and was in hopes, that when I should
tell Mr. Stapleton how the matter stood between Mr. Danford and myself, that he
would relinquish all his pretentions to me, and would try to help me out of my
present difficulty. But in this I found myself mistaken; for the more I
expostulated with him, the more he would claim his right by my father's
engagement; so I was resolved to use him very plainly, and to let him know,
that I was determined to adhere to my promise to Mr. Danford. Well, as to our
discourse; after I had seated myself, he moved his seat nearer to me, and
accosted me as follows:

Well, Miss Polly, your father has engaged me to address you, and I hope that
my visits will meet with your approbation; for I should be fond of an alliance
with your family; and I hope I shall make myself as agreeable to you, as you
are to me.

Sir, said I, if it were in my power to receive your visits, I should be very
glad to on my father's account, who has given you the trouble to call upon me.
But as I have a prior engagement, I hope you will excuse me, Sir, when I tell
you, that I cannot discourse with you on the subject. And I have more
dependence on your honor, Sir, than to think that you will try to make a young
defenseless creature break her promise with another man. For you know, Sir,
that such an engagement is solemn, and ought to be held sacred. And I have
great dependence on your honor, Sir, in this affair; expecting you will not
insist on my favoring your pretensions; and hope you will say no more to me on
that subject.

As I said before, he is quite an unpolite gentleman, wherefore breaking in
upon me, he said, ma'am* ma'am! -- if you are agreeable to Mr. Danford, why
should not you be so to me? And no doubt, if Mr. Danford is agreeable to you, I
can make myself equally agreeable. For we all know that affections are
transferable. And besides, I am vastly above Mr. Danford in every point of
view. So I am no ways concerned, but that you will like me, in a little time,
as well as you do him.

But Mr. Stapleton, said I, what shall I do with the promise I have made to Mr.
Danford? for I have pledged myself to him in a solemn manner; and if I should
break that promise, I should be afraid that something uncommon would befall me.
And what can you say to this?

Love-promises, said he, are nothing but words of course, and I have made a
dozen of them in my lifetime; but never thought them binding. And if you have
made a promise to Mr. Danford, you know the form now: and so you may make
another to me, and I will do the same to you, and we will join our hands at the
church, and then the matter will be settled, and who can call you to an account
about it?

Mr. Stapleton, said I, you surprise me! Do you make thus light of solemn
promises? If these are your sentiments, what security could a woman have with
you? why you put me quite out of conceit of the other sex. But I hope they are
not all of your turn of mind. And I am under the necessity of telling you, that
you are no ways pleasing to me; therefore wish you to withdraw, and not disturb
me with such discourse -- for I must tell you, that I have no liking to you.
And indeed, Sir, if I was not engaged, I could not think of a man of your
sentiments for a companion -- indeed I could not! And now, as I have been so
plain with you, I hope you will give me no more trouble in this affair: for we
being not of a consonant turn of mind, cannot be agreeable to each other.

Well, said Mr. Stapleton, I shall not give up my pretensions to you, for your
father and I have settled the whole matter; and he having a right to command
you, I shall depend upon his authority, and expect a speedy marriage. For I
have engaged so far in the affair, that I cannot easily give it up: and so you
may as well comply, as not.

Sir, said I, may not I depend on your honor, when I tell you, that I cannot
love you, and that you are wholly disagreeable to me? If I should consent to
give you my hand, what a life should we be likely to live together? For, where
there is no love, there can be no confidence: and then we might both repent our
proceedings when it would be too late.

I am, said he, not at all concerned about that. For it is a wife's duty, to
obey her husband. And I shall take care of that in the first place, and then
look out for your affections afterward. And it will be strange, if you cannot
both love and esteem me -- for I have a large estate; and, you know, where
there is riches, there must be contentment of mind. So I have no doubt, but, in
time, you will both love and respect me; and I am resolved to venture the
consequence, and doubt not, that we shall be married soon.

Mr. Stapleton, said I, you may rely upon it, that I will never be your wife
whilst I am living -- neither do I intend to talk any more with you about the
matter. Indeed, I did depend some upon your honor, but I find that you are
void of that qualification. And to show you that I am in earnest in all that I
have said, I shall this moment withdraw, and leave you by yourself, hoping you
will make proper reflections on what has been said, and that you will give me
no more trouble:

And so I retired to my chamber. But my father and he had a long conference,
after I withdrew. And, by what I can find out, by the bye, my father is
determined to use all his authority, to make me comply with his proposal. And,
I believe, he told Mr. Stapleton as much -- for since that time, he uses me
more like a stranger than a child: only with this difference, that he is not so
polite with me, as he is with others.

When we sat down to tea, after Mr. Stapleton was gone -- we having no company,
his discourse was wholly about the above affair; and he said, I was altogether
unpolite to Mr. Stapleton; but if I did not behave myself better to him, the
next time he visited me, he would use his authority with me: and if that would
not make me bend, he should take such measures with me, as would be very
distressing, both for him to inflict, and for me to bear.

I thought it best for me not to answer him, so made no reply to what he said;
but soon retired to my chamber again, and wrote you the result.

And now, ma'am, what must I expect? Nothing but hard words and angry looks
from them that ought to deal most kindly and tenderly by me. But I did not
think my mother capable of hard-heartedness: for she used to be very kind to
me; indeed, she never gave me an angry word before this affair happened. But I
intend to have another discourse with her. Pray, my dear Miss Sophia, write to
me, and tell me how one ought to behave to parents in such a case as mine. I
know one ought to obey parents in all things: But when Mr. Danford first
addressed me, my parents seemed to encourage me in the affair; and now when my
inclination has got strongly biassed in his favor, and we have promised
marriage to each other -- and all done, as it were, through their concurrence,
they can have no right, I think, to insist upon my breaking with him, and
admitting the visits of another, who is altogether disagreeable to me.
Therefore, I think I shall not be altogether wrong, if I do disobey them in
this point, for my worldly happiness does depend on it, and I fear it will go
far in breaking my peace with heaven. For, dear ma'am, we should, in all our
schemes of worldly happiness, make some provision for the better part; and not
let the world infringe on the affairs of the soul and eternal happiness. But in
my mind, to be joined to such an abandoned man, is, in effect, to bid farewell
to all serious thoughts, and is forsaking religion entirely. But do, dear Miss
Sophia, send me your thoughts on this subject; and if I am wrong, don't spare
me; but give me your mind upon the matter plainly; for I am a young defenseless
creature, and I seem to have no mortal to ask advice of but you at present. So
I will conclude by sending you my best wishes.

I am yours, etc. POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER V. From Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON to Miss POLLY GRANVILLE.
My Dear Miss Polly,
I RECEIVED your two last letters which gave me much pain for you. And I do
lament your case, and heartily sympathize with you in your misfortunes. Your
troubles seem to come fast upon you, and from a quarter that I little expected.
For your father and mother used to show you all that tenderness, which is the
effect of real paternal affection. Nay, I often thought, that they were partial
in your favor; and it seemed as if you could not do a wrong thing, in their
view. Your mother, especially, was, I thought, a kind and tender hearted woman;
and seemed to have a feeling for any who were in distress. But your father, I
always thought was a great lover of the world. Indeed, wealth seemed to engross
his whole attention; and he could easily forego any thing for riches. But I did
not think he was capable of such conduct to his Polly. Indeed I could not have
thought it of him. What! reject Mr. Danford, who is in possession of a good
estate; is quite a polite gentleman, endowed with every accomplishment to be
found either in the intrepid or gentle? And then to encourage Mr. Stapleton to
visit you, wholly upon the score of riches, is to me quite unaccountable. And
to join his authority with his proposal, and try to compel you to break with
the one, and to marry the other, is too flagrant to be justified, even in one's
father.

Do you, my dear Miss Polly, ask my opinion upon the above affair? Perhaps, I
am not so tender hearted, as my Polly is; but I know what I should do, was I in
your circumstances. Why, I should write to Mr. Danford, to meet me at some
place, and then go off with him, and get married. And to use Mr. Stapleton's
words, who could call you to an account about the matter? For you know that
your uncle left you something of an estate, which is wholly at your disposal*
and which you may join with Mr. Danford's, and then you will be nearly as
wealthy as your father.

But I don't suppose that you will follow this advice. Well, this is what I
would do. But then, you said I must tell you how you ought to behave; and that,
you know is another matter. Well, I think that parents ought not to do any more
than advise their children; and that I think, they are in duty bound to do. But
I do not think they ought to compel them to marry against their wills; for in
such a case, many times, the consequence is fatal. On the other hand, a
parent's advice ought to be well weighed; and if it is reasonable, it ought be
followed, by all means. But then there is such a thing as parents giving
unreasonable advice; and then I do not think we ought to obey them. For suppose
your parents should command you to murder a certain person, do you think that
you ought to obey them? No, by no means. Now in your affair -- you having
solemnly promised marriage to Mr. Danford; your worldly happiness, in a great
measure depending upon your fulfilling that promise: and their not advising you
to the contrary before you made that promise, when they might well expect that
this would be the consequence of his visits; in my mind, fully authorizes you
to disobey them in this point, and they have no right to command your obedience
in this affair; or to make you revoke your promise

But I must still advise you, to use all the patience that you are capable of;
for gentle methods are certainly the best. And do try to gain your mother over
upon your side; for that will be as likely a means to extricate you out of your
present trouble, as any that I can think of. But I would never give up the main
point; nor break with Mr. Danford on any account whatsoever. And so you have my
thoughts on the matter, without any reserve. Pray excuse what is not agreeable
to your mind; and at the same time assure yourself, that I am your
compassionate friend and servant,

SOPHIA DANIELSON.
P. S. My dear Miss Polly, I may depend upon your continuing your letters --
may not I? So do not fail of writing, and tell me all your trouble; not waiting
for me to answer you; for I have not much to write about. But you have a good
subject, or a bad one, to write from; and I want to hear all your story.

S. D.



LETTER VI. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
Dear Miss Sophia,
WILL you not be tired of reading my letters? Well, if you should be, I must
write, because to you I can unbosom all my thoughts. And, you know, it is some
consolation for one to communicate their afflictions and trials. And then we
have promised to write to each other every thing that is worthy of notice.
Accordingly I shall make no further apology, but write on as usual. You must
expect to hear of nothing but trials and troubles from your Polly; and so I
will begin with the first. -- My mother and I have had another discourse about
Mr. Danford and Mr. Stapleton, which was as follows:

My mother being in her chamber, I happened to step in at her door; she said to
me, Polly, come sit down by me, child; for I want to have some discourse with
you. This put me into a flutter, as any thing she says to me on that subject
always does; for I was sensible of what she wanted to talk upon. Well, I went
in, and sat down by her, and said, what would you say to me, ma'am?

Why, Polly, said she, you quite vexed your father by your behavior to Mr.
Stapleton. He says you did not treat him with common civility. You might have
used him with politeness, though you did not intend to encourage him any
further. You know, Polly, it is the duty of a child to obey their parents; and
your father commanded you to receive him kindly; therefore I think you are
guilty of disobedience.

Perhaps, ma'am, said I, you are misinformed, as to my behavior to Mr.
Stapleton: for in the first place, I assure you, I treated him with all the
politeness I was capable of, and told him of my situation and engagements, but
he used me with unpolite language; and then I was obliged to be plain with him.
And now, ma'am, as to obeying parents, I hold myself bound to obey my parents
in all things wherein their commands are not repugnant to the commands of my
Supreme Judge, as set forth to us in the word of unerring truth: where we are
informed, that we ought not to be unequally yoked; which, I suppose, implies
this -- (...) who is of a religious (...) of mind, ought not (...) be married
to one that is altogether vain and abandoned -- where there can be no hopes of
amendment. For if a child should obey her parents in this thing, she must make
herself miserable for life; and, perhaps endanger her everlasting happiness
thereby. For if a parent has a right to command a child in such a matter,
surely a husband has a greater right to command his wife. And, if a child must
obey her parents in this thing, then she must be married to an abandoned man,
if it is her parents' pleasure. And what if that abandoned husband should
command the wife to follow him in all manner of wickedness? -- Why, by the same
rule, she must obey him, and so must sin unavoidably, besides breaking the
above supreme command: and therefore I think a child is not bound to obey her
parents, when they command her to be joined to such a man. And now, dear ma'am,
let me tell you, word for word, what passed between Mr. Stapleton and myself,
that you may judge whether he or I was most unpolite.

And then I related to her the whole discourse, that past between myself and
Mr. Stapleton, nearly as I sent it to you; and when I had ended, I made some
remarks on his discourse with me.

For him, said I, to say, that, if I really loved and esteemed Mr. Danford, it
was a token that I would love and respect him, would incline one to think, that
he never knew what either love or friendship meant. But then his making so
light of solemn promises, put me out of all patience with him. A wretch! to say
that he had made a dozen of them already! Why do you think, Madam, that I could
have any patience with him? Indeed I could not. And now, do you wish your Polly
to have such a husband as this is, on whose word there is no dependence; and
who might divide his affection between her and another woman? If it might be
said that he has any affection. And would it not be a dreadful thing for one
to have a companion, in whom they could have no confidence nor security: one
who knows not what religion is, and has no regard to right or wrong?

But Polly, said she, perhaps you are prejudiced against him, and prepossessed
in another's favor, which might cause you to construe all that he said to his
disadvantage; and, perhaps, if you were to hear him again, he might appear to
you in another point of view. And don't you wish, Polly, to have another
conversation with him?

By no means, Madam, said I, if I can avoid it: nor do I desire ever to see him
again. And now, dear mamma, if you have any love and affection for your Polly,
you will not insist upon our having another interview. And, if you have any
regard for me, I pray you will give me your sentiments on his discourse with
me, without the least reserve; and also tell me, whether I may expect a friend
in my mamma, or not.

At this, my mother burst into tears; and I could not avoid joining with her;
and indeed, my eyes would be running over all the time I was talking with her
do the best I could. Well, after a while my mother said, Polly, you know that
my love and affections are strongly biassed in your favor; and I must
acknowledge that I never did like or esteem Mr. Stapleton, nor do I like his
discourse with you at all: which discover neither the gentleman nor the lover.
-- And I own, he was very unpolite to you, nor can I blame you much for your
plainness of speech to him.

But then, what shall we do with your father? For he is obstinately bent upon
your having Mr. Stapleton; I having discoursed with him on the subject, find he
is not to be turned. And, he being of such a passionate temper, I dare not
speak to him any more on the subject. Therefore, you must not let him know that
I have let you into these thoughts of mine; but my heart yearned upon you so,
that I could not keep my mind from you any longer. And now I will assist you
all I can; but I can have but little hopes of helping you much. Yet this will
be some consolation to you, that I don't hate you as you thought I did.

My dear Miss Sophia, after this tender declaration from her, do you think I
could keep my seat? No; for running to her, and dropping on my knees before
her, and with my arms clasped around her, I exclaimed, what did you say to your
Polly? And do you love me yet? When I thought I had no friend in this house, to
find that my dear mamma is yet my friend, fills me with such joy, as is almost
insupportable! And indeed, I cried, till I sobbed again; my mother joining with
me. But my father coming home, I withdrew to my chamber, and could do no less
than write you the whole affair. My father does not so much as give me a
pleasant look; and is always throwing out some word or other, to let me know
what to depend upon, if I don't favor Mr. Stapleton; to which I never make any
answer. But I understand he intends to have another discourse with me upon the
above affair. And, O how I dread the interview! for I shall do nothing but cry,
I Will warrant: but that must be the subject of another letter; therefore I Will
conclude this, having an opportunity to send it. And shall only say,

I remain yours, etc. POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER VII. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
My dear Miss Sophia,
I WILL now continue my story; for my father and I have had a discourse
together, on the subject of Mr. Stapleton, which was pretty much as follows:
Being in my chamber, my father sent for me to attend him in his closet; my maid
attending me, I went trembling to him, and when entered* sat down in the first
chair I came to, and thought I should have fainted, do the best I could. My
father, speaking to my maid* said, Ann, you may withdraw, for I wish to talk
with your mistress in private.

After Ann was gone, my father began, by saying, Polly, what can be the reason,
that you did not encourage Mr. Stapleton, when I engaged him to visit you
purely on that account? You knew it was my pleasure that you should use him
kindly. And now give me the reasons why you behaved so unpolitely to him, when
he visited you.

Dear Sir, said I, I cannot discourse with you on the subject. Indeed I cannot!
And fell a crying.

But, Polly, said my father, I will be answered to these questions without the
least evasion!

Dear Sir, said I, I did not use him unpolitely. But as for encouraging him in
the ideas of marriage with me, it is wholly inadmissible; as I have not the
least possible regard for him: and beg you, Sir, to excuse me from ever
discoursing with him again on that subject; for I cannot think of him for a
companion -- indeed I cannot!

Why, Polly! said my father, you would think well enough of Mr. Stapleton, were
it not for Mr. Danford. But I am determined that you never shall see him again;
and so you may content yourself; for that affair is at an end.

Well, Sir, said I, if I am never to see Mr. Danford again, I am fully
determined never to alter my condition. For, excuse me, Sir, it is impossible
for me to think of another man, whilst Mr. Danford is living; as I have pledged
myself to him.

I don't care, says my father, any thing about your pledging yourself to Mr.
Danford; for you shall not be married to him! And now, tell me, positively,
whether you will encourage Mr. Stapleton or not?

Sir, said I, it is not fitting that I should tell my papa that I will not;
therefore desire to be excused from saying any thing on the subject.

But, said he, you shall give me a direct answer to the question, without any
equivocation.

Then, said I, I must say, I cannot encourage him; and hope you will excuse me,
Sir, if I tell you that I think my life depends upon it; and hope you will not
insist upon my ever seeing him again* and, I am sure if you love your Polly,
you will not invite Mr. Stapleton here on that account.

Polly, said he, if you are so incorrigible, I shall not give myself any
trouble about you; and so, you must not expect any protection from me in any
matter whatsoever; for I shall wholly give you up for lost: and if you lose my
friendship, I don't know what will become of you.

Dear papa, said I, will you consent for me to go to my uncle's at
Philadelphia, and pay my aunt a visit; she being very earnest to have me visit
her this season, and spend the winter with her? If you will give your
approbation, Sir, I will immediately set about getting ready to go, as I can
have an opportunity to be conveyed there soon. Dear Sir, will not you consent to
my going?

Polly, said my father, you shall not go: and from this time you shall not go
out of my house; which, with the garden, shall be your limits, until you submit
to my proposals. I have no more to say to you at present, so you may withdraw.

Well, our I went, to my chamber, and cried a good while; for the tears would
run down my cheeks all the time my father was talking with me. So you see I am
completely confined. Yet under all these afflictions, I have some consolation.
My Miss Sophia is my friend. Mr. Danford does not despise me; and my mother
loves me still. Besides, I think I have a conscience that does not accuse me*
but, above all, my greatest dependence is in him who is able to deliver out of
all adversity; religion being my chief support. For, to contemplate seriously
on heaven, and heavenly things, seems to carry one above the noisy tumults of a
busy world; and fills one's soul with quiet, and satisfaction, in the midst of
troubles and worldly affliction. But, perhaps, I shall conclude my letter too
seriously for your lively spirits. But it being a time of trouble with me, I
expect to be excused by my Miss Sophia; who may assure herself, that I am, in
all conditions of life, her friend and servant,

POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER VIII. From Mr. DANFORD, to Miss POLLY GRANVILLE.
My Dear Miss Polly,
I CAN take no rest or comfort because of your confinement. Must I be the cause
of so much trouble and affliction, to the person in whom my worldy happiness is
wholly centered? But, my dear, if it was in my power to extricate you out of
these difficulties, I should not hesitate one moment: but I don't see that any
thing can be done at present, in an honorable way, to deliver you out of your
trouble. I find I am wholly excluded from seeing you: for, applying to Mr.
Granville for leave to discourse with you for the space of ten minutes only, I
was denied with contempt. I even expostulated with him, to suffer me to take my
leave of you, if no more, but could not prevail. I then told him how deeply I
was interested in your welfare; which only put him into a passion; and I was
forced to drop the subject: But it touched me to the quick, to think that I
must not so much as discourse with him upon the matter. For he forbid me ever
saying any thing about you again. But I don't love you the less for his
behavior to me, no, my dear. You may rest assured, that I am wholly yours,
and that my affections are unalterably fixed, and are incapable of roving. But
I am going to propose a thing to you, which is this. The ship Goodspeed now
lies at the wharf, ready loaded for the East, and perhaps will proceed as far
as Canton, in China: which will be a voyage of a year and a half or two years;
and as I own one half of her, the rest of the owners have applied to me to go
in her, in the capacity of a super-cargo. I having some inclination to visit
those countries; and my affairs being now in a prosperous situation, I think it
may be productive of good to us, for me to undertake the voyage. If Providence
should still smile upon me, perhaps, in the course of a year or two, I may
appear in a less exceptionable point of view to your father than I do at
present I think, at least, my going abroad, must effect your liberation. I
cannot think of your being confined wholly on my account; and I disdain to use
any kind of artifice, to get you into my hands, until every other method is
tried: for we ought not to use fraud in any case whatsoever, but trust all our
affairs in the hands of a kind Providence; and, be assured, my dear, if we do,
we shall not be disappointed. And I verily believe, that we shall be extricated
out of these troubles and difficulties, and be happier in each other than if
those difficulties had never befallen us. Some things that have come under my
observation of late, fully evinces the above observation.

I shall not, however, engage in this undertaking without your approbation; and
shall therefore wait your answer to this before I proceed any farther. For it
shall be wholly in your power to command me, either to go or stay, as you shall
think most conducive to your happiness. At the same time, you may rest assured,
that I am wholly yours; and shall remain so, either at home or abroad.

And now, my dearest Miss Polly, let us put our whole trust in that Providence
which is able to keep us in all these changes and vicissitudes of life, and
bring good out of evil -- which I pray may be the happy case with you and me.
And I cannot but make some dependence on being happy in you, after these storms
are overblown.

But in all events, I am ever yours to command, JAMES DANFORD.

LETTER IX. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Mr. DANFORD.
My Dearest Friend,
I RECEIVED your letter with as true affection, perhaps, as you wrote it; but
language will fail me to describe the gratitude of my heart, for your regard
and tenderness to me, after your having experienced such insulting behavior
and outrageous language from my father. But there is no comparison between
virtue and vice: for virtue will ever set a man above resentment at the little
foibles of those that have no regard to virtue; causing him to act consistently
in every occurrence of life; not even aiming to take the advantage of the low
minded; but passing on in quiet, through the boisterous tumults of a noisy
world, with a mind fully fixed, and firmly rested, on a kind Providence; he is
willing to wait the determination of that Providence; and not to rush into
fraudulent measures to extricate himself out of difficulty. This is the
characteristic of my dear Mr. Danford, when, at the same time, those, that are
not possessed of your noble mind, would try to retaliate and use every kind of
fraud, to be revenged on such as they think are their enemies; by which means
they often involve themselves in inextricable difficulties, which often end in
their utter ruin.

But to return: I think you have pitched upon a noble mode of conduct, which
cannot fail of salutary effects. It will, doubtless, be productive of my
enlargement. And, in the time of your absence, something, I doubt not, will
turn up to our advantage in an honorable way, which will be vastly preferable
to the same end gained in a clandestine manner. For, to use your language, I
don't think fraud ought to be used in any case whatsoever. If we trust to
Providence, I don't think we shall be disappointed.

I fully acquiesce in your proposal of visiting the eastern part of the world.
And may your life and health be preserved, and the best of heaven's blessings
attend you, until you return, richly experiencing the kind hand of Providence.
In the mean time, I experience great trials, and afflictions on your account:
for my father, using me with great severity, has confined me to the house;
except that I have the privilege of the garden, with my maid to attend me as
usual. But his severity has only this effect, to increase my affections to you:
causing me to see the vast disparity between a virtuous character, and a man
whose aims are wholly confined to this world. But I must tell you that I have
gained my mother over on my side, who no doubt will try all in her power to
help me.

I still expect to suffer great trials; but am determined to adhere firmly to
the promise I made you. And you may rest assured, that I will prove constant to
you even to a punctilio. Neither shall any trouble that I may meet with lessen
my attachment to you. I have requested of my father to allow me to go to my
uncle's at Philadelphia, and was denied. But I shall renew my request when you
are gone, and perhaps by the interference of my mother, I may gain his consent.
But I hope I shall conduct myself in all these affairs, so as that I may be
blameless, and have a conscience void of offense; ever trusting and looking to
him for aid, who is able to rescue in the greatest distress.

And so I conclude with my warmest and most unfeigned wishes, and prayers, that
you may be returned in safety to your friend and humble servant,

POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER X. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
Dear Miss Sophia,
IT has been some time since I wrote to you; and longer since I received a line
from you. I have a great many things to tell you; for you say you wish to be
informed of all the occurrences relative to Mr. Danford. Accordingly, I shall
proceed without any apology. And, in the first place, I will inform you that
Mr. Danford sent me a letter, informing me of his design of going in the ship
Goodspeed, to the East Indies, if agreeable to me. To which I returned an
answer, that I had no objection. And now he is gone, having sailed about a
fortnight ago; since which, I have had the old story over again; my father
having had another discourse with me, in which he told me, that Mr. Danford was
now gone to a far distant country, (which plainly showed, as was always his
opinion, that he did not set much by me, notwithstanding all his professions of
esteem;) as he is now gone, said he, the matter is at an end. For now he has
plainly showed what he was after, that he wanted the lamb for the sake of her
fleece. For, when he saw that he was not likely to have any of my estate, his
love soon came to nothing; and now he has run away. Well, Polly, I can soon
make up your loss, for I have invited Mr. Stapleton to pay you another visit,
and I hope now he will have better success, since your idol has forsaken you.
And I hope you will receive him in a more polite manner than you did when he
was here before; at least, I hope you will receive him with common civility.
And what say you, Polly, to another visit from Mr. Stapleton?

Dear Sir, said I, if I tell you, that I cannot receive his visits, you will be
angry with me. But if I must answer you directly to your question, I must say,
that I don't desire to see him on any such account. And if he gives himself the
trouble of calling upon me, I cannot discourse with him upon the subject you
mentioned. Therefore I beg to be excused from seeing him at all, for it is
impossible for me to think of placing him in any other relation to me, than he
now stands in.

Polly, said my father, you are of an incorrigible temper, and take more
delight in displeasing me than any thing you do. If Mr. Stapleton was ever so
agreeable to you, yet, I believe you would reject him merely to displease me.

Sir, said I, I should be happy in pleasing my papa, if it was in my power. But
as for encouraging Mr. Stapleton, I cannot: for my worldly happiness does
wholly depend upon my not being connected with him. And do you, Sir, wish to
make me wretched for life? I cannot think you do -- but, dear Sir, let me be
excused from seeing Mr. Stapleton, dear Sir, do!

At this, my father broke out into a violent rage, and said, that if I did not
receive him kindly, he would turn me out of his house and disinherit me; and
never regard me again, any more than he would a stranger. He then charged me to
mind how I behaved myself, for he would not, he said, bear such treatment from
me in future. -- And so he dismissed me.

I went to my chamber, and spent the remainder of the day and evening in
lamenting my great affliction, and then wrote thus far, and shall still
continue, writing, until I have an opportunity to send you what I have written.

My dear Miss Sophia, I will now proceed with my narrative, and relate our
further proceedings; for I have had another discourse with my mother, and thus
it began. As my mother and I were sitting together, she bid the maid go down
and stay till she should ring for her. She then said to me, Polly, your father
is much set upon your receiving another visit from Mr. Stapleton; and perhaps,
as Mr. Danford has now left the country, you will think more favorable of Mr.
Stapleton than you did before. It being uncertain that Mr. Danford will ever
come near you again. For it appears to me that he would never have undertaken
such a voyage, had he set as high a value upon you as he pretended: for he
might well think you would be married to some other man in his absence. And
indeed I cannot find that he ever said a word to you about his going so long a
voyage: nor that he has ever sent you a letter since your father forbid him our
house. If that is the case, it is very probable he has done thinking of you in
any other view, than that of a common acquaintance.

Dear ma'am, said I, I cannot think of Mr. Stapleton; and I wish I might not be
under the necessity of seeing him again. But I don't see how I can avoid it:
and yet you told me that you would stand my friend; and do, dear mamma, stand
by me -- for I cannot think of having any body but Mr. Danford.

Well, Polly, said she, has Mr. Danford sent you any letters of late? Upon my
acknowledging that he had, she desired me to let her see them; and upon her
promising the utmost secresy, I consented; and immediately fetched her two
letters that I received from Mr Danford, and copies of the two letters that I
sent him, and gave them into her hand. She read them, and gave them to me again
-- saying, well, Polly, I see now, that the matter is settled between Mr.
Danford and you: and it will be in vain for Mr. Stapleton to renew his visits
to you. But I think it will be best for you to use him with politeness, on your
father's account; for I dread the consequence if you should not -- as your
father's heart seems to be bound up in Mr. Stapleton; and if you finally reject
him, I fear he will turn you off entirely, and wholly disinherit you.

Dear Madam, said I, as for his disinheriting me, it does not trouble me much
-- for great riches have not the charms with me that they have with some. -- My
heart is not wholly set on the things of this world. As to an estate, you know,
ma'am, that Mr. Danford is in possession of a good estate, and the interest
that my uncle left me, is something considerable -- which, placed together,
will make a fortune, fully answering the utmost of my wishes. But then I dread
my father's displeasure; and I would do any thing to gain his blessing,
consistent with my former solemn promises: for a parent's blessing is an
essential thing with me -- I prize that above all my father's estate. You don't
know, Madam, how many tears it has cost me already; for I do nothing but cry
night and day. -- But it gives me great consolation, to think you are my
friend, because, now I can unbosom my mind to you, which is a great relief to
me.

As for my being favorable to Mr. Stapleton, I cannot in any sense of the
word: for if I should, and then reject him, it would only exasperate my father
the more. And so I think it will be best to use him plainly: for if there must
be a storm with my father, it may as well be now, as six months hence. But if
matters should be desperate with my father, do be so kind, as to intercede with
him to let me go and pay my uncle Finter, of Philadelphia, a visit: my aunt
Finter having sent me a letter, desiring me to wait on her this season and
spend the winter there. Now, Madam, if you could prevail with my father, to
give his consent for me to go; and if I should stay there some time, perhaps,
something might turn up that would reconcile my father to me. At least it would
have this effect, that I should be out of the way of Mr. Stapleton; and then he
would soon address some other person; for one is as good as another, with him.
As he is void of any kind of love, or tender feelings, personal qualifications
are not an object with him. Doubtless, he would be glad of money; for his mind
is wholly set on the world. If he should marry some other person, it would
relieve me of that trouble; and, perhaps, something would turn up, that I might
gain my father's affections, and blessing; which would be a happy event to me.
And now, Madam, may not I depend on your aid in this matter? May I not?

Polly, said she, I will think on this matter, and perhaps I may assist you;
for I think it best for you to go to your uncle's, and spend the winter there.
And after this visit of Mr. Stapleton is over, I will importune your father on
your behalf. But you must keep these things to yourself, on my account. For
should your father know of this discourse, he would be displeased at me, as
well as at you.

Upon this, I went out; and now you see that I must have another interview with
Mr. Stapleton. And O, how I dread that interview! But I am resolved to use him
very plainly. Don't you think 'twill be the best way? Well, that must be the
subject of another letter; in the mean time, assure yourself that I am, etc.

POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER XI. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
My Dear Miss Sophia,
I WILL now continue my narrative, without much regard to method, as I am
writing to my Miss Sophia, who will make proper allowances.

Well, Mr. Stapleton has paid me another visit; and the creature came in full
assurance of success; being filled with a sense of his own importance. Indeed,
he is, naturally, very self-sufficient. Well, I thought I would use him with a
little pleasantry, to see if I could not shame him; and, at the same time,
divert my self. My father having introduced him to me, in form, immediately
withdrew. And he, seating himself by me, said, well, Miss Polly, I am come to
pay you another visit; and I hope it will be more agreeable to you now, than
when I called upon you the other day. What say you?

Perhaps, Mr. Stapleton, said I, you and I may become acquainted yet, in spite
of my best endeavors to the contrary. For you are so good, Sir, as to pay your
respects officiously. But I wish to know on what errand you have come; and then
I shall know how to discourse with you.

I have come, said he, upon the old score of courtship; and hope now, you will
not say to me, nay: seeing Mr. Danford is gone; that being your chief objection
before. And I expected to have been received now with open arms; and that you
would have been more earnestly engaged in the business, than I should myself.

It is a wonder, Sir, said I, that I have not been to your house, before now,
on this same business; but I beg you to excuse me, Sir, because it is not
agreeable to the rules of decorum, for a maiden to address a man on that
subject. But I must tell you, Sir, that I should think much better of you, if
you could distinguish between real affection, and real hatred. But I find you
are void of quick discernment, or else you are wilfully blinded, and will not
discern.

Be that as it may, said he, I will not give up my pretensions to you; as your
father promises to aid me all in his power. Nay, I will even worry you with my
visits, and perhaps, by and bye, you will think more favorably of me. And so I
do not despair of success yet.

Well Sir, said I, I am already greatly worried with your visits; and yet you
may well despair of success: for I declare positively, that you shall never
succeed with me. And if you had the least discernment, you would not have given
yourself the trouble to call upon me, at this time. And, indeed, had you the
least sense of honor, you would, now, quit all your pretensions; and try to
gain me my father's affection, that you have been the means of alienating from
me. Had you a generous heart, you would try to extricate me out of the
difficulty you have brought me into. But I cannot depend upon your generosity:
fearing that you are wholly destitute of that nobleness of mind. But you being
an egotist, and self-admirer, are led to think it impossible but that every one
must like you: And it is of no avail to use reason with you; because you are
not possessed, in any considerable degree of that noble qualification, which
raises the humane above the brutal creation. Perhaps, Sir, I shall raise your
choler; and I don't care if I do: because you deserve to be dealt plainly with,
at least, from me. For you have been the cause of great trouble and affliction
to me. And now, Sir, why will not you be so kind, as to quit all thoughts of me,
and let me try to extricate myself out of those entanglements, as well as I
can? For 'twill be fruitless, to say any thing more to me on that subject; as I
am fully determined in my own mind; and unalterably set against any alliance
with you, of such a nature. And, dear Sir, if you will give me no more trouble
on this score, I shall ever esteem you as my father's friend, and my benefactor.

But, said he, perhaps I shall get your father's displeasure, if I don't
persist. Indeed, I am almost discouraged: and if it was not for your father, I
would relinquish all pretensions to you; but I don't know how he will like it,
if I should. Dear Sir, said I, my father will not resent the matter with you;
but I shall feel the weight of his resentment. Then, Sir, you will leave me,
will not you? What say you to this?

I will not, said he, insist any more upon it at present; and so I hope you
will think as favorable of me as you can. So taking his leave of me, he went
out, and told my father, that he found me wholly averse to any alliance with
him; and thought it best to drop the matter; thanked my father for his
favorable opinion of him, took his leave of him, and withdrew.

I have not seen my father since, but I fear his displeasure greatly. Dear Miss
Sophia, these are trying scenes; for it is hard to disobey parents; but in this
thing, I cannot obey my father. Yet I would not wilfully do a wrong thing for
the world! And, O that I may so behave myself, as that I may, in some measure,
be blameless! But, Miss Sophia, one word to you. I have heard that Mr. Granbe
has paid his addresses to you. How is it? Is the account that I had of it true?
You must tell me, without any reserve. Well, he is a gentleman, in the true
sense of the word; is endowed with a noble mind, and worthy of any body's
esteem; and I am sure you will not slight him.

Well now, Miss Sophia, I shall expect a letter from you; for you have a good
subject now to write upon, and I want some of your advice. At the same time,
you may assure yourself, that

I am yours, etc. POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER XII. From Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON, to Miss POLLY GRANVILLE.
My dear Miss Polly,
I HAVE read your letters with emotion, and I feel for you in every line. Your
trials are truly complicated; having an angry father at home, who ought to give
you protection, and endeavor to secure your morals: but who, on the contrary,
is turned against you, and is trying to destroy them. And abroad, the man in
whom you placed your whole delight, is abandoning his country on your account.

Well, now let us look on the bright side. I am exceeding glad that you have
gained your mother over; and as you are rid of Mr. Stapleton, it is not likely
you will meet with any more trouble from that quarter; upon which event I do
heartily congratulate you.

Your proposition of going to your uncle's at Philadelphia, I think, is a good
thought of yours; for if you can once get there, perhaps you can easily gain
liberty to continue there till Mr. Danford returns; and I doubt not, but, by
the help of your mother, you will gain your father's consent to your going. I
know you ever had a desire to visit your aunt, and this will be a lucky
opportunity, as you will spring two mines at once; you will get clear of these
domestic disquietudes, and pay your aunt, and cousins, a visit at the same time.

Well, as to what you wrote about my own affairs, do you think I will acquaint
you with my love affairs; and let you into those transactions, which delicacy
and prudence, in our sex, require us to conceal? Yes, to my Miss Polly, I will
write, without any kind of reserve.

Well, the affair was introduced in the following manner. One day, as I sat in
the summer house, at the end of our garden, I saw my father enter the garden,
with Mr. Granbe. They walked the garden, and seemed to be engaged in discourse.
After taking several winding-walks, but still bending their course toward the
summer house, at length they came to the door. I arose, paid my respects, and
was going to withdraw; but my father said to me, Sophia, this gentlemen wishes
to have some discourse with you for a few minutes; and then he immediately
withdrew. We seated ourselves in the summer house, and discoursed together for
some time; since which he has renewed his visits often. He is a gentleman of a
noble mind and generous heart; is very polite, and seems to have a tender
regard for me: he is of a serious turn of mind; and, I think, one may fully
trust to his honor. But the most fortunate circumstance is, that he is a
favorite of my father's. Now, what objection can I have to such a man? Or what
objections have you to such an alliance for your Sophia? Will you send me your
thoughts on the subject, and at the same time continue your narrative? For I
must know all your proceedings; and so you must write without any reserve. And
at the same time, you may look upon me as your most faithful friend and servant,

SOPHIA DANIELSON.

LETTER XIII. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
My dear Miss Sophia,
AS it has been some time since I wrote to you, I have several things to inform
you of: for I have met with more hard things, and experienced more of my
father's displeasure. But now I am all joyous; and so you see I go from one
extreme to the other. But to continue my narrative. -- My father and I have had
another ecclaircissement: for he called upon me to explain to him, the reasons
of my conduct of late, and said he would have an answer to his question,
without the least evasion.

Sir, said I, what part of my conduct would you wish me to explain to you?

I will have you explain to me, said he, the reasons why you disobeyed me, in
not encouraging Mr. Stapleton.

There are many reasons, Sir, said I, which I can give, why I could not
encourage him. In the first place, he is a man that I could never love or
esteem; and then his morals are altogether naughty: for he cares not for right
or wrong. He is not possessed of that turn of mind that would be in any degree
agreeable to me -- for he seems to me to be formed for a tyrant. Why, he once
told me, that he should first take care to gain my obedience, and then look out
for my love and esteem. Now, Sir, that plainly shows that he means to make a
slave of his wife. And would you wish, Sir, that your daughter should live in a
state of vassalage all her days, and be in a worse condition than the meanest
of your dependants? And, indeed Sir, I should rather be a servant in some
families, than to be his wife. And I hope, Sir, you will forgive my seeming
disobedience, now you have heard my inducements to reject him.

But he is very rich, said my father, and you know money answers all things;
and why need you care about his morals, as long as he has money enough? His
morals will not effect you -- you may look to your own rectitude, and let his
alone. A large estate is all that you ought to look after, when going to be
married.

Dear Sir, said I, I must differ from you in sentiment relative to the choice
of a companion. Are not virtue and nobleness of mind, vastly preferable to
riches and grandeur? For riches may be suddenly taken from a man, and then if
he has nothing else to recommend him, he will be in a poor condition indeed. A
person of no morals is not to be trusted, but a virtuous person will be trusted
and respected in whatever station of life he may be in. As to a man's bad
morals not effecting his wife, I cannot join with you, Sir: for a man's word is
his wife's security: but where one cannot trust to her husband's honor, how
can she feel herself safe? And then, such an one will bring disgrace upon
himself; and how can the man be disgraced without his companion participating
in it? For that connection, let me remind you, dear Sir, is, or ought to be,
very near.

On the other hand, a virtuous man is ever the honor, and glory of his wife.
Such a man will ever come into one's presence with that serenity and
cheerfulness in his countenance, which is a true emblem of greatness of mind.
And indeed, such men, and such only, are capable of that tenderness, love, and
greatness of soul, that would ever cause me to delight in the other sex. And
now, Sir, I hope I have answered your demand, as to this subject.

Well, Polly, said he, you have disobliged me to that degree, that for the
future, I shall not give myself any trouble about you; and you must not expect
ever to share in my affections or estate, as you would if you had not disobeyed
me.

Dear papa, said I, if I may expect to have your blessing, I will be content,
as I shall prize that above any thing. And may not I expect* Sir, to have your
consent to my spending the winter with my aunt Finter, at Philadelphia? Do,
dear Sir, give me your consent to go, will you? I had rather you would go than
not, said he, and you may stay there, until you come home more obedient to your
father, than you are at present.

I thank you, Sir, said I, and it shall ever be my study to please my papa in
all things that I possibly can: for there is nobody that has a greater
affection for a father than I have, or would do more for a parent than I would.
And so I withdrew. But it was a hard task to me, to talk so much to my father
on that subject: for I am ever struck with an awe, when I come into his
presence, as he has a very stern majestic countenance, and seems to look one
through. Well, I am now preparing for my visit, and shall set out in less than
a month. I am determined to go in the stage-coach, being quite averse to water
carriage. And now you may see I am all life, having gained my point farther
than I expected. And who knows but I shall gain a complete deliverance after a
while. It is best, I see, not to run ourselves into ruin, but wait upon the
movements of Providence, and trust ourselves wholly to a divine care, which I
hope to do in some measure. And I will yet venture myself in the hands of that
Divine Power, who cannot do amiss.

Well, now, as to your affairs with Mr. Granbe. Why, your courtship goes on
swimmingly; and I suppose you have nearly arrived at the haven of matrimony.
Well, look out, if you should arrive there before I do. Do you ask for my
objections to Mr. Granbe? I have no objections; but, on the contrary, I think
he is a gentleman, in the genuine sense of the word; and that you cannot do
better than to receive his visits. And besides, it seems your family are all
delighted with him. And your father is a man of quick discernment, and is a
good judge of men, and their pretensions.

But I shall expect one letter more from you, before I set out on my visit. And
so conclude your friend and servant, POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER XIV. From Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON, to Miss POLLY GRANVILLE.
My dear Miss Polly,
I AM greatly rejoiced to find you have gained your father's consent to visit
your aunt Finter. I am inclined to think, that your sufferings on that score
are nearly at an end; for certainly, when Mr. Danford arrives at Philadelphia,
and finds you there, he will, doubtless, marry you without waiting for your
father's consent. And I don't see where the wrong will be, as he will find you
out of your father's protection. And as your father has threatened to
disinherit you, it will make no difference whether you please him, or not. If I
was in your place, I should be glad of such an opportunity to steal a march
upon them. Indeed, I could not help exulting a little, upon frustrating their
views, though they were my parents. But I don't know whether it would be right
or not. Perhaps you will send me your thoughts on the subject in your next
letter: for I expect to receive letters from you, even from Philadelphia. And
you must write all the occurrences relative to your courtship, until you are
married. And I shall expect one letter from you soon after you arrive there.

Well, as to my own affairs. You seem to threaten me if I should get married
before you; but you don't say what shall be the punishment. And therefore, it is
ten to one if I don't; for matters go on in as just a train as can be expected.
Mr. Granbe continues his visits, and I expect that we shall soon stand in a
different capacity to each other, than what we do at present. Well, when this
event takes place, I will write and inform you of it. And so I conclude,
wishing you peace and prosperity, and every enjoyment that life can afford.

SOPHIA DANIELSON.

LETTER XV. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Miss SOPHIA DANIELSON.
My dear Miss Sophia,
I AM now safely arrived at my uncle Finter's house in Philadelphia. My uncle
Finter is a very noble minded man indeed. He is an ornament to the age he lives
in; being, besides, otherwise qualified, quite a religious man. He has a large
estate, and carries on an extensive trade; and, of course, has a large family;
yet not one of his family is allowed to be absent at the time of prayers, which
are constantly performed by himself every night and morning. And all under his
care are enjoined to attend constantly on public worship, on the Lord's day;
except they have such an excuse as they dare appear before their Judge with, at
the last day. And all are commanded to let their conversation be modest* and to
live, as if they expected to give an account of their behavior and conduct in
life. After I have told you this, you may expect that they have a very modest,
regular family. And, indeed, I never lived in such a delightful family before.
For you know that religion always appeared beautiful to me. And how different
is this family from many in the world! And even from my father's! For he being
a lover of the world, gave himself no trouble about religious duties; in which
I always thought he was faulty. But it is my earnest prayer that he may see his
mistake, and reform, before it is too late. It Is my opinion, that if a man did
not think well of religion, yet he would find his account in setting up such a
regulation in his family; if it were only for the sake of the government of his
house. But my uncle is quite a thoughtful man; and takes delight in the
performance of his duty, which seems to impress one's mind with holy thoughts,
that carry one quite out of themselves, and give one the foretaste of those
delights that are reserved for them, who love virtue, and are willing to suffer
for religion. My uncle and aunt have been made acquainted with my story; are
very kind to me, and try to make me as easy as possible. And, as I am of a
sober turn of mind, my uncle takes delight in discoursing with me; and often
tells me, that I shall not go home again, until Mr. Danford returns He tells me
he has seen Mr. Danford, and was delighted with him at their first
acquaintance. If Mr. Danford, said my uncle, was not possessed of one copper of
estate* I should prefer him in every respect, to any rich, selfish clown
whatever. But I am informed, said he, that his circumstances are quite easy;
and you must make yourself easy with us, Polly, till Mr. Danford returns, who
will touch in here, as the ship is partly to unload in this port; and we will
write to your father, not doubting but his consent can be obtained to your
marriage. In the mean time, you must make yourself as easy, and as free, as if
you were in your father's house. And furthermore, child, said he, I desire you
would look upon me as a father, until your other father is reconciled to you;
which event, I have no doubt, will he brought about in a happy manner. In the
mean time, I shall look upon you as one of my daughters. And you must not
harbor a thought of being burdensome to us; for we delight to have you in the
family, and shall regret your departure, whenever the time comes that we must
be deprived of you. And so you see, Miss Sophia, that I may make myself easy;
and indeed I should, if I had but my father's blessing. But what do you think I
could say to my uncle? Why I could do nothing but cry for joy, I think, which
my uncle saw with pleasure: for he is a man of discernment, and can distinguish
between tears of joy, and those of a troubled heart. But I recovered myself as
well as I could, and thanked him for his kindness to, and tenderness of me. But
my heart seemed as if it would have left its orbit, on such a tender discourse
as this was. For having had nothing but rough usage of late, and now having all
these tender expressions heaped on me; indeed it was almost too much for me.
But my uncle and aunt often discourse on these subjects, and sometimes on
religion; and indeed they try all in their power to make my present situation
agreeable to me.

I will now give you some account of my cousins. My uncle has four children,
three daughters and a little son. The oldest daughter is about fourteen; named
Sally, after my aunt. She is a sweet girl, and I take great delight in her
company; and indeed we are almost always together. And it seems to please my
uncle much, that I set so much by her; for he is very fond of his children; and
well enough he may be, they being very promising, and modest behaved.

Now, as to my journey, I came in the stage, attended only by my maid Ann, who
has engaged to stay with me until I return. She is a sober, well-behaved girl;
is enamoured with the regularity of the family, and wishes she could always
live in such an one.

As there was nothing uncommon in our journey, I shall pass it over. But as to
what you said, about my marrying without my father's consent, and stealing a
march upon them, and then exulting in their mortification, I shall never agree
to it: for I hold myself bound to obey my father still, as much as if he had
not used me with such severity; and I shall not be married without his consent,
if it is possible to obtain it. But I can make little dependence on that;
although my uncle has promised to gain his consent, if possible. When you are
married, I hope you will write to inform me; and if you write by the post, I
shall soon get your letters.

Yours, POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER XVI. From Mrs. SOPHIA GRANBE, to Miss POLLY GRANVILLE.
My Dear Miss Polly,
YOUR letter has been received, and has given me very pleasing sensations; to
think you was so delightfully received by your uncle and aunt. What a good and
amiable man your uncle is! One that is formed to soothe the distressed, ease
the burdened, and comfort the troubled. You may well feel yourself easy in such
a house as his is; it being every way calculated to allay the troubles of the
mind. For where there is so much good nature, modesty, regularity, and real
religion, one cannot help being calm in one's mind. A ship's crew, that for
many days, has been beaten, and drove about with a violent storm, and all at
once, find themselves in a safe and commodious harbor, must feel a
satisfaction inexpressible: so it must have been with my dear Miss Polly, after
having escaped the rocks and quicksands which you had like to been driven
among; to find yourself in so good a harbor as your uncle's is. And I do
greatly rejoice that you have got safely at your uncle's house.

But now, as to my own affairs; I have been married these two months, and have
got to housekeeping, if you will believe me. Perhaps you may think that we were
in haste. But Mr. Granbe's circumstances required it; and what objection could
I have to it? Well, you will want to know how my -- what shall I call him? Why,
a husband -- and so there you have the word at large. Well, as I was going to
say, you will want to know how he behaves to me. Why, very politely. But he is
not one of those frantic lovers, that heap all upon one at once; and then have
no more to say about love, or affections all their days afterward. But he
leaves something for improvement; and indeed, he does improve in his attentions
to me every day. And then, he is always the most complaisant to me in company:
and never says any thing at my expense, in company. There are some men, that
will say shocking things of their wives, only to raise a laugh in company; and
don't think of what will be the effect; which will inevitably be this, that
other men will take the same liberty of speech with them, they do themselves.
But Mr. Granbe is not ashamed to be polite to, and tender of me, in company:
Indeed he is a very regular, sober man in his house; and keeps up those
regulations in his family, that you speak so highly of in your uncle. And he
being a man that has all my affections and esteem, I feel myself entirely easy
in my situation.

Well now, one word about your father; he has met with some capital losses
since you went away, which has considerably perplexed his affairs; and I heard,
by the bye, that he applied to your brother Murfee for assistance; and that he
refused to help him. For Murfee is just such another as himself. And he might
well think he would not help him. He will look well at home, and let others
shift for themselves: for he does not care who sinks, if he can swim. But I
feel grieved for your mother; for she is certainly a delightful woman! Indeed
she is.

In the mean time, you may assure yourself, that I am Your friend and servant,
SOPHIA GRANBE.

LETTER XVII. From Mrs. GRANVILLE, to her Daughter POLLY.
Ever Dear Daughter,
AS I have not written you a letter since you have been at your uncle's, except
just to inform you of our health, etc.

I will now inform you of our circumstances, which are in a distressful
situation. For we have lost a ship, and a brig: both richly loaded. The ship
returning from the East Indies, with a very valuable cargo, was cast away, and
all lost. The brig met with the same fate; and the rest of our shipping have
made but small returns. In consequence of these losses, your father has been
obliged to mortgage the largest part of his landed interest; and in vain has he
applied to your brother Murfee for relief; although the estate is mortgaged for
not more than half of its real value; and though he offered to secure the lands
to your brother, if he would only take up the mortgage, so that the estate
might not go out of the family; yet he refused, and returned him this answer,
that he would not involve himself to help another out of difficulty. And if he
had been so unwise, as to run himself into irretrievable ruin, he must abide by
the consequence.

You and your sister Jenny, are all the children we have left; for Murfee has
wholly abandoned us: and your father has used Mr. Danford and you so roughly,
that if Mr. Danford was at home, and you were married, we could not expect any
relief from you. The thoughts of which, together with our present distress, is
almost too much for me.

But this trouble has had so good effect on your father, that it has opened his
eyes, to see the difference between riches and virtue. And he says, that he
repents heartily of his folly, in using Mr. Danford and you with such severity;
and wishes to see Mr. Danford, that he might immediately ask his forgiveness,
and make an offer of you to him. He is, also, rejoiced to think, that you
escaped Mr. Stapleton.

I can now inform you, that Mr. Stapleton is married, and to just such another
as himself; and, that they live very unhappily together. Indeed they have had
their house on fire two or three times, already; and, at such times, she seeks
refuge at her father's; and then Mr. Stapleton has nothing to do, but to tackle
his coach and go after her. And after some abatement on both sides, she is
willing to go home with him again: and thus they must wear out a miserable life
together; being never likely to enjoy any peace or happiness in this world. And
what a blessing it is, my dear, that you steered clear of this rock!

My dear child, you must forgive your father; indeed you must! For he loves you
as well as a father ought to love a child: and I really believe, that his
severity to you, at that time, was designed by him for your good. But your
father thinks otherwise now; for he sees there is a great disparity between
virtue and vice; and that virtue, with poverty, is preferable to vice
accompanied with riches; and so, Polly, you will forgive your father, will not
you? And I should be glad if you would send us a letter, and tell us whether
you can, and will forgive us, or not. And O, that you was here with us. But all
in good time* For I suppose you look for Mr. Danford, by this time; and I would
not deprive you of an interview with him, at his arrival, by desiring you to
come home; knowing that his absence has been very tedious to you; your heart, I
know, being always with him. For you two seem to be formed for each other: and
I hope, ere long, you will stand in a nearer relation to one another, than you
have heretofore done.

As to our misfortunes, they are very grievous to the mind; being repugnant to
nature, and an idea of grandeur. But, no doubt, they are designed for our good,
and, perhaps, will terminate for our happiness in this world, as well as in
that which is to come; for it will certainly serve to wean us from the world.
And I think it has had a good effect on your father already; who has become a
great advocate for virtue, and speaks well of religion. And now, my dear
daughter, let us live in this world, as if we expected that this was not our
abiding place; and let us use the things of this world as only lent to us, and
be willing to part with them at any time, when the great Bestower of every
blessing shall think best to deprive us of them. For we, and all we have, are
at his disposal. And it is best for us to rejoice at all times, that we are in
his hands, who cannot do a wrong thing: "For shall not the God of all the earth
do right?" And my dear child, let us so live, as that we shall not be afraid to
die.

That you may be returned to us in peace, experience every blessing while in
this world, and at last be received by your Judge in peace, is the earnest
prayer of your affectionate mother,

MARY GRANVILLE.
P. S. Your father sends his blessing to you, and wishes you every good that
this world can afford; together with peace of mind, which is the best gift of
heaven.



LETTER XVIII. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to her Mother.
Dear and Honored Mother,
I RECEIVED your kind letter; and it greatly rejoiced my heart, to find you so
kind to me, and to have you relate your affairs to me, especially my father's
reformation. And, dear ma'am, if the loss of his estate has opened his eyes, to
see the emptiness of the things of this world, when compared to virtue; and to
see the preference of religion to riches; I think he has gained more than he
has lost. And O, ma'am, how acceptable was my father's blessing to me, which I
prize above all my father's estate. Upon reading your kind letter, to find my
father was well inclined to Mr. Danford, and that he gave his consent to our
marriage; and then to receive his blessing in form, was almost too much for me.
Tears of joy ran plentifully from my eyes; and, indeed, it seemed to raise me
above myself; and I was in such an ecstacy, that 'twas some time before I could
find myself descended to my proper orbit again.

As for my father, I do most heartily forgive, and will entirely forget
whatever he has done, that was grievous to me. And, dear ma'am, tell him that I
will do all in my power, to extricate him out of his present embarrassment. You
know the estate that my uncle left me, has been let for a number of years, and
the rent is now due; which, with the money that I have on interest, will amount
to a considerable sum; and, if he chooses, he may call on my trustee for that
money, before my return.

But I hope it will not be long before I shall have the happiness of throwing
myself before you both, and receiving your blessing from your own mouths. For
Mr. Danford has arrived here, having made a capital return; and will accompany
this, with a letter to my father.

I showed him the letter that I received from you; and he was much pleased that
my father was reconciled to him. My uncle will write, and therefore I shall not
say any thing about him. And I suppose you have seen the letter I sent to Mrs.
Sophia Granbe; for which reasons, I shall not give you any account of my
uncle's family; only that they continue to show me every mark of affection and
kindness; and seem to be as tender of me, as if I was one of their daughters.
My uncle is set upon it, that I shall be married at his house: he always calls
me his eldest daughter; and he says, his eldest daughter shall not be married
out of his house.

Dear mamma, you must think of these things, and at the same time, you may
assure yourself, that I am your dutiful and affectionate daughter,

POLLY GRANVILLE.

LETTER XIX. From Mr. DANFORD, to Mr. GRANVILLE.
Honored Sir,
PERMIT me to address you with a line on a very tender and interesting subject;
and, dear Sir, let it meet with your approbation. When I arrived at this place,
Mr. Finter informed me that your daughter was at his house; and invited me to
wait upon her, which I did with the greatest pleasure imaginable: for I need
not inform you, that she engrosses all my attention, and that my heart is
wholly here is; and sorry I am, that there was any misunderstanding between you
and I. But I flatter myself, that what you did at that time proceeded from a
true paternal care of, and affection toward your daughter, and not to any
personal dislike to myself. In hopes of a more favorable reception, I venture
to address you on that subject again, and ask your consent to our marriage. And
if such an alliance will be agreeable to you* Sir, may not I expect to have a
letter from you? For I must tell you, that I cannot make myself happy without I
can call her my own; for my worldly happiness does greatly depend on that
alliance.

I hope, Sir, you will forgive me in every particular, wherein I might have
incurred your displeasure in times past; and will rest assured of your kind
condescension toward me, and shall hold myself obliged to obey you in
whatsoever commands you shall be pleased to lay upon me. At the same time, Sir,
assure yourself, that I am your friend, and humble servant,

JAMES DANFORD.

LETTER XX. From Mr. FINTER, to Mr. GRANVILLE.
Ever honored, and much esteemed Brother and Sister,
WE have heard of your losses and misfortunes, and do truly sympathize with you
in your troubles. But we must consider that these are all the doings of
Providence, whose ways are past finding out, and knows how to lay afflictions
on his children; and at the same time, bring good out of evil. For many times
he does try them in the furnace of affliction, that those virtues, which lay
buried in the dross of the world, may shine forth and be conspicuous to those
that are around them. And I doubt not, but these afflictions of yours will all
work for your good. Nay, I am morally certain, that they will. You must be
patient, arming your mind with virtue and religion.

But I have another subject to write upon: for Mr. Danford has returned from
the East Indies, and has arrived here with the richest cargo I ever saw. He has
taken up his lodgings at my house, and I am enamoured with him. For indeed,
brother, he is every thing one could wish for in a gentleman. He has a noble
mind, that is above every little action, is sober, virtuous, and well-bred:
and, in short, he is endowed with every accomplishment that will bespeak one's
esteem and affections. I understand you did not affect Mr. Danford before he
went his voyage; but I hope you have thought better of the matter since: for I
must tell you, that if he addressed one of my daughters, and had not the tenth
part of the estate which he now has, yet I should rather encourage him, than
that she should be married to one of an independent fortune, who wanted his
endowments. And as Polly has been some time with us, (and indeed I look upon
her as one of my own daughters) I must request you to consent, that she may
give her hand to Mr. Danford, who is, at present, in possession of her heart.
And I intend she shall be married at my house, and you must give your consent
to both of these proposals; for indeed, I cannot be denied. After which Mr.
Danford will convey her to your house, and in him you will find a son, that you
will not be ashamed of. I shall depend upon a letter from you, as soon as you
can convey it, for I have begun to prepare for the nuptials already. And so you
see I am set upon having them celebrated at my house, and you must not deny me.

Well, a word in regard to my family, who are in health, and send their love
and respects to you and yours, hoping you are enjoying the same blessing; and
that you may yet live to see many prosperous days, and at the last enjoy
endless happiness, wishes and prays,

Your friend and brother, CHARLES FINTER.

LETTER XXI. From Mr. GRANVILLE, to Mr. DANFORD.
Much honored Sir,
I RECEIVED your letter, and am rejoiced that you have arrived in safety to
this country again. I want to see you very much; for my behavior toward you
before you went your voyage, was altogether exceptionable; and indeed, I am
greatly ashamed of my conduct, for which I now ask your forgiveness.

But in your letter, you ask my forgiveness. Does Mr. Danford ask my
forgiveness? And for what? I am sure, Sir, you never wronged me in the least --
your behavior, Sir, was ever consistent with virtue, and a religious mind --
whilst mine was quite the reverse. For at that time my whole mind was set on
riches and grandeur. But since your absence, I have experienced such
vicissitudes in fortune, as I think has fully opened my eyes. And now it
appears to me, that wealth ought not to be mentioned in comparison of virtue.
Indeed, Sir, religion appears beautiful to me. And now I hope you will not look
upon me with abhorrence, as I know you love those who love religion.

You wrote to me for my consent to your entering into an alliance with our
family, which I freely grant with pleasure: and you may either bring Polly home
before you are married, or may complete your happiness at my brother's -- as
you choose. For my brother is somewhat earnest that the ceremony should be
performed at his house. I shall expect you will pay your compliments to us as
soon as you conveniently can: for you must not resent my conduct to you. And as
I know you are of a kind, forgiving temper, I doubt not but you will overlook
those faults I have been guilty of. And do tell Polly, that she should forgive
me the wrong I have done her, and not think hard of me. For at that time I did
really think, that I was seeking her good. But a person that is blinded with
the world, will many times do wrong things; and let her be assured, that I love
her as well as a father ought to love a child -- Jenny and she, being all the
children that we have left.

Mr. Murfee's behavior toward us, has been quite exceptionable: for he
deserted us in the greatest of our difficulty, and has quite forsaken our
family. But all is for the best, for it gave me a dislike to those men who make
this world their god; and it gave me a relish to virtue and religion. And I do
rejoice now that those things have befallen me.

And now, dear Sir, let me commend you to the divine care and keeping; and may
we live in the exercise of those virtues that will recommend us in this world,
and that which is to come.

Allow me to conclude, by sending you my blessing,

WILLIAM GRANVILLE.

LETTER XXII. From Mr. GRANVILLE, to Mr. FINTER.
Honored Brother,
I RECEIVED your kind letter with pleasure, being rejoiced to hear of your
welfare. And O, how acceptable was your kind condolence for our affliction, and
your so seasonable advice to us under those misfortunes! It seemed like a
cordial to the fainting heart. And indeed, brother, the letters that we have
received from your house, have put new life into us. For the ways of
Providence, many times, appear to us to be intricate and full of windings, and
we can no ways comprehend them. But how often is it that these things which we
think are against us, are the very means designed for our good. And how often
is it that those adverse providence toward us, work a change in our minds,
and brings the creature to see his dependence on the Supreme Being. When this
is the case, the person afflicted, can kiss the rod, and say, "It is good for
me that I have been afflicted." And I humbly hope, that this is the effect
which trouble has produced in my mind: for the world does not appear to me as
it used to. And indeed I think I have a real love for virtue and religion. I
believe you will rejoice at this declaration, as coming from one that used to
make the world his chiefest good. But, dear Sir, you must own me now for a
brother, in a double sense. And I flatter myself that you will -- for I know
that virtue and religion was ever your boast, and you ever seemed to live above
the world, although your possessions were large in it. This is the more
admirable in you, as it is rare, for a very rich man to mind those things which
will terminate in true happiness.

As to what you wrote to me, concerning Mr. Danford, and Polly, I have wrote to
Mr. Danford, and have given my consent to their union; it will be needless for
me to say any thing to you about it. You wrote to me, desiring, that they might
be married at your house. I should be very glad to have the ceremony performed
at my house. But, as my daughter Polly found a father in you; I shall submit
the matter to have it performed, where it shall be most agreeable to you.

As to your recommendation of Mr. Danford, I must tell you, that he now stands
as high in my esteem, as he does, or can do, in yours. And I now see the folly,
in doing, as I did, by him and Polly. For I really carried my resentment to an
outrageous extremity. But as I now repent of my folly, I hope they will both
forgive me. And I am determined to ask their forgiveness in form. You must tell
them, that I have fully repented of what I did to them; and try to engage them
to think well of me; and I know they are both of a kind forgiving temper;
therefore, I flatter myself, that they will be reconciled to me, and that we
shall yet be happy in each other.

Your sister desires to join with me, in sending our love to you and your
family. That these may find you as they leave us, enjoying health, and peace of
mind, prays your affectionate brother, and humble servant,

WILLIAM GRANVILLE.

LETTER XXIII. From Miss POLLY GRANVILLE, to Mrs. SOPHIA GRANBE.
My dear Mrs. Granbe,
I MUST write you the particulars of Mr. Danford's arrival, and also of our
marriage. As to the first, my uncle came home one day, and said he had been in
company with a choice friend of his, and that he had invited him to take tea
with us in the afternoon, desiring the family might be properly dressed to
receive him. And as he was a particular friend of his, he hoped we would
receive him as politely as possible. All this time I did not in the least
mistrust who it should be; but my aunt told me afterward that she did; for,
upon her asking my uncle who this friend of his could be, whom he wished us to
receive with so much parade? He answered, that perhaps she might know him when
he came; and so waved the subject.

Well, after dining, we all dressed anew; and the whole house was so disposed,
as to receive the unknown stranger with all the politeness imaginable. My aunt,
her daughter, and I, were setting together in the parlour, when my uncle
entered, and with him Mr. Danford, Upon seeing him I arose, and immediately run
into his arms; for the surprise was so sudden, I knew not what I did. O, Mr.
Danford, said I. And indeed that was all I could say; for the interview was too
much for my weak frame of body to bear; and I fainted in his arms, which
greatly perplexed the company; but they soon recovered me again. My dear, said
my aunt to my uncle, you did not do well to surprise our niece to this degree.
But my uncle said that he did not in the least expect it would have had such an
effect on me; and that I must forgive him.

After the first emotion was over, Mr. Danford said a hundred tender things to
me, and soothed me in the best manner he could. And indeed, he never appeared
to me in such an amiable light before; for he was richly dressed: and besides,
there was that nobleness in his looks, which denotes real grandeur, and
conscious greatness. And he seemed to be more tender of me now, than when I was
in prosperity in my father's house; and says, he is glad it is in his power to
retrieve my father's affairs, which, he says, he means to do, as soon as he
arrives in those parts again, My dear Polly, said he to me, you must not think
hard of me, though your sufferings have been great on my account; nor for my
leaving this country at the time of your trouble; for it was attended with
pungent grief to me; and was wholly on your account in order to gain you your
liberty. And I cannot but hope, that your father thinks more favorably of me
by this time. Dear Sir, said I, you know my mind relative to your going abroad;
and it is matter of joy to me, and exalts you in my esteem, that you did not
abandon me under the insulting treatment you met with, from my father. But I
know, Sir, that you are not capable of any meanness; that your mind is steady
and consistent; and I ever supposed it was safe trusting to your word. And as
to what you said concerning my father's thinking better of you now than
formerly, I can assure you, Sir, that he does: for I have a letter, in my
hands, which makes it obvious that my father's mind is quite altered from what
it used to be.

And indeed, Mrs. Granbe, his eyes glistened with noble sensibility And there
seems to be a meaning in every turn of his countenance. Well, after he had
seated himself again, I put my mother's letter into his hand which contained
the particulars of my father's affairs; which he read several times over; and
then said, I am exceeding sorry for your father's misfortune. But, as your
mother writes, it may be all for the best. As for Mr. Murfee, it seems he has
behaved in a most shocking manner. Not to assist in their distress, the family
he is so nearly connected with, discovers neither the son, nor the humane
heart. How could he be so cruel? Is it possible that the noble creature, man,
should be so void of humanity? But your father, my dear Polly, stands high in
my esteem; and I love him with a real affection. And it shall be one of my
first concerns, when I return home, to set your father on as good a footing as
he was before. There ever was a dignity in that man's looks, which excited my
veneration. And now to have the gracious mind, joined to his other noble
qualifications, will really set him in a sphere above any in those parts. What
say you, Polly, to these propositions?

Dear Sir, said I, such generosity, and unmerited kindness, is almost too much
for me to bear. And what shall I do on my part, to deserve all this goodness
from you? But it is consistent with your noble turn of mind. You will then
forgive my father, and think well of him, and forget what he has done to you?
Yes, my dear, said he, I will. For I ever thought that his severity was owing
to his love to you. For, though his aims were wrong, yet, doubtless, his
intentions were good. And it is our duty to think as well of him now, since he
has repented of that evil, as if he had never been guilty of it. Dear Sir, said
I, your generosity is without an equal; and it shall be my care to merit as
much with you as I can.

My uncle and aunt also gave their minds on this topic; but I have confined
myself wholly to what he said on the subject. Well, Mr. Danford took up his
lodgings at my uncle's, upon his invitation; so that we were more or less
together every day. Mr. Danford wrote to my father for his consent to our
marriage, and received an answer full of kind expressions, with a cheerful
consent to our marriage, which raised every tender emotion in Mr. Danford, and
occasioned his saying many tender things to me on that subject. Indeed, he is
always full of complacency to me; and is exceeding polite to me in company;
ever showing me that preference, when in company, which is characteristic of
the real lover, and generous mind.

My uncle wrote to my father for his consent to our being married at his house;
which my father gave him, in a letter full of endearing expressions, at least
they were so to me, for it was a penitent one; my father condemning himself,
and speaking exceeding well of virtue, which was pleasing to us all. But my
uncle said, that my father ever stood high in his esteem; and he thought that
he never lacked but one thing, which was religion. And now he is possessed of
that qualification, he must, in my esteem, outshine any that I know of.

And Polly, said he, you may, and ought to rejoice, that you have suffered; for
that, I believe, has partly been the means of opening his eyes. And you may now
return to your father, who will set more by you than if you had never offended
him: and I hope neither Mr. Danford, nor you, will retain the least resentment
against him. But, on the contrary, endeavor to soothe him, mitigate his
affliction, and make his mind as easy as possible, under his present
difficulties; and you will be richly paid for what you do for him* even in
worldly interest: for your father is yet in possession of a considerable estate.

Mr. Danford said, that he would make it one of his first concerns after his
return home, to deliver my father out of all difficulty. And as for his
behavior to him in times past, he should entirely bury it in oblivion* I also
assured my uncle, that my parents should have no reason to find fault with my
behavior to them. I am rejoiced, said my uncle, to hear you make this
declaration! And as my brother has consented for you to be married at my house,
agreeable to the request I made in my letter to him, you may set the time when
the ceremony shall be performed, and we will make preparations accordingly.

Mr. Danford said that he wished to have his happiness completed, as soon as it
conveniently could be, and so they set the day. After this, my uncle brought
home several pieces of silk, for me to choose a suit out of; and would insist
on my making a choice, which I accordingly did. He furnished me with a suit
complete, and Mr. Danford gave me a second-day suit. Now you will think that
your Polly was gorgeously apparelled; well, so I was, and they would have it
so; for my uncle intended to invite many of his friends, to attend the
nuptials. Well, at length the appointed time came; but I did not find myself
cheerful as usual; neither could I make myself so for the life of me. Indeed I
have often wondered how a person can enter into that solemn covenant, with such
gaiety, and thoughtlessness as I have seen some: for it does appear to me to be
a solemn undertaking; and it always used to impress my mind with awe, to see a
couple married. But then, many look upon marriage to be only a ceremony,
prefixed by the civil authority, to oblige a man to take care of his wife, and
to keep families from separating. But I always looked upon marriage to be a
divine ordinance; and it is obvious from the word of truth, that it is so. But
now, when I came to enter into that covenant myself, it appeared more awful to
me than ever. But I was resolved to hold up as well as I could.

Well, the messenger coming in to inform us, that they were ready to receive
us, Mr. Danford took me by the hand, and spoke very encouraging to me; so we
stepped into the other room; but tremble, tremble went my feet all the way! Lay
still, said I, you little fool! why should you be so uneasy? For my heart was
ready to leave its orbit. After the first flutter was over, I held up better,
while the ceremony was performing, than I was afraid I should.

As to our guests, my uncle had got together a noble circle of the best gentry
in the city; and after the nuptials were over, they were nobly entertained by
him; and all was conducted in a modest, sociable manner; and after we had spent
a very agreeable evening together, the company withdrew, about eleven; and the
next day we had again a considerable company; and indeed we were obliged to
give up the whole week to entertainment and pleasure. We had so much parade,
that I was quite tired of it.

Well, the next Sunday I must be dressed to the best advantage, to make our
public appearance at church* For my uncle is a man of note here, and Mr.
Danford is looked upon very highly in this city; all seeming to be fond of an
acquaintance with him. After dressing myself very richly, agreeable to their
desire, we set out, attended by my uncle and aunt, and a young couple, that my
uncle invited for that purpose. When we came to the meeting house, my uncle
aided us into his pew; but it gave me another flutter, in spite of all I could
do; for the eyes of all the congregation were upon us. But the solemnity of the
place awed my mind into a frame of devotion; and so I held up better than I
expected.

There was nothing more occurred that was remarkable, except that the next week
we were crowded with company.

Now, I will tell you what preparations we are in to return to my father's. As
Mr. Danford did not own a coach, he has bought one here; and so we shall ride
home in state. But we shall not be accompanied by any besides my maid and the
coachman.

I forgot to tell you, that Mr. Danford, before we were married, presented my
maid Ann with a new suit, which mightily pleased her.

Mr. Danford has adjusted all his affairs relative to the cargo he has had
unloaded here; and the Captain is to proceed with the ship, whilst we go by
land. We shall set out sometime next week, so that you may soon expect us in
your part of the country again. I long to receive my father's blessing from his
own mouth, and again to embrace my dear Sophia. With which pleasing hopes, I
hasten to subscribe myself yours,

POLLY DANFORD.

LETTER XXIV. From Mrs. POLLY DANFORD, to her Uncle and Aunt FINTER.
Ever dear, and much honored Uncle and Aunt,
AS you engaged me to write to you, and inform you of our arrival at my
father's house, and how he received us, etc. and as it was ever a pleasure to
me to obey my second father and mother, as I used to call you, I will proceed,
hoping you will make allowances for my imperfections.

Setting out from your house at Philadelphia, we came by easy journies,
stopping a day or two at every town of note, till we arrived at this town, and
put up at Mr. Danford's cousin Fitcher's. Mr. Fitcher is a very polite
gentleman, but as we did not arrive till dark, we had no company that night,
and glad I was that we had not.

Mr. Danford and Mr. Fitcher had much discourse about my father. Mr. Fitcher
said, he believed my father would be able to carry on his trade, though he had
met with great losses. But his landed interest was mortgaged; and he believed
that his farms must be lost to him, as he did not think it possible for him to
redeem them, which was a pity -- for they were mortgaged for not more than one
half of their real value. And upon Mr. Danford's enquiry, he told him, that the
mortgage was not out, and that the man who held the deeds was my father's
friend; and wanted nothing more, than to be made whole, and would give them up
at any time.

The next morning Mr. Danford went to see the man who had the deeds, and soon
after came in and delivered me all the deeds of my father's farms, (and you
know he was in possession of several farms.) Upon handing me the papers, he
said, my dear, you may give them to your father, or I will myself, as you shall
think proper. But I returned him the papers, choosing he should deliver them
himself.

Soon after, Mr. Danford sent a servant to my father's, to inform him that we
were in town, and if he wished to see us at his house, and to know when he
would have us wait upon him, who returned for answer, that he should expect us
in the afternoon. Accordingly, after dining, we went in the coach. Mr. Danford
would have me dressed in the suit my uncle gave me, and he was charmingly
dressed himself.

When we arrived at my father's, we were met at the door, and conducted into
the parlour, where my father and mother were waiting, ready to receive us. --
When we entered the parlour, my father, rising, said, welcome, Mr. Danford,
into these parts again; and thrice welcome to my house! And after Mr. Danford
had returned him the usual compliment of thanks, my father, stepping to him,
took his hand and said, I ask your forgiveness, Sir, for the ill usage I showed
you before you went your Eastern voyage. -- Sir, said Mr. Danford, you did
nothing uncommon to me -- nothing at least, that requires forgiveness: but if
you are anxious, Sir, for a further declaration, I am ready to satisfy you. And
if you think you have done any thing to me that was unbecoming a gentleman in
your capacity, I do freely forgive you. And shall ever respect and behave
toward you, as if there never had been any misunderstanding between us: and
hope, Sir, that I shall be enabled to conduct myself toward you and others,
that you will not disdain to call me your son. At this, Mr. Danford took me by
the hand and presented me to him, saying, dear Sir, your daughter -- will you
be pleased to receive her into favor, and give her your blessing?

My father took me by the hand, and I dropping on my knees before him, said,
dear Sir, will you forgive your Polly, and grant her your blessing? At this, my
father raising me up, said, stand up, my dear child -- for I want to ask you,
whether you can, and will forgive me freely from your heart, all the severity
that I used toward you? Dear Sir, said I, you must not ask your Polly such a
question! But Polly, said he, if you can forgive me, you must say you will.
Dear Sir, said I, I do forgive you whatever you may have done amiss to me: and
now, Sir, you will give me your blessing and receive me into favor again,
will not you?

My blessing you have, said he, and may you both be a blessing to each other!
And may you enjoy the best of heaven's blessings; and be an honor to the place
you live in! And I am satisfied, because you are returned to us in peace; and
do not despise us, but will yet look upon us with love, and filial affections.
Then turning to my mother, he said, my dear, here I present you with a son and
daughter, that would do honor to any family on earth.

Then my mother took us both by the hand, and welcomed us to her house. Saying,
that she promised herself great comfort in us, seeing the former
misunderstandings were to be buried in oblivion. After we were seated, and had
got into conversation, Mr. Danford asked my father concerning the perplexed
state of his affairs, which he has hinted at in his letter to him? And whether
he had been able to extricate himself out of these difficulties, that he then
labored under?

My father answered, that his affairs were much in the same situation that they
were when he wrote; only, that he believed he was rather upon the gaining hand.

At this, Mr. Danford stepped to him, and gave him the mortgage deeds, which he
had purchased; and said, there is a small present, Sir; and if you are
elsewhere involved, and will notice the matter to me, I shall hold myself
obligated to extricate you as soon as possible. But when my father came to see
what he gave him, he rose up, and said, Sir, your kindness is too great for me
to bear! But as you have done this, I will immediately put you into the
possession of all those farms that you have restored to me

Sir, said Mr. Danford, I did not present them to you to be repaid again; and I
shall not receive any security on that account.

Now I see, said my father, the triumph of the virtuous mind over the covetous
worldling. For there is no comparison between the man that squares all his
doings by the rule of religion; and one that makes this world his idol, and is
hurried on by an impetuous desire after riches and grandeur. Then turning to my
mother, said, how unlike this, was our son Murfee? For we offered him the land,
if he would only take up the deeds, so that the estate might not go into the
hands of a stranger. But he refused us with contempt; and made himself strange
to our family, and forgot the duty of a child to a parent. But then, Murfee is
wholly a man of this world, and makes no distinction between virtue and vice;
riches and grandeur appearing to be the most essential articles in his creed.
And we see, my dear, continued he, in every occurrence of life, the preference
of virtue to wealth. And I desire to be thankful, that of late my eyes have
been opened in such a measure as to make the distinction. Then turning to Mr.
Danford, said, I acknowledge, Sir, that the kindness you have done me is great;
and that the principle from which you govern these actions must be wholly
centered in virtue. And, in future, I shall look upon you in as near a relation
as if you were my own son: and shall insist upon your joining your interest
with mine, that we may carry on an inseparable trade together: and what I have
in the world you must look upon as your own. And you must not think of living
in any house but mine. It is capacious enough for two families; and you must
not deny me this request; for I shall always want your person near me. Your
counsel and conduct will be a means to strengthen these good principles, and
laudable desires, that begin to bud forth in my heart.

And then turning to me he said, happy, thrice happy is my dear Polly! who was
enabled to withstand my anger, and to despise what then looked promising, as to
the things of this world; having her views wholly governed by virtue. You have
at last, my dear child, escaped all the snares that were laid for you; and now
your perseverance is crowned by an alliance with one of the noblest men this
age can produce. May you spend many happy days together; and, finally, may you
be unseparated in the world of joy and happiness!

My dear uncle and aunt, you may well think this discourse was pleasing to me.
How pleasing indeed must it be, to see my father's eyes glisten with rapture,
and his looks full of noble sensibility; every word being spoke with energy,
and his countenance carrying a meaning in it, beyond the power of words to
express! My mother seemed to indulge the anticipation of what might be the
result of this interview; tears of joy sometimes escaping her eyes, though she
seemed to strive against it. And, indeed, we all were more or less affected
with the interview. But pleasure seemed to pervade all our minds, and brighten
each one's countenance.

In the evening, we were waited upon by several of the neighboring gentry: and
we spent a very social evening together. And, the next day, my father invited
many of them, to dine with us, and welcome us into these parts again. Indeed,
the company of so many of my acquaintance, was very entertaining to me. They
complimented us highly on our nuptials; and my father related to them what Mr.
Danford had done for him. He spoke exceeding highly of him to the company; and
would run on in his praise, though evidently against Mr. Danford's inclination.
But he is so pleasing to my father, now, that he says, he must speak well of
him in all company; and that he does not think he will be lifted up by it;
because, says he* Mr. Danford is above pride* He also spoke very kindly to me,
and showed me that tenderness before the company, as must convince them, that
he was fully reconciled to me. He likewise took an occasion, to tell the whole
circle how much he was delighted with me; and how glad he was, that I had made
a virtuous man my early choice; and had been enabled to stand against every
temptation, and hard treatment, in order to secure to myself one that was as
virtuous as I was. And now I do rejoice, continued he, that her happiness is
crowned in one that she cannot be more proud in calling her companion, than I
am in calling my son. And as they have forgiven me, and all past
misunderstandings are to be buried in oblivion, I think there is a prospect of
our being very happy together -- which happiness, it shall be my endeavor to
cultivate.

The company staid till quite late, and then retired, giving us a thousand good
wishes, and seeming to participate in our happiness.

Well, as the post was to set out the next day, I hurried to get my scribbles
ready to send forward to you. And now my dear uncle and aunt, am I not richly
repaid for all the trials and troubles that I have met with? For I am now
returned to a virtuous* and religious father, who is no longer that selfish
worldling he used to be, but is a great advocate for virtue, and religious
duties, which will not fail delighting one, who thinks well of these things.
And then, to be received by my father with such open cordiality, to have his
affections all flowing upon me again; and to see the speaking joy of his
countenance, every time we come into his presence, is a matter of great joy and
thankfulness with me.

As for the proposal that my father made Mr. Danford, of living with him, I
cannot tell whether we shall accept of it or not.

And now, my dear uncle and aunt, accept of my thanks, for the favors I have
received from you, and of my best wishes, for your health and happiness. --
Please to give my love to your family, and my compliments to all inquiring
friends.

Your dutiful and affectionate niece, POLLY DANFORD.

LETTER XXV. From Mrs. POLLY DANFORD, to Mrs. FINTER.
Much honored, and greatly esteemed Uncle and Aunt,
I AGAIN write, agreeable to your request, and shall inform you of our further
proceedings. My father continues to show Mr. Danford every mark of distinction.
Soon after I wrote you last, as we were all setting together, my father
directing himself to Mr. Danford, said, have you considered of the proposal I
made you, relative to our connecting our interest, and becoming but one in
estate and family? Perhaps, Sir, said Mr. Danford, if I should join you, as you
desire, it might give offense to Mr. Murfee and his wife, and I should be loath
to do any thing, that might incur their displeasure. And then I do not know
whether it would be right for me to consider your estate as my own -- would it,
Sir?

Why truly, Mr. Danford, said my father, neither Murfee nor Jenny can expect I
should do much for them. For when I applied to him in my difficulty, he turned
a deaf ear to my complaint, although I expostulated with him, and told him it
would not be for the credit of the family, to let the estate go into the hands
of a stranger; yet he treated me with insult and contempt. I then made him the
offer I now make you; but he refused, and treated me with abusive language,
which raised my displeasure and indignation against him, and all those who
square all their doings by a view of self-interest, and are making an idol of
themselves. But it had this effect on me, that it caused me to think there must
be something in religion besides a mere form; and that brought me into a course
of thinking, which has terminated in the full belief of the reality and
importance of a religious course of life, which I hope I practice in some
measure. And now I want your assistance in my worldly affairs, and your advice
and example in the matters of a spiritual nature. And as to what you said,
concerning Mr. Murfee and Jenny, I shall submit the matter to your judgment, to
do as you shall think just and right; for I would not wish to do him wrong,
though he has displeased me. But you must not deny me the request I have made.
Mr. Danford in reply said, if you will do this, Sir, I will come into the
measure you proposed, viz. let your estate be valued, and a just inventory
taken, of all the estate you was in possession of, at the time I came to your
house; and let it stand in a fair manner, to be seen hereafter, and then I will
join my estate with yours, and we will carry on but one interest.

At this my father said he would fully acquiesce; and would set about the
business as soon as possible. And now, continued he, I can see the preference
of virtue to any thing else; for when you could have made my whole estate your
own, you refused it from a regard of justice. But what shall I say to you, my
dear son and daughter? You will doubtless be blessed in this world, and that
which is to come* and you will be a blessing to me, lightening my burden, and
causing me to spend the remainder of my days in quiet and happiness.

Well, my dear uncle and aunt, we have got all these matters settled, and we
now live in one house, and have but one interest. And indeed their stock in
trade is very large, which enables them to carry it on to great advantage. We
live exceeding happy together, for my father is very fond of Mr. Danford; and
Mr. Danford is careful to ask advice of him, in every undertaking of any
importance. And so you see we are as happy as one could think of being in this
world of uncertainty, change and trouble. My dear uncle and aunt, don't you
think that many of the troubles we labor under arise from ourselves? and that
we bring them on us by our own misconduct? I am led to think that is many times
the case. For oftentimes we get uneasy in our minds, and murmur at all we meet
with; and we often fault others, when, at the same time, our troubles arise
from our own baseness of heart: for our unruly hearts will run into faulty
measures, if we don't keep a strict watch over them, and then we shall be led
to wrong our fellow creatures, which will procure us many enemies, and those
enemies will try to be revenged on us; which will lead us into many
entanglements and troubles; when, at the same time, if we would only trace the
matter to its source, we should find it would terminate in our own hearts.

But with our family, every affair is conducted by the rule of strict justice,
which gains us many friends.

And now, my dear aunt, as we have got into a regular way of living, you must
expect no more adventures from me: and yet, perhaps, I may write you some
account of our visits; for we are going to pay Mrs. Granbe one soon.

With my best respects to you, and compliments to all my friends, I hasten to
subscribe myself yours, etc.

POLLY DANFORD.

LETTER XXVI. From Mrs. POLLY DANFORD, to her Aunt FINTER.
Ever dear Aunt,
I AGAIN assume my pen, as I have engaged to write you every thing that is
worth notice. Since I wrote to you last, I have made several visits; and there
are some particulars in our conversations, that I wish to let you into. In the
first place, we paid a visit to my dear Mrs. Sophia Granbe; and really Mr.
Granbe is a delightful man, indeed he is! Well, I will give you the particulars
of our tour. As we went in the coach, he and I had a considerable conversation
together; in which he was pleased to remind me of several things that he wished
to have observed in his family. And his discourse was delivered with such love,
and tenderness, that I am sure it was very pleasing to me. And indeed he ever
treats me with that tenderness which denotes the noble mind, and generous
heart. This fully secures me in his honor, and leaves me no room to distrust
his love or fidelity.

Well, the first thing that he mentioned to me was, that whenever he should
invite a friend home with him, or have one call upon him, he wished to have
such an one received with every mark of polite attention. Let your business,
said he, be what it will, or the person ever so obnoxious to you, yet I shall
expect that you will not receive such with indifference. For a woman, continued
he, to show by her countenance, words or behavior, that the person so invited
is not welcome, gives the person a very disagreeable feeling, and at the same
time reflects dishonor on the man. And the man, you know, cannot be
dishonored without his companion's participating in the same dishonor. For
often, my dear, have I been at houses, where the wife's conduct plainly showed
that I was not wanted; when, at the same time, the gentleman of the house was
urgent for me to call upon him. And once in particular I will mention: Falling
in company one evening with a gentleman, we soon got acquainted, and he very
urgently insisted upon my going home, and spending the night with him. I being
at a distance from home, after a little hesitation, accepted his invitation.
But when we arrived at his house, his wife behaved quite odly; for she never
rose from her seat, but fixed her eyes on the fire; and after the first volley
at her companion, was quite dumb. He set me a chair, and I seated myself. He
then ordered some refreshment, but in vain. He then addressed himself to me,
and said, it is but a few steps, Sir, to an house of entertainment. Upon this,
I bid him good by, and withdrew. How the man felt, you may judge; for I must
confess it gave me a disagreeable feeling. Indeed, the man and woman were both
to blame. He, for not instructing her better; and she, for insulting him to
such a degree. Such behavior reflects disgrace on any family. The wife ought
ever to receive her husband's acquaintance with an open and cheerful
countenance; and use such an one with all the politeness she is capable of.
Because, if she respects her husband, she must, and will respect his friends.
At least, that is the rule which we generally judge by.

I don't think, my dear, said he, you are capable of such an enormity; yet I
wanted to express my mind to you on this subject. And there are several other
things that I want just to mention. One is, that I should wish to have you
always dressed, and the house put in order, early in the day; then company
would never find you unprepared to receive them. For, at many places, when one
calls in to see a friend, they are wholly unprepared to receive one; and then
there is such a running, and dressing, and slutter in the whole family, that it
takes off all the pleasure of conversation; and one wishes themselves at home
again. And as to the hour of retiring to rest at night, and arising in the
morning; I should choose to go to rest at ten, and rise early in the morning.
But perhaps you will say, that this is quite unfashionable; and how will
company join with us in this unpolite practice? I answer, that in my opinion,
it is in the power of every man to prescribe rules for his own family, and
adhere to those rules without giving offense. And I shall make it my practice,
always, to withdraw from company, and return to my house, at nine in the
evening; and when others see that this is my practice, they will do the same
when they are at my house. And thus we shall have some time for contemplation.
For you know, my dear, that the better part ought not to be neglected, out of
mere fashionableness. And then, again, if we arise early, we may call our
family to orders, and not be disturbed by company. And now, my dear, I hope you
will take this discourse kindly. Indeed I have not a single thought, but that
these things are agreeable to you; yet I thought it was necessary, that I
should express my mind to you on these subjects.

Dear Sir, said I, your discourse is very agreeable, and I am glad you have
opened your mind to me on those subjects; and I wish you would often notice to
me those rules that are necessary for me to follow. And now, Sir, I wish to ask
you a question or two, wanting to have your opinion on the subject. The first
question is, how should a man and woman behave to each other, in company, after
they are married? For I have often seen those that are married use each other
with great freedoms; and seem as if they could not say too much to the expense
of each other; which ever looked ridiculous to me; and often made me think, it
was best for one not to change their condition, if one could not do it without
having all their foolish foibles exposed to the world. For you know, Sir, there
are many things which we do, and say, which we don't wish to have exhibited to
public view. And the other question is, how is it possible that any man should
be so abandoned, as to attempt the chastity of any of our sex that are within
the pale, without some encouragement from the person so attempted?

As to the first question, my dear, I think the behavior of those who are so
nearly connected, when in company, ought to be such, as would induce the
company to judge, that they were agreeable to each other. And when they
discourse with each other, it ought to be done with tenderness, and in as
polite a manner, as you would address any other person: but nothing bordering
on an overheated fondness; for a person can speak kind and agreeable things to
another; and show that their companion has the preference, and that one is no
ways dissatisfied with their choice, without that fawning fondness that is ever
disgustful to company, and is to be reprobated by all bystanders: But, as you
observed, there are those, who speak shocking things of their companions only
to divert themselves and company, not considering that the rest of the company
will think themselves authorized to use the same freedoms. And again, they will
many times expose the foibles of each other, which should be the care and
endeavor of every thinking person to conceal. By which means they are exposed
to the contempt and scorn of all that come near them. And how can it otherways
be, when those that ought to extenuate the faults of each other, seem to try
all in their power to exaggerate them, and to make their bosom friend look as
ridiculous as possible.

As to your other question, I do not think there are many men that will attempt
the chastity of a married woman, unless she, by some word or action, gives him
encouragement. And the greatest thing that one can possibly improve upon, is
the woman's speaking slightingly of her husband; which the man so attempting,
will immediately take advantage of, by joining with her against her husband,
and will soon make him appear to her a shocking picture of a man; and so will
lead on, from one thing to another, 'till he has insinuated himself into her
favor, which many times will end in ruin. We ought therefore to speak well of
our companion before all company, that none may take advantage of our
conversation. Great freedoms in conversation often emboldens the vicious to
construe such freedoms as an encouragement. Therefore I think it best to be
modest in our conversation; for that will tend to our own honor, as well as
satisfaction. And now, my dear, I have given you my thoughts on these subjects,
without the least reserve.

It is very kind in you, Sir, said I, and very satisfactory to me, for you to
discourse on these topics. -- And do, dear Sir, continue to instruct me, as
occasion shall offer.

And so my dear aunt, we held our discourse, till we arrived at Mr. Granbe's.
When we arrived there, we were met at the door by Mr. Granbe, who conducted us
into the parlour, where we were met by my dear Mrs. Sophia, who run to me, and
we could not refrain from embracing each other. You may easily imagine the
meeting was very agreeable to us; for we had not seen each other for the space
of two years. After the first emotion was over, we seated ourselves, and
entered into conversation; and there was such cheerfulness in each one's
countenance, accompanied with such frankness of behavior, and the conversation
was conducted with such politeness and ease, as made the interview very
pleasing to each one of us; and we spent the remainder of the day and evening,
greatly to my satisfaction. For, as Mr. Danford and Mr. Granbe are both of a
serious turn of mind, their discourse was beautified with some noble remarks on
religion. My dear Mrs. Granbe thinks exceeding well of religion, so that their
discourse was truly satisfactory to both of us. I cannot forbear mentioning one
remark that Mr. Granbe made on what I think is a great duty.

It appeared strange to him, he said, that so many in this land, where we are
favored with a preached gospel, should designedly absent themselves from
public worship, and debar themselves from the benefit of the word of God; and,
as it were, shut the door against all conviction; and thereby, in effect, say,
"they care for none of these things." And thus, through this fatal neglect, the
morals of those unhappy persons become corrupted, and they grow more and more
vicious, until, perhaps, they grow quite abandoned, and are past all hopes of
repentance. But the evil will not stop here; for his children will be apt to
follow his example, and so it will be like a great river of death, that flows
broader and deeper, till it ends in destruction. And I verily believe,
continued he, that it would be to a man's advantage to attend constantly on
public worship, if it were only to cultivate the morals of his children. And
what, continued he, can be the reason, that so many in these days, are so much
addicted to profane language? Can there be any pleasure in the use of such
language, or any satisfaction to be reaped therefrom? To me it is quite
disgustful; and I cannot see what can induce any one to utter such discourse*
and I would thank you Mr. Danford, continued he, to give us your mind on this
subject.

I shall be happy, said Mr. Danford, to oblige you, by delivering my sentiments
on that subject: for I think it is a most detestable practice. For in almost
all other enormities that we run into, there seems to be some temptation to
excite us thereunto: but profane language is a vice which seems to be without
the least temptation. For it does not promise either pleasure, profit, or
honor: but ever makes those who use it, look contemptible! Indeed, it is quite
a foolish practice, and unmans any person who makes use of it. -- I cannot
imagine what inducement any person can have, for addicting themselves to such
infernal language. But, perhaps, some may think, that wounding the ears of many
with their profane words, will grace their conversation in the opinion of
others, and set them off in the eyes of the world, causing others to think they
are full as important as they really are. But with good characters, they must,
and will appear very little, and their words of no consequence; because those
that will swear needlessly, will, generally, as needlessly wrong the truth. And
I make it a rule, to give but little credit to what such persons say: for a
person that will lie, will swear to it, without the least hesitation.
Therefore, such persons are not to be believed a whit the more for their
horrible asseverations. I have often wondered, that any person can be so
abandoned, as to imitate the father of lies, and prince of darkness, and use
language which we suppose is agreeable to his language, only for the sake of
following a foolish practice, which, the most abandoned amongst us, have
brought into vogue, by the instigation of the above agent. Some are so vicious
and void of good manners, that they do not scruple to wound, with their horrid
expressions, the ears and tender feelings of the fair sex, who, we must
suppose, abhor to hear such language made use of: for we cannot harbor a
thought that such discourse is agreeable to them, much less, that any of that
sex will make use of it.

The next day, as we were in conversation, Mr. Granbe desired me to give them
the history of my sufferings, which I accordingly did, with cheerfulness, and
much to his satisfaction.

He then asked me to give my opinion upon these questions, viz. How far ought a
parent to show resentment to their children, when they attempt to marry
contrary to their liking? And, also, whether parents ought to use commands in
that affair, or not. I have been, perhaps, Sir, said I, too much in the smoke,
to give you a clear and impartial account of the fire; and would beg you, Sir,
to put that question to Mr. Danford. And then turning to Mr. Danford, said,
will you, my dear, give Mr. Granbe an answer to this question?

If you request it, said Mr. Danford, I shall be happy to give Mr. Granbe, and
the rest of the company, my thoughts on that subject. The rest of the company
said, it would be very satisfactory to them, to hear his mind on it.

I will proceed, then, said Mr. Danford, by declaring, that, in my opinion,
parents ought never to command their children, in point of marriage, against
their inclination; nor use any roughness in the matter. But if parents see that
a child, in their opinion, is in danger of being ruined in marriage, they
ought, by all means, to give them their advice, and tell them of the fatal
consequences of their proceedings. But their advice ought to be given, mixed
with love, and the tenderest expressions they are capable of. For, how does a
parent know, but the child's inclination is too strongly biassed to admit of an
alteration. These are very tender points to meddle with; and the parent, by
commanding the child against its liking, may shock the feelings, change the
temper, and even disorder the senses of the child. For commands are very
stubborn things, and ought not to be used at all in this matter. And it is my
opinion, that advice will go further toward making a child break with a person
they are attached to, than rough usage: for a dutiful child will have a regard
to the tender advice of an affectionate parent; and if their inclinations are
not too strongly fixed, will certainly adhere to such advice, for it will then
appear to be wholly designed for their good. But when any kind of roughness is
used, the child will be apt to say, what! am I not capable of making my own
choice? and why may I not have one of my own choosing, instead of being
compelled to be joined to one who I cannot like? And then, what has the person
that I have set my affections on done, that he must be slighted and abused? I
am sure he is not to blame, that I am partial in his favor: and as long as I
have a regard for him, it is kind in him to regard me. And I think it very
unjust, that he should be persecuted only because he is agreeable to me. And
thus the parents, by their rough treatment to their child, will arouse the
sentiments of compassion and gratitude in favor of the person beloved, which
will have a tendency to heighten their affections for each other. -- "Stolen
waters are sweet;" and some have gone so far as to suppose, that our first
parents would not have preferred the forbidden fruit, if there had been no
prohibition on it. How very irksome it is to be confined to the company of
this, that, or any other person, against our wills and inclination? And to be
confined to a person that is not agreeable to us, and that confinement to be
for life, in the nearest relation that can possibly subsist, is a very unhappy
situation; and ought to engross the most serious consideration of parents as
well as children.

Your sentiments, said Mr. Granbe, are exactly agreeable to my mind. For, I
think, that parents, in such cases, ought to do nothing but give their advice;
and then let their children do as they please. For it is they that must abide
the consequence, and not the parents. And when they have given their advice,
told the child what they think will be the consequences of their proceedings,
and mentioned the particular failing of the persons they are advising against,
I think they have done their duty; and should suffer the child to consider of
the matter, and refuse, or accept the advice, as they think fit. When parents
use their power and authority in this point, it often has a contrary effect,
from what they designed; and is scarcely ever productive of good; but many
times will end in the disappointment of them, and damage of the child; and
sometimes the consequences prove fatal.

By this, my dear aunt, you may judge, that our visit was very entertaining.
And, as I have given you such a lengthy account of our conversation, I shall
say no more about this visit.

But I would say one word about my father's conduct, since our return to his
house. Indeed, my dear aunt, he is one of the most exemplary men in these
parts; for he is very exact in all the duties of religion, and makes a virtuous
life his aim and boast. He is exceeding fond of Mr. Danford, and is very lavish
in the praises of him, and his daughter Polly (as he always calls me) to all
his acquaintances. And is often telling his friends, what Mr. Danford has done
for him; and then condemns himself, for his conduct to us heretofore. But says,
as we have forgiven him, he hopes to gain our affections entirely by his
conduct to us; and that his endeavors shall not be wanting. But my papa need
not be anxious on that score; for, I am sure, he has our love, and respect, and
will ever have our best wishes. I feel myself entirely easy; and as contented
as is possible for one to be in this world.

Well, if I don't conclude, you will think I am going to write a packet,
instead of a letter. Please to give my compliments to all friends; and love to
your family. Dear aunt, assure yourself that I am your most affectionate niece,

POLLY DANFORD.

LETTER XXVII. From Mrs. POLLY DANFORD, to her Aunt FINTER.
Ever dear Aunt,
I WILL send you another letter. But perhaps I shall trespass on your patience.
Yet, as it is to my second mamma; and, as you say, you love to read my
scribbles, I will write on without further apology. Well, this letter shall
give you some account of Mr. Stapleton and his lady; for we have paid him a
visit. Mr. Danford, who had been out, the other day, informed me, that he had
been in company with Mr. Stapleton, who had invited us to pay him a visit. Have
you, my dear, said he to me, any inclination to accept of his invitation?

If it is agreeable to you, Sir, said I, I have no objections; and shall attend
to your command at any time.

He wished to wait upon us, tomorrow, replied Mr. Danford, and I think we will
go; for I have some inclination myself to see his lady; and, perhaps, it will
be satisfactory to you to spend an hour or two with her. And I suppose you can
discourse with him now with more ease, than you could, when he used to visit
you.

I don't know but I can, said I. And, besides, I promised him that I would
respect him as my father's friend, if he would relinquish his pretensions to
me: and now if I pay him a visit, I shall be as good as my word.

Well, about ten o'clock the next day, we set out on our visit; and as it is
some distance to Mr. Stapleton's, we went in the coach.

On our way thither, Mr. Danford told me, that we must not expect to see so
polite a family as some; but, continued he, we must not let that disconcert us;
on the contrary let our behavior be as easy, and our conversation as cheerful,
as if we were well pleased with their conduct.

I hope, Sir, said I, that I shall not be so absurd as to trouble myself about
their family economy. Nevertheless, I am glad you mentioned it to me; for now,
I shall keep it in mind, and, therefore, shall not be so likely to show any
surprise at their roughness. I have seen Mrs. Stapleton when she was a maiden,
and she then appeared to be quite an odd person in her behavior. Therefore
must not expect to find any thing genteel or polite in them. Well, at length we
arrived at their house and Mr. Danford knocked at the door. Come in, said Mrs.
Stapleton; but did not come to the door. So in we bolted; and as the parlour
door was open, we stepped in; where Mrs. Stapleton was sitting. She, without
rising to receive us, cried out, lard! here is Mr. Danford come!

Mr. Danford then took my hand, and introduced me to her.

Your servant, ma'am! said she; but you have catched me in my morning dress.

We then seated ourselves, without any further compliments. Is Mr. Stapleton at
home, ma'am? said Mr. Danford.

No, said she, he is taking his morning ramble, I suppose. Why, Mr. Danford,
these men are strange creatures, when they once get married. And I suppose they
are all alike, ha, ha, ha!

He is doubtless on business, said Mr. Danford: but you expect him soon, don't
you, madam?

Yes, Sir, said she. But I believe it is time I was dressed, and the room set in
order. With that, she got up for the first time, and went to the door, calling
out, Nab! you jade! why don't you set this room in order? Because, ma'am, said
she, you did not order me to do it. Come along, said she, and do as I bid you!
And then away she went up stairs to dress, and left us sitting in the parlour
alone.

After a while Nab, as Mrs. Stapleton called her, came in; but seemed to be
very uneasy at what her mistress had said to her. For she said, the time she
had engaged to live with Mr. Stapleton was almost out, after which, she would
not live with them one hour. For, said she, when one does all in one's power to
please; to have nothing but angry words for their pains, is very discouraging.
And this very morning I offered to set this room in order, but she would not
let me; and now I must be called a jade, for not doing what she would not allow
me to do: and all this only to make me look ill before strangers. I am not used
to such treatment; for I was never faulted in any family before, neither will I
be faulted in this much longer.

After she had put the room in order, she went out; and though I did not care
to make her any reply, yet Mr. Danford and I had a considerable discourse on
the subject. For we were left alone, and could discourse as privily as if we
were in our own chamber.

What means do you think, my dear, said he to me, are the best, to prevent
these family feuds, which are so very troublesome, where they are practiced?

I think, Sir, said I, that a family may be governed as well without such a
clamor, as with it. And for the most part, a kind word, and a pleasant look
will do more toward keeping up good order in a family, than hard words and
angry looks. And then, for the head of a family to command, and then
countermand their servants, and blame them for not doing what, perhaps, they
never commanded them to do, is discouraging, and cannot fail of disagreeable
consequences. And then, when there is a continual clamor kept up, the servants
don't know when one is in earnest, and when not; and so, by this means, one
loses all their authority with their servants, and cannot expect any thing but
feuds, and disturbances in their family.

After a while, Mr. Stapleton came home, and put on as graceful a face as
possible, and was as polite as you ever saw him. When he entered the parlour
where we were sitting, he paid his compliments to Mr. Danford, and then to me;
which, being returned, and we having seated ourselves, he said, it gives me
great satisfaction, to see two of my most worthy friends call upon me; and I am
sorry that I was not at home when you first came; but I was called away on
business, and hope I may be excused.

You are very excusable, said Mr. Danford, for it is often the case, that we
are called from home, when we least wish to be absent.

Now, in this place, my dear aunt, I will try to give you some sort of a
portrait of Mrs. Stapleton, and a sketch of her character. She is of a dark
complexion, with coarse black hair, and black eyes; which, at the first sight,
show a degree of brilliance; but it needs but a small degree of physiognomy, to
discover, that they are filled with malignant spite. She is full faced, and all
her features rather coarse; and being pretty tall and bulky, one would be led
to think, that none could like her for her person. Well, now for her character.
She is of a ludicrous turn of mind, and affects to be a wit; which leads her to
be very loquacious; though for the most part, her prattle is without connection
or sense. And this she generally makes more contemptible, by letting up a large
laugh at the end of every sentence, which I think indicates brutality of
manners. She is of a dictatorial temper, and therefore cannot bear to be
contradicted; which makes it very difficult for one to discourse with her,
without offense; and indeed, I did not care to have much conversation with her.

But to return; after a while Mrs. Stapleton came down stairs, dressed out to
the best advantage; and seemed to be full of a sense of her own importance.
After seating herself, she said to Mr. Stapleton, I think you received your
guests in a shocking manner this morning; for you told me, that you expected
Mr. Danford and his lady here, and then run away yourself; so as to be out of
the way when they came.

But business called me away, ma'am, said he; and I was sorry for it: but I
think you might have been dressed before twelve, and not have left Mr. and Mrs.
Danford sitting here alone; which was very unpolite in you. And I had rather
you should not have been dressed today, than to have treated my friends in
such a manner. Perhaps, said Mrs, Stapleton, you have been at the tavern, this
morning; for I am sure, that you have come home much more nice, than you was
when you went away. And what if Mr. Danford did find me in my morning dress? Do
you think it was the first time he ever saw a woman in a morning habit? I don't
suppose that Mr. Danford is quite so nice as you are. But I believe, these men,
the best of them, love to fault their wives, yet we can, for the most part, be
up sides with you* and so there you have it! ha, ha, ha!

And so, my dear aunt, they sported with each other's characters, 'till they
had exposed all their foibles. I believe you may well think this was but a dull
entertainment to us. But to return.

My dear, said Mr. Stapleton, I believe it is time to drop this discourse.
Perhaps it is not agreeable to Mr. Danford and his lady.

Well, said she, if they cannot join with us, I suppose they can set and hear
us. With that she set up a horse laugh again. After this, the conversation
became general, and we discoursed on common topics till dinner.

After dinner, upon Mr. Stapleton and his wife's falling into the same
thwarting, reproachful discourse, Mr. Stapleton, addressing himself to Mr.
Danford, said, don't you and your lady never get into these foolish disputes?
Although I cannot approve of such discourse, yet I think Mrs. Stapleton and I
are always at them.

Neither can I approve of such discourse, said Mr. Danford; for I think it is a
very disagreeable sight, to see the two that are, or ought to be, but one,
continually at variance; even though it is in a jesting way. And many times
they begin in jest, and end in earnest. Ah, said Mr. Stapleton, that is often
the case with Mrs. Stapleton and myself; for we often get by the ears; and
after a little smarting on both sides, we come to an ecclaircissement, and then
we jog on in the same path we did before.

Well, said Mrs. Stapleton, I don't care a fig about your refinements: neither
do I like such mighty politeness between a man and his wife. I love jesting;
and if we do disagree at times, what then? After we have had a smart quarrel,
we can have a sweet making up; and then we love one another better than ever.
And so I don't care whether either of you like it or not, as it is pleasing to
me. I suppose I have a right to choose my discourse. What say you, Mrs. Danford,
will not you join with us in this matter?

I must beg leave to differ from you, ma'am, said I, for I always look upon a
man and his wife, to be but one. And I think there ought not to be any
difference subsisting between them, on any account whatsoever. And then, a
woman ought ever to look upon her husband as the head, and one that has a right
to command; and she ought to reverence him accordingly. At this, Mrs. Stapleton
broke in upon me, saying, "Reverence to whom reverence is due;" but I think
myself as much above the men, as you think yourself below them. And, "as one
thinks, so is he." And so there I have you, ha, ha, ha!

And now, dear aunt, did you ever hear any thing like this? To turn every thing
one says into ridicule in this manner? Indeed it quite provoked me, so I did
not answer her again.

After this we discoursed on common topics till it was time to return home. And
glad was I, when we got into the coach again. After we had got a little from
the house, Mr. Danford said to me, well, my dear, how did you like your visit?
Did you get any instruction from Mr. and Mrs. Stapleton's discourse? For we
ought ever to improve by the conduct of others. It was not satisfactory to me
in the least, said I. On the contrary, their jesting, disputing, and exposing
one another, appeared to me ridiculous, and disgustful, in the highest degree.
But then, as to my improving by their conduct, I think I never made a visit in
my life that I might get more instruction from, than this: for what we see thus
strikingly amiss in others, we shall be more apt to avoid ourselves, and thus
escape the rock they split upon. May I never be left to conduct in a family as
Mrs. Stapleton does! But what do you think of their conduct, Sir?

I agree with you in sentiments, upon that subject, said he, but it is granted
by all, that a man and his wife may use freedom of speech to each other, when
alone: But you know that I always made it a point with me, when in company, to
use you with as much politeness, as I did any in the circle: and this I think
ought always to be observed as a rule by married people. But Mr. and Mrs.
Stapleton bid fair to wear out a wretched life together, without peace or
contentment of mind; while, at the same time, their being in the possession of
a considerable estate, seems only to heighten their discontent and misery.

You see, my dear, by what Mrs. Stapleton said to you about the reverence due
to husbands, that Mr. Stapleton has lost all authority in his family, and that
his wife places but little confidence in him; and when that is the case, you
cannot expect much regularity in a family.

But what could Mrs. Stapleton mean, said I, when she hinted to Mr. Stapleton,
a suspicion that he had been at the tavern? He does not practice drinking to
excess, does he? Indeed, my dear, said he, I believe it is too true to make a
test of. But Mr. Stapleton did not practice this vice, when he was a single
man: but now having but little peace at home, and not having steadiness of mind
to govern his family, nor resolution enough to guard against that vice, 'twill
be well if he does not ruin his reputation. A man cannot follow that vice
without an entire loss of his character: for a man must appear in a most
detestable light, that follows such a beastly practice. And then, such an one
is not to be trusted in the discharge of any business, as we know not when we
may depend upon him.

And so, my dear aunt, we discoursed, till we arrived at our own house.

I will now conclude this long epistle, by subscribing myself your affectionate
niece, or rather daughter,

POLLY DANFORD.

LETTER XXVIII. From Mrs. POLLY DANFORD, to her Aunt FINTER.
My dear Aunt,
AS you engaged me to send you an account of every thing worth notice, and as I
love writing, I will send you another letter; and this shall give you some
account of my brother and sister Murfee: for Mr. Danford, meeting with Mr.
Murfee, had a long discourse with him, who earnestly desired that we would pay
him a visit at his house. For he said, that he wished to discourse with us when
together. Upon which, Mr. Danford promised to wait upon him in a day or two.

Well, the next day we went, and were received by them in a very polite and
affectionate manner. -- Mr. Murfee met us at the door, and received us with an
open and cheerful countenance, and conducted us into his parlour, where Jenny
was ready to receive us, who, on our entering the room, arose and ran to me,
saying, it gives me inexpressible joy and satisfaction, to see you both at our
house. After compliments were over, we seated ourselves and conversed on common
topics for some time. After which Mr. Murfee said, I have earnestly desired
such an opportunity as now presents, to express my mind to you both, my brother
and sister; and I feel myself happy that you have condescended to visit me: and
hope now, that you will not hate and despise me, though I have acted a base and
foolish part with Mr. Granville, while you was absent. For as you must have
felt the injury, I shall endeavor to make you reparation: -- I do therefore
most sincerely ask forgiveness of you both; and hope, that after you have been
made sensible how truly I repent of my behavior to Mr. Granville, you will
endeavor to look upon me in the same light, as if I had acted the part of a
son to a parent. And if you can look upon me as a brother, do be so kind as to
assure me of it. Dear Sir, said Mr. Danford, you have done nothing against me;
but I am glad you are sensible of your neglect, in not assisting Mr. Granville
in his straits: but I dare say, that he waits for nothing but an opportunity to
forgive you. And I doubt not, now, but that you will soon give him that
pleasing satisfaction: for it is a pleasure to him to forgive an injury.

Well, sister Polly, said Mr. Murfee, can you look upon us the same as if none
of these misunderstandings had taken place?

Dear Sir, said I, you need not have asked me such a question, for I shall ever
look on you as a brother; and I hope these misunderstandings will soon be
compromised,

I hope then, said Mr. Murfee, that you will both assist me in bringing about
this much desired reconciliation.

I will try all in my power, said Mr. Danford, to get these differences
reconciled.

These differences, said Mr. Murfee, have been the cause of great anxiety of
mind to me. But then, I believe they have been a great means of good to me, For
many times, good comes out of evil: yet that is not a warrant for us to do
wrong. For, believe me, Mr. Danford, though I used to think, there was nothing
in virtue or religion, but a mere name; yet I think quite otherwise now. And I
flatter myself, that you will think the more favorable of me for this
confession: seeing you are an advocate for virtue, and delight in it, and in
those who endeavor to practice it.

I rejoice, said Mr. Danford, that you are come over to the side of virtue* For
"her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace." And there is
no comparison between a life spent in the ways of virtue, and one wasted in
vice. I dare say, this is highly pleasing to Mrs. Murfee. And I cannot but
rejoice with her; for I know, that virtue and religion were always her boast.

Dear Sir, said Jenny, no event of my life ever gave me the joy which this has
done* nor ever did I know what it was to enjoy social happiness, till of late.
And now, if my father was but reconciled to Mr. Murfee, I should feel myself
without a wish for any thing in this world.

This, my dear aunt, was an agreeable relation to me, you may well think. To
see Mrs. Murfee's countenance sparkle with sensibility, and to see the
cheerfulness of her looks, and the pleasure which seemed to pervade her mind;
every word appearing to be spoken with a feeling sense of the happy turn Mr.
Murfee had taken, were scenes truly delightful, and sweetened my visit greatly.
But to return; there was nothing else remarkable in our visit, save that, when
we set out for home, Mr. Danford invited Mr. and Mrs. Murfee to return the
visit, and promised them to be an advocate with my father, on their behalf.
They thanked him, and promised to wait on us soon.

The next day Mr. Danford fell into discourse with my father concerning Mr.
Murfee; wherein he told him that Mr. Murfee was exceeding sorry for his
behavior to him, and earnestly desired his forgiveness. And really, continued
Mr. Danford, Mr. Murfee is quite a different man from what he used to be: and I
hope, Sir, you will forgive him, and receive him into favor again.

If Mr. Murfee, said my father, is sorry for his behavior to me, and repents
of his past misconduct, and will ask my forgiveness, I shall think it my duty
to forgive him. And then Mr. Danford related to him what Mr. Murfee had said on
the subject, which gave him great satisfaction.

The next day, Mr. and Mrs. Murfee called upon us -- Mr. Danford met them at
the door, and conducted them into the parlour, where my father, mother, and
myself were sitting. We all arose to receive them, and after the usual
salutations on both sides, Mr. Murfee accosted my father as follows:

Dear Sir, I most sincerely beg your forgiveness: For I know I have acted the
part of an undutiful son with you, by neglecting to assist you when in
distress. And indeed, my conduct at that time was not inconsistent: for to my
shame, I now confess, that I had then no regard to virtue; but considered
virtue and vice on a par: and did not trouble myself any further about those
nice distinctions (as I then called them) than just to keep up my reputation.
But I hope, Sir, you will believe me, when I declare, that such conduct as I
then practiced, now appears odious to me; and that I now love virtue for
virtue's sake* for the behavior of Mr. Danford and my sister Polly, convinced
me, that there must be something in virtue more than an empty name. And I
think, I can now say, that virtue and religion appear amiable to me. And now,
dear Sir, can you forgive me, and own me for one of our family again. I am
glad, said my father, that your eyes are opened; and that you have seen your
error. And as you have asked my forgiveness, I freely grant it you, and hope
you will stand fast in the ways of virtue: For as vice carries its punishment
along with it, so virtue gives its reward, even whilst we are in the practice
of it.

And thus, my dear aunt, they discoursed together, for some time; and this you
may well think, was a happy period to my mother. Indeed, we all seemed to be
highly pleased with this reconciliation; and, in particular, my sister Jenny,
who seemed to be all life, upon this occasion. For you may remember, I once
mentioned to you, that there seemed to be a latent concern in her countenance,
ever since she had been married. Though she never spoke of it, yet one might
plainly discern it in her face. But now she has that open cheerfulness in her
looks, which she used to have in her maiden state. And indeed, she seems to be
thrown back to eighteen again. I am, indeed, greatly rejoiced for Jenny. My
heart used formerly to be grieved for her; for she would not open her mind to
any; but kept her troubles to herself; and tried to make herself as cheerful as
possible. But now she speaks freely of it, and says her happiness is complete;
and that she did not know, till of late, the sweets of social happiness, etc.

Dear aunt please to give my respects to uncle, and compliments to all friends.

I am, etc. POLLY DANFORD.
P. S. I had forgot to mention, that Mr. Danford still continues exceeding fond
of me. Indeed, he seems to be more kind to, and tender of me, than ever. For,
he says, that at this time, I need all the tenderness he is capable of showing.
And accordingly he ever speaks encouragingly to me; which I find to be a great
support. For I often get into a melancholy mood, and train of thinking; and
when Mr. Danford finds me in such a frame, he endeavors to cheer me, all in
his power. And indeed, he is nobly calculated to soothe the distressed, and
strenghten the feeble minded. But you will think I am going to write another
letter.

Yours, etc. P. D.



LETTER XXIX. From Mrs. DANFORD, to her Aunt FINTER.
Ever dear Aunt,
MY first devoir I must pay to you. For never does a day pass over me, without
the remembrance of the happy time I spent in your family: which fills me with
so grateful a sense of the kindness you then showed me, as will not be effaced
so long as life endures. I have likewise to thank you for your kind letter;
from which I received much pleasure and benefit; especially that part where you
advised me not to give way to desponding thoughts on my condition, (you having
discovered my situation from the postscript of my last) but to "put my trust in
that power, who is able to help in time of trouble." You likewise assured me of
your prayers for my safety. Now let me inform you that I have past through the
perilous hour; and have just got about again. Blessed be the great Disposer of
all events, who appeared for me in the hour of distress; and "has filled my
heart with rejoicing and my mouth with praise!" I am now the mother of a noble
son; and our family have done nothing but rejoice, ever since this event. And
in particular, my father seems to be ten years younger, than he was before.

Mr. Danford, who seeks every opportunity to please my father, said, as soon as
our little son was carried to him -- this is William Granville Danford. I had
almost said, you might see the bloom of youth flush in my father's face, and
with a complacent countenance and looks full of sensibility, he looked at Mr.
Danford, and then at me, saying, with ecstacy, how greatly do I rejoice in the
birth of this child! He shall be my son, indeed he shall: for, as I have no son
left, I shall look upon this as my own, and shall provide for him accordingly.
And then, his being the son of my beloved Mr. Danford and Polly, heightens his
value in my estimation, and will secure him my affections. And may he live to
the age of man, and be a comfort to his parents, a support to the declining age
of his grand-parents, and a glory to the land he lives in!

It gave Mr. Danford great satisfaction to find he had pleased my father so
well. And, indeed, he is never better satisfied, than when he does any thing
that pleases him. I was likewise as well pleased myself. For I must confess,
that the little dear looked charmingly to me: For I fancy, that I can see all
that intrepidity, mixed with gentleness, so conspicuous in the countenance of
my dear Mr. Danford. But I would not wish to praise the little lamb too much.
For, are we not my dear aunt, apt to set too much by our children? We are apt
to consider them as our own; indulging the anticipation of what may be for many
years to come: although so very liable to be deprived of them. But then, it is
our duty to love our children; and besides; it is natural for us so to do.

Mr. Danford is fonder of me than ever; and my father cannot keep out of the
room where our child is: for his heart seems to be bound up in the little dear.
He is also very tender of me; and my mother is highly satisfied with all our
conduct. And indeed, we are a happy family: for all seem to be emulous to excel
in virtue; and vie with each other in acts of duty and friendship. Nor have we
any of those bad servants, that many complain of; which, perhaps, is owing more
to the wise management, and good examples of Mr. Danford, than to our good
fortune in procuring them.

The only earthly wish I can reasonably indulge, is for the happiness of seeing
my other parents. For, you know, I always considered you and my uncle as
parents; you having always acted the part of parents toward me. Of this
kindness, I hope I shall ever retain a grateful sense.

Please to present my love and respects to all friends; and assure yourself,
that I am

Your grateful, and affectionate niece, POLLY DANFORD.

CONCLUSION.
SUFFICE it now to say, that Mr. Granville and Mr. Danford live together, in
the utmost harmony, cultivating but one interest; Mr. Danford being chief actor
in business, and is exceeding careful to ask advice of Mr. Granville in all
affairs of importance, by which he secures his confidence entirely. Mr.
Granville doats on Mr. Danford greatly, ever speaking well of him to all that
comes within the circle of his acquaintance. And as Mr. Danford has obtained
his confidence, Mr. Granville approves of all his proceedings; seeming to think
it impossible for him to do a wrong thing.

Mrs. Danford makes a polite and agreeable gentlewoman; is kind,
tenderhearted, pious, and, indeed every thing that is amiable. This emulates
many to cultivate her friendship, which her mother sees with pleasure.

As Mr. Murfee has become a sober gentleman, and has gained a reconciliation
with Mr. Granville, he and Mrs. Murfee often visit him; and they now take great
delight in the conversation of each other.

Indeed, the whole of Mr. Granville's family, and children, live in love and
unity, delighting themselves in virtue and religion; practicing honesty and
punctuality with all men; which gains them many friends. And there is a
cheerfulness in their conversation which discovers their happiness, and which
is apparent in their countenances, therefore it is a great pleasure to be in
their company.

THE END

