THE BOARDING SCHOOL; OR, LESSONS OF A PRECEPTRESS TO HER PUPILS: CONSISTING OF
INFORMATION, INSTRUCTION, AND ADVICE, Calculated to improve the Manners, and
form the Character of YOUNG LADIES.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A Collection of LETTERS, written by the PUPILS, to their
INSTRUCTOR, their FRIENDS, and each other.

BY A LADY OF MASSACHUSETTS; AUTHOR OF THE COQUETTE.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS. Sold by them, by C.
BINGHAM, and the other Booksellers in Boston; by I. THOMAS, Worcester; by
THOMAS, ANDREWS and PENNIMAN, Albany; and by THOMAS, ANDREWS and BUTLER,
Baltimore. -- JUNE, 1798.

Dedication.
TO the YOUNG LADIES of AMERICA the following sheets are affectionately
inscribed.

CONVINCED of the many advantages of a good education, and the importance of
improving those advantages; or of counterbalancing the want of them by exerting
the mental powers which nature has bestowed; sensible, too, that the foundation
of a useful and happy life must be laid in youth, and that much depends on the
early infusion of virtuous principles into the docile mind, the author has
employed a part of her leisure hours in collecting and arranging her ideas on
the subject of female deportment.

How far she has succeeded in her design, the voice of a candid public will
pronounce.

THE BOARDING SCHOOL, etc.
ON the delightful margin of the Merrimac, in one of the most pleasant and
beautiful situations, which that fertile and healthful part of America affords,
lived Mrs. Williams, the virtuous relict of a respectable clergyman.

She had two daughters, lovely and promising as ever parent could boast.

Mrs. Williams's circumstances were easy. She possessed a little patrimony, to
which she retired, after her husband's decease; but a desire of preserving this
for her children, and a wish to promote their advantage and enlarge their
society, induced her to open a Boarding School.

As she had an eye, no less to the social pleasure, than to the pecuniary
profit of the undertaking, she admitted only seven, at a time, to the privilege
of her tuition.

These were all young ladies, who had previously received the first rudiments
of learning, and been initiated into the polite accomplishments, which
embellish virtue and soften the cares of human life. They had generally lived
in the metropolis, and had acquired the graces of a fashionable deportment; but
they possessed different tempers and dispositions, which had been variously,
and, in some respects, erroneously managed.

To cultivate the expanding flowers, and to prune the juvenile eccentricities,
which were disseminated among these tender plants; or, to speak without a
figure, to extend and purify their ideas, to elevate and refine their
affections, to govern and direct their passions, required an eye, watchful, and
a hand, skilful as those of the judicious Mrs. Williams.

While her judgment and prudence aided the useful acquisitions of the mind, a
sprightly fancy and a cheerful disposition, regulated by experience and
discretion, qualified her to enter, at once, with becoming dignity and
condescending ease, into all their concerns; to participate their pleasures;
while, with candor and mildness, she reproved their errors, detected their
follies, and facilitated their amendment.

As the young ladies had finished their school education, before Mrs. Williams
received them to her mansion, her instructions were more especially designed to
polish the mental part, to call forth the dormant virtues, to unite and arrange
the charms of person and mind, to inspire a due sense of decorum and propriety,
and to instill such principles of piety, morality, benevolence, prudence and
economy, as might be useful through life.

Their time was, accordingly, disposed in a manner most conducive to the
attainment of these objects. Every part of it was employed to some valuable
purpose; "for idleness," Mrs. Williams observed, "is the rust of the mind."

Whatever tended to enlarge, inform, improve, or amuse, she supposed worthy
their attention.

She particularly endeavored to domesticate them; to turn their thoughts to
the beneficial and necessary qualifications of private life; often inculcating,
that Nothing lovelier can be found in woman,
Than to study household good;
and laboring to convince them of the utter insignificance and uselessness of
that part of the sex, who are Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence; to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troll the tongue, and roll the eye.


Early rising she recommended, both by precept and example. This, she said,
would not only promote their health, but render them mistresses of many hours,
which must otherwise be lost in enervating sloth and inaction. "And should we,"
continued she, "who have so much cause for exertion, thus sacrifice the best
part of our time?"

"Falsely luxurious, will not man awake,
And, starting from the bed of sloth, enjoy
The cool, the fragrant, and the silent hour,
To meditation due, and sacred song?
And is there aught in sleep can charm the wise?
To lie in dead oblivion, losing half
The fleeting moments of too short a life?
Total extinction of the enlightened soul!
Or else to severish vanity alive,
Wilder'd and tossing through distempered dreams?
Who would in such a gloomy state remain,
Longer than nature craves; when every muse*
And every blooming pleasure wait without,
To bless the wildly devious morning walk?"
Another laudable practice of Mrs. Williams, was perfect regularity in the
government of her pupils, and in the arrangement of their daily exercises.
"When," said she, "we observe the order of the natural world, and admire the
consistency and harmony of every part, we may hence derive a lesson, for the
regulation of our conduct, in the sphere assigned to us."

Pursuant to this plan of operation, the young ladies arose at five; from which
they had two hours at their own disposal, till the bell summoned them at seven,
to the hall, where, the ceremonies of the morning salutation over, they
breakfasted together; their repast being seasoned with the unrestrained
effusions of good humor and sociability. On these occasions, Mrs. Williams
suspended the authority of the matron, that, by accustoming her pupils to
familiarity in her presence, they might be free from restraint; and, feeling
perfectly easy and unawed, appear in their genuine characters. By this mean she
had an opportunity of observing any indecorum of behavior, or wrong bias;
which she kept in mind, till a proper time to mention, and remonstrate against
it; a method, the salutary effects of which were visible in the daily
improvement of her pupils.

The breakfast table removed, each took her needle work, except one, who read
some amusing and instructive book, for the benefit and entertainment of the
rest. The subject was selected by Mrs. Williams, who conferred the reading upon
them in rotation.

At twelve o'clock, they were dismissed till one, when dinner again called them
together, which was conducted in the same manner as the morning repast.

Having resumed their occupations, the reader of the day produced some piece of
her own composition, either in prose, or verse, according to her inclination,
as a specimen of her genius and improvement. This being submitted to Mrs.
Williams's inspection, and the candid perusal and criticism of her companions;
and the subject canvassed with great freedom of opinion, they withdrew from the
tasks of the day to seek that relaxation and amusement, which each preferred.
No innocent gratification was denied them. The sprightly dance, the sentimental
song, and indeed every species of pastime, consistent with the decorum of the
sex, was encouraged, as tending to health, cheerfulness, and alacrity.

In these pleasing pursuits and enjoyments, the present class of happy
companions had nearly completed the term allotted them by their parents, and
were soon to leave the peaceful shades in which they delighted, when, being
assembled on the Monday morning of their last week, their revered Preceptress
thus accosted them:

"As the period is approaching, my dear pupils, when I must resign your
society, and quit the important charge of instructor and friend, which I have
sustained with so much pleasure, and, I trust, with some degree of fidelity, I
shall sum up the counsels, admonitions, and advice, which I have frequently
inculcated, and endeavor to impress them on your minds, as my valedictory
address. For this purpose, during this last week of your residence with me, I
shall dispense with your usual exercises, and substitute a collection of my own
sentiments, enforced by the pathos of the occasion.

"Your docility, and cheerful diligence in attending to my instructions; your
modest, affectionate, and respectful behavior, together with the laudable
progress you have made in every branch, which you have pursued, have well
rewarded my care, and engaged my approbation and love. To me, therefore, a
separation will be painful. To you the period is important. It is a period,
which, while it relieves you from the confinement of scholastic rules,
introduces you to new scenes of cares, of pleasures, of trials, and of
temptations, which will call for the exercise of every virtue, and afford
opportunity for improving the endowments, both natural and acquired, which you
possess. Think not, then, that your emancipation from schools, gives you
liberty to neglect the advantages which you have received from them. The
obligations under which you are laid to your parents for the education they
have given you, require a diligent improvement of every talent committed to
your trust.

"Of needle work you are complete mistresses, from the most delicate and highly
finished, to the most ordinary, though perhaps not less useful, economy of
mending and making the coarser garments of family use. Many, I am aware,
suppose this last a species of learning, which is beneath the attention of a
lady: but Clara will tell you how valuable it has proved to her; and how
valuable it may prove to you.

"Nursed in the lap of affluence, and accustomed to unbounded expense, Clara
little thought, at your age, that she should ever depend on her needle for the
livelihood and decent appearance of a rising family. A discreet and prudent
mother early inculcated the lessons of industry and economy, which she now
practices; and taught her that the knowledge could be of no disservice, though
she never had occasion for it. She married with the brightest prospects. But a
series of unavoidable disasters, such as no human wisdom could foresee or
prevent, reduced her to narrow circumstances; and, to complete her misfortune,
she was left a widow with four small children. Her parents were in the grave;
her patrimony was gone! In this exigence, what was her resource? Not fruitless
lamentations, and unavailing complaints. She immediately summoned her
resolution; and by the use of her needle has ever since supported herself and
family with decency, and been highly respected for her prudent exertions and
exemplary industry. Directly the reverse of this amiable character is that of
Belinda. She was educated in the same way with Clara; the same schools gave
them tuition; and similar prospects awaited their entrance into life.
Calamities attended the progress of each; but different as their tempers and
dispositions was their conduct under them. The falling fortunes of Clara were
awhile suspended by her discretion and frugality; while the ruin of Belinda was
hastened by her extravagance, dissipation, and idleness. View them, now, in
their reduced state! Neatness, cheerfulness, and activity preside in the
dwelling of Clara; negligence, peevishness, and sloth are legibly stamped on
that of Belinda. The ear is pained by her complaints of poverty; the eye is
disgusted by her slatternly appearance, and ostentatious display of the
tattered remnants of finery, which bespeak the pride and indolence of their
owner; who will neither convert them into more comfortable garments, nor, by
repairing, render them becoming.

"I hope, however, that occasions like these may never call for your exertions.
But there may be cases, when, to know the use of your needles will answer
important purposes, even in an exalted station, and amidst the splendour of
affluence and plenty.

"Matilda dignified a princely fortune by the exercise of every virtue which
can adorn a lady. Among these, charity shone conspicuous. Her maid said to her,
one day, Madam, would you have me lay aside these cast-clothes for some poor
person? Yes, replied Matilda; but sit down, and mend them first. Don't you see
they need it? Why, Madam, rejoined the girl, is it not enough for you to give
them away? I should think the least they can do is to mend them for themselves!
In that case, said Matilda, my bounty would be greatly diminished. People, who
need charity have not the necessary materials for putting such articles into
repair; and should I furnish them, perhaps they have never been taught to use
their needles. No more have I, returned the maid. Have you not? said Matilda.
Well then, sit down, and I will direct your ingenuity upon these clothes. By
this mean you may learn a very useful lesson, I assure you; a lesson, which by
practicing for yourself, will enable you to lay up part of your wages against
the time when sickness or old age shall take you from your labors.

"Such examples of condescension and benevolence to inferiors, are of more real
and lasting use than pounds prodigally bestowed.

"Do you seek higher testimonies of the honor and utility of this employment?
You may collect many from the histories which you have read during the last
year. Among the Romans, and several other nations of antiquity, a scarf,
wrought by the needle of a favorite fair, was received as an honorable token
of respect, and improved as an invincible stimulus to heroic deeds. Ladies of
the first rank and station considered it as no derogation from the dignity or
delicacy of their character, to make their own apparel, and that of their
families. The virtuous Panthea, when her husband was going to fight in the
cause of Cyrus, her generous deliverer, magnificently adorned his person, and
decorated his armor with her own needle work.

"We ought never to be idle. No moment should be unoccupied. Some employment,
salutary, either to body or mind, or both, should be constantly pursued; and
the needle is always at hand to supply the want of other avocations. The
listless vacuity, which some young ladies indulge, renders them extremely
unhappy, though they are insensible of the cause, and seek to beguile the time
in frivolous amusements.

"A still more endearing motive remains to be suggested; and that is the
pleasure, which your accomplishments in this ornamental and useful art must
afford your parents; and the pain, which your neglect of it hereafter must
occasion them.

"But your faithful and assiduous improvement of time, since you have been with
me, is a sure pledge of your perseverance in the path of duty, and your
progress in every virtue. I trust, therefore, that what I have said will be
engraved on your memories; and that some useful ideas will be selected by each
of you for your future advantage.

"Your minds are a good soil; and may I not flatter myself, that the seeds of
instruction which I have sown, "will spring up, and yield fruit abundantly?"

With one voice, they most affectionately assured Mrs. Williams, that it should
be their daily study to profit by her lessons; and withdrew.

Monday, P. M. READING.
BEING assembled, this afternoon, Mrs. Williams thus resumed her discourse.

"Reading is so common a part of education, that the value of it is not duly
estimated; nor the manner of performing it, sufficiently attended to. It is not
the mere propriety of pronunciation, accent, and cadence, which constitutes
good reading. You must enter into the spirit of the subject, and feel
interested in the matter, before you can profit by the exercise.

"But you are so well acquainted with the manner of reading, that the quality
of books most worthy of your perusal is the only point on which I need to
enlarge.

"Romances, the taste of former times, are now so far out of vogue, that it is
hardly necessary to warn you against them. They exhibit the spirit of chivalry,
knight-errantry, and extravagant folly, which prevailed in the age they depict.
But they are not interesting; nor can they be pleasing to the correct taste and
refined delicacy of the present day.

"Novels are the favorite, and the most dangerous kind of reading, now adopted
by the generality of young ladies. I say dangerous, because the influence,
which, with very few exceptions, they must have upon the passions of youth,
bears an unfavourable aspect on their purity and virtue. The style in which
they are written is commonly captivating; and the luxuriance of the
descriptions with which they abound, extremely agreeable to the sprightly
fancy, and high expectations of the inexperienced and unreflecting. Their
romantic pictures of love, beauty, and magnificence, fill the imagination with
ideas which lead to impure desires, a vanity of exterior charms, and a fondness
for show and dissipation, by no means consistent with that simplicity, modesty,
and chastity, which should be the constant inmates of the female breast. They
often pervert the judgment, mislead the affections, and blind the understanding.

"A melancholy example of this sort is exhibited in Juliana. Juliana was the
only daughter of a wealthy merchant, who grudged no expense which could please
or embellish his darling child. He, however, possessed neither leisure nor
abilities "to teach the young idea how to shoot;" but thought it sufficient
that he gave her every advantage, which could be derived from the various
schools, to which she was consigned. She had a brilliant fancy, and a fondness
for books, which, properly directed, might have proved of great use to her.
But, having no better principles instilled into her mind, she indulged herself
in the unlimited reading of novels, and every light publication which a
circulating library could furnish.

"Hence her imagination took wing, and carried her far above the scenes of
common life. The excessive refinement of her mind admitted no ordinary
amusements or avocations. Plain truth from her own sex was an insult; and from
the other, nothing less than adoration would satisfy her unbounded vanity. Her
beauty (of which she really had a considerable share) and the large fortune
which she would probably inherit, gained her many admirers; some of whom were
men of unquestionable merit. But a sober, rational courtship could not answer
her ideas of love and gallantry. The swain, who would not die for her, she
deemed unworthy of notice.

"Her father strongly recommended a gentleman, as well calculated, in his
opinion, to make her happy, and as having his entire approbation; but she
rejected him with disdain, though she could produce no one objection against
his person, or character.

"Her father acquiesced; expressing, however, his regret at the mistaken
notions she had imbibed; and warning her most pathetically against the
indulgence of so romantic a disposition; yet all in vain. He was considered as
an illiterate plodder after wealth, which she had a right to bestow as she
pleased.

"At last the lovely youth whom she had so long contemplated, made his
appearance. A military captain entered the town on the recruiting service.
Young, handsome, easy, bold and assuming; with all the bon ton of the coxcomb,
and all the insolence of the novice. He saw Juliana; he sacrificed to her
charms, and conquered. She could not resist the allurements of his gallantry.
His affectation of dying love was received with apparent pleasure; while art
and duplicity took advantage of her weakness, to precipitate her into
engagements to pity and relieve him. Her friends saw her danger, and warmly
remonstrated against her imprudent conduct, in receiving the addresses of a
man, destitute of property to support her, and void of every kind of personal
merit. Her father entreated and implored the rejection of her lover, till,
finding every other method vain, he at length resolutely forbade him the house,
and his daughter's company. This was viewed as persecution; and, consistently
with her sentiments of adventurous love, a clandestine amor was commenced. Her
father surprised them together; and, enraged at their disgraceful intrigue,
seized the captain, and endeavored to turn him out of doors. He violently
resented this ungentlemanlike treatment, as he termed it, and defended himself
with his sword. The old gentleman received a slight wound, in the scuffle; but
accomplished his purpose. Juliana was terrified at this rencounter, and,
dreading her father's displeasure, ran out with her paramour* His lodgings were
near, and thither, favored by the darkness of the night, he instantly led her.
She involuntarily followed him, without considering the impropriety of her
conduct. Here he drew his sword, and, throwing himself at her feet, professed
his despair, and declared himself resolved to put an immediate end to his life.
She endeavored to reason him into calmness; but in vain. He was sensible,
that, if he now relinquished her to her father, he should lose her forever. His
apparent agony overcame her, and she gave him her hand.

"Her father was almost distracted at her elopement. He traced her steps, and,
following her to the house, condescended to soothe her with parental kindness;
and promised her pardon and continued affection, if she would renounce her
worthless lover, and return. She confessed it was too late; that she was his
wife.

"Petrified with astonishment, he looked at her, for some time, with speechless
grief; and, showing his arm, bound up with the wound he had received, left her
with every token of anguish and indignation!

"When the fever of passion had abated, a returning sense of duty in Juliana,
and, in the captain, the fear of losing the property which he sought, induced
them to seek a reconciliation, and make submissive efforts to obtain it. But
her father was too highly incensed to grant it to him, on any terms; or to her,
on any other than the utter rejection of her unworthy companion. These terms
were not complied with.

"Sorrow and vexation preyed so deeply upon the mind of this afflicted parent,
that they brought on a rapid decline; and he died without again seeing his
undutiful and ruined daughter. His estate was divided between Juliana and her
four brothers. Her portion was received by her husband, and soon spent in
dissipation and excess. Having rioted on the fortune of his wife, while she
often pined at home for want of the common necessaries of life, he left her, to
join his regiment, promising remittances from time to time, for her support.
This promise, however, was but ill performed; and she now feels the dreadful
effects of her folly, in the accumulated ills of poverty and neglect. Yet she
still cherishes the most passionate fondness for what has proved her bane. A
friend called to see her, not long since, and found her the emblem of
wretchedness and sloth. Her emaciated form, her squalid appearance, the
disorder of her house, and her tattered raiment, bespoke the shameful
negligence of the owner. Yet she was sitting with a novel in her hand, over
which she had apparently been weeping. She expatiated largely on the tale it
contained, while her children, who exhibited a picture of real woe, engaged not
her attention. Her friend enquired how she could be thus interested and
distressed by mere fiction, while every thing about her was calculated to
arouse the keenest feelings of her soul! She coolly replied, I have fortitude
sufficient to support my own calamity, but I must sympathize with the heroine
of adversity. I have not lost my sensibility with my fortune. My only luxury is
now imagination! How ill-timed, and how improperly exerted, was this kind of
sensibility, in Juliana! Where, and what was her sensibility, when she
disobeyed an indulgent parent, sacrificed her reputation, and threw herself
into the arms of a worthless man for protection -- from what? from the kindness
and love of her best friends!

"But I would not be understood to condemn all novels indiscriminately; though
great prudence is necessary to make a useful selection. Some of them are
fraught with sentiment; convey lessons for moral improvement; and exhibit
striking pictures of virtue rewarded; and of vice, folly, and indiscretion
punished; which may prove encouragements to imitate, or warnings to avoid
similar practices. I shall not descend to particulars. Those, which are
sanctioned by the general voice of delicacy and refinement, may be allowed a
reading; yet none should engross your minds, to the neglect of more important
objects; nor be suffered to monopolize too large a portion of your time.

"Novels are a kind of light reading, on which the imagination feasts, while
the more substantial food which is requisite to the nourishment of the
understanding, is either untasted or undigested. Imagination is a sportive
faculty, which should be curbed by the reins of prudence and judgment. Its
sallies are delightful in youth, provided they be not too excursive.

"Poetry is, by some, ranked with novels; but I think injudiciously. Good
poetry is certainly a sublime source of entertainment and instruction. What
music is to the ear, poetry is to the heart. There must, indeed, be a natural
taste for it, before it can be highly relished or enjoyed; and this taste,
wherever it exists, should be cultivated. I know of no kind of reading more
richly formed for the mental repast of a liberal and polished young lady, than
the poetical productions of true genius. The trifling and indelicate cantos of
ordinary witlings, and everyday poetasters, are unworthy your attention. But
the species of poetry which I now recommend, is peculiarly adapted to soften
the passions, excite sympathy, and meliorate the affections. It soothes the
jarring cares of life, and, pervading the secret recesses of the soul, serves
to rouse and animate its dormant powers.

"Many essays, written by monitors of both sexes, are extant, which you may
find profitable and pleasing, both in youth and more advanced age. Among the
foremost of these, I mention Mrs. Chapone's letters to her niece, which contain
a valuable treasure of information and advice.

"But among your hours devoted to reading, history must not be without a place.
Here an extensive field of ages and generations, which have gone before you, is
opened to your view. Here your curiosity may be gratified by a retrospection of
events, which, by conducting your thoughts to remotest elimes and periods,
interests and enlarges the mind. Here the various revolutions, the rise, fall,
and dismemberment of ancient kingdoms and states may be traced to the different
springs of action, in which they originated. Hence you may gain a competent
acquaintance with human nature in all its modifications, from the most rude and
barbarous, to the most civilized and polished stages of society. This is a
species of knowledge, which will not only be of constant use to you, in the
government of your own temper and manners, but highly ornamental in your
intercourse with the polite and learned world.

"But let your reading of every description be regular and methodical. Never
confuse your minds by a variety of subjects at once. When you turn your
attention to any one in particular, finish, and lay that aside, before you take
up another. Let what you read be well understood at the time, and well digested
afterward. Possess yourselves, at least, of the leading traits: otherwise your
labor will be totally lost. If convenient, always recapitulate what you have
been perusing, and annex to it your own sentiments and remarks, to some friend.
If you have no friend at hand, who will be disposed to hear, recollect, and run
it over in your own thoughts. This will be a great assistance to memory. But
whatever be the kind of reading which you undertake, select such authors as
good judges esteem the best, upon the subject. Have a particular regard to the
morality and delicacy of the books you peruse.

"When you read for mere amusement, (which should seldom happen) be careful not
to corrupt and vitiate your taste by frothy and illiberal performances, which
will degrade the dignity and fully the purity of your minds. That time is very
greatly misspent, which is bestowed in reading what can yield no instruction.
Not a moment's attention should be given to books which afford not some degree
of improvement. Always have an eye, therefore, to profit, as well as to
pleasure. Remember that youth is the seed-time of life. You are now to
cultivate that knowledge, which future years must ripen. Free from those
domestic cares, which will engross and occupy your minds, when placed at the
head of families, a most inestimable price is now put into your hands to get
wisdom. Now you may learn; then you must practice.

"Now, therefore, lay up in store some provision for every exigence, some
embellishment for every station.

"Look upon Elvira. Her acquirements in a single state have qualified her for a
shining pattern of matronal duties. Her husband's business abroad prevents him
from attending to domestic avocations; nor need he be anxious respecting the
management of his household affairs. Elvira is present to every occasion. The
superintendence of her family, and the education of her children is her
delight. Capable of instructing them in every needful branch of science, and of
furnishing them with every requisite endowment, she is, at once, their guide,
their example, and their friend. When her husband returns from the cares and
fatigues of business, with what becoming ease and cheerfulness does she
dissipate the anxiety which sometimes hangs upon his brow, and exhilerate his
spirits by the enlivening charms of rational and refined conversation! In the
entertainment of their friends, how distinguished a part she sustains! Her
powers of mind have been so happily improved, that she is able to discuss every
subject with ease and propriety. To an enlarged understanding and a cultivated
taste, to an extensive knowledge of the world and an acquaintance with polite
literature, she superadds those amiable virtues, which give society its highest
relish; while the elegance of her manners and the modesty of her deportment are
a proof of the greatness of her mind, and render her esteemed, beloved, and
respected by all who know her.

"But I flatter myself that each of you, my dear pupils, will be an Elvira.
Then will you do justice to the superior advantages of your education; be the
delight of your friends, and the ornaments of your country.

"Religious subjects must, by no means, be neglected in the course of your
reading. Let the BIBLE be the rule of your faith and practice. If you wish an
explanation of any particular passages, seek it from some judicious and pious
friend, or in the writings of some judicious and learned commentator. But
always attend chiefly to those points which serve to mend the heart, rather
than to those knotty, metaphysical disquisitions, which tend only to perplex
the understanding, and involve the inquirer in such labyrinths of abstrusity,
as are above human comprehension, and beyond human concern. The essential
doctrines and precepts of the gospel are level to every capacity; and upon a
life and conversation governed by these, our hopes, both of present peace and
future glory, must be founded. "He has showed thee what is good; and what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God?"

Tuesday, A. M. WRITING AND ARITHMETIC.
THE young ladies being seated, this morning, their Preceptress addressed them
as follows.

"Writing is productive both of pleasure and improvement. It is a source of
entertainment which enlarges the mental powers more, perhaps, than any other.
The mind is obliged to exertion for materials to supply the pen. Hence it
collects new stores of knowledge, and is enriched by its own labors. It
imperceptibly treasures up the ideas, which the hand impresses. An opportunity
is furnished of reviewing our sentiments before they are exposed; and we have
the privilege of correcting or expunging such as are erroneous. For this
purpose, you will find it a good method to collect and write your thoughts upon
any subject that occurs; for by repeatedly arranging and revising your
expressions and opinions, you may daily improve them, and learn to think and
reason properly on every occasion. By this mean you may likewise provide
yourselves with a fund of matter for future use, which, without this
assistance, the memory would not retain. It will be of great service to note
down in your commonplace book such particulars as you may judge worth
remembering, with your own observations upon them. This will be a kind of
amusement which will exercise your thinking powers at the time, and, by
recurring to it afterward, it may afford you many useful hints.

"The frequent use of the pen is calculated to refine and enlarge your
understandings. Have you any talent at composition? it will be increased by
cultivation.

"Neglect no opportunity, therefore, which your leisure affords, of delighting
your friends, and accomplishing yourselves by the exercise of your genius in
this way.

"Thrice blessed are we, the happy daughters of this land of liberty, where the
female mind is unshackled by the restraints of tyrannical custom, which in many
other regions confines the exertions of genius to the usurped powers of lordly
man! Here virtue, merit, and abilities are properly estimated under whatever
form they appear. Here the widely extended fields of literature court
attention; and the American fair are invited to (...) the flowers, and
cultivate the expanding laurel.

"But the species of writing, which is open to every capacity, and ornamental
to every station, is the epistolary. This, between particular friends, is
highly agreeable and interesting. It is a method of interchanging sentiments,
and of enjoying intercourse with those from whom you are far removed, which is
a happy substitute for personal conversation. In a correspondence of this sort,
all affectation, formality, and bombast should be laid aside.

"Ease, frankness, simplicity, and sincerity should be its leading traits. Yet
let not your letters be composed of mere sounding terms, and verbose egotism;
but intermix sentiment with expression, in such a manner as may be improving as
well as pleasing. Letters of friendship should conduce no less to the advantage
than entertainment of the person addressed; and mere cursory letters, of
general acquaintance, must, at least, be written with propriety and accuracy.
The formation of the characters, the spelling, the punctuation, as well as the
style and sense, must be attended to.

"Never omit noticing the receipt of letters, unless you mean to affront the
writers. Not to answer a letter, without being able to assign some special
reason for the neglect, is equally unpardonable as to keep silence when
conversation is addressed to you in person.

"By habituating yourselves to writing, what may, at first, appear a task, will
become extremely pleasant. Refuse not, then, to improve this part of your
education, especially by your frequent and dutifully affectionate epistles to
your parents, when absent from them. Express your gratitude for their care, and
convince them it has not been lost upon you.

"Always employ your pens upon something useful and refined. Let no light or
loose compositions occupy your time and thoughts; but remember that what you
utter in this way is in some measure the picture of your hearts. Virtue forbid,
that this favorite employment should be disgraced by impurity, indelicacy, or
the communication of vicious and ignoble sentiments!

"One of the sages of antiquity being asked why he was so long in writing his
opinion, replied, "I am writing for futurity."

"Your characters during life, and even when you shall sleep in the dust, may
rest on the efforts of your pens. Beware then how you employ them. Let not the
merit of your seize in this noble art be degraded by improper subjects
for its exercise. Suffer not the expectation of secrecy to induce you to
indulge your pens upon subjects, which you would blush to have exposed. In this
way your characters may be injured, and your happiness destroyed.

"Celia and Cecilia were companions at a boarding school. When separated, they
commenced an epistolary correspondence, on which each valued herself. Their
former intimacy, which they termed friendship, prompted them to write with
unlimited confidence; and, without the least reserve, to reveal every dictate
of levity and thoughtless folly. They imagined themselves perfectly secure from
the censure of the critic. Their education had not taught them, that a virtuous
mind should shrink even from ideal indelicacy. Celia was courted by Silvander,
a young man of whom she was passionately fond; but she had art and resolution
enough to conceal her letters from his inspection, though he often solicited a
communication of her correspondence. At length he became impatient for a
perusal of letters which appeared so pleasing and interesting to the parties,
and suspicious that some particular cause directed their privacy. Influenced by
these motives, Silvander bribed a market-boy, who came from the village where
Cecilia lived, and always conveyed the letters to and from her, to give them
first into his hand. How astonished was he to find the lightness of mind
exemplified in them! Purity of sentiment, delicacy of thought, and refinement
of taste were entirely laid aside; and illiberal wit, frothy jests, double
entendres, and ridiculous love-tales were substituted in their place. His name
was used with so much freedom, and every circumstance relative to his
intercourse, and proposed connection with Celia, was bandied with such
familiarity, that he was mortified, disgusted, and chagrined, in the extreme.
He had the policy, however, to conceal the discovery till he had copied a
considerable number of Celia's letters, leaving out whatever had reference to
his own affairs. He then revenged himself by disclosing his knowledge to her,
avowing his indignation at her weakness, duplicity and folly, and taking an
immediate and final leave. Not content with this, he even circulated her
letters among his acquaintance. This fixed the stamp of ignominy on the
correspondents; and their names and characters were rendered as ridiculous as
scandal and malicious wit could desire.

"Celia was almost distracted at the loss of her lover; but when she found the
method he had taken to punish her indiscretion, and that her reputation was
thus materially injured, she secluded herself, in a great measure, from
society. Her sensibility received a wound which could never be healed; and she
lived and died in melancholy, regret, and obscurity.

"However censurable the unjust and ungenerous conduct of Silvander may be
deemed, yet no adequate excuse can be offered for the young ladies, who
dishonored their pens and their talents by a most improper and unbecoming use
of both.

"Next to writing, arithmetic usually claims attention. This is absolutely
necessary in every department, and in every stage of life. Even in youth, the
proper arrangement of your expenses will conduce greatly to your advantage; and
when placed at the head of families, it will be very friendly to the order and
economy of your domestic affairs. But, leaving your matronal conduct to future
admonition, many benefits result from keeping regular accounts in a single
state. Your parents allow you a certain sum for your own private use. Fashion
and folly are always busy in creating innumerable imaginary wants, which must
exceed your finances, if you do not attend to an exact adjustment of your
expenditures. For this purpose, always calculate your immediate and most
necessary demands. Let these be first supplied, and then, if your funds be not
exhausted, more superfluous ones may occupy your thoughts. There is one claim,
however, which must not be neglected, and that is CHARITY. You will, therefore,
manage your expenses in such a manner as to reserve some portion of your income
for the necessitous. Should you think your allowance insufficient to admit the
children of want to a share, let your benevolence plead for the retrenchment of
some trifling article which you may dispense with, without much inconvenience;
and the exquisite pleasure resulting from the bestowment, will more than
counterbalance the sacrifice. In these, and many other particulars, a knowledge
of arithmetic will enable you to conduct the affairs of youth with case,
advantage, and usefulness. And, perhaps, as you advance in years, and are
called to fill more important stations, you may find it of still greater
utility.

"The father of Lucinda was in easy circumstances, while he could perform the
duties and enjoy the profits of a lucrative business. He was the affectionate
parent of a numerous family, to whose education and improvement he attended
with unwearied diligence and pleasure; till repeated losses in trade, and
disappointments in his worldly expectations embarrassed his affairs, depressed
his spirits, and impaired his health. In the midst of these difficulties, his
amiable and beloved wife was removed by death. This trial was greater than he
could support. He sunk under the affliction, and lost his reason. Lucinda was
the eldest of six children, the care of whom, with the melancholy task of
attending and ministering to the necessities of her unhappy father, devolved on
her. She looked upon the woe-fraught scene, and wept. Her heart was sinking
under the weight of grief; and hope, the best soother of the unfortunate, had
nearly abandoned her. She advised with her friends, who proposed to relieve the
family by means of a subscription. Lucinda thanked them for their proffered
kindness, and returned to her disconsolate habitation. She deliberated on the
projected measure; which she considered must be slow, uncertain, and, at any
rate, inadequate to their future exigences. She could not reconcile herself to
the idea of her father's depending on charity for subsistence. Yet what could
be done? One resource only remained; -- her own exertions. By these she
flattered herself, that she might save the family from suffering want, and
discharge the obligations she owed to her revered parent. Her education, by
which, among other branches of learning, she had been well instructed in
arithmetic, (that being her father's favorite study) qualified her for this
undertaking. She therefore devoted herself to the business without delay;
examined her father's accounts, collected whatever remained that was valuable;
sold the superfluous movables, and purchased a small stock for trade. All who
knew her motives and merit frequented her shop, and encouraged her by their
custom and kindness. By this mean, together with her judicious management, and
engaging behavior, she increased her business to such a degree, as to support
the family with ease and reputation.

"Her discreet and dutiful conduct to her father, soon restored him to his
reason.

"When he found how prudently and affectionately Lucinda had exerted herself in
his behalf, he exclaimed, "Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou
excellest them all!"

"He resumed his former business, and lived to see his children all well
provided for, and happily settled around him."

Tuesday, P. M. MUSIC and DANCING.
HER pupils having taken their places, Mrs. Williams proceeded.

"In music and dancing you have made such proficiency that your performances
must be very pleasing to your friends, before whom you occasionally exhibit.

"As dancing is an accomplishment merely external, let not the vanity of
excellence in it betray itself in an air of conscious superiority, when you
shine at the ball, and perceive yourselves to have attracted the attention and
applause of the gay assembly. But in the midst of hilarity and mirth, remember
that modesty, diffidence, discretion, and humility are indispensable appendages
of virtue and decency.

"Music is a talent which nature has bestowed, and which your application has
considerably improved. It has a powerful influence over the heart; wonderfully
soothes and humanizes the passions, and is a source of refined pleasure to a
mind capable of tasting its charms.

"Never refuse gratifying your friends by the exertion of your abilities in
performing, unless for some very special reason. Though I would not have you
vain of your skill, and officiously forward to display it; yet the affectation
of uncommon modesty, and ignorance, is truly ridiculous. To plead inability to
exercise powers, which you are conscious of possessing, and for which you wish
to be esteemed and honored by others, is false delicacy, and will never gain
admission to the breast where that which is genuine resides. How perfectly
absurd it is for a young lady, who is politely requested to entertain a company
with her musical talents, to declare them so small that she is really ashamed
to expose herself before such good judges; or that she has neglected playing,
or singing, for some time, and cannot immediately revive her dormant skill; or
that she has forgotten her tunes, or songs; or that she has a bad cold, (which
none but herself perceives) and is unable to sing; or that she is loath to
begin this amusement, and must insist upon some other lady's setting the
example; which other lady has, in her turn, an equal number of excuses! Thus
the time of the company is engrossed, and their pleasure suspended, till a long
train of arguments, entreaties, and compliments are run through, and her vanity
fully gratified by the most flattering and importunate solicitations.

"Then, elate with pride and self importance, she condescends to grant their
request; not considering how far she has derogated from her own merit by the
futile artifice she has employed; an artifice unworthy of an ingenuous mind,
and disgraceful to any lady who has arrived to years of discretion.

"Let us view this evasive manner of seeking compliments a little nearer. When
a person is known to be mistress of this delightful art, what can be her motive
for delaying the gratification of her friends by its exercise, and refusing a
compliance with their wishes, till their patience is exhausted? I believe that
excuses, in this case, are very seldom sincere. The youthful mind is not
insensible to praise, nor indifferent to the means of obtaining it.

"Why then should it not be received and increased by a ready and obliging
compliance? A desire to please is usually attended with success; and for what
reason should the power and disposition be artfully concealed?

"Always preserve a frankness and sincerity in your actions and designs. These
will add dignity to your condescensions, and gracefulness to your deportment.

"Rise superior to those little arts which bespeak the finesse of a childish
folly, or a narrow mind. Do honor to this, as well as to every other part of
your education, by acting conformably to the precepts which have been given
you, the knowledge which you have acquired, and the opportunities with which
you may be furnished for the purpose.

"Music and dancing, though polite and elegant accomplishments, are, perhaps,
the most fascinating, and, of course, the most dangerous of any that fall under
that description. When indulged to excess, beside engrossing much time which
ought to be employed in the execution of more necessary and useful designs,
they sometimes allure their fond votaries from that purity and rectitude which
are the chief embellishments of the female character. They lay the mind open to
many temptations, and, by nourishing a frivolous vanity, benumb the nobler
powers both of reflection and action.

"Levitia was endowed, by the joint influence of nature and art, with these
pleasing charms. Symmetry was perfected in her form; and her voice was melody
itself. Her parents were not in affluent circumstances; yet their taste led
them to distinguish those graces and talents in their daughter, which they
injudiciously flattered themselves might, one day, raise her to affluence and
fame. Hence they spared no pains nor expense, in their power to bestow, to
assist her inclination and gratify her wishes. As she advanced in years, she
assiduously cultivated and diligently imimproved those endowments which she had
been erroneously encouraged, and even taught, to consider most valuable. To
adorn her person, regulate her movements, and practice her music, was all her
care. Nor had she a wish beyond the pleasures, which she fancied they could
yield. Her mind resembled a garden, in which the useful plants are overrun and
choked by noxious weeds. Here and there a gaudy flower rears its brilliant
head, and proudly dares to arrest the eye; while the delicate and useful lie
buried and concealed in the surrounding waste!

"Flattery was pleasing to her ear, in whatever form it was presented. The gay
and licentious sought her society; and vanity with its attendant train of
follies led her imagination far from the sphere of life which Providence had
assigned her. Her parents saw their own mistake, and were alarmed at here is:
but, alas! too late were their endeavors to prevent the mischiefs which
impended. They could not supply her unbounded wants; and therefore to gratify
her ruling passion, she deemed means of her own invention indispensable. Among
her admirers was a foreigner, who, failing of success in his own country,
sought a subsistence in ours, from the stage. He knew Levitia's talents. These
might give her the palm of applause, and in his way of life, reader her
conspicuous. This plan he communicated to her, insidiously offering to become
her guardian, and to put her under the protection of such friends as should
defend her honor, and ensure her success. She was pleased with the project.
Wholly unacquainted with the world, and unsuspicious of the subtle arts of the
deluding libertine, she scrupled not his veracity, but listened to his
insinuating declarations of love and friendship. She was deceived by the vanity
of appearing where her fancied merit would meet with the encouragement and
reward it deserved; and vainly imagining that her beauty might secure her
elevation and affluence, she readily consented to the fatal experiment, eloped
from her father's house, and became a professed actress.

"Her parents were overwhelmed with grief and anxiety, at the discovery; but to
no purpose were all their exertions to reclaim her. She had left them, no more
to return; left them, too, with the heart-rending reflection, that they
themselves had heedlessly contributed to her disgrace and ruin. But bitter
indeed were the fruits of her disobedience and folly!

"She made her appearance on the stage. She sung and danced, for which she was
caressed, flattered, and paid. A licentious mode of life quadrating with the
levity of her heart, soon left her a prey to seduction. Her gaiety and beauty
gained her many votaries, and she became a complete courtezan.

"In the midst of this career, her mother died of a broken heart, evidently
occasioned by her undutiful and vicious conduct. A sense of her ingratitude to
her parents, and her shameless manner of life struck her mind, not naturally
unfeeling, with such force, as to throw her into a fever which undermined her
constitution, deprived her of her beauty, ruined her voice, and left her
without means of support. Her pretended lover, finding she could no longer be
useful to him, perfidiously abandoned her to poverty and shame. She returned,
like the prodigal, to her unhappy father, who received, but could not assist
her. Her behavior, with its consequences in the death of her mother, had
impaired his health, depressed his spirits, and rendered him incapable of
providing for himself.

"She is now despised and avoided by all her former acquaintance, and must
inevitably spend the remainder of her days in wretchedness.

"Let us turn from this disgusting picture, and behold its contrast in the
amiable Florella. To beauty of person she superadds delicacy, sensibility, and
every noble quality of the mind. Respectful to her superiors, affable,
cheerful, and polite to her equals, and condescendingly kind to her inferiors,
Florella is universally esteemed, beloved, and admired. Of the pleasing
accomplishments of music and dancing she is a consummate mistress. Yet she is
superior to the vain arts of flattery, while the dignity of conscious virtue
raises her far above the affectation of false modesty and diffidence. To please
and oblige those friends who are interested in her happiness, and gratified by
her performances, is her delight. Nor does she think it necessary, by feigned
excuses, to delay the pleasure, which she is able to afford; but willingly
enhances that pleasure by a ready and cheerful compliance. This she thinks the
best return she can make for their kind attention. Though delighted with these
amusements herself, she, nevertheless, considers them as amusements only; and
assiduously cultivates the more solid branches of her education. These, she is
wont to say, may render me useful and happy, when the voice of music shall be
brought low, and when the sprightly limbs shall become languid and inactive.

"How happy her parents in her filial duty and affection! How rich the reward
of their care and expense in contributing to her improvements! How happy
Florella in their complacency and love, and in the consciousness of deserving
them!

"She was, not long since, addressed by a gentleman, who was pleasing to her
fancy; but, determined never to indulge a sentiment of partiality without the
entire approbation of her parents, she referred him to their decision. For
particular reasons, they disapproved of his suit. She acquiesced without
reserve, and immediately dismissed him. Who would not rather be a resembler of
Florella, than a vain, imprudent, and ruined Levitia?

"True, indeed, the acquirements and graces of Florella are not attainable by
every one; but the virtues of discretion, modesty, and kindness are within the
reach of the humblest sphere, and the most moderate abilities."

Wednesday, A. M. MISCELLANEOUS DIRECTIONS for the GOVERNMENT of the TEMPER and
MANNERS.
"I SHALL now," said Mrs. Williams, "endeavor to sketch out for you the plan
of conduct, which I think will be most conducive to your honor and happiness
while in a single state. Hitherto you have been under the direction of parents,
guardians, and instructors, who have regulated your deportment, and labored to
give you just ideas upon every subject and occasion. That period is now over.
You are now launching into life, where you will think and act more for
yourselves.

"The path of rectitude, my dear young friends, is narrow and intricate.
Temptations lurk around to beguile your feet astray; and dangers which appear
insurmountable will often arise to affright you from the ways of virtue.

"But remember that a crown of honor and happiness awaits the undeviating
pursuit of truth and duty. Let religion be your guide, and discretion your
handmaid. Thus attended, you will escape the snares of youth, and surmount the
perplexing cares of more advanced age. At your entrance on the stage of action,
the allurements of pleasure will spread innumerable charms to court your
acceptance. Beware of their fascinating wiles; and whatever course you adopt,
be sure it is such as will bear the test of examination and reflection. Let
these be the criterion of all your pursuits and enjoyments. Make it an
invariable practice to re-trace the actions and occurrences of the day, when
you retire to rest; to account with your own hearts for the use and improvement
of the past hours; and rectify whatever you find amiss, by greater vigilance
and caution, in future; to avoid the errors into which you have fallen, and to
discharge the duties incumbent upon you.

"To neglect this, will be a source of great inadvertencies and failings.

"To know yourselves, in every particular, must be your constant endeavor.
This knowledge will lead you to propriety and consistency of action. But this
knowledge cannot be obtained without a thorough and repeated inspection of your
various passions, affections, and propensities. When obtained, however, it will
prevent the ill effects of flattery, by which you will doubtless be endangered,
as you advance into the scenes of fashionable life. It will enable you to
distinguish flattery from that generous praise which is the effusion of a
feeling heart, affected by the perception of real merit. A young lady,
unskilled in the deceitful arts of a giddy world, is very apt to be misled by
the adulation which is offered at the shrine of vanity. She is considered as a
mark for the wit of every coxcomb, who wishes to display his gallantry.

"Flattery is a dazzling meteor, which casts a delusive glare before the eye;
and which seduces the imagination, perverts the judgment, and silences the
dictates of sound reason. Flattery is, therefore, the poison and bane of the
youthful mind. It renders the receiver blind to those defects which she ought
to see and rectify, and proud of imaginary graces which she never yet
possessed. Self-knowledge, as before observed, will facilitate the detection of
this disguised adversary, by enabling you to investigate your real
accomplishments and merits.

"That praise which is the result of deserved approbation from those, whose
good opinion you wish to enjoy, is worthy your attention and grateful
acceptance: but the fulsome compliments and hyperbolical professions of
unmeaning and empty pretenders, calculated only to fill the imagination with
the inflammable air of self-conceit and arrogant pride, should be rejected with
disdain, and cordially despised by every lady of sense and sentiment, as an
insult upon her understanding, and an indignity to her sensibility.

"Let it, therefore, be known to those who court your favor by an ostentatious
parade of admiration and obsequiousness, that their dissimulation and duplicity
are discovered, and that you are superior to such futility.

"In order to discriminate between flattery and merited praise, critically
examine your own heart and life. By this mean you will ascertain what is really
your due, and what is merely the effect of this insidious art. But let no ideas
of your own endowments, however just, elate you with an opinion of your
superior powers of pleasing.

"Be not ostentatious of your charms, either of person or mind. Let modesty,
diffidence, and propriety regulate you, in regard to each. Exalted advantages
will render you an object of envy to the weak minded of your own sex, and of
satire to the ill-natured part of the other. Never obtrude even your real
graces and accomplishments upon the world. The penetrating and judicious will
see and applaud them, while retiring from the gaze of a misjudging and
misrepresenting throng.

"Naked in nothing should a woman be,
But veil her very wit with modesty;
Let man discover; let her not display;
But yield her charms of mind with sweet delay."
"Those who are solicitous for beauty should remember that the expression of
the countenance, in which its very essence consists, depends on the disposition
of the mind.

"What Is female beauty, but an air divine,
Through which the mind's all gentle graces shine?
These, like the sun, irradiate all between;
The body charms, because the soul is seen.
Hence men are often captives of a face,
They know not why; of no peculiar grace.
Some forms, though bright, no mortal man can bear;
Some, none resist, though not exceeding fair."
"Beauty, my dear girls, is indeed a desirable quality. Neither the pen of the
moralist, nor the spleen of the satyrist, nor the envy of such as want it,
could ever bring it into contempt or neglect. Yet mere external beauty is
transient as the meteor, and frail as the bubble, which floats on the surface
of the watery element.

"Behold the disconsolate and despised Flirtilla! and from her fate learn not
to trust in the effects or duration of this adventitious quality.

"Early in life, Flirtilla was taught that her charms were irresistible; that
she might aspire to an absolute ascendency* over the hearts and passions of her
votaries. A superficial, but fashionable education added the allurements of art
to those of person, and rendered her a finished coquette.

"Her beauty and the gaiety of her manners gained her numerous admirers, who
swarmed around, like the insect tribe, eager to sip the fragrance of the
equally fair and fading rose. The incense of flattery, in every form, was her
tribute.

"Elated by this, she gave free scope to her ruling passions, the love of
pleasure and dissipation. Her best days were spent in the chase of vanity; and
she culled the flowers of life, without considering, that substantial fruit
would be required at a more advanced period, as a substitute for the fading
blossoms of youth. Her mind was barren of improvement, and consequently
destitute of resources.

"She vainly imagined the triumphs of beauty to be permanent, till its declared
enemy, the smallpox, convinced her of the egregious mistake. By this she found
her empire suddenly overturned. The merciless disorder had reduced her to a
level with the generality of her sex, in appearance, and, in enjoyment, far
below them. Her glass faithfully represented this insupportable reduction.
Regret and chagrin heightened the apparent calamity. She was remembered only as
the contrast of what she once had been. Her lovers were disgusted with the
change, and sought more pleasing objects of attention; while men of sentiment
could not find a similarity of disposition, in her, to induce a connection.

"Her female acquaintance, who had envied her as a rival, or feared her as a
superior, now insulted her with their pity, or mortified her by remarks on the
surprising alteration in her appearance.

"Finding no alleviation from society, she retired from the world to nurse, in
solitude, the vexation and disappointment she experienced.

"View her now, peevish, discontented, and gloomy! Her ideas of pleasure were
centered in that person, which is now neglected; in those endowments which have
now forsaken her forever!

"Thought she studiously shuns; for she has nothing pleasing to occupy her
reflections, but what is irretrievably lost!

"Miserable Flirtilla! thou trustedst in vanity, and vanity is thy recompense!
How happy might thou have been, even in this change, if thy heart had been
rectified, thy understanding improved, and thy mind liberally stored with
useful sentiments, knowledge, and information!

"Cultivate, then, my young friends, those dispositions and seize, which
will yield permanent and real satisfaction, when sickness, adversity, or age
shall have robbed your eyes of their luster, and diminished the bloom and
sprightliness of your forms.

"You are doubtless sensible that your happiness, in life, does not depend so
much on your external, as your internal graces.

"The constitutional temper of your minds was given you by nature; but reason
is added for its regulation.

"On life's vast ocean diversely we sail;
Reason the chart; but passion is the gale."
"Our passions were certainly implanted for wise and benevolent purposes; and,
if properly directed, may be of great utility. This direction nature will
teach, and education improve. To their precepts we must implicitly listen, if
we would become respectable or contented.

"Examine yourselves, therefore, with impartial scrutiny. Find out your
particular faults in this respect, and exert your unwearied industry to amend
them.

"Possibly you may be naturally hasty, passionate, or vindictive. If so, how
wretched, at times, must the indulgence of this temper render you! When reason,
awhile suspended, resumes its empire, and calm reflection succeeds the riot of
passion, how severe must be your self-condemnation, and how keen your
sensations of regret! Perhaps an unkindness of expression to some particular
friend, disrespectful treatment of an honored superior, ill-timed resentment to
a beloved equal, or imperious and unbecoming severity to a deserving inferior,
may give you the most painful emotions, and degrade you in your own, as well as
in the estimation of every observer! To prevent this evil, accustom yourselves
to check the first risings of anger, and suspend every expression of
displeasure, till you can deliberate on the provocation, and the propriety of
noticing it. It may have been undesigned, and, therefore, not justly provoking.
You may have misunderstood the word, or action of offense, and inquiry may
remove the grounds of your suspicion: or the person offending may be one with
whom prudence and honor require you not to enter the lists. But if neither of
these considerations occur, reflect a moment, that your own reputation and
consequent happiness are at stake; and that to lose the command of yourselves
and your passions is inconsistent with the delicacy of ladies, the moderation
of christians, and the dignity of rational beings.

"Let every sally alarm, and excite you to rally and new-discipline your
forces; and to be more strictly on your guard against the assaults of your foe.

"The character of Camilla is a pattern worthy of your imitation. While very
young, Camilla was unfortunately deprived of the instruction and regulating
hand of a discreet and judicious mother. Her father was too much immersed in
business to attend to the cultivation of his daughter's mind.

"He gave her the means of a genteel education, praised her excellencies, and
chid her faults, without being at the pains of teaching her how to amend them.
The irritability of her temper he rather indulged, considering her as a girl of
spirit, who would make her way in the world, in spite of obstacles. She was
naturally generous, tenderhearted, and humane; but her temper was as
uncontrollable as the whirlpool, and as impetuous as the wind. Happily for her,
she had an uncommon strength of mind, a ready apprehension, a quick perception,
and a depth of understanding, seldom equalled. She saw her errors, was
conscious of her failings, and a severe sufferer for her faults. But such was
the extreme quickness of her feelings, and so passionate her resentment of any
thing which appeared injurious or affrontive, that she could not always repress
them. She married a gentleman of a similar temper, and of equal prudence. In
the union of such violent spirits, great harmony could not be presaged. Their
passions were lively, their affections ardent.

"The honey-moon in raptures flew,
A second brought its transports too;
The third, the fourth, were not amiss;
The fifth was friendship, mixed with bliss:
But ere a twelvemonth passed away,
They found each other made of clay."
"Inadvertencies gave offense; frequent altercations arose; both were tenacious
of their rights, and averse to condescension. Camilla saw the impending danger;
she became sensible that the happiness of her life depended on amendment and
caution; she resolved to avoid giving or taking offense, with the greatest
diligence; to suppress every emotion of anger; and when she thought herself
injured, to retire, or be silent, till passion had subsided, and she could
regain her calmness.

"This was a hard task, at first; but perseverance rendered it effectual to a
thorough reformation in each.

"Her example and pathetic admonitions induced her husband to adopt her prudent
plan. They found their mutual endeavors productive of real satisfaction, and
happiness the reward of their exertions to secure it.

"To be vindictive is equally, perhaps more fatal to our own, and the peace of
others, than to be passionate. Violent passions of all kinds are generally
transient; but revenge is the offspring of malice, the parent of discord, and
the bane of social love. It is an evidence of a weak and sickly mind. True
greatness will rise superior to this ignoble spirit, so peculiarly ungraceful
in a lady, and inconsistent with that delicacy and softness, which ought ever
to characterize the sex.

"But an envious temper is, of all others, the most degrading and miserable.
Envy is a malignant poison, which rankles in the heart, and destroys the inward
peace; even while there is an outward appearance of serenity. That mind, which
cannot rejoice in the happiness of others, is capable of very little in itself.
To look with a grudging and evil eye on the enjoyments of our neighbor, must
be a source of perpetual chagrin and mortification.

"Envy indulged, is a punishment to its possessor. Eradicate, then, the first,
and every emotion of so corroding and destructive a nature; and endeavor to
excel only by that virtuous emulation, which is productive of improvement and
respectability.

"A kind, compassionate, benevolent, humane disposition is an invaluable
treasure. It will render you blessings to society, and objects of universal
esteem.

"In you it is graceful to dissolve at woe;
With every motion, every word, to wave
Quick over the kindling cheek the ready blush;
And from the smallest violence to shrink," --
"This amiable temper, however, may sometimes degenerate into weakness.

"Prudence should be exercised, even in the indulgence of the most engaging
qualities. In the progress of life, occasions may call for that resolution and
fortitude, which admit not of apparent softness; but such occasions very seldom
occur.

"How alluring are the charms of sympathy and charity! Happy are they who
always feel the one, and have power and inclination to exemplify the other!

"The diamond, and the ruby's blaze
Dispute the palm with beauty's queen;
Not beauty's queen demands such praise,
Devoid of virtue, if she is seen.
But the soft tear in pity's eye
Outshines the diamond's brightest beam,
And the sweet blush of modesty
More beauteous than the ruby's seen."
Wednesday, P. M. DRESS.
"DRESS" continued Mrs. Williams to her re-assembled and attentive pupils, "is
an important article of female economy. By some it is doubtless considered as
too essential. This is always the case, when it becomes the ruling passion, and
every other excellence is made subordinate to it. A suitable attention to the
etiquette of appearance is necessary to render us respectable in the eyes of
the world; and discovers an accommodating disposition, which is, at once,
engaging and useful in the commerce of society. Females are taxed with being
peculiarly attached to, and captivated by the glare of splendour and show. But I
believe superficial minds are not confined to sex. Whatever form they actuate,
to beautify and adorn it will be the principal object.

"A certain species of gaiety and airiness is becoming in youth. Young ladies,
therefore, act perfectly in character, when, under proper restraint, they
indulge their taste in the decoration of their persons. But they should be
especially careful that their taste be correct; consistent with the modest
delicacy which is the glory and ornament of woman.

"It is laudable to follow fashions, so far as they are governed by these
rules; but whenever they deviate, quit them with express disapprobation and
disgust. Any assumptions of the masculine habit are unbecoming. Dress and
manners should be correspondent; and the engaging softness and artless
simplicity, which grace my pupils, must be quite inconsistent with the air and
attire of the other sex.

"A gaudy and fantastical mode of decoration is by no means a recommendation.
It bespeaks a lightness of mind and a vanity of disposition, against which a
discreet and modest girl should guard with the utmost vigilance. Extravagance
is a great error, even where fortune will allow the means of supporting it.
Many are the claims which the children of affliction and want have upon the
superfluous plenty of the rich. How much better expended would some part of
their redundance be, in relieving the necessities of such, than in decorating
their own persons, with every ornament which art can contrive to create expense!

"Neatness and propriety should be the main objects; for loveliness needs no
foreign aid to give it a passport. Neatness is too often connected with the
idea of a prudish singularity; but no gaudiness of apparel, no richness of
attire, no modishness of appearance can be an equivalent for it. Propriety is
that garb which becomes our situation and circumstances in life. There
certainly ought to be a difference between different ages and conditions, in
this respect. Many articles, ornamental to Miss in her teens, would appear
absurd, fantastical, and ridiculous in maturer years. Neither should the
matronal robes, and the close cap hide the natural ringlets, and easy shapes of
the blooming girl.

"It is a very false taste which induces people in dependent and narrow
circumstances, to imitate the expensive mode of dress which might be very
decent for those who move in a higher sphere.

"To endeavor to conceal indigence by the affectation of extravagance, is
committing a great offense, both against ourselves, and the community to which
we belong. The means of support should always be attended to. A conformity to
these will render you more respected for prudence, than a deviation for the
sake of show without substance, can make you admired.

"Louisa and Clarinda are striking examples. They were both the daughters of
reputable parents, whose situations in the world were easy and comfortable,
though not affluent. They were able to give their children a good education,
but no other portion. Gay, volatile, and ambitious, Louisa was the votary of
fashion. A superior in dress excited the keenest sensations of envy in her
bosom; and a rival in appearance gave her unspeakable mortification.
Dissatisfied with her natural charms, cosmetics and paints added to her
expenses, and betrayed her folly. She had many professed admirers, who found
her a willing dupe to flattery, and who raised her vanity by praising her
excellent taste.

"Leander, a gentleman of liberal education, superior merit, and handsome
property, cast his eye around for a companion to share and enjoy these
advantages with him. Louisa caught his attention. The elegance of her person,
and splendour of her appearance, charmed his imagination, and inspired the idea
of a fortune sufficient to support her expensive style of living. He paid his
addresses, and was received with the most flattering encouragement. But how
great was his disappointment, when he discovered the smallness of her
resources, and the imprudence of her management! This, said he to himself, will
never do for me. Were my income far superior to what it is, it would not be
adequate to such unbounded extravagance. Besides, where so little economy is
practiced, while under parental government, what must be the consequence of
that unlimited indulgence, which the confidence due to a wife demands? Were I
to abridge her expenses, and endeavor to rectify her fantastical taste, it
would doubtless foment dissension, discord, and animosity, which must terminate
in wretchedness. He resolved, however, to try her real disposition, by gently
hinting his disapprobation of her gaiety. This she resented; and a rupture,
which ended in a final separation, ensued. She found, too late, the value of
the man, whom she had slighted; and ever after regretted that folly which had
irretrievably alienated his affections.

"The modesty and neatness of Clarinda's garb next caught Leander's eye.
Conversing with her on the subject of dress, the justness of her sentiments
gave him the highest ideas of the rectitude and innocence of her mind. A costly
article was offered for her purchase; but she refused it. It would not become
me, said she, nor any other person who has not an affluent fortune. If I had a
sufficiency to buy it, I would procure something more simple and necessary for
myself; and the overplus might render an object of distress contented and happy.

"Yet was Clarinda always elegantly neat; always genteelly fashionable.
Frugality and economy, free from profusion and extravagance, enabled her to
indulge her own taste entirely; and while she enjoyed that, she repined not at
the fancied superiority of others. Leander found her all he wished, in
appearance; all he hoped for, in reality. As their tastes were correspondent,
and their highest aim, when united, to please each other, they were not
dependent on the breath of fashion for their happiness. A compliance with its
forms did not elate their pride, nor a departure from them, fill their hearts
with peevishness and discontent."

Thursday, A. M. POLITENESS.
"STILL more important than your habit, is your air and deportment. It is not
sufficient that these are pleasing to the eye of the superficial observer. Your
behavior and conversation must be uniformly governed by the laws of
politeness, discretion, and decorum. Else you will be disgusting to people of
refinement; and the judicious and discerning will discover the weakness of your
minds, notwithstanding the showy ornaments, intended to conceal it from public
view.

"Inattention in company is a breach of good manners. Indeed, it is a downright
insult; being neither more nor less, than declaring that you have not the least
respect for any who are present. Either you do not value their good opinion, or
you have something more important than their conversation to occupy your minds.

"You should always be attentive to those with whom you are conversant, let
their rank and standing be what they may. Your superiors will esteem you for
your respectful treatment of them; your equals will love you for your kindness
and familiarity; your inferiors will respect you for your condescension and
meekness.

"Attention in company will be advantageous to yourselves. Like the industrious
be, which sips honey from every plant, you may derive some benefit or
instruction from all kinds of society. Some useful remark or information; some
sentiment which may allure you to the practice of virtue, or deter you from a
vicious perpetration, may repay your labor, and be serviceable through life.

"But should there be no other motive than that of pleasing your associates,
and rendering them happy, by making yourselves agreeable, it may be considered
as a sufficient inducement to the practice of this branch of good-breeding.
Many girls, in the thoughtless levity of their hearts, divert themselves at the
expense of others; and, with the utmost glee, point out any thing peculiar in
the appearance, words, or actions of some one in the company, whom they select
for a subject of merriment and ridicule. This, by shrewd looks, ironical
gestures, or tittering whispers, is kept up, to the great mortification of the
unhappy victim, and to the reproach and dishonor of the offenders. Such conduct
is a breach, not only of the rules of common civility, but of humanity; besides
being directly repugnant to the precept of doing to others as we would that
they should do to us.

"Be particularly careful, then, not to mortify, or give pain to an inferior.

"Let the question, "who makes thee to differ?" suppress every emotion of
ridicule, contempt, or neglect; and induce you to raise and encourage depressed
merit by your notice and approbation.

"As far as propriety, delicacy, and virtue will allow, conform to the taste,
and participate in the amusements and conversation of the company into which
you have fallen. If they be disagreeble to you, avoid a supercilious avowal of
your dislike. This, instead of reforming, would probably give them a disgust to
you, and perhaps subject you to affronts. Yet where a disapprobating word or
hint may be seasonable, neglect not the opportunity of contributing to their
benefit and amendment.

"Are you conscious of superior advantages, either mental or external, make no
ostentatious display of them. Vanity too often leads young ladies to obtrude
their acquirements on the eyes of observers, inconsiderately apprehending they
may otherwise be unnoticed. Such forwardness always subjects them to censure,
ridicule, and envy; the expressions of which destroy that self-approbation
which retiring merit invariably enjoys. However, exert that dignity of virtue
which will render you independent of caprice, calumny, and unprovoked satire.

"Make no ungenerous, or ill-natured remarks on the company, or on the
individuals of which it is composed.

"If you dislike them, avoid them in future. If you witness errors, faults, or
improprieties, conceal, or at least extenuate them, as much as possible.

"Make just allowances for those who may differ from you in opinion; and be
cautious never to misrepresent, or circulate what appears amiss to you, and
must, if exposed, be injurious to others. Charity hides a multitude of faults.
Certainly then, charity will never aggravate nor create them.

"To give currency to a report, which tends to the disadvantage and dishonor of
another, is defaming; and defamation is a species of cruelty, which can never
be expiated.

"Of this the unhappy, though imprudent Eudocia, is an exemplification.

"Eudocia was young, gay* and charming. A levity of disposition, which the
innocence of her heart attempted not to restrain, sometimes gave the tongue of
slander pretense to aim its envenomed shafts at her character, and to
misrepresent her sprightliness.

"Independent in fortune; still more so in mind, calumny gave her no pain,
while she was conscious of the rectitude of her intentions.

"Leontine was a gentleman of property; agreeable in his person and manners; of
strict honor, and extremely tenacious of it; but of a severe and unforgiving
temper. He paid his addresses to Eudocia; was accepted, approved, and beloved.
Yet, though he had gained her affections, he had not sufficient influence to
regulate her conduct, and repress her gaiety. Her fondness for show and
gallantry, in some instances, induced her to countenance the attentions, and
receive the flattery, of men, whose characters were exceptionable, in
Leontine's estimation. He remonstrated against her imprudence, and gave her his
ideas of female delicacy. She laughed at his gravity, and rallied him on his
implicit subjection to the opinions of others.

"Toward the close of a fine day, Eudocia rambled along a retired road, to
enjoy the air. She was alone; but the hope of meeting her beloved Leontine,
whom she expected that evening, imperceptibly led her beyond her intended
excursion. The rattling of a carriage caused her to stop; and, thinking it to
be Leontine's, she approached it before she perceived her mistake. A gentleman
of an elegant appearance alighted, and accosting her politely, expressed his
surprise at finding her so far from home without an attendant. She found it was
Florio, with whom she had a slight acquaintance, having once met with him in
company. She frankly owned her motive for walking thus far; and refused his
invitation to return in his carriage. He renewed his request; and his
importunity, seconded by her fatigue, at last prevailed. At this moment the
detracting Lavina passed by. She saw Eudocia, and with a sneering smile, wished
her a good night. Eudocia was unconscious of fault, and therefore fearless of
censure. But the artful Florio, desirous of protracting the pleasure of her
company, took a circuitous route, which considerably increased the distance to
her father's house. However, he conveyed her safely home, though not so soon as
she wished. She found that Leontine had been there, and had gone to visit a
friend; but would soon return. Leontine was just seated at his friend's, when
Lavina entered.

"She told the circle, that Florio had just passed her, and that he had company
she little expected to see with him. They inquired if it was his former
mistress? No, said she, he has discarded her some time ago, and if we may judge
by appearances, has chosen a new one. Upon being asked who, she presumed to
name Eudocia. Every countenance expressed surprise and regret. In Leontine's,
rage and resentment were visibly depicted. He rose, and stepping hastily to
Lavina, told her he was a party concerned, and demanded an explanation of what
she had insinuated. She perceived that she had given offense, and endeavored
to excuse herself; but he resolutely told her that no evasions would avail;
that he insisted on the real truth of her scandalous report. Finding him thus
determined, she related the simple fact of seeing Eudocia in a carriage with
Florio, who was a known libertine, and accustomed to the society of loose
women. Leontine asked her how she came to associate the ideas she had mentioned
with Eudocia's name? She replied that the lightness of her behavior had
sometimes rendered her censurable; and she thought this instance, in
particular, authorized suspicion. Leontine could not deny that she was culpable
in appearance; yet made answer, that though scandal might feast on the failings
of virtue, he believed Eudocia's innocence much purer, and her heart much
better than her detracters'; and, taking his hat, he wished the company a good
evening, and left them.

"His passions were on fire. He could not comprehend the mysterious conduct of
Eudocia. Her absence from home, at a time when he expected her to receive him,
and her being seen at a distance, in company with a professed debauchee, were a
labyrinth which he could not explore. Though he doubted not Eudocia's honor,
yet her folly and imprudence, in subjecting her character to suspicion and
reproach, he thought unpardonable. His resentment determined him to break the
proposed connection immediately; and, lest his love should get the better of his
resolution, he went directly to the house.

"As he could not command his temper, he appeared extremely agitated, and
angrily told Eudocia that she had caused him great uneasiness; and that he came
to claim the satisfaction of knowing, why she had avoided his society, and made
an assignation with a man who had involved her in infamy? Eudocia was
astonished, and justly offended at this address. With all the dignity of
conscious innocence, she replied, that as yet he had no right to challenge an
account of her conduct; but for her own sake, she would condescend to give it.
This she did, by a faithful and undisguised relation of facts. She then asked
him, if he was satisfied. He answered, No. For, said he, though you have
cleared yourself of guilt, in my apprehension, you will find it very difficult
to free your character from the blemish it has received in the opinion of the
world. Saying this, he told her, that, however highly he esteemed her, so
opposite were their dispositions, that they must often be at variance; and so
nice was his sense of honor, that his wife, like Caesar's, must not only be
virtuous, but unsuspected. She rejoined, that his sentiments were apparent; and
if what he then expressed were his opinion of her, it was best they should part.

"Some further conversation passed; when, promising to call, the next day, and
satisfy her parents, and wishing Eudocia all possible happiness in life, he
took his leave.

"The impropriety of her conduct, and her losing the affections of a man she
too ardently loved, together with the cruel treatment she had just received
from him, overwhelmed her with grief, and produced the most violent emotions of
regret. She walked her room in all the anguish of disappointed hope. Her
parents used every argument to soothe and console her; but in vain.

"She yielded to their persuasions so far as to retire to bed; but rest she
found not; and the morning presented her in a burning fever. Leontine called in
the course of the day; but the friends of Eudocia refused to see him. An
account of her disorder had roused him to a sense of his rashness, and he
begged to be admitted to her chamber; but this she utterly denied.

"Her fever left her; but the disease of her mind was beyond the power of
medicine. A settled melancholy still remains; and she lives the victim of
calumniation!

"To detract from the merit of others, beside the want of politeness which it
betrays, and beside the injuries which it always occasions, is extremely
impolitic. It is to confess your inferiority, and to acknowledge a wish, not to
rise to greater respectability; but to bring down those about you to your own
level! Ill-natured remarks are the genuine offspring of an envious and
grovelling mind.

"Call yourselves to a severe account, therefore, whenever you have been guilty
of this degrading offense; and always check the first impulses toward it.

"Accustom yourselves to the exercise of sincerity, benevolence, and
good humor, those endearing virtues, which will render you beloved and
respected by all.

"To bestow your attention, in company, upon trifling singularities in the
dress, person, or manners of others, is spending your time to little purpose.
From such a practice you can derive neither pleasure nor profit; but must
unavoidably subject yourselves to the imputation of incivility and malice."

Thursday, P. M. AMUSEMENTS.
"AMUSEMENT is impatiently desired, and eagerly sought by young ladies in
general. Forgetful that the noblest entertainment arises from a placid and well
cultivated mind, too many fly from themselves, from thought and reflection to
fashionable dissipation, or what they call pleasure, as a mean of beguiling the
hours which solitude and retirement render insupportably tedious.

"An extravagant fondness for company and public resorts is incompatible with
those domestic duties, the faithful discharge of which ought to be the
prevailing object of the sex. In the indulgence of this disposition, the mind
is enervated, and the manners corrupted, till all relish for those enjoyments,
which, being simple and natural, are best calculated to promote health,
innocence, and social delight, is totally lost.

"It is by no means amiss for youth to seek relaxation from severer cares and
labors, in a participation of diversions, suited to their age, sex, and
station in life. But there is great danger of their lively imaginations'
hurrying them into excess, and detaching their affections from the ennobling
acquisitions of moral improvement, and refined delicacy. Guard, then, against
those amusements which have the least tendency to sully the purity of your
minds.

"Loose and immoral books; company, whose manners are licentious, however gay
and fashionable; conversation, which is even tinctured with profaneness or
obscenity; plays, in which the representation is immodest, and offensive to the
ear of chastity; indeed, pastimes of every description, from which no advantage
can be derived, should not be countenanced; much less, applauded. Why should
those things afford apparent satisfaction in a crowd, which would call forth
the blush of indignation in more private circles? This question is worthy the
serious attention of those ladies, who, at the theater, can hardly restrain
their approbation of expressions and actions, which, at their houses, would be
intolerably rude and indecent, in their most familiar friends!

"Cards are so much the taste of the present day, that to caution my pupils
against the too frequent use of them, may be thought old-fashioned in the
extreme. I believe it, however, to be a fascinating game, which occupies the
time, without yielding any kind of pleasure or profit. As the satyrist
humourously observes,

"The love of gaming is the worst of ills;
With ceaseless storms the blackened soul it fills;
Inveighs at Heaven, neglects the ties of blood;
Destroys the power and will of doing good;
Kills health, pawns honor, plunges in disgrace;
And, what is still more dreadful -- spoils your face."
"One thing at least is certain; it entirely excludes all rational
conversation. That delightful interchange of sentiment, which the social
meeting of friends is calculated to afford, and from which many advantages
might be derived, is utterly excluded.

"Reading, writing, drawing, needle work, dancing, music, walking, riding, and
conversation, are amusements well adapted to yield pleasure and utility. From
either of these, within proper bounds, there is no danger of injury to the
person, or mind; though to render even our diversions agreeable, they must be
enjoyed with moderation, and variously and prudently conducted. Such as are
peculiarly exhilarating to the spirits, however innocent in themselves, should
be more cautiously and sparingly indulged.

"When once the mind becomes too much relaxed by dissipating pastimes, it is
proportionably vitiated, and negligent of those nice attentions to the rules of
reserve and decorum, which ought never to be suspended. Intoxicating is the
full draught of pleasure to the youthful mind; and fatal are the effects of
unrestrained passions.

"Flavia was the daughter of a gentleman, whose political principles obliged
him to leave his country, at the commencement of the American revolution. At
that time she was at nurse in a neighboring village; between which and the
metropolis, all communication being cut off, he was reduced to the necessity of
leaving her to the mercy of those to whom she was entrusted. Having received
her from pecuniary motives only, they no sooner found themselves deprived of
the profits of their labor and care, than they sought relief by an application
to the town for her support. A wealthy farmer in the vicinity, who had often
seen and been pleased with the dawning charms of Flavia, pitied her condition;
and having no children of his own, resolved to shelter her from the impending
storm, till she could be better provided for. At his house, she was brought up
in a homely, though comfortable manner. The good man and his wife were
excessively fond of her, and gave her every instruction and advantage in their
power. Plain truths were liberally inculcated, and every exertion made to give
her a habit of industry and good nature. Flavia requited their kindness by an
obliging and cheerful, a docile and submissive deportment. As she advanced in
years, she increased in beauty. Her amiable disposition rendered her beloved,
and her personal accomplishments made her admired by all the village swains.
The approbating smile of Flavia was the reward of their toils, and the favor
of her hand in the rustic dance was emulously sought.

"In this state, Flavia was happy. Health and innocence were now her portion;
nor had ambition as yet taught her to sigh for pleasures beyond the reach of
her attainment.

"But the arrival of her father, who had been permitted to return, and
re-possess the estate which he had abandoned, put a period to the simplicity
and peace of Flavia's mind. He sought, and found her; and though sensible of
his obligations to her foster-parents for snatching her from want and distress,
still he could not prevail on himself to make so great a sacrifice to gratitude
as they wished, by permitting his daughter to spend her days in obscurity. The
lively fancy of Flavia was allured by the splendid promises and descriptions of
her father; and she readily consented to leave the friends of her childhood and
youth, and explore the walks of fashionable life.

"When she arrived in town, what new scenes opened upon the dazzled eyes of the
admiring, and admired Flavia!

"Wealth, with its attendant train of splendid forms and ceremonies, courted
her attention, and every species of dissipating amusement, sanctioned by the
name of pleasure, beguiled the hours and charmed the imagination of the
noviciate. Each enchanting scene she painted to herself in the brightest
colors; and her inexperienced heart promised her happiness without allay.
Flattery gave her a thousand charms which she was hitherto inconscious of
possessing, and the obsequiousness of the gaudy train around raised her vanity
to the highest pitch of arrogance and pride. Behold Flavia, now, launched into
the whirlpool of fashionable folly! Balls, plays, cards, and parties engross
every portion of her time.

"Her father saw, too late, the imprudence of his unbounded indulgence; and his
egregious mistake, in so immediately reversing her mode of life, without first
furnishing her mind with sufficient knowledge and strength to repel temptation.
He endeavored to regulate and restrain her conduct; but in vain. She
complained of this, as an abridgment of her liberty, and took advantage of his
doting fondness to practice every excess. Involved in expenses (of which
losses at play composed a considerable part) beyond her power to defray, in
this embarrassing dilemma, she was reduced to the necessity of accepting the
treacherous offer of Marius to advance money for the support of her
extravagance. Obligated by his apparent kindness, she could not refuse the
continuance of his acquaintance, till his delusive arts had obtained the reward
he proposed to himself, in the sacrifice of her honor. At length she awoke to a
trembling sense of her guilt, and found it fatal to her peace, reputation, and
happiness.

"Wretched Flavia! no art could conceal thy shame! The grief of her mind, her
retirement from company, and the alteration in her appearance, betrayed her to
her father's observation. Highly incensed at the ingratitude and baseness of
her conduct, he refused to forgive her; but sent her from the ensnaring
pleasures of the town, to languish out the remainder of life in solitude and
obscurity."

Friday, A. M. FILIAL AND FRATERNAL AFFECTION.
"THE filial and fraternal are the first duties of a single state. The
obligations you are under to your parents cannot be discharged, but by a
uniform and cheerful obedience; an unreserved and ready compliance with their
wishes, added to the most diligent attention to their ease and happiness. The
virtuous and affectionate behavior of children is the best compensation, in
their power, for that unwearied care and solicitude which parents, only, know.
Upon daughters, whose situation and employments lead them more frequently into
scenes of domestic tenderness; who are often called to smooth the pillow of
sick and aged parents, and to administer with a skilful and delicate hand the
cordial, restorative to decaying nature, an endearing sensibility, and a
dutiful acquiesence in the dispositions, and even peculiarities of those from
whom they have derived existence, are indispensably incumbent.

"Such a conduct will yield a satisfaction of mind more than equivalent to any
little sacrifices of inclination or humor which may be required at your hands.

"Pope, among all his admired poetry, has not six lines more beautifully
expressive than the following:

"Me, let the pious office long engage,
To rock the cradle of declining age;
With lenient arts extend a mother's breath,
Make languor smile, and smooth the bed of death;
Explore the thought, explain the asking eye,
And keep awhile one parent from the sky!"
"Next in rank and importance to filial piety, is fraternal love. This is a
natural affection which you cannot too assiduously cultivate. How delightful to
see children of the same family dwell together in unity; promoting each other's
welfare, and emulous only to excel in acts of kindness and good will. Between
brothers and sisters the connection is equally intimate and endearing. There is
such a union of interests, and such an undivided participation of enjoyments,
that every sensible and feeling mind must value the blessings of family
friendship and peace.

"Strive, therefore, my dear pupils, to promote them, as objects which deserve
your particular attention; as seize which will not fail richly to reward
your labor.

"Prudelia, beside other amiable endowments of person and mind, possessed the
most lively sensibility, and ardent affections.

"The recommendations of her parents, united to her own wishes, had induced her
to give her hand to Clodius, a gentleman of distinguished merit. He was a
foreigner; and his business required his return to his native country.

"Prudelia bid a reluctant adieu to her friends, and embarked with him. She
lived in affluence, and was admired and caressed by all that knew her, while a
lovely family was rising around her. Yet these pleasing circumstances and
prospects could not extinguish or alienate that affection, which still glowed
in her breast for the natural guardians and companions of her childhood and
youth.

"With the deepest affliction she heard the news of her father's death, and the
embarrassed situation in which he had left his affairs. She was impatient to
console her widowed mother, and to minister to her necessities. For these
purposes, the prevailed on her husband to consent that she should visit her,
though it was impossible for him to attend her. With all the transport of
dutiful zeal, she flew to the arms of her bereaved parent. But how great was
her astonishment and grief, when told that her only sister had been deluded by
an affluent villain, and by his insidious arts, seduced from her duty, her
honor, and her home! The emotions of pity, indignation, regret, and affection,
overwhelmed her, at first; but recollecting herself, and exerting all her
fortitude, she nobly resolved, if possible, to snatch the guilty, yet beloved
Myra, from ruin, rather than revenge her injured family by abandoning her to
the infamy she deserved. To this intent she wrote her a pathetic letter,
lamenting her elopement, but entreating her, notwithstanding, to return and
receive her fraternal embrace. But Myra, conscious of her crime, and
unworthiness of her sister's condescension and kindness, and above all,
dreading the superiority of her virtue, refused the generous invitation.
Prudelia was not thus to be vanquished in her benevolent undertaking. She even
followed her to her lodgings, and insisted on an interview. Here she painted,
in the most lively colors, the heinousness of her offense, and the ignominy
and wretchedness that awaited her. Her affection allured, her reasoning
convinced her backsliding sister. Upon the promise of forgiveness from her
mother, Myra consented to leave her infamous paramour, and retrace the paths of
rectitude and virtue.

"Her seducer was absent on a journey. She, therefore, wrote him a farewell
letter, couched in terms of sincere penitence for her transgression, and
determined resolution of amendment in future, and left the house. Thus restored
and reconciled to her friends, Myra appeared in quite another character.

"Prudelia tarried with her mother till she had adjusted her affairs, and seen
her comfortably settled and provided for. Then taking her reclaimed sister with
her, she returned to her anxiously expecting family. The uprightness and
modesty of Myra's conduct, ever after, rendered her universally esteemed,
though the painful consciousness of her defection was never extinguished in her
own bosom.

"A constant sense of her past misconduct depressed her spirits, and cast a
gloom over her mind; yet she was virtuous, though pensive, during the remainder
of her life.

"With this, and other salutary effects in view, how necessary, how important
are filial and fraternal affection!"

Friday, P. M. FRIENDSHIP.
"FRIENDSHIP is a term, much insisted on by young people; but, like many
others, more frequently used than understood. A friend, with girls in general,
is an intimate acquaintance, whose taste and pleasures are similar to their
own; who will encourage, or at least connive at their foibles and faults, and
communicate with them every secret; in particular those of love and gallantry,
in which those of the other sex are concerned. By such friends, their errors
and stratagems are flattered and concealed, while the prudent advice of real
friendship is neglected, till they find, too late, how fictitious a character,
and how vain a dependence they have chosen.

"Augusta and Serena were educated at the same school, resided in the same
neighborhood, and were equally volatile in their tempers, and dissipated in
their manners. Hence every plan of amusement was concerted and enjoyed
together. At the play, the ball, the card-table, and every other party of
pleasure, they were companions.

"Their parents saw that this intimacy strengthened the follies of each; and
strove to disengage their affections, that they might turn their attention to
more rational entertainments, and more judicious advisers. But they gloried in
their friendship, and thought it a substitute for every other virtue. They were
the dupes of adulation, and the votaries of coquetry.

"The attentions of a libertine, instead of putting them on their guard against
encroachments, induced them to triumph in their fancied conquests, and to boast
of resolution sufficient to shield them from delusion.

"Love, however, which, with such dispositions, is the pretty play-thing of
imagination, assailed the tender heart of Serena. A gay youth, with more wit
than sense, more show than substance, more art than honesty, took advantage of
her weakness to ingratiate himself into her favor, and persuade her they could
not live without each other. Augusta was the confident of Serena. She fanned
the flame, and encouraged her resolution of promoting her own felicity, though
at the expense of every other duty. Her parents suspected her amor,
remonstrated against the man, and forbad her forming any connection with him, on
pain of their displeasure. She apparently acquiesced; but flew to Augusta for
counsel and relief. Augusta soothed her anxiety, and promised to assist her in
the accomplishment of all her wishes. She accordingly contrived means for a
clandestine intercourse, both personal and epistolary.

"Aristus was a foreigner, and avowed his purpose of returning to his native
country, urging her to accompany him. Serena had a fortune, independent of her
parents, left her by a deceased relation. This, with her hand, she consented to
give to her lover, and to quit a country, in which she acknowledged but one
friend. Augusta praised her fortitude, and favored her design. She accordingly
eloped and embarked. Her parents were almost distracted by her imprudent and
undutiful conduct; and their resentment fell on Augusta, who had acted contrary
to all the dictates of integrity and friendship, in contributing to her ruin;
for ruin it proved. Her ungrateful paramour, having rioted on the property
which she bestowed, abandoned her to want and despair. She wrote to her
parents, but received no answer. She represented her case to Augusta, and
implored relief from her friendship; but Augusta alleged that she had already
incurred the displeasure of her family on her account, and chose not again to
subject herself to censure by the same means.

"Serena at length returned to her native shore, and applied in person to
Augusta, who coolly told her that she wished no intercourse with a vagabond,
and then retired. Her parents refused to receive her into their house; but,
from motives of compassion and charity, granted her a small annuity, barely
sufficient to keep her and her infant from want.

"Too late she discovered her mistaken notions of friendship; and learned by
sad experience, that virtue must be its foundation, or sincerity and constancy
can never be its reward.

"Sincerity and constancy are essential ingredients in virtuous friendship. It
invariably seeks the permanent good of its object; and in so doing, will
advise, caution and reprove, with all the frankness of undissembled affection.
In the interchange of genuine friendship, flattery is utterly excluded. Yet,
even in the most intimate connexions of this kind, a proper degree of respect,
attention, and politeness, must be observed. You are not so far to presume on
the partiality of friendship, as to hazard giving offense, and wounding the
feelings of persons, merely because you think their regard for you will plead
your excuse, and procure your pardon. Equally cautious should you be, of taking
umbrage at circumstances which are undesignedly offensive.

"Hear the excellent advice of the wise son of Sirach, upon this subject:

"Admonish thy friend; it may be he has not done it; and if he have done it,
that he do it no more. Admonish thy friend; it may be he has not said it; and
if he have, that he speak it not again. Admonish thy friend; for many times it
is a slander; and believe not every tale. There is one that slippeth in his
speech, but not from his heart; and who is he that offends not with his
tongue?"

"Be not hasty in forming friendships; but deliberately examine the principles,
disposition, temper, and manners, of the person you wish to sustain this
important character. Be well assured that they are agreeable to your own, and
such as merit your entire esteem and confidence, before you denominate her your
friend. You may have many general acquaintances, with whom you are pleased and
entertained; but in the chain of friendship there is a still closer link.

"Reserve will wound it, and distrust destroy.
Deliberate on all things with thy friend:
But since friends grow not thick on every bough,
Nor every friend unrotten at the core,
First, on thy friend, deliberate with thyself:
Pause, ponder, sift; not eager in the choice,
Nor jealous of the chosen: fixing, fix:
Judge before friendship; then confide till death."
"But, if you would have friends, you must show yourselves friendly; that is,
you must be careful to act the part you wish from another. If your friend have
faults, mildly and tenderly represent them to her; but conceal them as much as
possible from the observation of the world. Endeavor to convince her of her
errors, to rectify her mistakes, and to confirm and increase every virtuous
sentiment.

"Should she so far deviate, as to endanger her reputation and happiness; and
should your admonitions fail to reclaim her, become not, like Augusta, an
abettor of her crimes. It is not the part of friendship to hide transactions
which will end in the ruin of your friend. Rather acquaint those who ought to
have the rule over her of her intended misteps, and you will have discharged
your duty; you will merit, and very probably may afterward receive, her thanks.

"Narcissa and Florinda were united in the bonds of true and generous
friendship. Narcissa was called to spend a few months with a relation in the
metropolis, where she became acquainted with, and attached to a man who was
much her inferior; but whose specious manners and appearance deceived her
youthful heart, though her reason and judgment informed her, that her parents
would disapprove the connection. When she returned home, the consciousness of
her fault, the frankness which she owed to her friend, and her partiality to
her lover, wrought powerfully upon her mind, and rendered her melancholy.
Florinda soon explored the cause, and warmly remonstrated against her
imprudence in holding a moment's intercourse with a man, who, she knew, would
be displeasing to her parents. She searched out his character, and found it far
inadequate to Narcissa's merit. This she represented to her in its true
colors, and conjured her not to sacrifice her reputation, her duty, and her
happiness, by encouraging his addresses: but to no purpose were her
expostulations. Narcissa avowed the design of permitting him to solicit the
consent of her parents, and the determination of marrying him without it, if
they refused.

"Florinda was alarmed at this resolution; and, with painful anxiety, saw the
danger of her friend. She told her plainly, that the regard she had for her
demanded a counteraction of her design; and that if she found no other way of
preventing its execution, she should discharge her duty by informing her
parents of her proceedings. This Narcissa resented, and immediately withdrew
her confidence and familiarity; but the faithful Florinda neglected not the
watchful solicitude of friendship; and when she perceived that Narcissa's
family were resolutely opposed to her projected match, and that Narcissa was
preparing to put her rash purpose into execution, she made known the plan which
she had concerted, and by that mean prevented her destruction. Narcissa thought
herself greatly injured, and declared that she would never forgive so flagrant
a breach of fidelity. Florinda endeavored to convince her of her good
intentions, and the real kindness of her motives; but she refused to hear the
voice of wisdom, till a separation from her lover, and a full proof of his
unworthiness, opened her eyes to a sight of her own folly and indiscretion, and
to a lively sense of Florinda's friendship, in saving her from ruin without her
consent. Her heart overflowed with gratitude to her generous preserver. She
acknowledged herself indebted to Florinda's benevolence, for deliverance from
the baneful impetuosity of her own passions. She sought and obtained
forgiveness; and ever after lived in the strictest amity with her faithful
benefactress."

Saturday, A. M. LOVE.
"THE highest state of friendship which this life admits, is in the conjugal
relation. On this refined affection, love, which is but a more interesting and
tender kind of friendship, ought to be founded. The same virtues, the same
dispositions and qualities which are necessary in a friend, are still more
requisite in a companion for life. And when these enlivening principles are
united, they form the basis of durable happiness. But let not the mask of
friendship, or of love, deceive you. You are now entering upon a new stage of
action, where you will probably admire, and be admired. You may attract the
notice of many, who will select you, as objects of adulation, to discover their
taste and gallantry; and perhaps of some whose affections you have really and
seriously engaged. The first class your penetration will enable you to detect;
and your good sense and virtue will lead you to treat them with the neglect
they deserve. It is disreputable for a young lady to receive and encourage the
officious attentions of those mere pleasure-hunters, who rove from fair to
fair, with no other design than the exercise of their art, address, and
intrigue. Nothing can render their company pleasing, but a vanity of being
caressed, and a false pride in being thought an object of general admiration,
with a fondness for flattery which bespeaks a vitiated mind. But when you are
addressed by a person of real merit, who is worthy your esteem, and may justly
demand your respect, let him be treated with honor, frankness, and sincerity.
It is the part of a prude, to affect a shyness, reserve, and indifference,
foreign to the heart. Innocence and virtue will rise superior to such little
arts, and indulge no wish which needs disguise.

"Still more unworthy are the insidious and deluding wiles of the coquette. How
disgusting must this character appear to persons of sentiment and integrity!
how unbecoming the delicacy and dignity of an uncorrupted female!

"As you are young and inexperienced, your affections may possibly be
involuntarily engaged, where prudence and duty forbid a connection. Beware,
then, how you admit the passion of love. In young minds, it is of all others
the most uncontrollable. When fancy takes the reins, it compels its blinded
votary to sacrifice reason, discretion and conscience to its impetuous
dictates. But a passion of this origin tends not to substantial and durable
happiness. To secure this, it must be quite of another kind, enkindled by
esteem, founded on merit, strengthened by congenial dispositions and
corresponding virtues, and terminating in the most pure and refined affection.

"Never suffer your eyes to be charmed by the mere exterior; nor delude
yourselves with the notion of unconquerable love. The eye, in this respect, is
often deceptious, and fills the imagination with charms which have no reality.
Nip, in the bud, every particular liking, much more all ideas of love, till
called forth by unequivocal tokens, as well as professions of sincere regard.
Even then, harbor them not without a thorough knowledge of the temper,
disposition, and circumstances of your lover, the advice of your friends; and,
above all, the approbation of your parents. Maturely weigh every consideration
for and against, and deliberately determine with yourselves, what will be most
conducive to your welfare and felicity in life. Let a rational and discreet
plan of thinking and acting, regulate your deportment, and render you deserving
of the affection you wish to insure. This you will find far more conducive to
your interest, than the indulgence of that romantic passion, which a blind and
misguided fancy paints in such alluring colors, to the thoughtless and
inexperienced.

"Recollect the favorite air you so often sing:

"Ye fair, who would be blessed in love,
Take your pride a little lower;
Let the swain that you approve,
Rather like you than adore.
Love that rises into passion,
Soon will end in hate, or strife;
But from tender inclination
Flow the lasting joys of life."
"I by no means undervalue that love which is the noblest principle of the
human mind; but wish only to guard you against the influence of an ill-placed
and ungovernable passion, which is improperly called by this name.

"A union, formed without a refined and generous affection for its basis, must
be devoid of those tender endearments, reciprocal attentions, and engaging
sympathies, which are peculiarly necessary to alleviate the cares, dispel the
sorrows, and soften the pains of life. The exercise of that prudence and
caution which I have recommended, will lead you to a thorough investigation of
the character and views of the man by whom you are addressed.

"Without good principles, both of religion and morality, (for the latter
cannot exist independent of the former) you cannot safely rely, either upon his
fidelity or his affection. Good principles are the foundation of a good life.

"If the fountain be pure, the streams which issue from it will be of the same
description.

"Next to this, an amiable temper is essentially requisite. A proud, a
passionate, a revengeful, a malicious, or a jealous temper, will render your
lives uncomfortable, in spite of all the prudence and fortitude you can exert.

"Beware, then, lest, before marriage, love blind your eyes to those defects,
to a sight of which, grief and disappointment may awaken you afterward. You
are to consider marriage as a connection for life; as the nearest and dearest of
all human relations; as involving in it the happiness or misery of all your
days; and as engaging you in a variety of cares and duties, hitherto unknown.
Act, therefore, with deliberation, and resolve with caution: but, when once you
have come to a choice, behave with undeviating rectitude and sincerity.

"Avarice is not commonly a ruling passion in young persons of our sex. Yet
some there are, sordid enough to consider wealth as the chief good, and to
sacrifice every other object to a splendid appearance. It often happens, that
these are miserably disappointed in their expectations of happiness. They find,
by dear-bought experience, that external pomp is but a wretched substitute for
internal satisfaction.

"But I would not have outward circumstances entirely overlooked. A proper
regard should always be had to a comfortable subsistence in life. Nor can you
be justified in suffering a blind passion, under whatever pretext, to involve
you in those embarrassing distresses of want, which will elude the remedies of
love itself, and prove fatal to the peace and happiness at which you aim.

"In this momentous affair, let the advice and opinion of judicious friends
have their just weight in your minds. Discover, with candor and frankness, the
progress of your amor, so far as is necessary to enable them to judge aright
in the cause; but never relate the love-tales of your suitor, merely for your
own, or any other person's amusement. The tender themes, inspired by love, may
be pleasing to you; but, to an uninterested person, must he insipid and
disgusting, in the extreme.

"Never boast of the number, nor of the professions of your admirers. That
betrays an unsufferable vanity, and will render you perfectly ridiculous in the
estimation of observers. Besides, it is a most ungenerous treatment of those
who may have entertained, and expressed a regard for you. Whatever they have
said upon this subject, was doubtless in confidence, and you ought to keep it
sacred, as a secret you have no right to divulge.

"If you disapprove the person, and reject his suit, that will be sufficiently
mortifying, without adding the insult of exposing his overtures.

"Be very careful to distinguish real lovers from mere gallants. Think not
every man enamoured with you, who is polite and attentive. You have no right to
suppose any man in love with you, till he declares it in plain, unequivocal,
and decent terms.

"Never suffer, with impunity, your ear to be wounded by indelicate
expressions, double entendres, and insinuating attempts to seduce you from the
path of rectitude. True love will not seek to degrade its object, much less to
undermine that virtue which ought to be its basis and support. Let no
protestations induce you to believe that person your friend, who would destroy
your dearest interests, and rob you of innocence and peace. Give no heed to the
language of seduction; but repel the insidious arts of the libertine, with the
dignity and decision of insulted virtue. This practice will raise you superior
to the wiles of deceivers, and render you invulnerable by the specious flattery
of the unprincipled and debauched.

"Think not the libertine worthy of your company and conversation, even as an
acquaintance.

"That reformed rakes make the best husbands," is a common, and I am sorry to
say, a too generally received maxim. Yet I cannot conceive, that any lady, who
values, or properly considers her own happiness, will venture on the dangerous
experiment. The term reformed can, in my opinion, have very little weight;
since those, whose principles are vitiated, and whose minds are debased by a
course of debauchery and excess, seldom change their pursuits, till necessity,
or interest requires it; and, however circumstances may alter or restrain their
conduct, very little dependence can be placed on men whose disposition is still
the same, but only prevented from indulgence by prudential motives. As a rake
is most conversant with the dissolute and abandoned of both sexes, he doubtless
forms his opinion of others by the standard to which he has been accustomed,
and therefore supposes all women of the same description. Having been hackneyed
in the arts of the baser sort, he cannot form an idea, that any are in reality
superior to them. This renders him habitually jealous, peevish, and tyrannical.
Even if his vicious inclinations be changed, his having passed his best days in
vice and folly, renders him a very unsuitable companion for a person of
delicacy and refinement.

"But whatever inducements some ladies may have to risk themselves with those
who have the reputation of being reformed, it is truly surprising that any
should be so inconsiderate as to unite with such as are still professed
libertines. What hopes of happiness can be formed with men of this character?

"Vice and virtue can never assimilate; and hearts divided by them can never
coalesce. The former is the parent of discord, disease, and death; the latter,
of harmony, health, and peace. A house divided against itself cannot stand;
much less can domestic felicity subsist between such contrasted dispositions.

"But however negligent or mistaken many women of real merit may be, relative
to their own interest, I cannot but wish they would pay some regard to the
honor and dignity of their sex. Custom only has rendered vice more odious in a
woman than in a man. And shall we give our sanction to a custom, so unjust and
destructive in its operation; a custom which invites and encourages the enemies
of society to seek our ruin? Were those who glory in the seduction of
innocence, to meet with the contempt they deserve, and to be pointedly
neglected by every female of virtue, they would be ashamed of their evil
practices, and impelled to relinquish their injurious designs.

"But while they are received and caressed in the best companies, they find
restraint altogether needless; and their being men of spirit and gallantry (as
they style themselves) is rather a recommendation than a reproach!

"I cannot help blushing with indignation, when I see a lady of sense and
character gallanted and entertained by a man who ought to be banished society,
for having ruined the peace of families, and blasted the reputation of many,
who, but for him, might have been useful and happy in the world; but who, by
his insidious arts, are plunged into remediless insignificance, disgrace, and
misery."

Saturday, P. M. RELIGION.
"HAVING given you my sentiments on a variety of subjects which demand your
particular attention, I come now to the closing and most important theme; and
that is Religion. The virtuous education which you have received, and the good
principles which have been instilled into your minds from infancy, will render
the enforcement of Christian precepts and duties a pleasing lesson.

"Religion is to be considered as an essential and durable object; not as the
embellishment of a day; but an acquisition which shall endure and increase
through the endless ages of eternity.

"Lay the foundation of it in youth, and it will not forsake you in advanced
age; but furnish you with an adequate substitute for the transient pleasures
which will then desert you; and prove a source of rational and refined delight;
a refuge from the disappointments and corroding cares of life, and from the
depressions of adverse events. "Remember now your Creator, in the days of your
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when you shall
say, we have no pleasure in them." If you wish for permanent happiness,
cultivate the divine favor as your highest enjoyment in life, and your safest
retreat when death shall approach you.

"That even the young are not exempt from the arrest of this universal
conqueror, the tombstone of Amelia will tell you. Youth, beauty, health and
fortune, strewed the path of life with flowers, and left her no wish
ungratified. Love, with its gentlest and purest flame, animated her heart, and
was equally returned by Julius. Their passion was approved by their parents and
friends; the day was fixed, and preparations were making for the celebration of
their nuptials. At this period, Amelia was attacked by a violent cold, which,
seating on her lungs, baffled the skill of the most eminent physicians, and
terminated in a confirmed hectic. She perceived her disorder to be incurable,
and with inexpressible regret and concern anticipated her approaching
dissolution. She had enjoyed life too highly to think much of death; yet die
she must! "Oh," said she, "that I had prepared, while in health and at ease,
for this awful event! Then should I not be subjected to the keenest distress of
mind, in addition to the most painful infirmities of body! Then should I be
able to look forward with hope, and to find relief in the consoling expectation
of being united, beyond the grave, with those dear and beloved connexions,
which I must soon leave behind! Let my companions and acquaintance learn from
me the important lesson of improving their time to the best of purposes; of
acting at once as becomes mortal and immortal creatures!"

"Hear, my dear pupils, the solemn admonition, and be ye also ready!

"Too many, especially of the young and gay, seem more anxious to live in
pleasure, than to answer the end of their being by the cultivation of that
piety and virtue which will render them good members of society, useful to
their friends and associates, and partakers of that heartfelt satisfaction
which results from a conscience void of offense both toward God and man.

"This, however, is an egregious mistake; for in many situations, piety nd
virtue are our only source of consolation; and in all, they are peculiarly
friendly to our happiness.

"Do you exult in beauty, and the pride of external charms? Turn your eyes, for
a moment, on the miserable Flirtilla. See page 52.
Like her, your features and complexion may be impaired by disease: and where
then will you find a refuge from mortification and discontent, if destitute of
those ennobling endowments which can raise you superior to the transient graces
of a fair form; if unadorned by that substantial beauty of mind which can not
only ensure respect from those around you, but inspire you with resignation to
the divine will, and a patient acquiescence in the most painful allotments of a
holy Providence? Does wealth await your command, and grandeur with its
fascinating appendages beguile your fleeting moments? Recollect, that riches
often make themselves wings and fly away. A single instance of mismanagement; a
consuming fire, with various other misfortunes which no human prudence can
foresee or prevent, may strip you of this dependence; and, unless you have
other grounds of comfort than earth can boast, reduce you to the most
insupportable wretchedness and despair. Are you surrounded by friends, and
happy in the society of those who are near and dear to you? Soon may they be
wrested from your fond embrace, and consigned to the mansions of the dead!

"Whence, then, will you derive support, if unacquainted with that divine
Friend, who will never fail nor forsake you; who is the same yesterday, today,
and forever?

"Health and youth, my dear girls, are the seasons for improvement. Now you may
lay up a treasure which neither sickness nor adversity can impair.

"But the hour of distress is not the only time, in which religion will be
advantageous to you. Even in prosperity, it will prove the best solace, and the
highest ornament of your lives. What can be more dignified, respectable, and
lovely, than the Christian character? The habitual practice of those duties
which the gospel inculcates will give luster to your beauty and durability to
your charms. By correcting your passions, it will improve your joys, endear you
to your friends and connexions, and render you contented, happy, and useful in
every stage and condition of life.

Religion will not deprive you of temporal enjoyments; it will heighten and
increase them. It will not depress, but exhilarate your spirits. For it
consists not in a gloomy, misanthropic temper, declining the social and
innocent delights of life; but prepares the mind to partake with satisfaction
of every pleasure which reason approves, and which can yield serenity and peace
in the review. Be not ashamed then of appearing religious, and of rising by
that mean above the vain, unthinking crowd.

"Let not the idle jests of heedless and unprincipled companions deter you from
a steadfast adherence to the path of truth and righteousness. "Follow not the
multitude to do evil." Never conform to fashion, even though it claim the
patronage of politeness, so far as to countenance irreligion in any of its
modifications.

"Jesting upon sacred subjects, ridiculing the professors of Christianity,
light and irreverent conduct upon solemn occasions, ought to be cautiously
avoided and decidedly condemned. Too many girls are so extremely thoughtless as
to carry the levity of their manners even to the sanctuary; and by whispering,
winking, tittering, and other indecent actions, display their folly to their
own disgrace, and to the great disgust of all judicious and sober people. Such
behavior is not only offensive to the Deity, but insulting to all who would
worship him free from interruption. It is not only an indignity offered to
religion, but a flagrant breach of the rules of good breeding. Content not
yourselves, therefore, with a bare attendance on the institutions of religion;
but conduct with propriety, decorum, and seriousness, while engaged in the
solemn service. Bear in mind, that you assemble with a professed purpose of
paying homage to the Supreme; and consider yourselves as in his immediate
presence!

"The offices of devotion demand your attention in private, as well as in
public.

"Accustom yourselves, therefore, to stated periods of retirement for
meditation and prayer; and adopt every other mean which is calculated to keep
alive in your minds a due sense of your dependence and obligations, and to
inspire you with that uniform love to God and benevolence to the human kind,
which will prove your greatest glory here, as well as your crown of rejoicing
hereafter."

THE hour of departure having arrived, on Monday morning, Mrs. Williams
assembled with her pupils; when the regret, visibly depicted on every
countenance, was variously expressed. The tear of grateful regard stole
silently down the bloomy cheeks of some: others betrayed their sensibility by
audible sobs, which they could not repress: and all united in testifying the
sense they entertained of the advantages they had received from Mrs. Williams's
tuition, the happiness they had enjoyed in each others society, and their
determination to remember her counsels, cultivate continued friendship among
themselves, and endeavor to be worthy of here is.

Mrs. Williams then took an affectionate leave of each one, and left them with
her daughters. The most cordial good wishes were mutually interchanged, till
their carriages received and separated them.

The friendship and unity thus commenced and confirmed, were never obliterated.
They always cherished the most sincere affection for their Preceptress, and
each other; which they displayed in an unreserved and social correspondence,
both personal and epistolary. The residence of Mrs. Williams they denominated
HARMONY-GROVE, which it ever after retained, and by which it is designated in
the following selection of their letters.

LETTERS.
To Mrs. M. WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. RESPECTED AND DEAR MADAM,
CONFORMABLY to my promise, when I left your abode, the first efforts of my pen
are dedicated to you. The pleasure which arises from the recollection of your
more than maternal kindness to me, especially your unwearied endeavors to
refine and embellish my mind, and to lay the foundation of right principles and
practices, is interwoven with my existence; and no time or circumstances can
erase my gratitude.

I arrived last evening safely; and was affectionately received by my honored
parents, and beloved brothers and sisters. The emotions of regret which I felt
in the morning, at the painful separation from you and my dear school-mates,
with whom I have lived so happily, had not wholly subsided. I could not help
listening, now and then, for some judicious observation from my Preceptress;
and frequently cast my eyes around in search of some of the amiable companions,
among whom I had been used to unbend every thought.

The splendour of the apartments gave me ideas of restraint that were painful;
and I looked abroad for the green, where we were wont to gambol, and the lawn
where we so often held our twilight sports, and almost fancied that we
sometimes caught a glimpse of the attendant Sylphs who played around us; but in
vain. Stately domes, crowded streets, rattling carriages, and all the noise and
confusion of a commercial city were substituted. I retired to bed, and was
awaked in the night by the riotous mirth of a number of Bachanalians, reeling
from the haunts of intemperance and excess.

Alas! said I, this is not the Aeolian harp that used to soothe our slumbers at
the boarding school. I composed myself again; but awoke at the accustomed hour
of five. I arose; and, having praised my Maker for the preservations of the
night, walked down. Not a living creature was stirring in the house.

I took a turn in the garden. Here art seemed to reign so perfectly mistress,
that I was apprehensive lest I should injure her charms by viewing them.

I accordingly retired to the summer house, and, having a book in my hand, sat
down and read till the clock struck seven. I then thought it must be breakfast
time, and returned to the house; but was much disappointed to find none of the
family up, except one manservant and the house-maid, who had just crept down.

They appeared perfectly astonished to see me come in from abroad; and the girl
respectfully inquired if indisposition had occasioned my rising so early. I
told her no; that the wish to preserve my health had called me up two hours
before. Well, rejoined she, you will not find any body to keep you company
here, for two hours to come. I was chagrined at the information, and asked her
for a bowl of milk, it being past my usual breakfast time. The milk man had
just arrived, and I drank some; but it had lost its flavor on the road. It was
not like that which was served us at Harmony-Grove. I stepped to the
harpsichord, and having sung and played a morning hymn, returned to my chamber,
where, taking my work, I sat down by the window to view the listless tribe of
yawning mortals who were beginning to thicken in the streets. One half of these
appeared to be dragged forth by necessity, rather than any inclination to enjoy
the beauties of a fine morning.

At nine, I was summoned into the parlour to breakfast. My sisters gently chid
me for disturbing their repose with my music. I excused myself by alleging that
I had been so long accustomed to early rising that I should find it difficult
to alter the habit.

Here, madam, you have an account of my first night and morning's occupation.
Were I to proceed with every new occurrence, through the year, and subjoin my
own remarks, I must write volumes instead of letters.

Please to communicate this scroll to your amiable daughters, and remind them
of their promise to write.

A line from Harmony-Grove would be a luxury to me.

Meanwhile, permit me still to subscribe myself, with the utmost respect, your
grateful pupil*

HARRIOT HENLY.

To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
BOSTON. DEAR MATILDA,
I DID not intend, when we parted at the boarding school, that a whole month
should have elapsed without bearing you some testimony of my continued
friendship and affection; but so numerous have been my avocations, and so
various my engagements, that I have scarcely called a moment my own since* I
returned home. Having been from town a year, I was considered as too antique to
appear in company abroad, till I had been perfectly metamorphosed. Every part
of my habit has undergone a complete change, in conformity to the present
fashion. It was with extreme regret that I parted with the neatness and
simplicity of my country dress; which, according to my ideas of modesty, was
more becoming. But, I trust, this alteration of appearance will have no
tendency to alienate those sentiments from my heart, which I imbibed under the
tuition of Mrs. Williams.

I went, last evening, to the assembly; but though dazzled, I was by no means
charmed, by the glare of finery and tinselled decorations that were displayed.

There were some ladies, whose gentility and fashionable dress were evidently
the product of a correct taste; but others were so disguised by tawdry gewgaws,
as to disgust me exceedingly.

Mrs. Williams used to say, that the dress was indicative of the mind. If this
observation be just, what opinion am I to form of the gay multitudes who trip
along the streets, and throng the places of public resort in this metropolis;
the lightness and gaudiness of whose appearance, bespeak a sickly taste, to say
no more!

I am furnished with feathers, flowers, and ribbons, in profusion. I shall,
however, use them very sparingly; and though I would not be entirely singular,
yet I must insist on consulting my own fancy a little, and cannot willingly
sacrifice my own opinion to the capricious whims of fashion, and her devotees.
My aunt Laurence, who, you know, is extravagantly genteel, is making us a
visit. She laughs very heartily at my silly notions, as she calls them, and
styles me a novice in the ways of the world; but hopes, notwithstanding, that I
shall acquire a better taste, when I am more acquainted with fashionable life.
That I may be much improved by a more extensive knowledge of the world, I doubt
not; yet may I never be corrupted by that levity and folly, which are too
prevalent among a part of my sex.

I will not, however, censure and condemn others; but attend to myself and be
humble. Adieu.

LAURA GUILFORD.

To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR MATILDA,
THE tear of regret for your departure is scarcely dried from the cheek of your
Maria; and the pleasing remembrance of the happiness I have enjoyed in your
society is accompanied with a sigh, whenever I reflect that it exists no more.

My mamma has often observed, that those friendships which are formed in youth,
provided they be well founded, are the most sincere, lively, and durable. I am
sure that the ardency of mine can never abate; my affectionate regards for you
can never decay.

We have another class of boarders; but you and your amiable companions had so
entirely engrossed my confidence and esteem, that I shall find it difficult to
transfer them, in any degree, to others. The sensations of Anna are very
different, though she is capable of the most refined friendship. The natural
vivacity, and, as I tell her, the volatility of her disposition, renders a
variety of associates pleasing to her.

In order to recall your ideas to the exercises of Harmony-Grove, I enclose the
sallies of my pen for this rnorning, fully assured of your candor and
generosity in the perusal.

Pray omit no opportunity of writing, and favor me with your observations on
the polite world. I shall receive every line as a pledge of your continued love
to your

MARIA WILLIAMS.
AN ODE ON SPRING. Enclosed in the preceding Letter.
HAIL, delight-restoring Spring!
Balmy pleasures with thee bring;
Aromatic gales dispense,
Misty vapors banish hence.
Blithe the jocund hinds appear,
Joy supports returning care,
Mirth the ready hand attends,
Pleasing hope the toil befriends.
Hark! the shady groves resound,
Love and praise re-echo round;
Music floats in every gale,
Peace and harmony prevail.
Here no stormy passions rise;
Here no feuds impede our joys;
Here ambition never roams,
Pride or envy never comes.
Come, Matilda; ruddy morn
Tempts us over the spacious lawn;
Spring's reviving charms invite
Every sense to taste delight.
Such delights as never cloy,
Health and innocence enjoy.
Youth's the springtime of our years,
Short the rapid scene appears:
Let Us improve the fleeting hours!
Virtue's noblest fruits be ours.


To Miss CAROLINE LITTLETON.
BOSTON,
YOU have left -- you have forsaken me, Caroline! But I will haunt you with my
letters; obtrude myself upon your remembrance; and extort from you the
continuance of your friendship!

What do I say? Obtrude and extort! Can these harsh words be used when I am
addressing the generous and faithful Caroline?

But you have often encouraged my eccentricities by your smile, and must
therefore still indulge them.

Nature has furnished me with a gay disposition; and happy is it for me, that a
lax education has not strengthened the folly too commonly arising from it.

Mrs. Williams's instructions were very seasonably interposed to impress my
mind with a sense of virtue and propriety. I trust they have had the desired
effect; and that they will prove the guardian of my youth, and the directory of
maturer age. How often has the dear, good woman taken me into her chamber, and
reminded me of indecorums of which I was unconscious at the time; but thankful
afterward that they had not escaped her judicious eye; as her observations
tended to rectify my errors, and render me more cautious and circumspect in
future. How salutary is advice like here is; conveyed, not with the dogmatic air
of supercilious wisdom; but with the condescending ease and soothing kindness
of an affectionate parent, anxiously concerned for the best good of those under
her care!

I was very happy at Harmony-Grove; and the result of that happiness, I hope,
will accompany me through life.

Yet I find the gaiety of the town adapted to my taste; nor does even Mrs.
Williams condemn the enjoyment of its pleasures.

I was, last evening, at a ball; and I assure you, the attention I gained, and
the gallantry displayed to attract my notice and approbation, were very
flattering to my vanity; though I could not forbear inwardly smiling at the
futile arts of the pretty fellows who exhibited them.

Their speeches appeared to have been so long practiced, that I was on the
point of advising them to exercise their genius, if they had any, in the
invention of something new. But a polite conformity to the ton restrained my
satire. Adieu.

JULIA GREENFIELD.

To Miss CLEORA PARTRIDGE.
NEWBURY-PORT.
I AM disappointed and displeased, Cleora! I have long been anxious to procure
the Marchioness de Sevigne's letters, having often heard them mentioned as
standards of taste and elegance in the epistolary way. This excited my
curiosity, and raised my hopes of finding a rich entertainment of wit and
sentiment. I have perused, and perused in vain; for they answer not my ideas of
either. They are replete with local circumstances, which, to indifferent
readers, are neither amusing nor interesting. True, the style is easy and
sprightly; but they are chiefly composed of family matters, such as relate to
her own movements and those of her daughter; many of which are of too trifling
a nature to be ranked in the class of elegant writing. I own myself, however,
not a competent judge of their merit as a whole, even in my own estimation; for
I have read the two first volumes only.

That letters ought to be written with the familiarity of personal
conversation, I allow; yet many such conversations, even between persons of
taste and refinement, are unworthy the public attention.

Equal was my chagrin, not long since, on reading Pope's letters. He, said I to
myself, who bears the palm from all contemporary poets, and who is so
consummate a master of this divine art, must surely furnish a source of
superior entertainment, when he descends to friendly and social communications.

Indeed, there are good sentiments and judicious observations, interspersed in
his letters; but the greater part of them have little other merit than what
arises from the style.

Perhaps you will charge me with arrogance, for presuming to criticize, much
more to condemn, publications which have so long been sanctioned by general
approbation. Independent in opinion, I write it without reserve, and censure
not any one who thinks differently. Give me your sentiments with the same
freedom upon the books which you honor with a perusal, and you will oblige your
affectionate

CAROLINE LITTLETON.

To Miss CAROLINE LITTLETON.
SALEM. DEAR CAROLINE,
I RECEIVED yours with those lively sensations of pleasure which your favors
always afford. As I was perusing it, my papa came into the room. He took it out
of my hand, and read it; then returning it with the smile of approbation; I
think, said he, that your correspondent has played the critic very well. Has
she played it justly, Sir? said I. Why, it is a long time, said he, since I
read the Marchioness de Sevigne's letters. I am not, therefore, a judge of
their merit. But, with regard to Pope, I blame not the sex for retaliating upon
him; for he always treated them satirically. I believe revenge was no part of
my friend's plan, said I. She is far superior to so malignant a passion;
though, were she capable of seeking it, it would be in behalf of her sex.

Company now coming in, the conversation shifted.

I have often smiled at the pitiful wit of those satirists and essayists, who
lavish abundant eloquence on trifling foibles, the mere whims of a day; and of
no consequence to the body natural, moral, or political. The extension of a
hoop, the contraction of the waist, or the elevation of the head-dress,
frequently afford matter for pages of elaborate discussion. These reformers,
too, always aim at the good of our sex! I think it a great pity they do not lop
off some of their own exuberant follies; though, perhaps, they wish us to
exchange labors; and, in return for their benevolent exertions, that we
endeavor to expose and correct their errors. I have sometimes thought their
satire to be tinctured with malice; and that the cause of their disaffection
may generally be found in personal resentment. Had Pope and his coadjutors been
favorites with the ladies, I doubt not but they would have found more
excellencies in them than they have ever yet allowed.

I have lately been reading the generous and polite Fitzosborne's letters; and
I need not tell you how much I was pleased and charmed with them.

The justness of his sentiments, and the ease and elegance of his diction are
at once interesting and improving. His letter and ode to his wife on the
anniversary of their marriage, surpass any thing of the kind I have ever read.
I verily think, that, had I the offer of a heart capable of dictating such
manly tenderness of expression, and such pathetic energy of generous love, I
should be willing to give my hand in return, and assent to those solemn words,
"love, honor, and -- (I had almost said) obey." Adieu.

CLEORA PARTRIDGE.

To Miss CLEORA PARTRIDGE.
NEWBURY-PORT. DEAR CLEORA,
I AGREE with you, that the habits of the weak and vain are too insignificant
to employ the pens of those, whose literary talents might produce great and
good effects in the political, moral, and religious state of things. Were
absurd fashions adopted only by those whose frivolity renders them the dupes of
folly, and whose example can have no effect on the considerate and judicious
part of the community, I should think them below the attention of statesmen,
philosophers, and divines: but this is not the case. The votaries and the
inventors of the most fantastical fashions are found in the ranks of, what is
called, refined and polished society; from whom we might hope for examples of
elegance and propriety, both in dress and behavior. By these, luxury and
extravagance are sanctioned. Their influence upon the poorer class is
increased; who, emulous of imitating their superiors, think that the most
eligible appearance, (however beyond their income, or unsuitable to their
circumstances and condition in life) which is preferred and countenanced by
their wealthier neighbors.

Absurd and expensive fashions, then, are injurious to society at large, and
require some check; and why is not satire levelled against them, laudable in
its design, and likely to produce a good effect? Adieu.

CAROLINE LITTLETON.

To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR MATILDA,
NOTWITHSTANDING the coldness of the season, every heart seems to be enlivened,
and every mind exhilarated by the anniversary of the new year. Why this day is
so peculiarly marked out for congratulations, I shall not now inquire; but in
compliance with the prevailing custom of expressing good wishes on the
occasion, send you mine in a scribble.

Early I greet the opening year,
While friendship bids the muse appear,
To wish Matilda blessed.
The muse, devoid of selfish art,
Obeys the dictates of a heart,
Which warms a friendly breast.
The rolling earth again has run
Her annual circuit round the sun,
And whirled the year away:
She now her wonted course renews,
Her orbit's track again pursues;
Nor feels the least decay.
How soon the fleeting hours are gone!
The rapid wheels of time glide on,
Which bring the seasons round.
Winter disrobes the smiling plain,
But spring restores its charms again,
And decks the fertile ground.
The sweet returns of cheerful May
Come with a vivifying ray,
Inspiring new delight:
Beclad with every various charm
To please the eye, the fancy warm,
And animate the fight.
But youth no kind renewal knows;
Swiftly the blooming season goes,
And brings the frost of age!
No more the vernal sun appears,
To gild the painful round of years,
And wintry damps assuage!
With rapid haste the moments fly
Which you and I, my friend, enjoy;
And they return no more!
Then let us wisely now improve
The downy moments, as they rove,
Which nature cannot restore.
O Source of wisdom! we implore
Thy aid to guide us safely over
The slippery paths of youth:
O deign to lend a steady ray
To point the sure, the certain way
To honor and to truth!
Let thy unerring influence shed
Its blessings on Matilda's head,
While piety and peace,
Thy genuine offspring, round her wait,
And guard her through this transient state,
To joys that never cease!
May constant health its charms extend,
And fortune every blessing lend,
To crown each passing day:
May pleasures in succession shine,
And every heartfelt bliss be thine,
Without the least allay.
MARIA WILLIAMS.

To Miss CLEORA PARTRIDGE.
BOSTON. DEAR CLEORA,
I HAVE this week engaged in the celebration of the nuptials of my friend,
Amanda South. A splendid wedding, a gay company, an elegant supper, and a
magnificent ball, were the sum of our entertainment.

I imagine such exhilarating scenes designed to dispel the anxiety and
thoughtfulness, which every reflecting person must feel on this solemn
occasion. This untried state presents to the apprehensive mind such a variety
of new cares and duties, that cheerfulness, festivity, and hilarity seem
necessary to banish the thought of them, so far as to render a delicate and
sensible female sufficiently composed to conduct with propriety. But I must
confess, that, were I called to the trial, I should choose to retire from the
observation of those indifferent and unfeeling spectators, to whom the blushing
modesty of a bride is often a pastime.

Indeed, Cleora, when we look around the world and observe the great number of
unhappy marriages, which were contracted with the brightest prospects, yet,
from some unforeseen cause, have involved the parties in wretchedness for life,
we may well indulge a diffidence of our own abilities to discharge the duties
of the station, and be solicitous that our future companion should in all
respects be qualified to assist in bearing the burdens of the conjugal state.

Experience only can determine how far we are right in the judgment we form of
ourselves, and of the person of our choice. So many are the deceptions which
love and courtship impose upon their votaries, that I believe it very difficult
for the parties concerned to judge impartially, or to discern faults, where
they look only for virtues. Hence they are so frequently misled in their
opinions, and find, too late, the errors into which they have been betrayed.

When do you come to Boston, Cleora? I am impatient for your society; because
your friendship is void of flattery, and your sincerity and cheerfulness are
always agreeable and advantageous. Adieu.

HARRIOT HENLY.

To Miss HARRIOT HENLY.
SALEM.
INDEED, Harriot, I open your letters with as much gravity as I would a sermon;
you have such a knack of moralizing upon every event! What mortal else would
feel serious and sentimental at a wedding? Positively, you shall not come to
mine. Your presence, I fear, would put such a restraint upon me, as to render
me quite foolish and awkward in my appearance.

However, I must acknowledge it a weighty affair; and what you say has,
perhaps, too much truth in it to be jested with. I believe, therefore, we had
better resolve not to risk the consequences of a wrong choice, or imprudent
conduct; but wisely devote ourselves to celibacy. I am sure we should make a
couple of very clever old maids. If you agree to this proposition, we will
begin in season to accustom ourselves to the virtues and habits of a single
life. By observing what is amiss in the conduct of others in the same state,
and avoiding their errors, I doubt not but we may bring even the title into
repute. In this way we shall be useful to many of our own sex, though I am
aware it would be a most grievous dispensation to a couple of the other; but no
matter for that.

The world needs some such examples as we might become; and if we can be
instrumental of retrieving old-maidism from the imputation of ill nature,
oddity, and many other mortifying charges, which are now brought against it, I
believe we shall save many a good girl from an unequal and unhappy marriage. It
might have a salutary effect on the other sex too. Finding the ladies
independent in sentiment, they would be impelled to greater circumspection of
conduct to merit their favor.

You see that my benevolence is extensive. I wish to become a general reformer.
What say you to my plan, Harriot? If you approve it, dismiss your long train of
admirers immediately, and act not the part of a coquette, by retaining them out
of pride or vanity. We must rise above such narrow views, and let the world
know that we act from principle, if we mean to do good by our example. I shall
continue to receive the addresses of this same Junius, till I hear that you
have acceded to my proposal; and then, display my fortitude by renouncing a
connection which must be doubtful as to the issue, and will certainly expose me
to the mortification of being looked at, when I am married. Farewell.

CLEORA PARTRIDGE.

To Miss CAROLINE LITTLETON.
BOSTON. DEAR CAROLINE,
I HAVE just returned from a rural excursion, where, in the thicket of a grove,
I enjoyed all the luxury of solitude. The sun had nearly finished his diurnal
course, and was leaving our hemisphere to illuminate the other with his
cheering rays.

The sprightly songsters had retired to their bowers, and were distending their
little throats with a tribute of instinctive gratitude and praise.

The vocal strains re-echoed from tree to tree, and invited me to join the
responsive notes. My heart expanded with devotion and benevolence. I wished the
whole human kind to share the feelings and the happiness which I enjoyed; while
the inanimate creation around seemed to partake of my satisfaction! Methought
the fields assumed a livelier verdure; and the zephyrs were unusually officious
in wafting the fragrance of aromatic gales. I surveyed the surrounding scenery
with rapturous admiration; and my heart glowed with inexpressible delight at
the lovely appearance of nature, and the diffusive bounties of its almighty
Author!

Let others, said I, exult in stately domes, and the superfluities of pomp;
immerse themselves in the splendid novelties of fashion, and a promiscuous
crowd of giddy amusements! I envy them not.

Give me a mind to range the sylvan scene,
And taste the blessings of the vernal day;
While social joys, and friendly, intervene
To chase the gloomy cares of life away.
I wish not to abandon society, nor to resign the pleasures which it affords;
but it is a select number of friends, not a promiscuous crowd, which I prefer.

When the mind is much engrossed by dissipating pleasures, it is apt to forget
itself, and neglect its own dignity and improvement. It is necessary often to
retreat from the noise and bustle of the world, and commune with our own
hearts. By this mean we shall be the better qualified both to discharge the
duties and participate the enjoyments of life.

Solitude affords a nearer and more distinct view of the works of creation;
elevates the mind, and purifies its passions and affections.

O Solitude! in thee the boundless mind
Expands itself, and revels unconfined;
From thee, each vain, each grov'lling passion flies,
And all the virtues of the soul arise!
Adieu. JULIA GREENFIELD.

To Miss LAURA GUILFORD.
BOSTON. MY DEAR LAURA,
RAMBLING in the garden, I have picked a nosegay, which I transmit to you as a
token of my remembrance. Though the poetical bagatelle which accompanies it is
not equal to the elegance of the subject; yet I confide in your candor to
excuse its futility, and give a favorable interpretation to its design.

Laura, this little gift approve,
Plucked by the hand of cordial love!
With nicest care the wreath I Have dressed,
Fit to adorn your friendly breast.
The rose and lilly are combined,
As emblems of your virtuous mind!
Pure as the first is seen in thee
Sweet blushing sensibility.
Carnations here their charms display,
And nature shines in rich array,
Odorous, as virtue's accents sweet,
From Laura's lips with wit replete.
The myrtle with the laurel bound,
And purple amaranthus crowned,
Within this little knot unite,
Like Laura's charms, to give delight!
Fair, fragrant, soft, like beauty dressed;
So she unrivaled stands confessed;
While blending still each finished grace,
Her virtues in her mien we trace;
Virtues, which far all tints outshine,
And, verdant, brave the frost of time.
I am, etc. SOPHIA MANCHESTER.

To Miss MARIA WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. DEAR SISTER,
I AM not so far engaged by the new scenes of fashionable gaiety which surround
me, as to forget you and the other dear friends, whom I left at Harmony-Grove.
Yet so great is the novelty which I find in this crowded metropolis, that you
cannot wonder if my attention is very much engrossed. Mr. and Mrs. Henly, with
their amiable daughters, are extremely polite and attentive to me; and have
taken every method to contribute to my amusement. I went, yesterday, in their
company, to Commencement at Cambridge; and was very much entertained with the
exhibition. I pretend not to be a judge of the talents displayed by the young
gentlemen who took an active part; or of the proficiency they had made in
science. I have an opinion of my own, notwithstanding; and can tell how far my
eye and ear were gratified.

I never knew before that dress was a classical study; which I now conclude it
must be, or it would not have exercised the genius of some of the principal
speakers on this public occasion!

The female garb too, seemed to claim particular attention. The bon ton, taste,
and fashions of our sex, afforded a subject of declamation to the orator; and
of entertainment to the audience, composed, in part, of our legislators,
politicians, and divines! I could not but think that those scholars who employ
their time in studying, investigating, and criticizing the ladies' dresses,
might as well be occupied in the business of a frizeur or the man-millener;
either of which would afford them more frequent opportunities for the display
of their abilities, and render their labors more extensively useful to the
sex. Others might then improve the time, which they thus frivolously engrossed
on this anniversary, in contributing to the entertainment of the literati, who
doubtless expect to be gratified by the exertions of genius, and an apparent
progress in those studies, which are designed to qualify the rising youth of
America for important stations both in church and state.

The assembly was extremely brilliant; the ladies seemed to vie with each other
in magnificent decorations. So much loveliness was visible in their native
charms, that, without any hint from the speakers of the day, I should have
thought it a pity to add those foreign ornaments, which rather obscure than aid
them.

I was a little displeased by the unbecoming levity of some of my sex; and
apprehensive lest it might induce misjudging and censorious people to imagine
that they were led thither more by the vanity of attracting notice, than to
receive any mental entertainment.

Without our consent, we ran a race back to town, which endangered our necks.
The avaricious hackman, desirous of returning for another freight, had no mercy
on his passengers or horses. However, we arrived safely, though much fatigued
by the pleasure of the day.

Pleasure carried to excess degenerates into pain. This I actually experienced;
and sighed for the tranquil enjoyments of Harmony-Grove, to which I propose
soon to return, and convince you how affectionately I am yours.

ANNA WILLIAMS.

To Miss ANNA WILLIAMS.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR ANNA,
YOUR enlivening letter restored us, in some measure, to your society; or at
least alleviated the pain of your absence.

I am glad you attended Commencement. It was a new scene, and consequently
extended your ideas. I think you rather severe on the classical gentlemen. We
simple country-folks must not presume to arraign their taste, whose learning
and abilities render them conspicuous on the literary stage. They, doubtless,
write on subjects best adapted to their capacities. As for the follies of
fashion, I think the gentlemen are under obligations to the ladies for adopting
them; since it gives exercise to their genius and pens.

You were tired, you say, with pleasure. I believe those dissipating scenes,
which greatly exhilarate the spirits, call for the whole attention, and oblige
us to exert every power, are always fatiguing.

Pleasures of a calmer kind, which are moderately enjoyed, which enliven rather
than exhaust, and which yield a serenity of mind on reflection, are the most
durable, rational, and satisfying. Pleasure is the most alluring object which
is presented to the view of the young and inexperienced. Under various forms it
courts our attention; but, while we are still eager in the pursuit, it eludes
our grasp. Its fascinating charms deceive the imagination, and create a bower
of bliss in every distant object. But let us be careful not to fix our
affections on any thing which bears this name, unless it be founded on virtue,
and will endure the severest scrutiny of examination.

Our honored mamma, and all your friends here, are impatient for your return.
They unitedly long to embrace, and bid you welcome to these seats of simplicity
and ease: but none more ardently, than your affectionate sister,

MARIA WILLIAMS.

To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
BOSTON. DEAR MATILDA,
ANXIOUS to make the best possible use of the education I have received; and
fully impressed with the idea, that the human mind is capable of continual
improvements, it is my constant endeavor to extract honey from every flower
which falls in my way, or, to speak without a figure, to derive advantage from
every incident. Pursuant to the advice of our excellent Preceptress, I keep
this perpetually in view; and am therefore disappointed when defeated in the
attempt.

This afternoon I have been in company with three ladies, celebrated for their
beauty and wit. One of them, I think, may justly claim the reputation of
beauty. To a finished form, a fair complexion, and an engaging, animating
countenance are added. Yet a consciousness of superior charms was apparent in
her deportment; and a supercilious air counteracted the effects of her personal
accomplishments. The two others were evidently more indebted to art than to
nature for their appearance. It might easily be discovered that paint
constituted all the delicacy of their complexion!

What a pity, that so many are deceived in their ideas of beauty! Certain it
is, that artificial additions serve rather to impair than increase its power.
"Who can paint like nature?" What hand is skilful enough to supply her defects?
Do not those who attempt it always fail, and render themselves disgusting? Do
they not really injure what they strive to mend; and make it more indifferent
than usual, when divested of its temporary embellishments? Beauty cannot
possibly maintain its sway over its most obsequious votaries, unless the
manners and the mind unitedly contribute to secure it. How vain then is this
subterfuge! It may deceive the eye, and gain the flattery of the prattling
coxcomb; but accumulated neglect and mortification inevitably await those who
trust in the wretched alternative.

From their good sense, I had been led to expect the greatest entertainment. I
therefore waited impatiently till the first compliments were over, and
conversation commenced.

But, to my extreme regret, I found it to consist of ludicrous insinuations,
hackneyed jests, and satirical remarks upon others of their acquaintance who
were absent. The pretty fellows of the town were criticized; and their own
adventures in shopping were related with so much minuteness, hilarity, and
glee, that I blushed for the frivolous levity of those of my sex, who could
substitute buffoonery for wit, and the effusions of a perverted imagination for
that refined and improving conversation, which a well cultivated mind and a
correct taste are calculated to afford!

If, said I to myself, this be the beauty and the wit of polished society,
restore me again to the native simplicity and sincerity of Harmony-Grove!

I took my leave as soon as politeness would allow; and left them to animadvert
upon me. Independent for happiness on the praise or censure of superficial
minds, let me ever be conscious of meriting approbation, and I shall rest
contented in the certain prospect of receiving it. Adieu.

SOPHIA MANCHESTER.

To Miss SOPHIA MANCHESTER.
BEVERLY.
I SYMPATHIZE with you, my dear Sophia, in the disappointment you received in
your expectations from beauty and wit.

You may nevertheless derive advantage from it. Your refined and delicate ideas
raise you too far above the scenes of common life. They paint the defects of
your inferiors in such lively colors, that the greater part of the community
must be displeasing to you. Few, you should remember, have had the advantages
which you have enjoyed; and still fewer have your penetrating eye, correct
taste, and quick sensibility. Let charity then draw a veil over the foibles of
others, and candor induce you to look on the best and brightest side.

It is both our duty and interest to enjoy life, as far as integrity and
innocence allow; and, in order to this, we must not soar above, but accommodate
ourselves to its ordinary state. We cannot stem the torrent of folly and
vanity; but we can step aside and see it roll on, without suffering ourselves
to be borne down by the stream.

Empty conversation must be disgusting to every rational and thinking mind;
yet, when it partakes not of malignity, it is harmless in its effects, as the
vapor which floats over the mead in a summer's (...). But, when malice and
envy join to give scope to detraction, we ought to avoid their contagion, and
decidedly condemn the effusions of the ill-natured merriment which they inspire.

Our sex have been taxed as defamers. I am convinced, however, that they are
not exclusively guilty; yet, for want of more substantial matter of
conversation, I fear they too often give occasion for the accusation! A mind
properly cultivated, and stored with useful knowledge, will despise a pastime
which must be supported at the expense of others. Hence only the superficial
and the giddy are reduced to the necessity of filling the time in which they
associate together, with the degrading and injurious subjects of slander. But I
trust that our improved countrywomen are rising far superior to this necessity,
and are able to convince the world, that the American fair are enlightened,
generous, and liberal. The false notions of sexual disparity, in point of
understanding and capacity, are justly exploded; and each branch of society is
uniting to raise the virtues and polish the manners of the whole.

I am, etc. MATILDA FIELDING.

To Miss JULIA GREENFIELD.
SALEM. DEAR JULIA,
FROM your recommendation of Mrs. Chapone's letters; and, what is still more,
from the character given them by Mrs. Williams, I was anxious to possess the
book; but, not being able to procure it here, my clerical brother, who was
fortunately going to Boston, bought and presented it to me.

I am much gratified by the perusal, and flatter myself that I shall derive
lasting benefit from it.

So intricate is the path of youth, and so many temptations lurk around to
beguile our feet astray, that we really need some skilful pilot to guide us
through the delusive maze. To an attentive and docile mind, publications of
this sort may afford much instruction and aid. They ought, therefore, to be
carefully collected, and diligently perused.

Anxious to make my brother some acknowledgment for his present, I wrought and
sent him a purse, accompanied with a dedication which I thought might amuse
some of his solitary moments; and which, for that purpose, I here transcribe
and convey to you.

THE enclosed, with zeal and with reverence due,
Implored my permission to wait upon you;
And begged that the muse would her favor extend,
To briefly her worth and her service commend.
The muse, who by dear-bought experience had known
How little her use to the clergy had grown,
With officious advice thus attacked the poor purse:
Why, you novice! it is plain that you, cannot do worse!
If the end of your being you would ever attain,
And honor, preferment, and influence gain,
Go quick to the pocket of some noble knave,
Whose merit is wealth, and his person its slave:
Or enter the mansion, where splendor appears,
And pomp and eclat are the habit she wears:
Or hie to the court, where so well you are known,
So highly esteemed and so confident grown,
That without your assistance and recommendation,
None claims any merit, or fills any station!
Seek either of these* and with joy you will behold
Yourself crowned with honor, and filled with gold.
But to wait on a priest: How absurd is the scheme:
His reward's in reversion* the future's his theme.
Will these, for the present, your cravings supply;
Or soften the din of necessity's cry?
Of hunger and want the loud clamours repel;
Or crush the poor moth that would on you revel?
For poets and prophets, the world has decreed,
On fame and on faith may luxuriously feed!
Here the purse interposed with a strut and a stare,
Pray, good madam muse, your suggestions forbear!
On virtue and worth I Am resolved to attend,
A firm, if I am not a plentiful friend.
Though not swelled with gold, and with metal extended,
What little I have shall be rightly expended:
And a trifle, by justice and wisdom obtained,
Is better than millions dishonestly gained!
Yet I hope and presume, that I never shall be
Excluded his pocket for the lack of a fee!
Thus the muse and the purse -- till I took the direction,
And destined the latter to your kind protection.
My wishes attend her, with fervor expressed,
That in yellow or white she may always be dressed;
And ever have the power each dull care to beguile;
Make the summer more gay, and the bleak winter smile!
But if Fortune be blind; or should she not favor
These wishes of mine, you must scorn the deceiver;
And, rising superior to all she can do,
Find a bliss more substantial than she can bestow!
CLEORA PARTRIDGE.

To Miss LAURA GUILFORD.
WORCESTER. DEAR LAURA,
I HAVE spent a very agreeable summer in the country; but am now preparing to
return to town. I anticipate, with pleasure, a restoration to your society, and
that of my other friends there. I should, however, quit these rural scenes with
reluctance, were it not that they are giving place to the chilling harbingers
of approaching winter. They have afforded charms to me, which the giddy round
of fashionable amusements can never equal. Many, however, think life
insupportable, except in the bustle and dissipation of a city. Of this number
is the volatile Amelia Parr, whom you know as well as I. So extreme is her
gaiety, that the good qualities of her mind are suffered to lie dormant; while
the most restless passions are indulged without restraint. I have just received
a letter from her, which you will see to be characteristic of her disposition.
I enclose that, and my answer to it for your perusal. Read both with candor;
and believe me ever yours.

HARRIOT HENLY.

To Miss HARRIOT HENLY. [Enclosed in the preceding.]
BOSTON.
WHERE are you, Harriot; and what are you doing? Six long months absent from
the town! What can you find to beguile the tedious hours? Life must be a burden
to you! How can you employ yourself? Employ, did I say? Pho! I will not use so
vulgar a term! I meant amuse! Amusement surely is the prime end of our
existence! You have no plays, no card-parties, nor assemblies that are worth
mentioning! Intolerably heavy must the lagging wheels of time roll on! How
shall I accelerate them for you? A new novel may do something toward it! I
accordingly send you one, imported in the last ships. Foreign, to be sure; else
it would not be worth attention. They have attained to a far greater degree of
refinement in the old world, than we have in the new; and are so perfectly
acquainted with the passions, that there is something extremely amusing and
interesting in their plots and counter-plots, operating in various ways, till
the dear creatures are jumbled into matrimony in the prettiest manner that can
be conceived!

We, in this country, are too much in a state of nature to write good novels
yet. An American novel is such a moral, sentimental thing, that it is enough to
give any body the vapors to read one. Pray come to town as soon as possible,
and not dream away your best days in obscurity and insignificance.

But this boarding school; this Harmony-Grove, where you formerly resided, has
given you strange ideas of the world. With what raptures I have heard you
relate the dull scenes in which you were concerned there! I am afraid that your
diseased taste has now come to a crisis, and you have commenced prude in
earnest! But return to your city friends; and we will lend our charitable
assistance, in restoring you to gaiety and pleasure.

AMELIA PARR.

The Answer.
WORCESTER. DEAR AMELIA,
YOUR letter -- your rattle, rather, came to hand yesterday. I could not avoid
smiling at your erroneous opinions; and, in my turn, beg leave to express my
wonder at your entertainments in town. True, we have no plays. We are not
obliged by fashion to sit, half suffocated in a crowd, for the greater part of
the night, to hear the rantings, and see the extravagant actions of the buskin
heroes, (and those not always consistent with female modesty to witness!) We
have no card-parties, avowedly formed for the purpose of killing time! But we
have an agreeable neighborhood; among which we can easily collect a social
circle; and persons of taste, politeness and information compose it. Here we
enjoy a rational and enlivening conversation, which is at once refined and
improving. We have no assemblies, composed of a promiscuous crowd of gaudy
belles and beaux; many of whom we should despise in a private company, and deem
unworthy our notice. But we have genteel balls, the company of which is select,
none being admitted but such as do honor to themselves and each other. The
amusement is not protracted till the yawning listlessness of the company
proclaims their incapacity for enjoyment; but we retire at a seasonable hour,
and add to the pleasure of the evening that of undisturbed rest through the
night. Of course, we can rise with the fun, and sip the nectarious dews, wasted
in the aromatic gale. We breakfast before the heat of the day has brought on a
languor, and deprived us of appetite; after which, we amuse ourselves with our
needles, books, or music; recline on the sofa, or ramble in the grove, as fancy
or convenience directs. In the shady bower we enjoy either the luxury of
solitude, or the pleasures of society; while you are, the whole time, in the
midst of hurry and bustle. Eager in the chase, you fly from one scene of
dissipation to another; but the fatigue of this ceaseless round, and the
exertion of spirits necessary to support it, render the objects of pursuit
tasteless and insipid.

Which mode of life, yours or mine, do you now think the most rational, and
productive of the greatest happiness? The boarding school, which you affect to
despise, has, it is true, formed my taste; and I flatter myself that I shall
never wish it altered.

I shall soon return to town; but not for pleasure. It is not in crowds that I
seek it. Adieu.

HARRIOT HENLY.

To Miss SOPHIA MANCHESTER.
CONCORD. DEAR SOPHIA,
HAVING been with my aunt Burchel for a fortnight past, I have indulged myself
in reading novels; with which her library is well supplied.

Richardson's works have occupied a large portion of the time. What a
surprising command has this great master of the passions over our feelings! It
is happy for his own and succeeding ages, that he embarked in the cause of
virtue. For his influence on the affections of his readers is so great, that it
must have proved very pernicious, had he enlisted on the side of vice. Though
am not much of a novel reader, yet his pen has operated like magic on my fancy;
and so extremely was I interested, that I could have dispensed with sleep or
food for the pleasure I found in reading him.

By this circumstance I am more than ever convinced of the great caution which
ought to be used in perusing writings of the kind. How secretly, and how
insidiously may they undermine the fabric of virtue, by painting vice and folly
in the alluring colors, and with the lively style of this ingenious author.
The mind should be well informed, and the judgment properly matured, before
young people indulge themselves in the unrestrained perusal of them.

The examples of virtue and noble qualities, exhibited by the author I have
mentioned, are truly useful; but every writer of novels is not a Richardson:
and what dreadful effects might the specious manners of a Lovelace have on the
inexperienced mind, were they not detected by a just exhibition of his vices!

The noble conduct of Clementina and Miss Byron are worthy of imitation; while
the indiscretion of Clarissa, in putting herself under the protection of a
libertine, is a warning to every fair. But both examples are often overlooked.
While the ear is charmed with the style, and the fancy riots on the luxuriance
of description, which so intimately blend the charms of virtue and the
fascinations of vice; they are not readily distinguished by all.

I am not equally pleased with all Richardson's writings; yet so multifarious
are his excellencies, that his faults appear but specks, which serve as foils
to display his beauties to better advantage.

Before I went from home I was engaged in reading a course of history; but I
fear I shall not return from this flowery field to the dry and less pleasing
path of more laborious studies. This is one disadvantage of novel reading. It
dissipates the ideas, relaxes the mind, and renders it inattentive to the more
solid and useful branches of literature. Adieu.

LAURA GUILFORD.

To Mrs. WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. DEAR MADAM,
NEITHER change of place nor situation can alienate my affections from you, or
obliterate my grateful remembrance of your kindness.

Your admonitions and counsels have been the guide of my youth. The many
advantages which I have already received from them, and the condescending
readiness with which they were always administered, embolden me to solicit your
direction and advice in a still more important sphere. The recommendation of my
parents and friends, seconded by my own inclination, have induced me to yield
my heart and engage my hand to Mr. Sylvanus Farmington, with whose character
you are not unacquainted. Next Thursday is the era fixed for our union. O
madam, how greatly shall I need a monitor like you! Sensible of my own
imperfections, I look forward with diffidence and apprehension, blended with
pleasing hopes, to this new and untried state!

Your experienced pen can teach me how to discharge the duties, divide the
cares, and enjoy the pleasures, peculiar to the station on which I am entering.
Pray extend your benevolence, and communicate your sentiments on female
deportment in the connubial relation. Practicing upon such a model, I may still
be worthy the appellation, which it will ever be my ambition to deserve, of
your affectionate friend and pupil,

HARRIOT HENLY.

To Miss HARRIOT HENLY.
HARMONY-GROVE.
INDEED, my dear Harriot, you are making an important change of situation; a
change interesting to you and your friends; a change which involves, not only
your own happiness, but the happiness of the worthy man whom you have chosen,
of the family, over which you are to preside, and perhaps, too, of that with
which you are to be connected.

I rejoice to hear that this connection, on which so much depends, is not
hastily formed; but that it is the result of long acquaintance, is founded on
merit, and consolidated by esteem. From characters like yours, mutually
deserving and excellent, brilliant examples of conjugal virtue and felicity may
be expected. Yet as human nature is imperfect, liable to errors, and apt to
deviate from the line of rectitude and propriety, a monitorial guide may be
expedient and useful. Your partiality has led you to request this boon of me;
but diffidence of my own abilities compels me to decline the arduous task.
Nevertheless, I have it happily in my power to recommend an abler instructor,
who has written professedly upon the subject. The AMERICAN SPECTATOR, or
MATRIMONIAL PRECEPTOR, lately published by Mr. David West, of Boston, contains
all you can wish. The judicious compiler has collected and arranged his
materials with admirable skill and address. Peruse this book, and you will be
at no loss for counsels to direct, and cautions to guard you through the
intricate cares and duties of the connubial life. The essays are, chiefly,
extracted from the most approved English writers. The productions of so many
able pens, properly disposed, and exhibited in a new and agreeable light, must
not only be entertaining, but useful to every reader of taste and judgment. I
wish this publication to be considered as a necessary piece of furniture by
every housekeeper. The editor has certainly deserved well of his country; and
Hymen should crown him with unfading garlands.

I shall visit you, my dear Harriot, after the happy knot (for such I flatter
myself it will prove) is tied. In the mean time, I subscribe myself, with the
most ardent wishes for your prosperity and happiness, your sincere friend,

MARY WILLIAMS.

To Miss CLEORA PARTRIDGE.
NEWBURY-PORT.
WHAT think you of wit, Cleora? If you estimate it by the worth of your own,
you think it an invaluable jewel. But this jewel is variously set. Yours is in
the pure sterling gold of good sense: yet, as displayed by some, it glistens on
the mere tinsel of gaiety, which will not bear the scrutinizing eye of judgment.

Yesterday I received a visit from a young lady, lately moved into this
neighborhood, who is reputed a wit. Her conversation reminded me of Pope's
satirical remark:

"There are, whom Heaven has blessed with store of wit;
But want as much again to manage it."
I found here is to consist in smart sayings, lively repartees, and ludicrous
allusions.

So strong was her propensity to display this talent, that she could not resist
any temptation which offered, though it led her to offend against the rules of
politeness and generosity. As some persons of real genius were present, topics
of literature and morality were discussed. Upon these she was mute as a statue;
but whenever the playfulness of her fancy could find a subject, she was
extremely loquacious. This induced me to suspect that the brilliance of her
imagination had dazzled her understanding, and rendered her negligent of the
more solid and useful acquisitions of the mind.

Is it not often the case, that those who are distinguished by any superior
endowment, whether personal or mental, are too much elated by the consciousness
of their pre-eminence, and think it sufficient to counterbalance every
deficiency?

This, Mrs. Williams used to say, is owing to the want of self-knowledge;
which, if once possessed, will enable us properly to estimate our own
characters, and to ascertain with precision wherein we are defective, as well
as wherein we excel. But it is the misfortune of us, young people, that we
seldom attain this valuable science, till we have experienced many of the ills
which result from the want of it. Ambition, vanity, flattery, or some such
dazzling meteor, engrosses our attention, and renders us blind to more
important qualifications.

But to return to this same wit, of which I was speaking. It is certainly a
very dangerous talent, when imprudently managed. None that we can possess tends
so directly to excite enmity, or destroy friendship.

An ill-natured wit is of all characters the most universally dreaded. People
of this description are always feared, but rarely loved. Humanity and
benevolence are essentially necessary to render wit agreeable. Accompanied by
these, it cannot fail to please and entertain.

"Wit, how delicious to man's dainty taste!
It Is precious as the vehicle of sense;
But as its substitute, a dire disease!
Pernicious talent! flattered by mankind,
Yet hated too. --
Sense is the diamond, weighty, solid, sound:
When cut by wit, it casts a brighter beam;
Yet, wit apart, it is a diamond still.
Wit, widowed of good sense, is worse than naught;
It hoists more sail to run against a rock."
But I believe I cannot give a better proof of my own wit, than to conclude
this scribble before your patience is quite exhausted by the perusal. Adieu.

CAROLINE LITTLETON.

To Miss HARRIOT HENLY.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR HARRIOT,
THE first moment which I have been able to snatch from the affectionate
embraces of my honored mamma, and my dear sister Maria, is devoted to you.
Judging by the anxious solicitude of my own heart, I know you are impatient to
hear of my safe arrival. It is needless to tell you how cordially I was
received. You have witnessed the mutual tenderness which actuates our domestic
circle. Where this is the governing principle, it is peculiarly interesting to
sensibility. It is extremely exhilarating to the mind to revisit, after the
shortest absence, the place of our nativity and juvenile happiness. "There is
something so seducing in that spot, in which we first had our existence, that
nothing but it can please. Whatever vicissitudes we experience in life, however
we toil, or wheresoever we wander, our fatigued wishes still recur to home for
tranquillity. We long to die in that spot which gave us birth, and in that
pleasing expectation opiate every calamity." Goldsmith.


The satisfaction of returning home, however, has not obliterated the pleasure
which I enjoyed on my visit to you. Does not a change of scene and situation
contribute to the happiness of life? The natural love of this variety seems
wisely implanted in the human breast; for it enables us to accommodate
ourselves with facility to the different circumstances in which we are placed.
I believe that no pleasures make so deep an impression on the memory, as those
of the first and most innocent period of our lives. With what apparent delight
do persons; advanced in years, re-trace their puerile feats and diversions!
"The hoary head looks back with a smile of complacency, mixed with regret, on
the season when health glowed on the cheek, when lively spirits warmed the
heart, and when toil strung the nerves with vigor." Knox.


The pleasures of childhood and youth, when regulated by parental wisdom, and
sweetened by filial affection and obedience, must be grateful to the
recollection at any age: and for this plain reason, because innocence and
simplicity are their leading traits. How soothing, how animating, then, must be
reflection, at the evening of a life, wholly spent in virtue and rectitude!

Pope observes that "Every year is a critique on the last. The man despises the
boy, the philosopher the man, and the Christian all." Happy are those who can
take a retrospect of all, with the supporting consciousness, that each part has
been rightly performed! Adieu.

ANNA WILLIAMS.

To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
BOSTON.
I AM impatient for an opportunity of returning your civilities, my dear
Matilda; and if possible, of repaying you some part of the pleasure, which you
so liberally afforded me, during my late visit to your hospitable mansion. For
this purpose, I must insist on the performance of your promise to spend the
winter in town. It is true that I cannot contribute to your amusement in kind.
Yet, according to the generally received opinion, that variety is necessary to
the enjoyment of life, we may find our's mutually heightened by the exchange.
Delightful rambles, and hours of contemplative solitude, free from the
interruptions of formality and fashion, I cannot insure; but you may depend on
all that friendship and assiduity can substitute; and while the bleak winds are
howling abroad, a cheerful fireside, and a social circle, may dispel the gloom
of the season. The pleasures of our family are very local. Few are sought, in
which the understanding and affections can have no share. For this reason, a
select, not a promiscuous acquaintance is cultivated. And however unfashionable
our practice may be deemed, we can find entertainment, even in the dull hours
of winter, without recourse to cards. Almost every other recreation affords
some exercise and improvement to the body or mind, or both; but from this
neither can result. The whole attention is absorbed by the game. Reason lies
dormant, and the passions only are awake. However little is depending, the
parties are frequently as much agitated by hope and fear, as if their all were
at stake. It is difficult for the vanquished not to feel chagrin; while the
victors are gratified at the expense of their friends. But the principal
objection with me, is the utter exclusion of conversation; a source of
pleasure, and of profit too, for which I can admit nothing as an equivalent.
Winter evenings are peculiarly adapted to this rational and refined
entertainment. Deprived of that variety of scenery, and those beauties of
nature, which the vernal and autumnal seasons exhibit, we are obliged to have
recourse to the fireside for comfort. Here we have leisure to collect our
scattered ideas, and to improve, by social intercourse, and the exertion of our
mental powers.

Our sex are often rallied on their volubility: and, for myself, I frankly
confess, that I am so averse to taciturnity, and so highly prize the advantages
of society and friendship, that I had rather plead guilty to the charge than
relinquish them.

"Have thou no friend to set thy mind a-broach?
Good sense will stagnate. Thoughts shut up, want air,
And spoil, like bales unopen'd to the sun.
Had thought been all, sweet speech had been denied;
Speech, thought's canal! Speech, thought's criterion too.
Thought, in the mine, may come forth gold or dross;
When coined in word, we know its real worth:
If sterling, store it for thy future use;
'Twill buy thee benefit, perhaps renown.
Thought, too, delivered, is the more possessed;
Teaching, we learn; and giving, we retain
The births of intellect: when dumb, forgot.
Speech ventilates our intellectual fire;
Speech burnishes our mental magazine;
Brightens for ornament, and whets for use."
Come then, Matilda, participate the pleasures, and accelerate the improvement,
of your affectionate friend,

LAURA GUILFORD.

To Miss LAURA GUILFORD.
BEVERLY. DEAR LAURA,
Yours of the 9th ult. has just come to hand. It gave me renewed experience of
the truth of the observation, that next to the personal presence and
conversation, is the epistolary correspondence of a friend. I am preparing,
with the most lively sensations of pleasure, to gratify my own wishes, and
comply with your polite invitation. The romantic beauty of the rural scenes has
forsaken me; and what can so amply compensate for their absence, as the charms
you offer?

I envy you nothing which the town affords, but the advantages you derive from
the choice of society adapted to your own taste. Your sentiments of the
fashionable diversion of card-playing, are, in my view, perfectly just. I
believe that many people join in it, because it is the ton, rather than from
any other motive. And as such persons generally pay the greatest deference to
Lord Chesterfield's opinions and maxims, I have often wondered how they
happened to overlook, or disregard his animadversions upon this subject; and
have felt a strong inclination to tell them, that this all-accomplished master
of politeness, and oracle of pleasure, expressly say, "All amusements, where
neither the understanding nor the senses can have the least share, I look upon
as frivolous, and the resources of little minds, who either do not think, or do
not love to think."

We had a pretty party here, last evening; and a party it literally was; for it
consisted entirely of ladies. This singular circumstance was remarked by one of
the company, who, at least, pretended to think it agreeable, because, said she,
we can now speak without restraint, or the fear of criticism. I confess that I
was not prude enough to acquiesce in her opinion.

Ladies of delicacy and refinement will not countenance or support a
conversation, which gentlemen of sense and sentiment can disapprove. As each
were formed for social beings, and depend on the other for social happiness, I
imagine that society receives its greatest charm from a mutual interchange of
sentiment and knowledge.

"Both sexes are reciprocal instruments of each other's improvement. The rough
spirit of the one is tempered by the gentleness of the other, which has
likewise its obligations to that spirit. Men's sentiments contract a milder
turn in the company of women, who, on the other hand, find their volatility
abated in that of the men. Their different qualities, intermingling, form a
happy symphony. From their intimate conjunction, their real advantages must be
common and inseparable; and as for those ridiculous wranglings about
superiority, they may be reckoned insults to nature, and betray a want of a due
sense of its wise and gracious dispensations." The Ladies' Friend.


Many ladies affect to think it inconsistent with female reserve, to
acknowledge themselves pleased with the company of the other sex; but while
such are the objects and advantages of a mixed society, I blush not to own
myself desirous of its cultivation. Adieu.

MATILDA FIELDING.

To Miss CAROLINE LITTLETON.
BOSTON. DEAR CAROLINE,
I TAKE the liberty to send you Bennet's Letters. When my mamma put them into
my hand, Sophia, said she, I recommend this book to your attentive perusal. It
highly deserves it, and will richly reward your labor. You have, indeed,
completed your school education; but you have much yet to learn. Improvements
in knowledge are necessarily progressive. The human mind is naturally active
and eager in pursuit of information; which we have various and continual means
of accumulating: but never will you have a more favorable opportunity for the
cultivation of your mind, than you now enjoy. You are now free from those
domestic cares and avocations, which may hereafter fall to your lot, and occupy
most of your time. Speculation must then give place to practice. Be assiduous,
therefore, to increase the fund, that it may yield you a competent interest,
and afford you a constant resource of support and enjoyment.

With these words she withdrew, while I was still listening to the sweet
accents of maternal tenderness and discretion, which vibrated on my ear, even
after her departure.

I find it worthy the recommendation of so good a judge. As a moral writer, the
precepts and observations of its author are excellent; as a religious one, his
piety is exemplary, and his instructions improving. His selection of books,
which he deems most proper for our sex, though too numerous, perhaps, may,
notwithstanding, assist and direct the young, in their course of reading.

Who would not imitate his Louisa? In her he has forcibly displayed the
beauties of an amiable disposition, and the advantages which even that may
derive from a virtuous and religious education.

These letters are not scholastic and elaborate dissertations; they are
addressed to the heart; they are the native language of affection: and they can
hardly fail to instill the love of virtue into every mind susceptible of its
charms.

If you have not read them, I will venture to predict that they will afford you
entertainment, as well as instruction; and if you have, they will bear a second
perusal. Indeed, every valuable book should be re-perused. On a first reading,
our curiosity to know something of all it contains, hurries us forward with a
rapidity which outstrips both the memory and judgment.

When this predominant passion is gratified, an attentive review will commonly
furnish many useful and important lessons, which had nearly or quite escaped
our notice before.

This, by some, is deemed too laborious a task. They prefer company and
conversation to reading of any kind; and allege, in defense of their opinion,
that a knowledge of the world, and of human nature, together with that ease and
gracefulness of manners, which are of the utmost consequence to all who would
make a respectable figure in life, are much better obtained in this way, than
by the cold and unimpassioned perusal of books.

But is not every acquisition of this sort merely superficial? Need we not a
guide, superior to our own judgment and experience, to point out the line of
duty and propriety, in the various conditions and relations of our existence?

Our acquaintance with living characters and manners can afford us but a very
limited view of mankind, in the different periods and stages of society. The
inquisitive mind labors to extend its knowledge to the most distant climes and
remote antiquity; and craves other materials for the exercise of its reflecting
powers, than can be derived from occasional and desultory conversation. Now, by
what means can this laudable curiosity be so effectually satisfied, as by the
perusal of judicious and well chosen books? Not that I would depreciate the
value of good company (for I esteem it highly;) but add its many advantages to
those which reading affords. This combination must have a happy tendency to
give us possession, both of the virtues and graces; and to render our
seize at once solid and ornamental.

What think you, Caroline? Do you agree with me in opinion? Let me hear from
you by the first opportunity; and believe me yours most sincerely.

SOPHIA MANCHESTER.

To Miss SOPHIA MANCHESTER.
NEWBURY-PORT.
I THANK you, my dear friend, for the book you were so obliging as to send me;
and for the letter which accompanied it. The book I had read; but, as you
justly observe, I must be a gainer by a second perusal.

Upon the subject of reading, I perfectly accord with you in sentiment. It is
an amusement, of which I was always enthusiastically fond. Mrs. Williams
regulated my taste; and, by directing and maturing my judgment, taught me to
make it a source of refined and substantial pleasure. I do not wish to pursue
study as a profession, nor to become a learned lady; but I would pay so much
attention to it, as to taste the delights of literature, and be qualified to
bear a part in rational and improving conversation. Indeed, I would treasure up
such a fund of useful knowledge, as may properly direct my course through life,
and prove an antidote against the vexations and disappointments of the world. I
think, Sophia, that our sex stand in special need of such a resource to beguile
the solitary hours which a domestic station commonly imposes. Is it not for
want of this that some females furnish a pretext for the accusation (which is
illiberally brought against all) of having recourse to scandal, and the sallies
of indelicate mirth? Conversation requires a perpetual supply of materials from
the mind: and, accordingly as the mind has been cultivated or neglected,
dignified or degrading subjects will be introduced.

I received a letter, yesterday, from our lively and lovely friend, Anna
Williams. How delightfully blended in this charming girl, are vivacity and
sentiment, ease and propriety. Adieu.

CAROLINE LITTLETON.

To Miss MARIA WILLIAMS.
BOSTON.
SO often, my dear Maria, has the pen of the divine, the moralist, and the
novelist been employed on the subject of female frailty and seduction; and so
pathetically has each described the folly and misery of the fatal delusion
which involves many in disgrace, that I am astonished when I see those, who
have the best means of information, heedlessly sacrificing their reputation,
peace and happiness, to the specious arts of the libertine! In this case, it is
common for our sex to rail against the other, and endeavor to excite the pity
of the world by painting the advantage which has been taken of their credulity
and weakness. But are we not sufficiently apprised of the enemies we have to
encounter? And have we not adequate motives to circumspection and firmness?

I am generally an advocate for my own sex; but when they suffer themselves to
fall a prey to seducers, their pusillanimity admits no excuse. I am bold to
affirm that every woman, by behaving with propriety on all occasions, may not
only resist temptation, but repel the first attempts upon her honor and virtue.

That levity of deportment, which invites and encourages designers, ought
studiously to be avoided. Flattery and vanity are two of the most dangerous
foes to the sex. A fondness for admiration insensibly throws them off their
guard, and leads them to listen and give credit to the professions of those who
lie in wait to deceive.

The following remarks, though severe, perhaps, can hardly be deemed
inconsistent with the character which their author assumes. The Ladies' Friend.
"Women would do well to forbear their declamations against the falsity and
wickedness of men; the fault is theirs, to fall into such coarse-spun snares as
are laid for them.

"That servile obsequiousness which women should immediately look upon as the
mark of fraud, and which should make them apprehend a surprise, is the very
thing which allures them, and renders them soon the victims of perjury and
inconstancy; the just punishment of a disposition which fixes their
inclinations on superficial qualities. It is this disposition which draws after
them a crowd of empty sops, who, if they have any meaning at all, it is only to
deceive. Something pleasing in a man's person, a giddy air, a perpetual levity,
supply the place of valuable endowments."

A recent, and singular adventure has rendered observations of this sort
peculiarly striking to my mind; which may account for the subject and the
length of this letter.

I will give you a detail of it, though I must conceal the real names of the
parties concerned.

Yesterday, the weather being very fine, and the sleighing excellent, several
of our family, with two or three friends, were induced to make an excursion a
few miles into the country. We stopped at a house which had formerly been a
tavern, and in which we had often been well entertained on similar occasions.
As we were in haste to receive the benefit of a good fire, we did not notice
the removal of the sign, nor advert to the possibility of its being converted
to a private mansion. Being very cold, I stepped first out of the sleigh, and
ran hastily in; leaving the gentlemen to exercise their gallantry with the
other ladies. The room I entered had no fire. I therefore opened the door which
led to the next apartment, when I beheld the beautiful and admired Clarinda
sitting in an easy chair, pale and wan, with an infant in her arms! I stood
mute and motionless, till the woman of the house appeared to conduct me to
another room. Confusion and shame were visibly depicted in Clarinda's
countenance; and, unable to meet my eye, she threw her handkerchief over her
face, and fell back in her chair.

I followed the good woman, and, apologizing for my intrusion, told her the
cause. She recollected my having been there before, and readily excused my
freedom.

By this time the rest of the company, who had been shown into a decent
parlour, were inquiring for me; and I could scarcely find opportunity to
request my conductress to ask Clarinda's forgiveness in my name, and to assure
her of my silence, before I had joined them. I assumed an appearance of
cheerfulness very foreign to the feelings of my heart, and related my mistake
without any mention of the melancholy discovery I had made. We prevailed on the
woman to accommodate us with tea and coffee, as we wished to ride no further.
While preparations were making, she came in to lay the table, and as she
withdrew gave me a token to follow her; when she informed me that Clarinda had
been extremely overcome by my detecting her situation; but being somewhat
recovered, desired a private interview. I accordingly repaired to her
apartment, where I found her bathed in tears. Pity operated in my breast, and
with an air of tenderness I offered her my hand; but she withheld here is,
exclaiming in broken accents, O no! I am polluted -- I have forfeited your
friendship -- I am unworthy even of your compassion!

I begged her to be calm, and promised her that she should suffer no
inconvenience from my knowledge of her condition.

She thanked me for my assurances, and subjoined that, since she knew the
candor and generosity of my disposition, she would entrust me with every
circumstance relative to her shameful fall; when, after a considerable pause,
she proceeded nearly in the following words.

"Though our acquaintance has been for some time suspended, and though we have
lived in different parts of the town, yet common fame has doubtless informed
you that I was addressed by the gay, and to me, too charming Florimel! To the
most captivating form, he superadded the winning graces of politeness, and all
those insinuating arts which imperceptibly engage the female heart.

"His flattering attentions, and apparent ardour of affection were to my
inexperienced and susceptible mind proofs of his sincerity; and the effusions
of the most lively passion were returned with unsuspecting confidence.

"My father, strict in his principles, and watchful for my real welfare,
disapproved his suit; alleging that although Florimel was calculated to please
in the gayer moments of life, he was nevertheless destitute of those sentiments
of religion and virtue, which are essentially requisite to durable felicity.
But I could not be persuaded that he lacked any perfection which maturer years
would not give him; and therefore finding my attachment unconquerable, my
father reluctantly acquiesced in the proposed connection. My ill-judged
partiality for this ungenerous man absorbed every other passion and pursuit;
while he took advantage of my yielding fondness, and assumed liberties which I
knew to be inconsistent with delicacy, but had not resolution to repel. One
encroachment succceded another, and every concession was claimed and granted as
a proof of love, till at length he became absolute master of my will and my
person! Shame and remorse soon roused me to a sense of my guilt, and I demanded
an immediate performance of his promise of marriage. This, under one pretext or
another, he constantly evaded. His visits daily became less frequent, and his
attentions less assiduous; while the most poignant anguish of mind deprived me
of every comfort. I found myself reduced to the humiliating alternative of
entreating my seducer to screen me from infamy by the name of wife, though he
should never consider or treat me as such. To this he insultingly replied, that
my situation must necessarily detect our illicit commerce; and his pride could
never brook the reputation of having a wife whose chastity had been sacrificed.
As soon as rage and resentment, which at first took from me the power of
utterance, would permit, Wretch! exclaimed I, is it not to you the sacrifice
has been made? Who but you has triumphed over my virtue, and subjected me to
the disgrace and wretchedness I now suffer? Was it not in token of my regard
for you that I yielded to your solicitations? And is this the requital I am to
receive? Base, ungrateful man! I despise your meanness! I detest the ungenerous
disposition you betray, and henceforth reject all intercourse and society with
you! I will throw myself on the mercy of my injured parents, and renounce you
forever.

"Seeing me almost frantic, he endeavored to soothe and appease me. He
apologized for the harshness of his language, and even made professions of
unabated affection; but gave as a reason for deferring the conjugal union, at
present, that commercial affairs obliged him to sail immediately for (...) me
at the same time that on his (...) would not fail to renew and consummate the
connection. To this I gave no credit, and therefore made no reply. He then
requested me to accept a purse to defray my expenses, during his absence, which
I rejected with disdain; and he departed. The distress and despair of my mind
were inexpressible. For some days, I resigned myself entirely to the agonizing
pangs of grief. My parents imputed my dejection to Florimel's departure, and
strove to console me. It was not long, however, before my mother discovered the
real cause. In her, resentment gave place to compassion; but the anger of my
father could not be appeased. He absolutely forbad me his presence for some
time; but my mother at length prevailed on him to see, and assure me of
forgiveness and restoration to favor, if I would consent to renounce and
disown my child; to which, not then knowing the force of maternal affection, I
readily consented. This place was privately procured for me, and hither, under
pretense of spending a month or two with a friend in the country, I retired.
Tomorrow my dear babe is to be taken from me! It is to be put to nurse, I know
not where! All I am told is, that it shall be well taken care of! Constantly
will its moans haunt my imagination, while I am deprived even of the hope of
ministering to its wants; but must leave it to execrate the hour which gave it
birth, and deprived it of a parent's attention and kindness.

"As soon as possible, I shall return to my father's house; and as I am unknown
here, and you are the only person, out of our family, who shares the dreadful
secret, I flatter myself that my crime may still be concealed from the world.
The reproaches of my own mind I can never escape. Conscious guilt will give the
aspect of accusation to every eye that beholds me; and however policy may
compel me to wear the mask of gaiety and ease, my heart will be wrung with
inexpressible anguish by the remembrance of my folly, and always alive to the
distressing sensations of remorse and shame! Oh Julia! you have witnessed my
disgrace! pity and forgive me! Perhaps I once appeared as virtuous and
respectable, as you now do; but how changed! how fallen! how debased! Learn
from my fate to despise the flattery of the worthless coxcomb, and the arts of
the abandoned libertine."

By this time I was summoned to tea; when, giving all the consolation in my
power to the unhappy Clarinda, I rejoined my company; and to prevent their
inquisitiveness about my absence, told them I had been with a sick woman, upon
whom I accidentally intruded when I first came in; and that she had detained
me, all this time, by a recital of her complaints and misfortunes. This account
satisfied their curiosity; but the melancholy into which my mind had been
thrown was not easily dissipated; nor could I, without doing violence to my
feelings, put on the appearance of my usual cheerfulness and ease.

Here, my dear Maria, is a picture of the frailty and weakness of our sex! How
much reason have we then to "watch and pray that we enter not into temptation!"

With affectionate regards to your mamma and sister, I subscribe myself yours
most sincerely,

JULIA GREENFIELD.

To Miss JULIA GREENFIELD.
HARMONY-GROVE. MY DEAR FRIEND,
I WAS much affected by the woe-fraught tale which you gave me in your last. We
cannot too much regret that such instances of duplicity and folly are ever
exhibited. They are alike disgraceful to both sexes, and demonstrate the
debasing and fatal tendency of the passions, when suffered to predominate.

Your observations upon our sex I believe to be just, though many would
probably deem them severe. However, I think it not much to the honor of the
masculine character, which the God of nature designed for a defense and
safeguard to female virtue and happiness, to take advantage of the tender
affection of the unsuspecting and too credulous fair; and, in return for her
love and confidence, perfidiously to destroy her peace of mind, and deprive her
of that reputation, which might have rendered her a useful and ornamental
member of society. True, we ought to take warning by such examples of treachery
and deceit; yet, how much more conducive to the honor and happiness of our
species, were there no occasion to apprehend such ungenerous requitals of our
sincerity and frankness!

Yesterday, my mamma took the liberty to read that part of your letter, which
contains the story of Clarinda, to her pupils, and to make such comments upon
it as the subject suggested; during which we could not but observe the extreme
emotion of one of the misses, a most amiable girl of about sixteen. When the
paragraph respecting Clarinda's disowning her child was read, she hastily rose,
and in broken accents begged leave to withdraw. This was granted, without any
inquiry into the cause; though our curiosity, as you may well suppose, was much
excited. After we were dismissed, my mamma prevailed on her to tell the reason
of her agitation.

"I am," said she, "the illegitimate offspring of parents, whom I am told are
people of fortune and fashion. The fear of disgrace overcame the dictates of
natural affection, and induced my mother to abandon me in my infancy. She
accordingly gave me away, with a large sum of money, which she vainly imagined
would procure me kind and good treatment. But, unhappily for me, the people to
whom I was consigned, availing themselves of their security from inspection and
inquiry, abused the trust reposed in them, and exposed me to the greatest
hardships. As they were persons of vulgar minds and unfeeling hearts, they did
not commiserate my friendless condition. My quick sensibility incurred their
displeasure or derision. I was often insultingly reproached with the misfortune
of my birth; while the tears which these ungenerous reflections extorted from
me, were either mocked or punished. I had a thirst for knowledge; but they
allowed me no time for acquiring it, alleging that they could not support me in
idleness, but that I must earn my living, as they did their's, by hard labor.
Oppressed by these insults, I bore the galling yoke of their authority with the
utmost impatience. When screened from observation, my tears flowed without
restraint; and the idea of my parents' cruelty, in thus subjecting me to infamy
and wretchedness, continually haunted my imagination. Sometimes I fancied my
mother in view, and, exposing my tattered raiment, expostulated with her
concerning the indignities I suffered, and the unreasonable hardship of leaving
me to bear all the punishment of my guilty birth! At other times I painted to
myself a father, in some gentleman of pleasing aspect; and fondly indulged the
momentary transport of throwing myself at the feet of one, whom I could call by
that venerable and endearing name! Too soon, however, did the reverse of
parental tenderness awake me from my delusive reveries.

"In this manner I lingered away my existence, till I was twelve years old;
when going, one day, to the house of a gentleman in the neighborhood, to which
I was often sent to sell herbs, and other trifles, I was directed into the
parlour, where the most beautiful sight in nature opened to my view; while the
contrast between my own situation, and that of children blessed with
affectionate parents, gave me the most painful sensations. The lady of the
house was surrounded by her four sons, the eldest of whom was reading lessons,
which she most pathetically inculcated upon all. As the door was open, I stood
some minutes unobserved; and was so delighted with the tender accents in which
her instructions were imparted, and the cheerful obedience with which they were
received, that I had no disposition to interrupt them.

"At length I was seen, and bid to come in. But, when questioned about my
errand, I was so absorbed in the contemplation of maternal and filial love,
exhibited in this happy group, that my tongue refused utterance, and I burst
into tears. The children gathered around, and inquired what ailed the poor
little girl? But when the lady took me by the hand, and kindly asked what was
the matter, I could not restrain or conceal my feelings. When my tears had
relieved me, I related the cause of my grief; describing my own situation, and
the effect which its contrast had produced on my mind.

"She was affected by my story, and seemed pleased with my sensibility; while
the children lamented my misfortunes, and artlessly requested their mamma to
let me come and live with them.

"Little did I then expect so great a favor; but to my surprise, as well as
joy, Mrs. --, the lady of whom I have been speaking, and by whom I am put under
your care, came, a few days after, and asked the people where I lived, if they
were willing to part with me. By their consent she took me home, and has ever
since treated me like a child.

"I am now happy beyond expression. My gratitude to my benefactress, who,
guided by a wife and good Providence, has snatched me from obscurity and
misery, and given me so many advantages for improvement, is unbounded.

"But the idea that any helpless innocent should be unnaturally exposed to the
sufferings which I have experienced, is insupportably distressing to my
imagination.

"Let my story, if possible, be told to Clarinda, that she may be induced to
have compassion upon her defenseless offspring."

You are at liberty, therefore, my dear Julia, to make what use you please of
this letter. I shall make no comments upon the subject of it, nor add any thing
more to its length, but that I am affectionately yours.

MARIA WILLIAMS.

To Miss ANNA WILLIAMS.
SALEM. DEAR ANNA,
MY contemplated visit to Harmony-Grove must be deferred. A severe illness has
lately confined my mamma to her chamber. This claimed all my time and
attention, and called me to a new scene of care; that of a family, which I was
obliged to superintend during her indisposition. Her recovery has, at length,
restored tranquillity and joy to our abode; but she has not yet resumed the
direction of her household affairs. To this, she tells me, she is reconciled by
the hope, that experience may render me an adept in domestic economy. Indeed,
Anna, I think this an essential branch of female education; and I question
whether it can be acquired by mere speculation. To me it is plain, that every
lady ought to have some practice in the management of a family, before she
takes upon herself the important trust.

Do not many of the mistakes and infelicities of life arise from a deficiency
in this point?

Young ladies of fashion are not obliged to the task, and have too seldom any
inclination to perform duties which require so much time and attention; and
with which, perhaps, they have injudiciously been taught to connect the idea of
servility. Hence it is, that when called to preside over families, they commit
many errors, during their novitiate, at least, which are alike detrimental to
their interest and happiness. How necessary is it, then, to avoid this
complication of evils by a seasonable application to those offices of
housewifery, which may one day become our province.

Early rising, I find a great assistance in my present occupation. It is almost
incredible how much may be gained by a diligent improvement of those hours
which are but too commonly lost in sleep. I arose this morning with the dawn.
The serenity of the sky and the fragrance of the air invited me abroad. The
calmness which universally prevailed served to tranquillize my mind, while the
receding shades of night, and the rising beams of day formed a contrasted
assemblage of the beautiful, the splendid, the solemn, and the sublime. The
silence which pervaded the surrounding scenery was interrupted only by the
melody of the feathered songsters, who seemed to rejoice in this undisturbed
opportunity of praising their Maker. My heart expanded with gratitude and love
to the all-bountiful Author of nature; and so absorbed was I in the most
delightful meditations, that I saw with regret the hour approaching which must
again call me to the active duties of domestic and (...). These, however, are
objects of real moment, and cannot innocently be disregarded. They give a
relish to amusement, and even to devotion, which neither the dissipated nor the
recluse can know. Adieu.

CLEORA PARTRIDGE.

To Miss HARRIOT HENLY.
BEVERLY. DEAR HARRIOT,
I SINCERELY thank you for your affectionate letter, by the last post, and for
the book with which it was accompanied. The very title is sufficient to rouse
the feelings and attract the attention of the patriotic mind. Beacon-Hill
claims a conspicuous place in the history of our country. The subject of this
poem must be highly interesting to every true American; while the genius it
displays cannot fail to gratify every poetical taste. Philenia's talents justly
entitle her to a rank among the literary ornaments of Columbia.

I have been reviewing Millot's Elements of Ancient and Modern History; and
recommend it to your re-perusal. It is undoubtedly the most useful compendium
extant. The tedious minuteness and prolix details of sieges and battles,
negociations and treaties, which fatigue the reader and oppress the memory, in
most works of the kind, are happily avoided in this; while the elegance,
simplicity, conciseness and perspicuity of the style, render it intelligible to
every capacity, and pleasing to every taste. To those who have a relish for
history, but want leisure to give it full scope, Millot is well calculated to
afford both information and entertainment. It is an objection, commonly made by
our sex to studies of this nature, that they are dry and elaborate; that they
yield little or no exercise to the more sprightly faculties of the mind; that
the attention is confined to an uninteresting and barren detail of facts, while
the imagination pants in vain for the flowery wreaths of decoration.

This is a plausible excuse for those who read only for amusement, and are
willing to sacrifice reason, and the enlargement of their minds, to the gaudy
phantom of a day; but it can never be satisfactory to the person, who wishes to
combine utility with pleasure, and dignity with relaxation. History improves
the understanding, and furnishes a knowledge of human nature and human events,
which may be useful, as well as ornamental, through life. "History," says the
late celebrated Ganganelli, "brings together all ages and all mankind into one
point of view. Presenting a charming landscape to the mental eye, it gives
color to the thoughts, soul to the actions, and life to the dead; and brings
them again upon the stage of the world, as if they were again living; but with
this difference, that it is not to flatter* but to judge them."

The duties and avocations of our sex will not often admit of a close and
connected course of reading. Yet a general knowledge of the most necessary
subjects may undoubtedly be gained, even in our leisure hours; provided we
bestow them not on works of mere taste and fancy, but on the perusal of books
calculated to enrich the understanding with durable acquisitions.

The sincerest wishes for your health and happiness glow in the breast of your
affectionate

MATILDA FIELDING.

To Miss MARIA WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. MY DEAR MARIA,
SINCE I wrote you last, I have made an agreeable visit to my good friend,
Sylvia Star. After rambling in the fields and gardens till we were fatigued, we
went into her brother's library. He was in a studious attitude, but gave us a
polite reception. We are come to solicit a portion of your repast, Amintor,
said I. Be so kind as to furnish us with some instructive page, which combines
entertainment and utility; and while it informs the mind, delights the
imagination. I am not happy enough to know your taste respecting books, said
he; and, therefore, may not make a proper selection. Here, however, is an
author highly spoken of by a lady, who has lately added to the number of
literary publications; handing me Sterne's Sentimental Journey. I closed and
returned the book. You have indeed mistaken my taste, said I. Wit, blended with
indelicacy, never meets my approbation. While the fancy is allured, and the
passions awakened, by this pathetic humourist, the foundations of virtue are
insidiously undermined, and modest dignity insensibly betrayed. Well, said he,
smiling, perhaps you are seriously inclined. If so, this volume of sermons may
possibly please you. Still less, rejoined I. The serious mind must turn with
disgust from the levity which pervades these discourses, and from the indecent
flow of mirth and humor, which converts even the sacred writings, and the most
solemn subjects of religion, into frolic and buffoonery. Since such is your
opinion of this celebrated writer, said he, I will not insult your feelings by
offering you his Tristram Shandy. But here is another wit, famous for his "
purity." Yes, said (...) obscene and vulgar ideas, if ill-natured remarks and
filthy allusions be purity, Swift undoubtedly bears the palm from all his
contemporaries. As far as grammatical correctness and simplicity of language
can deserve the epithet, his advocates may enjoy their sentiments unmolested;
but, in any other sense of the word, he has certainly no claim to " purity." I
conceive his works, notwithstanding, to be much less pernicious in their
tendency, than those of Stern. They are not so enchanting in their nature, nor
so subtle in their effects. In the one, the noxious insinuations of licentious
wit are concealed under the artful blandishments of sympathetic sensibility;
while we at once recoil from the rude assault which is made upon our delicacy,
by the roughness and vulgarity of the other.

Choose then, said Amintor, for yourself. I availed myself of his offer, and
soon fixed my eyes upon Doctor Belknap's History of New Hampshire, and American
Biography; both of which I have (...) with the greatest satisfaction.

By (...) judicious and impartial historian, we are led, from its first
settlement, to trace the progress of the infa^^ colony. We accompany its
inhabitants in their enterprises, their dangers, their toils, and their
successes. We take an interest in their prosperity; and we tremble at the
dreadful outrages of the barbarous foe. Our imagination is again (...) to the
gradual advance of population and agriculture. We behold the wilderness
blooming as the rose, and the haunts of savage beasts, and more savage men,
converted into fruitful fields and pleasant habitations. The arts and sciences
flourish; peace and harmony are restored; and we are astonished at the amazing
contrast, produced in little more than a single century!

When we turn to the American Biography, gratitude glows in our bosoms toward
those intrepid and active adventurers, who traversed a trackless ocean,
explored an unknown region, and laid the foundation of empire and independence
in this western hemisphere. The undaunted resolution, and cool, determined
wisdom of Columbus, fill us with profound admiration. We are constrained to pay
a tribute of just applause to the generosity of a female mind, exemplified in
Isabella, who, to surmount every obstacle, nobly (...) to sacrifice even h^^
personal ornaments to the success (...) glorious expedition.

The daring (...) and magnanimity (...) to the treacherous (...), and to his
equally treacherous and ungrateful countrymen, exhibit an example of patriotism
and moderation, which at once commands our applause, and interests our
feelings. While we tremble and recoil at his dreadful situation, when bending
his neck to receive the murderous stroke of death, the native virtues of our
sex suddenly reanimate our frame; and, with sensations of rapture, we behold
compassion, benevolence, and humanity triumphant even in a savage breast; and
conspicuously displayed in the conduct of the amiable, though uncivilized
Pocahontas! Nor are the other characters in this work uninteresting: and I am
happy to find that the same masterly pen is still industriously employed for
the public good; How vain are our expectations! While the types were setting
for this very page, Dr. Belknap suddenly expired in a fit. Printer.
and that a second volume of American Biography is now in the press.

In reviewing this letter, I am astonished at my own presumption, in
undertaking to play the critic. My imagination has outstripped my judgment; but
I will arrest its career, and subscribe myself most affectionately yours.

SOPHIA MANCHESTER.

To Miss ANNA WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. DEAR ANNA,
I RETIRED, after breakfast this morning, determined to indulge myself in my
favorite amusement, and write you a long letter. I had just mended my pen and
folded my paper, when I was informed that three ladies waited for me in the
parlour. I stepped down and found Lucinda P --, Fulvia F --, and Delia S --.
They were gaily dressed, and still more gaily disposed. "We called," said they,
"to invite you, Miss Maria, to join our party for a shopping tour." Loath to
have the ideas dissipated, which I had collected in my pericranium, for the
purpose of transmitting to a beloved sister, I declined accepting their
invitation; alleging that I had no occasion to purchase any thing today; and
therefore begged to be excused from accompanying them. They laughed at my
reason for not engaging in the expedition. "Buying," said their principal
speaker, "is no considerable part of our plan, I assure you. Amusement is what
we are after. We frankly acknowledge it a delightful gratification of our
vanity, to traverse Cornhill, to receive the obsequious congees, and to call
forth the gallantry and activity of the beaux behind the counter; who, you must
know, are extremely alert when we belles appear. The waving of our feathers,
and the attractive airs we assume, command the profoundest attention, both of
master and apprentices; who, duped by our appearance, suffer less brilliant
customers to wait, or even to depart without notice, till we have tumbled over
and refused half the goods in the shop. We then bid a very civil adieu; express
our regret at having given so much trouble; are assured, in return, that it has
been rather a pleasure; and leave them their labor for their pains."

A most insignificant amusement this, said I to myself! How little can it
redound to the honor and happiness of these unthinking girls, thus to squander
their time in folly's giddy maze! They undoubtedly wish to attract eclat; but
they would do well to remember those words of the satirist, which, with the
alteration of a single term, may be applied to them:

" Columbia's daughters, much more fair than nice,
Too fond of admiration, lose their price;
Worn in the public eye, give cheap delight
To (...), and tarnish to the sated sight."
Viewing their conduct in this light, I withstood their solicitations, though I
palliated my refusal in such a manner as to give no umbrage.

Of all expedients to kill time, this appears to me, as I know it will to you,
the most ridiculous and absurd.

What possible satisfaction can result from such a practice? It certainly
fatigues the body; and is it any advantage to the mind? Does it enlarge the
understanding, inspire useful ideas, or furnish a source of pleasing
reflection? True, it may gratify a vitiated imagination, and exhilarate a light
and trifling mind. But these ought to be restrained and regulated by reason and
judgment, rather than indulged.

I wish those ladies, who make pleasure the supreme object of their pursuit,
and argue in vindication of their conduct, that Pleasure is good, and they for
pleasure made,
would confine, themselves to that species which Neither blushes, nor expires.


The domestic virtues, if duly cultivated, might certainly occupy those hours,
which they are now solicitous to dissipate, both with profit and delight. "But
it is time enough to be domesticated," say they, "when we are placed at the
head of families, and necessarily confined to care and labor."

Should not the mind, however, be seasonably inured to the sphere of life which
Providence assigns us?

"To guide the pencil, turn the instructive page;
To lend new flavor to the fruitful year,
And heighten nature's dainties; in their race
To rear their graces into second life;
To give society its highest taste;
Well-ordered home man's best delight to make;
And, by submissive wisdom, modest skill,
With every gentle care-eluding art,
To raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils of human life.
This be the female dignity and praise."
A proper attention to these necessary duties and embellishments would not only
correct this rambling disposition, but happily leave neither leisure nor
temptation for its indulgence.

I intended to have given you some account of my agreeable visit here; but the
chit-chat of the ladies I have mentioned, has occupied a large portion of my
time this morning, and an engagement to dine abroad claims the rest.

I hope soon to embrace you in our beloved retirement, and again to enjoy the
sweets of my native home.

"Had I the choice of sublunary good,
What could I wish that I possess not there?
Health, leisure, means to improve it, friendship, peace."
My most dutiful affections await mamma; and my kind regards attend the young
ladies residing with her. How great a share of my ardent love is at your
command need not be renewedly testified by

MARIA WILLIAMS.

To Miss SOPHIA MANCHESTER.
NEWBURY-PORT.
THE extracts which you transmitted to me in your last kind letter, my dear
Sophia, from your favorite author, Doctor Young, corresponded exactly with the
solemnity infused into my mind by the funeral of a neighbor, from which I had
just returned.

I agree with you, that the Night-Thoughts are good devotional exercises. It is
impossible to read them with that degree of attention which they merit, without
being affected by the important and awful subjects on which they treat. But
Young, after all, is always too abstruse, and in many instances, too gloomy for
me. The most elaborate application is necessary to the comprehension of his
meaning and design; which, when discovered, often tend rather to depress than
to elevate the spirits.

Thompson is much better adapted to my taste. Sentiment, elegance, perspicuity,
and sublimity are all combined in his Seasons. What an inimitable painter! How
admirably he describes the infinitely variegated beauties and operations of
nature! To the feeling and susceptible heart they are presented in the
strongest light. Nor is the energy of his language less perceivable, when he
describes the Deity riding on the wings of the wind, and directing the stormy
tempest.

"How changed the scene! In blazing height of noon,
The sun, oppressed, is plunged in thickest gloom;
Still horror reigns, a dismal twilight round,
Of struggling night and day malignant mixed.
Far to the hot equator crowding fast,
Where, highly rarefy'd, the yielding air
Admits their stream, incessant vapors roll,
Amazing clouds on clouds continual heaped;
Or whirled tempestuous by the gusty wind,
Or silent, borne along, heavy and slow,
With the big stores of streaming oceans charged.
Meantime, amid these upper seas, condensed
Around the cold aerial mountain's brow,
And by conflicting winds together dashed,
The thunder holds his black tremendous throne.
From cloud to cloud the rending lightnings rage;
Till, in the furious elemental war
Dissolved, the whole precipitated mass
Unbroken floods and torrents pours."
Conscious of our own weakness and dependence, we can hardly fail to adore and
to fear that Divine Power, whose agency this imagery exhibits to our minds. Nor
are the devout affections of our hearts less excited, when we behold the same
glorious Being arrayed in love, and accommodating the regular succession of
summer and winter, seed-time and harvest to our convenience and comfort. When
nature, obedient to his command, revives the vegetable world, and diffuses
alacrity and joy throughout the animal, and even rational creation, we
involuntarily exclaim with the poet,

"HAIL, SOURCE OF BEING! UNIVERSAL SOUL
Of heaven and earth! ESSENTIAL PRESENCE, hail!
To THEE I bend the knee; to THEE my thoughts
Continual climb; who, with a master hand,
Have the great whole into perfection touched.
By THEE the various vegetative tribes,
Wrapped in a filmy net, and clad with leaves,
Draw the live either, and imbibe the dew.
By THEE, disposed into congenial soils,
Stands each attractive plant, and sucks and swells
The juicy tide; a twining mass of tubes.
At THY command, the vernal sun awakes
The torpid sap, detruded to the root
By wintry winds; which now in fluent dance,
And lively ^^^^entation, mounting, spreads
All this innumerous-colour'd s^^ne of things."
Aided in our observations by this pathetic and pious writer, our hearts beat
responsive to the sentiments of gratitude, which he indirectly, yet most
forcibly inculcates in that devout address to the Supreme Parent:

" -- Were every faultering tongue of man,
ALMIGHTY FATHER! silent in thy praise,
Thy works themselves would raise a general voice,
Even in the depth of solitary woods,
By human foot untrod; proclaim thy power,
And to the quire celestial THEE resound,
The eternal Cause, Support, and End of all!"
By this beautiful poem we are allured to the study of nature, and to the
contemplation of nature's God. Our hearts glow with devotion and love to the
sovereign Lord and Benefactor of the universe; and we are drawn, by the
innumerable displays of his goodness, to the practice of virtue and religion.

You may, possibly, call me an enthusiast. Be it so. Yet I contend for the
honor, but especially for the privilege, of being a cheerful one. For I think
we dishonor our heavenly Father by attaching any thing gloomy or forbidding to
his character. In the participation of divine blessings, let us rather exercise
a thankful, and contented disposition.

I remain yours most affectionately.

CAROLINE LITTLETON.

To Mrs. WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. DEAR MADAM,
BY her desire, in conjunction with my own inclination, I inform you that
Harriot Henly is no more -- Yesterday she gave her hand, and renounced her name
together; threw aside the sprightly girl we have been so long accustomed to
admire, and substituted in her place the dignified and respectable head of a
family, in Mrs. Farmington.

Have I not lost my amiable friend and associate? Will not her change of
situatiton tend to lessen our intercourse, and to alienate our affections?

When I contemplate the social circle, so firmly cemented in the bands of
friendship, at the boarding school, where the most perfect harmony, ease and
satisfaction presided, I recoil at the idea of becoming less dear, less
interesting, and less necessary to each other. It is with the utmost reluctance
that I admit the idea of rivals to that affection and benevolence which we
have, so long, and so sincerely interchanged.

The charm however is broken. Harriot is already married; and my friends are
extremely solicitous that I should follow her example. But in a connection which
requires so many precautions before it is formed, and such uninterrupted
circumspection and prudence afterward; the great uncertainty of the event
inspires me with timidity and apprehension.

Harriot put into my hands, and I read with pleasure, the book which you
recommended to her on the subject. But still we wished for your instruction and
advice. The sentiments of a person so dear and interesting to us, are
particularly calculated to engage our attention, and influence our conduct.
Relying, too, on your judgment and experience, your forming pen may render us
more worthy objects of attachment.

We, however, unite in assuring you of our gratitude for all past favors; and
in presenting our sincere regards to the young ladies.

I am, with great respect, your affectionate and grateful

LAURA GUILFORD.

To Miss LAURA GUILFORD.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR LAURA,
THE obligations under which you lay me, by your generous confidence, and
affectionate expressions of regard, induce me again to assume the Preceptress
toward you, and to gratify your wishes, by imparting my sentiments on your
present situation and prospects.

I am told by my daughter, who had the honor of bearing your letter, that you
are, what I always expected you would be, an object of general admiration. Yet,
I trust, your good sense will enable you duly to distinguish and treat the
several candidates for your favor.

It is, indeed, my young friend, a matter of the most serious consequence,
which lies upon your mind, and awakens your anxiety. Your friends are studious
of your welfare, and kindly concerned that the important die on which the
happiness of your life depends, should be judiciously cast. You doubtless
remember, that I discoursed upon this subject in my concluding lessons to your
class.

Disparity of tempers, among other things which were then suggested, and which
you will doubtless recollect, was represented, as tending to render life
uncomfortable. But there are other disparities which may be equally hostile to
your peace.

Disparity of years is very apt to occasion the indulgence of passions
destructive of conjugal felicity. The great difference between the sprightly
fancy, vivacity, and enterprise of youth, and the deliberate caution,
phlegmatic coldness, and sententious wisdom of age, render them very unpleasant
companions to each other. Marriage between persons of these opposite
descriptions is commonly the result of pecuniary motives, with one party, at
least: the suspicion of this, in the other, must necessarily produce
discontent, uneasiness, and disaffection.

Age is naturally jealous of respect, and apprehensive of being slighted. The
most trifling and unmeaning inattentions will therefore be construed amiss. For
an excessive desire of being objects of supreme regard is almost invariably
accompanied with a strong persuasion of being the reverse. Hence accusations,
reproaches, and restraints, on the one side, produce disgust, resentment and
alienation on the other, till mutual and unceasing wretchedness ensue. Indeed,
where interest alone, without this inequality of years, is the principal
inducement, marriage is seldom happy. Esteem and love are independent of wealth
and its appendages. They are not to be sold or bought. The conjugal relation is
so near and interesting; the mind, as well as the person, is so intimately
concerned in it, that something more substantial and engaging than gold is
requisite to make it a blessing.

Marriage, being the commencement of a domestic life, beside the many agreeable
circumstances attending it, has its peculiar cares and troubles, which require
the solace of a companion actuated by better principles, and possessed of more
amiable endowments than outward splendor and magnificence can afford. In the
hour of sickness and distress, riches, it is true, can bestow bodily comforts
and cordials; but can they be made an equivalent for the tender sympathy, the
endearing kindness, and the alleviating attention of a bosom friend, kindly
assiduous to ease our pains, animate our prospects, and beguile the languid
moments which elude all other consolations? The sorrows as well as the joys of
a family state, are often such as none but a bosom friend can participate. The
heart must be engaged before it can repose with ease and confidence. To a lady
of sensibility, the confinement of the body, without the consent and union of
according minds, must be a state of inexpressible wretchedness.

Another situation, not less to be deplored, is a connection with the immoral
and profane.

How shocking must it be, to hear that sacred NAME, which you revere and love,
constantly treated with levity and irreverence! And how painful the necessity
of being constrained, for the sake of peace, to witness in silence; and without
even the appearance of disapprobation, the most shameful outrages upon religion
and virtue! May you never taste the bitterness of this evil!

Intemperance is a vice, which one would imagine no lady would overlook in a
suitor. But, strange to tell! there are those, even among our own sex, who
think and speak of inebriation in the other, at the jovial and well-furnished
board, as a mark of conviviality and good fellowship!

What, then, is the distinguishing badge of humanity? Can that reason, which
alone raises us superior to the brute creation, be wantonly sacrificed with
impunity; yea, with reputation?

How degrading and how dreadful must this enormity appear to an interested,
affectionate, and virtuous wife! What agonizing pangs of mortification and
anguish must she endure, when she meets him, in whose society she delights,
whose return she has anticipated with impatience, and whose happiness and honor
are the moving springs of her life, intoxicated with wine; the powers of his
mind suspended by the poisonous cup, and every faculty absorbed in the deadly
draught! What a perpetual source of dread and apprehension must hence arise;
and how often must the blush of indignant virtue and wounded delicacy be called
forth!

The gamester is an equally dangerous companion. His family is robbed, not only
of his company and his talents, but of that property, to the benefit of which
they have an indisputable claim. His earnings are squandered among worthless
and profligate associates abroad; while the faithful partner of his life, and
perhaps, too, a rising offspring, languish at home for want of bread!

How fatal is the tendency of such examples! How can that father inculcate the
duties of piety, virtue and decency, who exhibits the reverse of each in his
own conduct? And under what an unspeakable disadvantage must that mother
labor, in the instruction and education of her children, whose admonitions,
counsels, and directions are practically counteracted by him who ought to bear
an equal share of the burden! The government and superintendence of a family
are objects of such magnitude and importance, that the union and cooperation
of its heads are indispensably necessary. It is a little commonwealth; and if
internal feuds and dissensions arise, anarchy and confusion must ensue.

Domestic happiness is the foundation of every other species. At times, indeed,
we may enjoy ourselves abroad, among our friends; but a good heart will return
home, as to the seat of felicity.

" -- Home is the resort
Of love, of joy, of peace and plenty, where,
Supporting and supported, polished friends
And dear relations mingle into bliss."
Since so much, then, depends upon a judicious choice, how important is it,
that you examine well before you decide; and that you dispense with no quality
in the man to whom you shall give your hand, which is essential to the virtue
and happiness of your life. For this purpose, consult your judgment, rather
than your fancy; and suffer not superficial accomplishments, but solid merit to
preponderate.

I have now endeavored to point out the most apparent and threatening dangers
to which you may be exposed. But though these are avoided, many unforeseen
accidents will doubtless occur to cloud your sanguine hopes. These, when there
are no vices to produce them, may arise from follies, and from the indulgence
of erroneous expectations. Little misunderstandings sometimes occasion
disagreements which terminate in coldness and disaffection, and plant a root of
bitterness which can hardly be eradicated.

Let prudence, therefore, be your pole star, when you enter the married state.
Watch with the greatest circumspection over yourself; and always exercise the
tenderest affection, the most unwearied patience, and the most cheerful
acquiescence in the treatment of your companion. Guard especially against being
affected by those little inattentions and foibles, which too often give pain
and umbrage without design; and produce those remonstrances, criminations, and
retorts, which are the great inlets of strife, and bane of love.

You must bear, with calmness, every thing that the sincerest desire of peace
can dictate; and studiously avoid every expression, and even look, which may
irritate and offend. Your own happiness, you will consider so intimately
connected with that of your husband, as to be inseparable; and consequently,
that all your hopes of comfort in this life, and perhaps, too, in the next,
depend upon your conducting with propriety and wisdom toward him.

I take the liberty, through you, to convey my congratulations to Mrs.
Farmington. May her change of condition be happy, to the full extent of our
most sanguine expectations, and benevolent wishes. I fully intended writing her
on the subject, but have unwarily bestowed so much time upon you, that for the
present, I must forego the pleasure. Some things in this letter, which you will
doubtless communicate, are applicable to her case. These she will receive as
friendly hints from me; and I am confident that her known discretion will
continue to shed a benign and engaging influence upon her whole deportment, and
render her uniformly respected and beloved.

The bearer is waiting, and I can only add, that I remain your sincere and
affectionate friend.

MARY WILLIAMS.

To Miss CLEORA PARTRIDGE.
BOSTON. DEAR CLEORA,
THE pleasing hope with which you inspired me, when we parted last, of
receiving a visit from you in town, has been constantly cherished. I have
anticipated your arrival with the utmost impatience; but have endeavored,
notwithstanding, to beguile the slow-paced hours by a useful and pleasing
occupation; the revision of my geographical studies.

My papa has kindly procured me Doctor Morse's last, and much improved edition
of Universal Geography, which, with the assistance of a pair of globes he
possessed, has afforded me the most delightful entertainment. When at school, I
thought this the most agreeable study allotted me; never deeming it a task, but
an amusement.

It affords me, as it must every true American, the sincerest pleasure to be
furnished with the means of acquiring this favorite science, by my own
countryman; and the spirit of Columbian independence exults in my bosom, at the
idea of being able to gain an accurate acquaintance with my own and other
countries, without recourse to the labors of foreigners.

I think the present generation under special obligations to the active
industry of Dr. Morse, in providing us with that necessary and rich fund of
information, which his Geography and Gazetteer contain. From these sources we
may derive a sufficient knowledge of the world we inhabit, without departing
from our domestic sphere.

Come, then, my dear Cleora, and without fatigue or expense, we will make the
tour of the globe together. After investigating the local situation of
different and distant climes, we will turn to the historic page, and examine
the manners, government, character, and improvements of their inhabitants. We
will traverse the frozen wastes of the frigid zones, and the burning sands of
the equatorial region; then return and bless the temperate and happy medium in
which we are placed; and, casting an eye around, exult in our peculiar
advantages of soil and situation, peace and good government, virtue and
religion.

The fine mornings of this season afford many delightful hours, before the heat
of the day relaxes the mind and enervates the body. Come, then, enjoy and
improve these, in concert with your faithful and affectionate friend,

JULIA GREENFIELD.

To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR MATILDA,
LAST Thursday, after having concluded the usual occupations and sedentary
amusements of the day, I walked out, toward evening, to enjoy the benefit of a
cool and fragrant air, and the serenity and beauty of those rural scenes which
have a powerful tendency to soothe and tranquillize the mind. When I had
rambled in the fields, to a considerable distance, I crossed into the road, to
return home free from the inconvenience of the dew, which had begun to fall.

I had not proceeded far, when I observed a female, who had the appearance of
youth and misfortune, sitting by the wall in a pensive attitude, with an infant
in her lap. When I approached her, she arose, and in the most humble and
pathetic accents, besought me to direct her to some shelter, where she might
repose her weary limbs for the night. The aspect and language of distress
awakened my compassion. To know she really needed charity, was a sufficient
inducement with me to bestow it, without scrupulously inquiring whether she
deserved it or not. I therefore told her to follow me, and I would conduct her
to a lodging.

As we walked on, I questioned her respecting the place of her nativity, her
parentage, and the reason of her being reduced to the situation in which I had
found her. She informed me that she was born in Ireland; that her parents
brought her into this country, before her remembrance; that while she was very
young, they both died, and left her to the protection and mercy of strangers;
that she was bandied from one to another, in the village where Providence had
cast her lot, till she was able to earn her own living: "and since that time,"
said she, "I believe the character of an honest and industrious girl will not
be refused me." How then, said I, came you by this encumbrance? pointing to the
child. "In that," replied she, "I am verily guilty. Brought up in ignorance of
those principles of decency, virtue and religion, which have kept you innocent,
Madam, I was ruined by a deceitful man, who, under the mask of love, and with
the most solemn promises of marriage, betrayed my confidence, and left me to
reap the bitter fruits of my credulity. The woman where I lived, when she
discovered my situation, ordered me to leave her house immediately. It was no
matter, said she, how much I suffered, or what became of me. On my own head,
she told me, my iniquity should fall; she would not lighten the burden, if it
were in her power.

"Some of the neighbors informed me, that she had reason to be severe upon my
fault, being once in the same condemnation herself.

"Having no friend who could assist me, I applied to the selectmen of the town,
who provided for me till I was able to work, and then told me I must shift for
myself; offering, however, to keep the child, which I refused, being determined
it should never suffer for want of a mother's care, while I had life.

"I am now wandering in pursuit of employment, that the labor of my hands may
support myself and little one. This has been often denied me, either for fear
my child should be troublesome, or because my character was suspected. I have
sometimes suffered so much from fatigue and want, that I have despaired of
relief, and heartily wished both myself and my babe in the grave."

On examination, I found her knowledge confined entirely to domestic drudgery;
that she had never been taught either to read or write. She appears,
notwithstanding, to have good natural sense; and a quickness of apprehension,
and readiness of expression, seldom equalled in her sphere of life.

I conducted her into the kitchen, and desired she might have supper, and a bed
provided for her. My mamma, whose benevolent heart and liberal hand are always
ready to relieve the necessitous, was pleased to approve my conduct; and having
kept her through the next day, and observed her disposition and behavior,
hired her as a servant; and we have reason to believe, from her apparent
fidelity and grateful exertions, that our kindness will be well repaid. I have
even extended my charity further, and undertaken to teach her to read. She is
very tractable; and I expect to be amply rewarded for my labor, by her
improvements.

Indeed, Matilda, it is melancholy to see our fellow creatures reared up, like
the brute creation; neither instructed how to live above their animal
appetites, nor how to die as Christians, when they have finished their toilsome
career!

This girl is only seventeen. Her age, therefore, as well as her docility and
submissiveness, encourage the pleasing hope of restoring her to the paths of
rectitude and peace. I shall endeavor, as opportunity offers, to instill into
her susceptible mind, the principles of virtue and religion; and, perhaps, I
may lead her to the love and practice of both, and render her a useful member
of society. Her fate impresses, more forcibly than ever, on my mind, the
importance of a good education, and the obligations it confers. Had you or I
been subjected to the same ignorance, and the same temptations, who can say
that we should have conducted better? How many fall for want of the directing
hand of that parental love and friendship, with which we are blessed!
Contrasting our situation with here is, how much have we to account for, and how
inexcusable shall we be, if we violate our duty, and forfeit our dignity, as
reasonable creatures!

That extreme bitterness and acrimony, which is sometimes indulged, against
persons who are unhappily seduced from the way of virtue, may operate as a
discouragement to all designs and endeavors to regain it: whereas, the
soothing voice of forgiveness, and the consequent prospect of being restored to
reputation and usefulness, might rouse the attention, and call forth the
exertions of some, at least, who, through despair of retrieving their
characters, abandon themselves to vice, and adopt a course, alike disgraceful
to their sex, and to human nature.

But, though I advocate the principles of philanthropy and Christian charity,
as extending to some very special cases, I am far from supposing this fault
generally capable of the least extenuation. Whatever allowance may be made for
those, whose ignorance occasions their ruin, no excuse can be offered for
others, whose education, and opportunities for knowing the world and
themselves, have taught them a better lesson.

I need not, however, be at the pains to enforce this truth upon you: and, as
my head is so full of the subject, that I have no disposition to write upon any
thing else, I will put an end to this incoherent scroll, by annexing the name
of your sincere and faithful friend,

MARIA WILLIAMS.

To Miss CAROLINE LITTLETON.
BOSTON. DEAR CAROLINE,
HAPPENING to be in my chamber, this morning, the maid came running up stairs
in such violent haste, as to put herself fairly out of breath. Will you be so
kind, Miss Sophia, said she, as to lend me a quarter of a dollar? I put my hand
into my pocket, and found I had no small change. I have nothing less than a
dollar, Susan, said I; but, if it is a matter of consequence to you, I will go
to my mamma, and procure it for you. She was loath to give me that trouble;
but, if I would, it would really oblige her very much indeed. Her solicitude
excited my curiosity. Will you inform me what you want it for? said I. O yes;
she believed it was no harm -- But there was a woman in the wood-house, who
told fortunes; and she wished to know here is, but could not without the money. A
woman who tells fortunes! said I. What fortunes? the past, or the future? The
future, to be sure, Ma'am, rejoined she. Ay, how does she know them? said I.
Has she been let into the secret designs of Providence? or can she divine the
mysteries of fate? She tells fortunes by cards, Ma'am, said she; and I really
believe she tells true. Can you imagine, said I, that a knowledge of your
destiny in life, is to be gained from any possible arrangement of a pack of
cards? Why not, Ma'am? Many people have been told exactly what was to happen.
You may depend on it, Susan, said I, you are deceived. The Almighty, who
disposes all events according to his sovereign pleasure, does not unveil
futurity to mortals, especially to such mortals, who, by an idle vicious course
of life, counteract his laws, and disregard his authority. I would willingly
give you the money, twice told, if you needed it; but I cannot consent to your
being imposed on, by this worthless vagrant, who has no other design than to
pick your pocket.

The girl departed at these words; and, though I felt an emotion of regret at
refusing to gratify her, yet my reason and conscience forbad my being accessory
to the fraud.

This curiosity to explore the hidden counsels of the Most High, prevails not
only among servants, but even many, from whom better things might be expected,
are under its infatuating influence.

The Supreme Being has, for wise and benevolent reasons, concealed from us the
future incidents of our lives. A humble reliance on his power and goodness,
accompanied with a cheerful submission to the dispensations of his providence,
is what the Lord our God requires of us.

I have heard my mamma relate an anecdote of a particular friend of here is, who
was imposed on very seriously in this way.

A gentleman, whom I shall call Sylvander, was very deeply in love with her;
but his person, and, much more, his disposition and manners, were extremely
disgusting to her. Averse to the very idea of a connection with him, she
accordingly refused his addresses. Yet he had art sufficient to interest her
friends in his behalf; who, pitying his situation, endeavored to soften the
heart of the obdurate fair. But in vain they strove to conciliate her
affections.

In defiance of all opposition, however, he incessantly obtruded his visits,
till she reluctantly admitted them; and being somewhat coquettish, she at times
received him more benignly; which flattered his hopes of ultimately
accomplishing his wishes. Finding his ardent suit of but little avail, and
perceiving that he made but small progress toward gaining her favor, he had
recourse to art. Surprising her, one day; in close confabulation with a
fortune tellers, the idea immediately struck him, that he might effect, through
this mean, what all his assiduity and solicitations could never insure. He
communicated his plan to a female friend, who was equally the confident of both
parties. Directed by him, she conversed with Sylvia on the subject; professed
her belief in the skill of these jugglers; and appeared desirous of taking this
measure to learn her fate. Sylvia joined in her opinion and wishes; and away
they tripped together on the important errand. Meanwhile, Sylvander had been to
the fellow who was to reveal their destinies; and, bribing him to favor the
design, left him, instructed what answers to make to their interrogations.

They arrived, and proposed their business. The mediums of information, a pack
of cards, were brought forth, and mysteriously arranged. Sylvia's curiosity was
on tip-toe. She listened with profound attention to his oracular wisdom; and
believed him really inspired, when he told her, that her former lover, for whom
she had a great regard, was gone to a foreign country. This she knew to be
true, and therefore gave him full credence, when he added, that he would never
live to return; and when he proceeded still further to observe, that another
gentleman of great merit now courted her; that she was not fond of his
addresses, but would soon see his worth and her own error; give him her hand,
and be happy.

In short, he so artfully blended the past and present, which she knew, with
the future which Sylvander wished, and had therefore dictated, that she was
firmly persuaded he dealt with some invisible power, and that fate had, indeed,
predestined her to the arms of Sylvander. Convinced of this, she attended to
his overtures more placidly, contemplated his person and endowments with less
aversion, and endeavored to reconcile herself to the unavoidable event.

This she effected; and not long after, he obtained her in marriage, and
triumphed in the success of his duplicity.

In process of time, her other lover returned. Disappointment and despair
presided in his breast. He saw Sylvia, upbraided her with her inconstancy, and
declared himself utterly ruined. Pity and returning love operated in her mind,
and rendered her completely wretched. She most severely condemned her own
folly, in listening to the dictates of a misguided curiosity; and acknowledged
herself justly punished, for presuming to pry into the secret designs of Heaven.

These strolling pretenders to foreknowledge are peculiarly dangerous to the
weak-minded and credulous part of the community; and how it happens that they
are ever encouraged, is to me inconceivable. Did they actually give the
information they promise, how much reason should we have to avoid them! How
many sources of grief would be opened, by the anticipation of future evils, of
which, now, we have no apprehension! and how often should we be deprived of the
consolatory hope of a speedy deliverance from present sufferings!

With every sentiment of respect and affection, I am most sincerely yours.

SOPHIA MANCHESTER.

To Miss ANNA WILLIAMS.
BOSTON. DEAR ANNA,
A MOST melancholy and distressing event has spread a gloom over the face of
the metropolis. Every heart heaves the sympathetic sigh, and every eye drops
the tear of regret. The very sudden death of Doctor Clarke, who was seized with
an apoplectic fit, in the midst of his sermon, yesterday afternoon, and expired
this morning, is a subject of universal lamentation.

Not only we, who had the happiness to sit under his ministry, and to enjoy his
particular friendship and attention, but the whole town; and, indeed, the
public at large have sustained a great loss in his departure. Amiable in his
disposition, engaging in his manners, and benevolent in his whole deportment,
he conciliated the affections of every class. His talents as a scholar,
philosopher, and divine, commanded the respect of the most judicious and
learned; while the elegance, perspicuity and delicacy of his style, joined with
the undissembled seriousness of his manner, rendered him uniformly acceptable
to the devout. In every condition and relation of life, he was exemplary as a
Christian; and as a preacher, an air of persuasion invariably accompanied him,
which arrested the attention of the most heedless auditors.

-- "By him, in strains as sweet
As angels use, the gospel whispered peace*
Grave, simple and sincere; in language plain;
And plain in manner. Decent, solemn, chaste,
And natural in gesture. Much impressed
Himself, as conscious of his awful charge,
And anxious mainly that the flock he fed
Might feel it too. Affectionate in look,
And tender in address, as well becomes
A messenger of grace to guilty men."
He was particularly attractive to young people. While he charmed their ear, he
convinced their understanding, and excited them to the love and practice of
virtue.

A striking example of this occurred some years ago, which I will take the
liberty to relate. He preached in a neighboring church on these words, "She
that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives." 1 Timothy, v.6.
In this discourse he painted those allurements of pleasure which surround the
young and gay; more especially of our sex, in the most just and lively colors.
He represented, in pathetic, engaging and refined language, the snares to which
they are exposed, and the most probable means of escaping them. He exhibited,
with all their attractions, the native charms of virtue, and pourtrayed vice in
its true deformity. He described, in the most animating terms, the
respectability, usefulness, and happiness of those who undeviatingly adhere to
the path of rectitude and innocence; and, with tbe most energetic and
affectionate tenderness, warned the youth to avoid the devious walks of vice
and dissipation.

A number of young ladies, who had been his hearers, happening to be together
in the evening, united in the wish to express their gratitude to him; but not
having a personal acquaintance with him, could devise no better method than
writing. The following anonymous letter was accordingly penned by one of the
company, and privately conveyed to the Doctor, at the request of all.

BOSTON. REVEREND SIR,
THE well known candor of your disposition, and your apparent zeal for the
promotion of religion and virtue, embolden us to flatter ourselves, that you
will pardon this method of conveying to you our sincere and united thanks for
your very seasonable, judicious, and useful discourse, delivered last Sunday
morning, at our meeting.

It is much to be lamented, that the depravity of the age is such, as to render
sermons of this nature just and necessary; and it is almost matter of equal
regret, that we have so seldom opportunities of being benefited by them.

That we oftener hear than receive instruction, is a truth which can neither be
denied, nor evaded; and can only be accounted for, by that passionate fondness
for pleasure, which prevails to such a degree of enthusiasm, as to precipitate
its votaries into whatever presents itself under this deluding aspect, without
considering whether it be durable, or fleeting.

It is certainly a most humiliating reflection, that our sex (which is the
female) should ever take more pains to gain the qualifications of agreeable
triflers than of rational friends; or be more anxious to become amusing, than
useful companions. But, Sir, does not such conduct in ladies too often receive
the most flattering encouragement from the gentlemen? How seldom is intrinsic
merit distinguished; and the serious, prudent female preferred, even by those
who style themselves men of sense and penetration, to the airy flaunting
coquette!

The constant attention which is paid to those who make the gayest appearance,
and the applause which is lavished upon her who has the largest portion of
external graces and fashionable embellishments, induce many who entertain the
good-natured desire of pleasing, to bestow more of their time and care on the
cultivation of those superficial accomplishments, which they find necessary to
render them acceptable to most circles into which they fall, than upon the
acquisition of those substantial virtues, which they daily see neglected and
ridiculed; though, at the same time, perhaps, they are convinced of the
superior satisfaction which the latter would afford.

But it is needless for one sex to criminate the other. We allow, that,
generally speaking, they are equally to blame. In this instance, however, as
the male assume the prerogative of superior judgment and intellectual
abilities, they ought to prove the justice of their claim by setting nobler
examples, and by endeavoring to reform whatever tends to vitiate the taste and
corrupt the morals of society.

Yet, after all, the evil cannot be effectually remedied, but by the concurrent
exertions of both: and we are humbly of opinion, that if this reformation were
more frequently inculcated from the pulpit, in the delicate, engaging, and
pious manner of the discourse which now excites our gratitude to you, and our
resolutions to conduct accordingly, it would be efficacious in bringing about
so desirable an event.

We entreat your pardon, Reverend Sir, for the freedom, prolixity, and errors
of this epistle.

Though personally unknown to you, we doubt not you will readily grant it, when
we assure you, that we are actuated by a sincere regard to the interests of
religion and morality, and by a grateful sense of your exertions in the
glorious cause.

The united sentiments of a number of young ladies, who heard and admired your
sermon, last Sunday morning, are expressed above.

Rev. JOHN CLARKE.




It is much to be regretted, that Dr. Clarke did not publish more of his
literary labors.

The universal approbation bestowed upon those, which he suffered to see the
light, is an unequivocal evidence of his merit, as an author. His "Letters to a
Student in the University of Cambridge," are written in a most pleasing style,
and contain instruction and advice, of which no person in pursuit of a public
education ought to be ignorant. His "Answer to the question, Why are you a
Christian?" which has already had three editions in Boston, and three in
England, is one of the best compendiums of the external and internal evidences
of our holy religion, extant. It is plain and intelligible to the lowest
capacity, and may enable every one without much study, to give a reason for the
hope that is in him.

From these specimens we may form an opinion of what the world has lost by his
early exit.

I shall make no other apology for the length of this letter, than the interest
which I feel in the subject; and this, I am persuaded, you will deem sufficient.

My affectionate regards wait on your mamma and sister, while I subscribe
myself yours most sincerely,

JULIA GREENFIELD.

To Miss CLEORA PARTRIDGE.
BEVERLY. DEAR CLEORA,
THE shortness of time is a very common subject of complaint; but I think the
misuse of it, a much more just one. Its value is certainly under-rated by those
who indulge themselves in morning sloth.

Sweet, indeed, is the breath of morn; and after the body has been refreshed by
the restoring power of sleep, it is peculiarly prepared to procure and
participate the pleasures of the mind. The jarring passions are then composed,
and the calm operations of reason succeed of course; while

" -- Gentle gales,
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
These balmy spoils."
The morning is undoubtedly a season, of all others, most favorable to useful
exertions. Those, therefore, who lose three or four hours of it, in slumbering
inaction, make a voluntary sacrifice of the best part of their existence. I
rose today, not with the sun, but with the dawn; and after taking a few turns
in the garden, retired to the summer house. This, you know, is a favorite hour
with me.

"To me be nature's volume broad displayed;
And to peruse its all-instructing page,
Or, happily catching inspiration thence,
Some easy passage, raptured, to translate,
My sole delight; as through the falling glooms
Pensive I stray, or with the rising dawn
On fancy's eagle-wing excursive soar."
Having a memorandum-book and pencil in my pocket, I descended from the lofty
heights to which the immortal bard, my beloved Thompson, had insensibly raised
my imagination, to the humble strains of simple rhyme, in order to communicate
my sensations to you. These I enclose, without attempting to tell you, either
in prose or verse, how affectionately I am yours.

MATILDA FIELDING.
THE morning dawns, the russet gray
Slowly avoids the opening day:
Receding from the gazing eye,
The misty shades of twilight fly.
The ruddy streaks of light appear,
To guide our western hemisphere;
While tuneful choirs responsive join
To praise the gracious Power Divine,
Whose mighty hand, with sovereign sway,
Restores, alternate, night and day.
Hail, opening morn! thy sober rays
Demand the contemplative gaze;
Unnumber'd beauties please the sight,
And give the mental eye delight.
O dawn! thy sombre shades I love;
With thee in solitude I Will rove;
While health expansive gives the mind
To taste thy pleasures unconfined.
Here, free from fashions artful forms,
Benevolence the bosom warms;
Persuasive virtue charms the soul,
And reason's laws alone control.
Let others, lost in sloth, forego
The joys thy early hours bestow;
Thy zephyrs far more sweets dispense,
Than Somnus yields to drowsy sense!
Mild as thy beams of radiance shine,
May piety my powers refine;
Pure as thy mimic pearls, that spread
Their liquid beauties over the mead;
And, like yon rising orb of day,
May wisdom guide my dubious way.


To Miss MATILDA FIELDING.
HARMONY-GROVE. DEAR MATILDA,
I WAS, last week, at Boston; and, having occasion for a new hat, stepped into
a milliner's shop to inquire the mode. The milliner replied, that it was not
yet in her power to answer my question. "The spring ships," said she "are later
than common; but their arrival is hourly expected, when we shall be furnished
with memorandum-books which will ascertain and determine the fashion for the
season." What she meant by memorandum-books, I could not conceive. I had always
supposed them blanks, designed for noting whatever occurred, without
inconvenience. Unwilling, however, to be thought a simple country-girl, totally
unacquainted with the world, I sought no explanation from her; but repaired to
a particular friend for instruction. From whom I learned that the chief value
of these same memorandum-books consists in their containing imported cuts of
ladies' head-dresses, hats, and other habiliments, which are always sure to be
admired and imitated, as the perfection of taste and propriety!

This discovery mortified me exceedingly. It justified, beyond any thing which
I had ever suspected to exist as a fact, what I once heard a European assert,
"that Americans had neither character nor opinion of their own."

With due deference to those better judges, who despise the simplicity of our
ancestors, and labor to introduce the corrupt manners and customs of the old
world into our country, I cannot but think it extremely ridiculous for an
independent nation, which discards all foreign influence, glories in its
freedom, and boasts of its genius and taste, servilely to ape exotic fashions,
even in articles of dress and fanciful ornaments.

Have not the daughters of Columbia sufficient powers of invention to decorate
themselves? Must we depend upon the winds and waves for the form, as well as
the materials of our garb? Why may we not follow our own inclination; and not
be deemed finical or prudish in our appearance, merely because our habit is not
exactly correspondent with the pretty pictures in the memorandum-books, last
imported?

It is sincerely to be regretted that this subject is viewed in so important a
light. It occupies too much of the time, and engrosses too much of the
conversation of our sex. For one, I have serious thoughts of declaring
independence.

ANNA WILLIAMS.

To Miss CAROLINE LITTLETON. [On the Death of her Mother.]
HARMONY-GROVE. MY DEAR CAROLINE,
TO tell you that I am sorry for your loss, or that I sympathize with you in
your affliction, would be but the language you daily hear; and often, perhaps,
from the unfeeling and indifferent. But you will do me the justice to believe,
that I take a particular interest in your concerns, and really share your
grief. A holy Providence has wounded you by a stroke, which is extremely
painful and severe. Your best friend is shrouded in the grave. In the maternal
breast, your fondest affections, and most unsuspecting confidence have hitherto
concentred; and who can provide you with an equivalent substitute? To the
almighty Father and Friend of creation, it becomes you to repair for comfort
and support.

The dying advice and counsel of your dear mamma, which, you inform me, were
pathetic, instructive and consolatory, will be a guide to your feet. Often
realize the solemn scene, and remember, that, "though dead, she yet speaks."

You have great cause of thankfulness, that she was spared to direct you so far
through the intricate and dangerous path of youth; to complete your education;
to teach you, by her example, how to acquit yourself with usefulness and honor;
and, above all, to furnish you with that important knowledge, to which every
thing else should be made subservient -- how to die!

An era of your life has now commenced, which is no less important than
affecting. That assisting hand, which formerly led you, is now cold and
lifeless! Those lips, from which you have been accustomed to receive
information and advice, are sealed in perpetual, silence! And that heart, which
always glowed with the warmest solicitude for your happiness, has ceased to
palpitate!

You must now think and act for yourself. As the eldest daughter, you will be
placed at the head of your father's family. You must, therefore, adopt a plan
of conduct, conducive to its harmony, regularity, and interest.

Filial duty to your surviving parent, more tenderly inculcated by your
participation of his heavy bereavement, will lead you to consult his
inclination, and sedulously contribute all in your power to lighten the burden
of domestic arrangements devolved upon him. While he laments the death of a
prudent, affectionate, and beloved wife, give him reason to rejoice, that he is
blessed with a daughter, capable of soothing the pains, alleviating the cares,
and heightening the enjoyments of his life.

Your brothers and sisters will look up to you as the guide of their tender
years. While their weeping eyes and pathetic accents are directed toward you,
let kindness, discretion, and patience, characterize your deportment, and
engage their confidence and love.

Having mentioned your duty to others, I cannot dismiss the subject without
dropping a few hints for your direction, in regard to your personal behavior.

A very important charge is committed to you, as well in the duties which you
owe to yourself, as in the superintendence of your father's family.

The sovereign Disposer of all things has, at an early age, made you, in a
measure, your own guardian. Your father's business calls him much abroad. With
you, therefore, he is obliged to entrust, not only his domestic concerns; but,
what is still more dear to his heart, the care of your own person and mind; of
your own reputation and happiness.

Circumstanced as you are, company has the most powerful charms. Yours is now
the prerogative of receiving and returning visits in your own name. At home,
you are sole mistress of ceremonies. This is extremely alluring to the
sprightly fancy of youth. But time, you will remember, is too important a
blessing to be sacrificed to a promiscuous crowd of unimproving companions.
Besides, the character of a young lady will necessarily be sullied by the
imputation of being constantly engaged in parties of pleasure, and exhilarating
amusement. Flattery often avails itself of the unguarded moments of gaiety;
and, insinuating its insidious charms into the heedless and susceptible mind,
inflates it with pride and vanity, and produces an affectation and air of
self-importance, which are peculiarly disgusting, because easily distinguished
from that true dignity of manners, which results from conscious rectitude.
Genuine merit is always modest and unassuming; dissident of itself, and
respectful to others.

Your father has a right to your unlimited confidence. You will, therefore,
make him your chief friend and counselor. Though he may not possess all the
winning softness of a mother, he doubtless has as ardent an affection for you,
and as sincere a desire to promote your welfare. Hence you may safely repose
your dearest concerns in his paternal breast, and receive, with the utmost
deference, his kind instruction and advice. Let his judgment have an entire
ascendency over your mind and actions, especially in your intercourse and
society with the other sex. Consider him as better acquainted with their merit,
circumstances, and views, than you can be; and, should you contemplate a
connection for life, let his opinion determine your choice.

Watch over your dear little sisters, with all the tenderness of fraternal
affection; be their protecttor and friend; instill into their minds the
principles of virtue and religion; arm them against the snares and temptations
by which they will be surrounded; and lead them, by your own conduct, in the
way of truth and peace.

When you have leisure and inclination to write, the effusions of your pen will
always be acceptable to your sincere and faithful friend,

MARY WILLIAMS.

THE END.

