A JOURNAL, OF THE CAPTIVITY AND SUFFERINGS OF JOHN FOSSE; SEVERAL YEARS A
PRISONER IN ALGIERS:

TOGETHER WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE TREATMENT OF CHRISTIAN SLAVES WHEN SICK: --
AND OBSERVATIONS ON THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE ALGERINES.

Published according to Act of Congress.

NEWBURYPORT: PRINTED BY A. MARCH, MIDDLE-STREET

To the Public.
MAN seldom undertakes a more difficult, or at least a more disagreeable task,
than that of relating incidents of his own life, especially where they are of a
remarkable or singular nature. And he must be fortunate indeed, who does it
without having his veracity called in question by the ignorant or censorious.

The following narrative (extracted from a Journal kept merely for the writer's
satisfaction, and without the most distant idea of its ever being made public)
contains a simple statement of facts, which can be attested to by many living
evidences this day in America. It is now published at the repeated and urgent
solicitations of some esteemed friends -- confident that the candid reader will
pardon the inadvertent inaccuracies of an illiterate mariner.

The tears of sympathy will flow from the humane and feeling, at the tale of
the hardships and sufferings of their unfortunate fellow countrymen, who had
the misfortune to fall into the hands of the Algerines -- whose tenderest
mercies toward Christian captives, are the most extreme cruelties; and who are
taught by the Religion of Mahomet (if that can be called a Religion which leads
men to the commission of such horrid and bloody deeds) to persecute all its
opposers.

In this work I have not attempted a full description of the many hellish
tortures and punishments those piratical sea-rovers invent and inflict on the
unfortunate Christians who may by chance unhappily fall into their hands -- my
design being principally confined to narrate in as concise a view as possible,
some important matters of fact that occurred, during our long, tedious and
cruel captivity.

As some may inquire what opportunities could be obtained for writing a journal
under such severe captivity; I would here observe, that I wrote in the night,
while in the Bagnio or prison, after our daily labor was over, the principal
events of the day, merely to amuse and relieve my mimd from the dismal
reflections which naturally occurred -- that I could have no inducement to
exaggerate our sufferings, not supposing my narrative would ever be seen here
-- these circumstances being known, I flatter myself the facts herein stated
will not often be called in question.

Sincerely wishing that none of my fellow-citizens may ever be so unhappy as to
experience the miseries of Algerine slavery, I commend the following to their
candor and patronage.

J. Fosse.

A JOURNAL, etc.
ON Saturday the 27th of July, 1793, I sailed from Newburyport in the State of
Massachusetts, in the capacity of a Mariner, on board the Brig Polly, belonging
to the above mentioned place, Samuel E. Bayley, Master, bound to Baltimore,
expecting to take a freight from thence for the Island of Tobago.

On Tuesday the 6th of August, were brought too by a French privateer, and
permitted immediately to proceed on our voyage. Being then in sight of the
Capes of Virginia, we took on board a pilot, and stood in for the Chesapeak.

Wednesday the 7th of August, we entered the Capes, and were until Saturday the
10th, before we arrived at Baltimore, and found on our arrival, that the
freight, which Capt. Bayley expected, was embarked and sailed on board another
vessel. -- Nothing particular happened, until Monday 19th when we were ordered
by the capt. to discharge the ballast, and were informed by him, that he had
agreed for a freight for Cadiz.

Thursday 29th, Paul Noyes, one of our mariners, was attacked with a severe
fever, and continued on board, until Monday the 9th September, when he was
carried on shore, and put under the care of a woman, who was well qualified for
attending sick people: And I understand he died in a few days after our
departure. Tuesday the 10th, we sailed from Baltimore, bound to Cadiz; and on
Friday the 13th we left sight of the Capes of Virginia. Nothing of any moment
happened, until Thursday 24th of October, when we fell in with, and spoke two
brigs from Elsinore, bound to Barcelona. On Friday 25th early in the morning we
saw the same brigs about two miles to windward standing on their larboard tack,
with the wind, about E. N. E.

We got our breakfast, and eat it in the greatest jollity, not apprehending any
danger nigh, and expecting to reach the port of our destination within 48
hours; As we judged ourselves to be about 35 leagues westward of Cape St.
Vincent. At nine A. M. we saw a strange sail bearing about F. N. E. and
standing directly for the two Danish brigs: We then discovered (with a prospect
glass) that she had boarded them; that she had the English Flag displayed at
her peak. We supposed her to be an English Privateer; she soon dismissed them,
and then bore down upon us. By this time we could see that she was a Brig; and
discerned by the cut of her sails, that she was not an English vessel, although
she had still the English flag flying; we then supposed her to be a French
Privateer, hoisting the English flag to deceive their enemy. We immediately
clued down top gallant sails, and hove too in order to wait 'till she came
along side. -- When she came near enough to make us hear, she hailed us in
English, asked from whence we came, and were bound; which was immediately
answered by Capt. Bayley. The man who hailed us, was dressed in the Christian
habit, and he was the only person we could yet see on her deck. By this time
the Brig was under our stern, we then saw several men jump upon her poop, to
hall aft the main sheet, and saw by their dress, and their long beard, that
they were Moors, or Algerines. Our feelings at this unwelcome sight, are more
easily imagined than described: She then hove too under our lee, when we heard
a most terrible shouting, clapping of hands, huzzaing, etc. And saw a great
number of men rise up with their beads above the gunnel, draft in the Turkish
habit, like them we saw on the poop. -- They immediately hoisted out a large
launch, and about one hundred of the Pirates, jumped on board, all armed; some,
with Scimitres and Pistols, others with pikes, spears lances, knives, etc. They
maned about 20 oars and rowed along side. As Soon as they came on board our
vessel, they made signs for us all to go forward, assuring us in several
languages, that if we did not obey their commands, they would immediately
massacre us all. They then went below into the cabin, steerage, and every place
where they could get below deck, and broke open all the Trunks and Chests,
there were on board, and plundered all our bedding, clothing, books, Charts,
Quadrants, and every moveable article, that did not consist of the Cargo, or
furniture. They then came on deck, and stripped the clothes off our backs, all
except a shirt and pair of drawers, (myself being left with no shirt at all.)
The next day an old Turk, with an air of kindness, gave me an old shirt without
sleeves, blaming those who had taken mine from me. It was soothing to find a
spark of humanity in my barbarous masters. -- Having chosen a sufficient number
of the Algerines to take command of the prize, they ordered us all into the
launch: and, when they were all embarked, they rowed along side their own
vessel, and ordered us on board. We embarked accordingly, and were conducted by
some of the sea-rovers to the door of the poop, at which place we were received
by a negro man, who conduced us into the cabin; when we entered the cabin, we
saw the commander of the Pirates, sitting upon a mat, on the cabin floor; who,
(with the help of an interpreter,) asked us many questions, concerning the
vessel, and cargo, the places of our nativity, and many others, as void of
sense as he was that asked them. He then informed us that he was an Algerine,
and his vessel belonged to Algiers, that her name was Babasera, and his name
was Raise Hudga Mahomet, Salamia, and we were his prisoners, and must
immediately experience the most abject slavery, on our arrival at Algiers,
which we soon found to be true. Our embarrassments were still greater, when we
found that they were Algerines (for before we supposed them to be moors;)
knowing, that the Algerines used the most severity (toward Christian captives)
of any state in all Barbary. He then informed that Charles Logie, Esquire. British
Consul at Algiers, had negociated with the Dey, for a truce with the
Portuguese, for the term of twelve months, and before that time was expired,
they would have a firm peace, and the Algerines could cruise in the atlantic
when they thought proper. He then told us we must do our duty as seamen on
board his vessel; We told him we had no clothes, for his people had taken
every thing from us except what he saw on our backs, which was not sufficient
for us to stand the deck with. He answered in very abusive words, that we might
think ourselves well used that they did not take them. -- And he would teach us
to work naked. And ordered us immediately to our duty.

When we came out of the cabin, we saw the Polly, just making sail, and
standing after us, and that night we lost sight of her, and saw her no more
until our arrival at Algiers. About sunset they brought us a dish of Oil,
Olives, and Vinegar, and some bread, and told us, to eat heartily, while we
were on board, for after our arrival at Algiers, we should not be allowed such
dainties. Although we were very hungry, we could eat but very little,
considering the situation we were in, and not being used to such diet. When we
set down to eat, we were accompanied by three Dutchmen, whom we had not seen
before. And on asking them the particulars of their being on board, they
informed us, that they sailed from Amsterdam, bound to Malaga three weeks,
before, on board the Ship Hope, belonging to New York, commanded by John
Burnham, and had been captured by an Algerine frigate, within ten leagues of
Gibraltar. And the frigate having taken several vessels; had a great number of
Christian captives on board, and the Capt. of the frigate, being fearful lest
they should make an attempt to rise upon the vessel, had distributed them on
board the other corsairs, which had not taken any prizes. After we had finished
our supper they divided us (twelve in number) into two watches, and ordered us
to stand the deck, in our respective watches. It fell to my lot to have the
first watch below, and as we went down they ordered us into the sail room to
sleep, and showed us the door. We were obliged to creep in, on our hands and
knees, and stow ourselves upon the sails, in the best manner we could. We
endeavored to get a little sleep, but could not as our minds were filled with
horror, and dreadful apprehensions of the fate we might experience, and
expecting additional severity on our arrival at Algiers. We lay in this unhappy
condition, bemoaning our hapless fate, until we supposed it to be past
midnight, and could not conceive the reason that the watch was not relieved, as
it is customary among Americans, and English. -- And being strangers to their
manner of relieving the watch, we supposed we had (innocently) neglected our
duty, which made us very uneasy, fearing the watch had been relieved, and we
not knowing it, they would inflict some corporal punishment. -- I then proposed
to my fellow sufferers, that I would go on deck, in order to know, whether they
had called the watch or not; but they advised me not to go, adding, that if the
watch was not called they might treat me very ill, for appearing on deck in the
night, when my duty did not call me there, we then resolved to wait 'till we
were called, and to bear patiently, our punishment if they inflicted any: We
waited in this suspense for near an hour longer, when I resolved to go on deck,
by myself, and know the issue, with this resolution, I crept upon my hands
knees, to the sail room door; on my appearance at the door, a Turk came to me,
armed with a Scimitre, and a pair of pistols, and made me to understand by
signs, that he wanted to know where I was going. I answered him in the same
manner, made him understand that necessity called me on deck. He then conducted
me to the hatchway, and spoke to some person on the deck, in his own language,
which I could not understand; and, pointing with his singer, I found I had
permission to go up. I accordingly went on deck, and was received by another
Turk, armed in the same manner he asked me in French, if I wished to go in the
head, which I answered in the affirmative. As I understood some French, and
could hold a tolerable discourse with him, I asked him if the watch was not
called, which he answered in the negative, and on asking him if it was not past
twelve o'clock, he told me it was past two. And on enquiring the manner of
their standing a watch, he informed me, that they kept ten hours for one watch;
that it commenced at 8 o'clock in the evening and continued until 6 in the
morning; then relieved, and kept 'till 4 in the afternoon, and their dog watch
was from 4 in the afternoon, 'till 8, having only three watches in 24 hours. I
then, went below and informed my fellow sufferers of what had passed, which
gave them great satisfaction to think we had not committed an innocent offense,
as before we feared we had done. We were happy in being freed from the terrors
of punishment. -- We then made ourselves as easy and comfortable as we could,
considering the deplorable situation we were in. But could not sleep any the
remainder of the night, for by this time, the vermin, such as lice, bugs, and
fleas, had found their way to our apartment, and in such quantity that it
seemed as if we were entirely covered with those unwelcome guests.

However we passed the remainder of the night, in condoling our miserable
condition, and rubbing those vermin from our bodies, in the best manner we
could. At 6 A M. we were surprised by three heavy knocks, we heard on the deck,
and with such force, that it seemed as if they endeavored to knock the deck to
pieces, and not hearing any thing said, we could not imagine the meaning; we
lay a few minutes, and were then called by a Turk, and ordered on deck, and
were informed, that that was their fashion of calling the watch, which office
is generally performed by the Boatswain, or one of his mates, in the following
manner. A large block is laid on the deck, near the hatchway, and struck upon
with a very large beetle, which makes such a horrid noise, as nearly sufficient
to stun the brain of a strong headed person, and which was the cause of our
surprise before mentioned. This being Saturday, the 26th October. -- We passed
the rock of Gibraltar on Monday the 28th and nothing of any consequence,
happened on our passage to Algiers, spoke several vessels, but none proved to
be their enemies. We having a very fresh breeze from the W. we arrived at
Algiers, on Friday the 1st. of November.

After they had brought their vessel to an anchor in the roads, they hoisted
out their boats and ordered us to embark, and to lay ourselves down in the
bottom of the boat: And having obeyed their commands, we were rowed on shore,
and landed, amidst the shouts and huzzas, of thousands of malicious barbarians.
We were conducted to the Dey's palace, by a guard, and as we passed through the
streets, our ears were stunned with the shouts, clapping of hands, and other
acclamations of joy from the inhabitants, thanking God for their great success,
and victories over so many Christian dogs, and unbelievers, which is the
appellation they generally give to all christians. On our arrival at the gates
of the Palace, we were received by another guard, and conducted before the Dey,
who after taking a view of us, told us he had sent several times to our
Government, entreating them, to negociate with him for a peace, and had never
received any satisfactory answer from them. And that he was determined, never
to make a peace with the United States, (in his reign) as they had so often
neglected his requests, and treated him with disdain, adding "now I have got
you, you Christian dogs, you shall eat stones." He then picked out four boys to
wait upon himself, in the palace, as follows, Benjamin Church, Benjamin Ober,
Charles Smith, and John Ramsey, and then ordered the rest of us to be conducted
to the prison Bilic. When we arrived there, we found several other Americans,
who landed a little before us, and they informed us that the Corsairs had
captured ten sail of American vessels, and that their Captains and crews were
chiefly in the same prison.

After condoling our hapless fate, for a considerable time; a French priest
came to us and enquired, if any among us understood the French language, and
was answered in the affirmative. After conversing sometime with the person who
spoke French, he left us, and told us he should return in a few minutes. About
half an hour afterward he returned, and two moors with him, who brought two
baskets full of white bread, and he gave each man, a loaf weighing nearly a
pound, which was a very delicious meal for us, we having eaten nothing during
the day, it now being about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. He likewise informed us
that it was a custom among those sons of rapine and plunder, not to allow the
slaves any kind of food on the first day of their landing, except one small
loaf of bread at night. And what we then received, he gave us, out of his own
pocket, and said if he was able, his charity would further extend. We thanked
our kind benefactor, and he took his leave of us, and left us. We then walked
from one part of the Bagnio to another, not knowing in what part we might be
allowed to remain. We wandered in this manner, bemoaning our deplorable
situation, 'till about 5 o'clock, when we saw (according to the best of our
judgment) about 600 men enter the Bagnio, -- all appearing to be in a more
miserable condition than ourselves, with wretched habits, dejected
countenances, and chains on their legs, every part of them bespeaking
unutterable distress. I enquired of the prison keeper, who those people were,
and of what crimes they had been guilty, that they were loaded with such heavy
chains. I was answered, that they were christian slaves, had been captured in
the same manner as myself, seeking an honest livelihood: A few minutes
afterward, we heard a man shouting out in a most terrible manner, and not
understanding his language, made it sound more terrible. -- We were immediately
informed by a man, who understood the English language, that all of us
(Americans) must appear in the third gallery. -- We made all haste up, we
possibly could, and as we entered the gallery, we passed one at a time* through
a narrow door, on one side of which stood a task-master, and on the other side
a christian slave. The former had a large stick in his hand, and the latter a
book, in which was written the names of all the Christian captives in that
prison. The christian asked each man his name, and then wrote it in the book,
and as we passed, the Turk gave each man a small bundle. On examining it, we
found it contained a blanket, a capoot, (which is a sort of jacket with a
head,) a waistcoat, made something like a frock, to draw on over the head, it
not being open at the belly, a shirt, with neither collar or wristbands, a pair
of Trowsers, made somewhat like a woman's petticoat, (with this difference,) the
bottom being sewed up, and two holes to put the legs through, and a pair of
slippers. There was neither button, or button-hole in the whole suit. Such a
suit excepting the blanket, of which they never get but one, is given to each
captive once a year. The day they receive this suit is on Friday ensuing
Christmas: And the first friday in January all the captives are obliged to go
about seven miles into the country, and gather reeds, and carry them to the
Dey's garden for Beans, Peace, etc. to run upon, and which is a very tedious
days work. -- At this season of the year the rains fall in abundance in that
country and renders the walking very disagreeable, as we do not follow the
road, but are obliged to cross fields, and meadows. -- The distance those reeds
must be carried is about eight miles. We go out at the easternmost gate (called
Babazoone,) and it is near 7 miles from said gate to the place where they are
gathered, and from thence they must be carried to the Dey's garden, which is
near a mile westward of the gate called Babel-wed which is the west gate of the
city.

I shall omit the particulars of the usage of the slaves at present and give an
account of our first nights lodging in this doleful mansion. Soon after we
received the above mentioned bundle, we were again called into the third
gallery, and passed in the same manner as before, and having our names called
by the clerk we passed the task master, and received each man a small loaf of
very black, sour bread weiging about three ounces and a half, which we ate,
although it was not so delicious as the bread we received from the french
priest. Having finished our supper, we lay down upon the stone floor, and went
to sleep, and made ourselves as comfortable, as we could, having neither bed,
nor beding, the blanket before mentioned but being very much fatigued, we slept
tolerably well until about three o'clock, when we were alarmed with a terrible
shouting* as before, and were all ordered to go down into the lower part of the
prison. When we arrived there, they put a chain on each man's leg, reaching up
to the shoulder, and weighing about 25 or 40 lb. This done, it now being day
break -- Saturday the 2d. Nov. we were all driven out of the Bagnio, and from
thence to the marine, where I experienced the hardest days work, I ever
underwent before. The dreadful clanking of the chains, was the most terrible
noise I ever heard. -- And never during my whole captivity did I feel such
horrors of mind, as on this dreadful morning. As it is not in my power to write
the particulars of each day of my captivity, (which would be too tedious to my
readers,) I only intend to give you a short narrative of some of the most
particular occurrences, which happened while I was in this abject slavery, and
the common labor, and usage of the slaves* which is as follows.

At day break in the morning, the Prison keeper calls all the slaves out to go
to work* and at the door of the Bagnio, they are met by the Guardians or
taskmasters (who have their orders from the Guardian Bachi, who is the master
of all the slaves that belong to the Regency) and we are conducted to whatever
place he has directed.

The greatest part of their work, is blowing rocks in the Mountains. While some
are drilling the holes, others are diging the earth off those rocks, which are
under it, and others carrying away the dirt in baskets. When the rocks are
blowed, they take such as will answer their purpose: (Rocks less than twenty
Tons weight, will not serve.) Many are hauled by the slaves, two miles
distance, which weigh forty tons. They roll them to the bottom of the mountain,
where is a convenient place to put them on a sled* from thence they are hauled
to a quay, about two miles distant, and left. Those rolled down the mountain
are left at the bottom, until Friday, (which is their Mohammedan Sabbath,) on
which day all the christian slaves belonging to the Regency, are driven out
haul them to the Quay. At day light in the morning they pass through the gates*
of the city, and arrive at the bottom of the mountain, sometime before sunrise.
On their arrival, they are divided by the taskmasters, into different gangs,
and each gang has one sled. They must haul as many in a day as the taskmasters
think proper, and are treated with additional rigor and severity on this day.
For the drivers being anxious to have as many hauled as possible, (because the
number they haul must be reported to the Dey.) -- they are continually beating
the slaves with their sticks, and goading them with its end, in which is a
small spear, not unlike an ox goad, among our farmers. If any one chance to
faint, and fall down with fatigue, they generally beat them until they are able
to rise again. The most Tyrannical guardian, or task-master, we had, during my
captivity, was known by the name of Sherief. This cruel villain never appeared
to be in his element, except when he was cruelly punishing some Christian
captive. In the month of April 1795. He and another task-master being sent with
20 slaves, to remove a pile of boards, which was in a magazine, upon the walls
of the city, and having beat several unmercifully without any provocation; an
American exclaimed (in the English Language, which the Turk did not understand)
"God, grant you may die, the first time you offer to abuse another man." A few
minutes afterward, as a slave was going upon some plank, which were laid from
the first wall to the second, having his load upon his back. Sherief thinking
he did not proceed as fast, as he might, ran, and endeavoring to strike him
missed his stroke, his stick gave him such a sudden jirk, that he fell from the
planks, between the walls, and was dashed to pieces.

Thus ended the days of a Godless wretch, apparently in a moment, swept away by
the devout breath of a suffering Christian.

When a slave is found to be so sick that he is incapable of doing any kind of
work, they then permit him to go to a hospital, until they think he can work
again.

This Hospital was erected by the Spaniards for the benefit of christian
slaves, in the year --, and is still maintained by them, when a slave goes in,
he is used very well by the doctors and priests. They generally allow three or
four doctors, and eight or ten priests to attend this hospital. The Doctors
order what is to be given to the patient, and the Priests prepare it. While a
slave is sick, he is no manner of expense to the Regency, for he is maintained
with victuals drink, medicine and attendance by the Spaniards; every morning
one of the taskmasters goes into the hospital to view the slaves, and if he
finds any one whom he thinks able to perform any kind of work, he drives him
out, not even asking the Doctors whether they think he is able or not. And
often times they are driven out in this manner, to work, and are obliged to
return within two or three hours to the hospital again, and often expire within
a few hours after their return.

A circumstance of this kind, happened on the 30th of January 1796. When one
Scipio Jackson, (a black man) had been for some time very sick, and was
recovering (to all appearance,) very fast; he had been able to walk the room,
but the day before, and was walking on the said morning when the task-master
came in, who on perceiving him walk, declared he was well, and ordered him to
the marine to work. He told the task-master he was not able, at which he gave
him several strokes with his stick saying if you are not able, I will make you
able, and drove him to the marine. The Doctors used their utmost endeavors to
dissuade him from it; all was to no purpose, he would not hearken to any thing
they said, but drove the poor man before him, to work. He did the best he could
for about half an hour, and then fell down insensible. Upon this he was again
sent to the hospital, expired at two o'clock in the afternoon, and was in his
grave before sunset.

At night when they have done hauling, all hands are called together, and have
their names called by the Clerk, and every one must pass the Guardian Bachi, as
his name is called. After they have done calling, and find that none are
missing they are driven by the taskmasters, into the city, and then left to go
to the Bagnio, by themselves, and must appear there within half an hour after
they must enter gates of the city. The roll is called every night in the
prison, a few minutes before the gates are locked. If any one neglects his
call, he is immediately put into irons hands and feet, and then chained to a
pillar, where he must remain until morning. Then the irons are taken from his
feet, and he is driven before a task-master, to the marine, and the Vigilhadge,
(who is the Minister of the marine) orders what punishment he thinks proper,
which is immediately inflicted, by the taskmasters. He commonly orders 150, or
200 Bastinadoes. The manner of inflicting this punishment is as follows, the
person is laid upon his face, with his hands in irons behind him and his legs
lashed together with a rope. -- One task-master holds down his head and another
his legs, while two others inflict the punishment upon his breech, with sticks,
some what larger than an ox goad. After he has received one half in this
manner, they lash his ancles to a pole, and two Turks lift the pole up, and
hold it in such a manner, as brings the soles of his feet upward* and the
remainder of his punishment, he receives upon the soles of his feet. Then he is
released from his bands, and obliged to go directly to work, among the rest of
his fellow slaves. There is several other punishments, for the christian
captives, for capital offenses. Sometimes they are burned, or rather roasted
alive. At other times they are impaled. This is done by placing the criminal
upon a sharp iron stake, and thrusting it up his posteriors, by his back bone
'till it appears at the back of his neck. For being found with a Mohammedan
woman he is beheaded, and the woman, is put into a sack and carried about a
mile at sea, and thrown overboard with a sufficient quantity of rocks, (or a
bomb) to sink her. For suspicion of being with them the slave is castrated, and
the woman bastinadoed.

A slave for murder of another slave, is immediately beheaded. But for murder
of a Mohammedan he is cast off from the walls of the city, upon iron hooks,
which are fastened into the wall about half way down. -- These catch by any
part of the body, that strikes them, and some times they hang in this manner in
the most exquisite agonies for several days before they expire. But should the
part that catches, not be strong enough to hold them (for sometimes the flesh
will tear out,) they fall to the bottom of the wall and are dashed in pieces.

Another punishment they have for slaves endeavoring to make their escape is,
they are nailed to the gallows, by one hand and the opposite foot, and in this
manner they expire, in the most undescribable torture. But this is not always
practiced for desertion, for sometimes they are only bastinadoed, at other
times they are beheaded. -- I never knew an instance of the former, during my
captivity. Though I have been an eye witness to the latter several times.

In the month of October 1793, fourteen slaves of different nations, made an
attempt to run away, with a boat, but were overtaken and brought back to
Algiers. When they were landed, the Dey ordered the steersman, and bowman, to
be beheaded, and the rest to receive 500 bastinadoes each, and to have a chain
of 50lb weight fastened to their leg for life, and a block of about 70lb. to
the end of that, which they were obliged to carry upon their shoulder when they
walked about to do their work. And those of them that were alive when I left
Algiers, (which was the 13th of July, 1796,) were still in this miserable
situation. When they are at work they lay the block down and can only work
within the length of their chain. When they have occasion to go further, they
must carry the block, to the place where the work calls them.

When a slave commits any crime, except murder, or speaking ill of their
religion or striking a Turk, if he can get into one of their Marabout Mosques,
they will not inflict any kind of punishment, except an additional chain upon
his leg, with a large block at its end.

A Turk is strangled for offenses capital, in the following manner. The
criminal is confined, with his back against a wall, in which is two holes,
right opposite the back of his neck, through which holes is reaved a rope with
the two ends on the opposite side, and the bite, or double of the rope comes
about the criminal's neck and when the two ends are knotted together, the
executioner puts a stick in and twists the rope, which brings it tight about
the criminal's neck, and he is soon dispatched. So the executioner does not see
the criminal while performing his office. This is counted the most honorable
death, for persons who are executed. And beheading the most ignominious. A moor
or arab convicted of theft, has sometimes his right hand cut off and hung
about his neck; Then he is led through the city upon an ass, with his face
toward the tail; but at other times they are hanged upon a tree, or bastinadoed.

A Turk is pardoned, let his crime be ever so capital, if he can get into one
of them before he is taken into custody. And those Marabout Mosques are an
asylum for persons of any religion whatever, having committed a small offense,
except the Jews, who would be burned if they were to offer to enter one of
them. Those Marabout Mosques, are particular Mosques, in which has been buried
a Marabout or Hermit, whom they account Saints. And their religion teaches them
to pardon a Mohammedan, having committed any crime whatever, if he flees to
those Saints for protection. When a Mohammedan, who has committed a crime, and
has taken to the Marabout, it is immediately reported to the Mufti, and he
reports it to the Dey, who sends a string of beads by the Mufti, to the keeper
of the Mosque, and the criminal then comes out. Though he might come out before
if he pleases, but should he leave the Mosque before the Mufti comes with the
beads, he would be liable to the same punishment he was before he had taken the
Marabout. The Mufti then returns with the beads, to the Dey, and they are laid
by, until some other similar occasion.

At the gates of the Deys Palace, there is a chain which is fastened at the top
of the gate, and at night the lower end is locked down, and any one that has
committed an offense, and can get hold of this chain before he is taken, it
serves the same purpose as the Marabout Mosque.

If a slave has been cheated by any Turk, Cologlie, Moor, Arab, Renegado, or
Jew, and he takes hold of this chain, and says he wants justice, one of the
principal officers of the Deys corpse of guards, goes to him and asks the
particulars of his being wronged; and who the person is that has wronged him
and justice is immediately done him. -- But should he give a wrong account, and
it be proved that he has not told the truth, he is immediately bastinadoed. If
it is a Jew that is complained of, and he is found guilty, he must make the
slave reparation and is bastinadoed.

I mentioned before, that on Friday, all the slaves work in the mountains, but
on other days only a part of them work there. They have commonly a part of the
captives at work in the marine. When they work in the marine, they have
different kinds of employ, Sometimes they are cleaning the corsairs, and
fitting them for fea. At other times they are striping them, and hauling them
up, discharging the prizes, cleaning the harbor, bringing those large rocks
before mentioned, from the quay, on board a large flat bottomed kind of vessel
which, they call a Puntoon, discharging them at back of the mole, with the help
of wheels. These rocks are laid there in order to break off the sea, that the
mole may not wash away, which must have a continual supply, for every gale of
wind that comes, washes them into the deep water. After a gale they have as
much need of them as they had the first hour after the mole was built. So we
may conclude this is a work that will never be finished. And every article that
is transported from one part of the Marine to another, or from the Marine to
the city or from the city to the marine, or elsewhere must be carried by the
slaves, with poles upon their shoulders. For the streets are so narrow that no
kind of carriage is used here, not even a wheelbarrow. In many streets it is
difficult for one man to pass another.

When their prizes are discharged, their cargo must be all carried into the
city, and stowed in Magazines, so that some part of the slaves are constantly
carrying, hogsheads of sugar, pipes of wine, casks of nails, cannon, etc. They
work from day break, in the morning, until a certain hour in the afternoon,
(which they call Laza) which is just half an hour before sunset, summer and
winter. At which time they hoist a white flag upon the mosques, to denote that
it is the hour of prayer, it being contrary to their religion to have a bell
found among them.

All the slaves at this hour, are ordered to leave work and go up to the gate,
called Babazia, which is the marine gate, and before they can pass, they are
searched by the taskmasters, to prevent their stealing any thing from the
Regency, and if they are found with any thing, (except a few chips,) they do
not escape punishment.

I have known a slave to receive 1^0 bastindoes for being found with three
board nails.

Having related the common labors and punishment of the slaves, I now proceed
to give you an account of the provisions they are allowed to subsist on, to
enable them to perform this laborious slavery. About eight o'clock in the
morning they are called by one of the taskmasters from their work to take
their breakfast. The order of receiving it, is as follows. When they are called
they all leave their work, and go near some sacks of bread. As they pass by,
they are counted by one of the drivers, while another gives each man a loaf of
bread. And to every eighth man he gives a wooden bowl with about a pint of
vinegar, in this manner they pass until all have received their allowance. They
then sit down upon the ground to eat, and are commonly called to work in about
ten minutes, and are seldom allowed more than twelve minutes. The same ceremony
is passed at twelve o'clock, and at night when the roll is called they receive
another loaf of bread, but no vinegar. This is all they have allowed from the
Regency. But oftentimes when they are at work on board the corsairs, the
steward will give them a little sweet oil, and sometimes some olives, and this
they count a feast. These loaves of bread weigh about three ounces and an half.
I have weighed several and never found one to exceed three ounces and eleven
drachms. So what bread they have allowed them for a day, will not exceed eleven
ounces, and it is so sour that a person must be almost starving before he can
eat it. The reason of its being so sour is, they mix the dough three days
before it is baked. To make this bread they sift the bran of wheat, after the
flour and midlings are taken out.

Perhaps you may think what I have already told you would not be augmented with
additional severity, but alas, this is not all. The Bagnio in which they sleep,
is built with several Galleries, one above another, in each gallery is several
small rooms, where the slaves sleep. And they must pay a certain sum, every
moon to the Guardian Bachi, or sleep in the open Bagnio, where they have
nothing but the sirmament to cover them. On the evening after the moon changes,
the keeper of the Bagnio calls out for all hands to pay for their rooms. And if
any one that has slept in a room during the moon, has not procured the money,
and cannot pay it down, his hands are put into irons behind him, and his legs
chained to a pillar every night, until the money is paid. And those miserable
objects are commonly relieved by the rest of their fellow sufferers. Some of
the slaves are allowed a small pittance from their country, which enables them
to pay this demand. Others are mechanics and work at their trade in the night,
to procure this sum, and others get it by theft, though they often hazard their
lives by so doing; and many are obliged to sleep every night upon the cold
stones with nothing but the heavens to cover them, for want of money to pay
this tribute. In the Bagnio, where the slaves sleep, is kept a great number of
animals of prey, they are confined with chains in different apartments from
where the slaves sleep. And are maintained by them; with Bullock's and Sheep's
heads; this money must be paid every moon when they pay for the rooms they
fleep in. There is still another demand as unreasonable as the former.

After their Ramadan, a fast which they keep a whole moon, and during which
they cannot eat, drink, smoke, or even wet their lips while the sun is in the
horizon, (what they do eat, is in the night) they have a great feast, which
continues two days, on the evening previous to the feast, every slave must
carry as a present to the task-master, two fowls; and a certain number of sheep
is given to them, for which each slave must pay his proportionable part. During
those two days the slaves are locked in the bagnio, and are allowed no kind of
subsistence from the Regency except one small loaf of the bread which I
mentioned before, and this they receive each night when the roll is called. The
drivers, on the first morning of the feast, give each slave a loaf of good
white bread, weighing about half a pound, for which they had received two fowls
from each slave the evening before.

In this deplorable situation, were upwards of 1,200 Christian captives,
(dragging out a miserable existence) when I left Algiers.

The present inhabitants of the territory of Algiers are composed of many
different nations. The Turks, are the first people among them, and have all the
government and power in their own hands, and no man can hold any post of great
distinction among them except he is a Turk. The Cologlies, are next the Turks,
in power. These are those persons born of a Morish mother the father being a
Turk. The Arabs, who trace their descent from the disciples of Mahomet, who
formerly subdued Algiers. Moors or Morescoes, who were driven out of Spain,
about the end of the 16th centutury. Renagadoes, Levantines, Jews, and
Christian slaves, with a crowd formed of the posterity of all these different
people, make the rest of the population. The people in the country, have no
houses, but live in tents, and remove from one place to to another, as they
want pasture, or as any other accidental circumstance may happen. The Dey
demands a tribute from them, which is procured by the Beys, and carried to
Algiers.

The manner of gathering the tribute is as follows: The Dey informs the Bey
what sum he must pay him the ensuing year, and then the Bey goes with a large
number of Cavalry, and if they do not pay his demand immediately, he takes from
them what he pleases, and if they make the least resistance, or even intimate
that they are dissatisfied with his proceedings, he cuts off their heads and
sends them in triumph to the Dey. And after they have carried it twice from the
Dey's palace to the gate Babazoon, and exposed it to public view, they then
bury it. The Beys seldom are in office more than two or three years, before
they are so rich that the Dey finds something against them, and haves them
executed, and all their property is brought to the city and deposited into the
treasury.

The dress of the men, (who live in the country) is only a coarse woolen cloth
wrapped round the shoulders, which falls down as far as their ancles, with a
cap of the same cloth, with a twisted turban of woolen ever that.

The women pay some more attention to ornament themselves with dress. They are
dressed with a long piece of coarse woolen cloth, not unlike that of the men's,
with a great number of pewter, and brass, broaches, fixed upon it, about the
shoulders, arms and breast.

They adorn their heads, with several of these broaches fixed in their hair,
and a braided woolen string passed several times round their heads, and filled
with several kinds of flowers. The children are suffered to go naked, 'till
eight or nine years of age. The Sheik or chief of a tribe is known by a linen
garment instead of a woolen, and a linen turban, he also wears a pair of shoes,
made of dressed leather.

The common sort of people, seldom wear any shoes, and when they do, they are
made of undressed leather with hair on the out side.

When a young man would marry, he drives a number of cattle to the tent where
the parents of his mistress reside. The bride is then set on horse back and led
to the tent where the young man resides, amidst the shouts and huzzas of a
multitude of young people, who have been invited to the nuptial feast. When she
arrives at the tent of her lover, a mixture of milk and honey is given her to
drink, and a song is sung suitable to the occasion. She then alights, and
receives a stick from her husband, which she thrusts into the ground, and
holding her right hand upon its end, she repeats some words to the following
effect: "As this stick is fastened in the ground, so am I bound in duty to my
husband, as nothing can remove it, but violence so naught but death, shall
force me from his love." She then drives his flock to water and back again, to
show her willingness to perform any duty that he may assign her. These previous
ceremonies being settled, all the company set down by the tent, and the evening
concludes with the greatest jollity. They feast upon Dates, Almonds, Raisins,
Olives, and Oil, and drink sherbot, which is water, having run through Raisins,
somewhat like making lie of ashes. Subsequent to the marriage, the wife is
veiled and never stirs from the tent, for the space of a whole moon, and no one
can see her, except her parents, during this time. These are the ceremonies,
which (I have been Informed by the Algerines) are customary, in celebrating a
marriage, among those savage barbarians, but I never had an opportunity of
viewing one of them.

The people of Algiers in general speak a compound of Arabic, Moresco, and the
remains of the ancient Phenician languages. The inhabitants of all
denominations, for the most part, understand the Lingua Franca. This is a kind
of dialect, which without being the proper language of any country whatever,
has a kind of universal currency all over the Mediteranean, as the channel of
information for people, who cannot understand each other through any medium but
this. The public business of the nation, and the records are transacted in the
Turkish tongue.

In Algiers, the men wear large turbans, having their heads close shaved, and
for the most part they wear their beards -- some only wear their whiskers.
Their longest jackets, which have sleeves, they wear next to their shirt, and
then a vest over that, always taking care to have the shortest garment outside.
Their shirts are made with neither collar nor wrisbands, their breeches,
something like a woman's petticoat, reaching down to their knees. Stockings are
entirely unknown among them. Their shoes have square toes, with no heels.
People of any denomination whatever, (except the Jews) are allowed to dress in
this habit. No person is allowed to dress in green, except a Sherief, whom they
say descended from Mahomet, they are known by a green turban. The Jews are
obliged to dress entirely in black, and wear shoes without any quarters.

I have known 50 in one day, to be punished with five hundred bastinadoes, for
being found with a small red sash about their waist.

The women dress, with a sort of cap upon their heads, of either Gold, Silver,
Brass Pewter, or Tin, according as their fortune will afford; and wear short
jackets, and long trowsers. After they are married, they are obliged to have
white trowsers, but before their trowsers are a sort of Callico; they are
obliged to wear a veil when they go out of their houses, though very few are
allowed to go out at all. They mark the forehead, nose and chin, with india
ink, and stripe the backs of their hands, and fingers black, and color their
finger nails red.

The husband never sees his wife before marriage but accepts her upon the
description of her father. When the match is agreed upon, and the man has paid
the father for the daughter, (for in this country every man is obliged to buy
his wife, from her parents,) the bridegroom sends a present of fruits and
sweetmeats, and entertains her relations with a feast, and musical
entertainments. He is then conducted into the presence of his wife, by four
women, who are veiled. He then retires and goes to his own house, and the bride
is set on horseback and led to his house. After she is safe delivered to her
husband, the females who were invited to the nuptial feast, assemble
themselves, and walk through the street, and at several corners they pronounce
the bans by shouting out all together, as loud as they can, with such strong
shrill voices, that they may be heard two miles.

Algiers is a country which derives its name from its metropolis, and extends
four hundred and eighty miles in length from east to west, along the northern
coast of Africa. And is in breadth three hundred and twenty miles, but at the
distance of an hundred miles from the seacoast, it becomes a barren desert,
almost uninhabited by either man or beast. Algiers is situated between
thirty-two and thirty-seven degrees of north latt. which coresponds to that of
the United States, from Virginia to Carolina, inclusive. It is bounded on the
north, by the Mediterranean sea; on the south, by Mount Atlas; on the east, by
the country of Tunis; and on the west by the River Mulvia, which separates it
from the empire of Morocco.

The principal rivers which water the territory of Algiers, rise in Mount
Atlas, and run by a northerly direction into the Mediterranean sea. They are
seven in number. None of them has a long course, or is navigable: at least none
of them are made use of in navigation. It is however likely that they might be
made use of for this purpose, were the inhabitants of a more intelligent and
industrious character, for some of them are of a tolerable depth. Such is the
gross ignorance of the natives in whatever concerns domestic improvements, that
there is not a single bridge over any of those rivers. And ferry boats are
entirely unknown. -- When they are to be crossed, the traveller has sometimes
to wander several miles in search of a ford.

The climate in this country is remarkably delightful. The air is pure and
serene. The soil is covered with almost a perpetual verdure. Extreme heat is
not common* -- In the winter it is seldom cold enough to freeze. I have been
informed, that it has been known to freeze at the depth of two or 3 inches. I
once saw frost during my residence there, but I never saw any ice. -- This
description applies to the land on the seacoast; for as you advance into the
country, the soil becomes more barren. -- Indeed a considerable part of the
back country is a savage desert, abounding with Lions, Tigers, Leopards,
Jackalls, Buffaloes, wild Boars, Porcupines, etc. And it must be acknowledged,
that these animals are not the least amiable inhabitants of this country.

The City of Algiers lies in latt. 36, 50 North, and in long. 3, 47 East, over
against the Island of Minorca, 380 miles from Tunis, it lies upon the side of a
very high hill, with such an ascent, that when you are at sea, you may see
almost every house in it. At a great distance it appears like a snow bank;
which is occasioned by the houses being white-washed on the outside. The city
is of a quadrangular form, and is near three miles in circumference, compassed
with two walls, about 25 feet distant, and in some places 100 feet in height.
The outward wall is defended by upward of 300 brass cannon, and outside the
wall is a deep entrenchment 40 feet wide, over which are built bridges at the
gates of the city. In the intermediate space between the walls are magazines,
for public stores.

The Mole of the harbor is about 500 paces in length, extending from the
continent to a ledge of rocks, where there are three castles, with large
batteries of guns.

The houses are all built with stone and lime. The principal buildings are the
Dey's palace, and several large Mosques: The former stands near the center of
the city; is very large but not magnificent. The Mosques are fine buildings,
though they make no great appearance at a distance. -- There is a great number
of hot baths in this city, people of any denomination whatever are allowed to
go into them and bathe, on paying double the sum which a Turk pays. If a
stranger happens to go in, they generally extort eight or ten fold. The men
spend a great part of their time in bathing, smoking, and drinking coffee. --
Their religion obliges them to bathe four times a day, but many of them do much
oftener, for their own pleasure. There are also several baths for the use of
women, who are not allowed to bathe, only in the afternoon. Those among them
who are able, have these conveniences in their own houses, that their women may
not go out. Few white women walk the streets, except prostitutes, and those far
advanced in years, and when these do they are obliged to be veiled. The
principal street extends from the east gate of the City, to the west, is
tolerable wide and some what magnificent. -- The rest are all very narrow,
which renders it very difficult for passengers. The men by their Laws, and
religion, are allowed to have four wives (if they are able to purchase them)
but they generally content themselves with two or three.

The present Dey of Algiers, is between sixty and seventy years of age -- is a
thick well built man, with his white beard covering his breast. He is of a very
light complexion. Does not appear to be much decayed by the weight of years,
which have rolled over his head. He is of a very malicious disposition, and
often when he is in a rage, commands deeds of inhumanity to be committed, of
which he repents afterward.

His family consists of himself, wife and one daughter. His wife and daughter
have a separate palace, at a little distance from that of the Dey's, and have a
great number of female christian slaves to serve them. The Dey visits them
every Thursday evening, abides with his wife the night, and returns to his own
palace on Friday morning. The Dey has also a number of Christian captives to
wait upon him. One cooks his victuals, another sets his table, waits upon him
while eating, makes his bed, and sees that all things in his apartment are kept
clean. The others do any kind of work that is necessary. He keeps no Seraglio
as is generally reported -- has but one wife, and sleeps with her but once a
week.

When the Dey eats, he has a table about four inches high, on which is set
several different dishes, with neither plates, knives or forks, they eat only
with spoons, their victuals being cut small before it is set on the table and
can touch their victuals only with their right hand. They sit always on the
floor, as chairs are entirely unknown among them. The common people only differ
from the Dey, by having no table whatever, their dishes being set upon the
floor.

The Dey is an absolute Monarch, and the Haznagi, is the next man to him in
dignity and power -- the Aga is next the Haznagi -- the Hoodge de Cabellos, is
next to him -- and the Petit Mell next to him -- The Aga de Baston, is next to
him, who enjoys his post but two moons, and then retires with a pension. The
other officers of importance are, a Secretary of State, twenty-four Chiah
Bassas, or Colonels subordinate to the Aga, about two hundred seinor Raises, or
Captains, and about four hundred Lieutenants. The Mufti, the Cadi, and the
grand Marabout, are known by the largeness of their turbans. The two former are
the High Priest and the Supreme Judge in ecclesiastical causes. The latter is
the chief of an order of Saints or Hermits. The inhabitants of Algiers live
very meanly, although their country plentifully produces the conveniences and
luxuries of life. The chief of their diet is bread, oil, olives, vinegar and
sallad. They very seldom eat any meat. When they do, one pound is sufficient
for six or eight people, and this they count extravagant. They profess not to
drink any kind of spirituous liquor, and if any one is seen intoxicated, he is
no more counted a true Mohammedan. Many of them will however, drink to excess
when they are out of sight of any others of their religion. Many instances of
this kind I have seen, particularly one Mustafa, an Algerine, would often go
into the Bagnio and purchase wine from the slaves (at double price) which they
had bought for their own use, and sit down and drink among them. One evening as
I went in, after returning from my labor, I saw Mustafa, drinking wine, and
eating pork sausages, I asked him if he knew what he was eating, he answered in
great rage, uz coot sanza fida, un ta main schelim, un a main arfshi, which is,
"Hold your tongue you unbeliever, if you do not tell me, I shall not know."

The Cologlies, Moors and Arabs, are the most numerous in Algiers. They compose
the great body of the inhabitants; but it may be supposed, that amidst such a
variety of different races, immense numbers cannot be said to belong to any
particular tribe or nation whatever.

The Turks are a well built robust people, their complexion not unlike
Americans, though somewhat larger, but their dress, and long beards, make them
appear more like monsters, than human beings.

The Cologlies are somewhat less in stature than the Turks, and are of a more
tawney complexion.

The Moors, or Morescoes, are generally a tall thin, spare set of people, not
much inclining to fat, and of a very dark complexion, much like the Indians of
North America.

The Arabs, or Arabians, are of a much darker complexion than the Moors, being
darker than Mulattoes. They are much less in stature than the Moors, being the
smallest people I ever saw, very few arrive at the height of five feet, though
they are in general nearly of a size. These people compose the greater part of
the Piscaras, or porters in the city. As they are not allowed to trade in any
mercantile line, nor even to learn any mechanic art, they are obliged to be
drudges to their superiors, to gain the hard earned morsel on which they
subsist.

They bury their dead in the following manner. The corpse is washed, then sewed
in a winding sheet, put upon a bier, and carried to the grave, where they are
buried in a sitting posture. No females are allowed to follow any corpse
whatever. Any Mohammedan who dies with the plague is carried to the grave as
fast as the bearers can run. All the followers sing while they are going. They
imagine all Mahometans who die with this disorder, are called by the Supreme
Being, and are happy to eternity. But people of any other religion, who die
with it, they suppose are damned. At each end of the grave they place a small
earthern pot, containing about half a pint, which they keep filled with water,
presuming that their friends, if not happy, will be relieved or comforted with
this drink, They also plant Pease and Beans on the graves of their friends, and
lay fragrant bushes on them, for the comfort and support of their departed
relatives.

The old women also every Friday morning repair to the mansion of the dead, to
carry such provisions as bread, beans, pease and plumbs. These they expect
their friends if unhappy, will receive; if they be happy, they are willing the
cats should partake the repast. These animals crowd their grave yards in
hundreds.

The greatest part of their commerce, is with the Swedes, Danes, Dutch, French,
Spaniards, Raguseans and English. The commodities they trade in, are Wheat,
Barley, Oil, Olives, Figs, Raisins, Wax, Honey, Silks, Almonds, Dates, Wool,
Leather of different colors, which is commonly called Morocco Leather, Horses,
Mules, etc.

Their manufactures are chiefly Silks and Woolen Carpets.

In Algiers are about five hundred christian slaves, of different nations, who
deserted from Oran, while it was in possession of the Spaniards. They have no
hopes of relief till death. The Spaniards will not ransom them because they are
deserters. In November '95, one of them having grown desperate, was drinking
wine one evening in the Bagnio, and making some noise; the Guard These Guards
or Corv^s, are slaves who are ordered by the Guardian Bachi to keep peace among
the rest of the slaves in the night, and have power to put any one in irons who
misbehaves, and keep him till morning when he is punished.
beat him without mercy. The slave drew a knife and stabbed him to the heart,
and he fell instantly dead. The rest of the Guards commanded the slaves to
endeavor to secure him. In attempting this, he killed one slave, and wounded
three more. He was then taken, secured while morning and then beheaded.

Another circumstance of this kind happened in March '96. One of those Oran
slaves having been informed, that the money for the redemption of the
Spaniards, (who deserted from that place) was lodged in the hands of a Spanish
priest, resident at Algiers; that he had neglected their liberation. The slave
went to the priest, asked if he had money for the redemption of the Spaniards.
Being answered in the negative, he drew a knife, and stabbed him in fourteen
different places, and left him to all appearance dead. However, the Priest
recovered. The slave then went to the house of the Spanish consul, intending to
kill him, and finding he was at his garden, he went to the Bagnio, where he
killed a Christian slave, with whom he had had some dispute before. He then
threw down his knife and delivered himself up, and was beheaded the same
evening.

Perhaps some of my rerders may wish to know something more particular,
concerning Oran, I therefore give the following description.

Oran is situated about eighty leagues west of Algiers; is a mile and an half
in circumference. It lies partly on a plain and partly on the ascent of a hill,
and is well fortified. As the Spanish coasts and merchantships had suffered
much from the corsairs of this port, Ferdinand, King of Spain, determined to
attempt its reduction. Accordingly he transported into Africa, an army under
the command of his prime minister, Cardinal Ximenes. The wonted good fortune of
this officer did not, at this juncture desert him. He had maintained a
correspondence with some of the people of Oran; and when the Moors sallied out
to attack the Spaniards, their perfidious countrymen shut the gates against
them. Ximenes killed four thousand of the barbarians, and set at liberty
sixteen thousand Christian slaves. The Algerines, during near two hundred
years, made frequent but unsuccessful attempts to recover it. In 1708, they
retook it. In June, 1732, a Spanish army was landed not far from Oran. The
Turkish troops and the inhabitants were seized with a panic, and abandoned
their fortifications without any resistance. The Moors not long after attacked
it with great fury, but were finally repulsed, with much slaughter. In '91, the
Algerines went with a strong force against it, under the command and of Alli
Bey of Mascara. After a siege of several days, they withdrew their troops,
having received much damage. In '92, the Dey of Algiers and the King of Spain
having agreed upon terms, very advantageous to the former, Oran was given up to
the Algerines, and is still in their possession.

Having given a short account of the common labor of the slaves, their
provisions, clothing, punishments, etc. and a short sketch of the manners and
customs of the inhabitants, in the city and country of Algiers. I now proceed
to give an account of the most particular circumstances which happened to
myself and fellow sufferers during my captivity, and some other circumstances
equally entertaining. Nothing of any great moment happened after our arrival,
which was on the first of Nov. 1793, until the eleventh, when a courier arrived
from Alicant, (sent by Colonel Humphreys, the Ambassador from the United
States, for Algiers,) to obtain the Dey's permission for him to come to
Algiers, and make a peace. The Dey answered, that "he would not receive him,
either to make peace or redeem the American slaves -- that he had been
soliciting the American government to send an ambassador to make a peace with
the Regency for three years before, and they had treated his propositions with
neglect -- that as he had a truce with the Dutch and Portuguese, and had
captured ten sail of American vessels, and had a fair prospect of capturing
many more, he would not make a peace with them -- that he made the truce with
Portugal for the purpose of having the straits open for his vessels to cruize
in the Atlantic, for capturing American vessels -- that he could not be at
peace with all nations at once."

At this dreadful news we despaired of ever tasting the sweets of Liberty
again; here we expected to end our days in the most laborious, slavery,
pregnant with unutterable distress, in whose presence reigns eternal horrors,
and meagre famine leads its doleful train; where subjugation adds to the weight
of each cursed load, and the pain of the vassal is doubled; It spreads a gloom
over the sprightly face of nature, and dooms every pleasure to the grave.

On the 29th, a prize arrived, and she proved to be the Minerva of New York,
loaded with Wine, Oil, Fruit, and Marble, Commanded by Joseph Ingraham, from
Leghorn, bound to America. She was captured by the Algerines, on the 25th
within 7 or 8 miles of Cape St. Sebastian. When the captors arrived they
brought the crew of the said brig. Seven more were now added to our number to
participate in our distress and partake with us the horrors of unspeakable
slavery, and bemoan the loss of the blessing of Liberty, draging out the
unwelcome existence of a slave, on Barbary's hostile coast, persecuted by the
hands of merciless Mahometans.

On the 23d of Dec. we were informed by Mr. Skjolderbrand, the Swedish Consul,
that we were allowed a valuable supply from the United States. And he had that
day received orders, and money, to pay each Capt. belonging to the United
States, 8 Spanish Dollars per month, and each mate, 6, and the rest three
dollars each.

Our country also furnished us with a sufficient quantity of clothing, decent
and comfortable. This was happy news for us, for from the time of our being
captured, to this day, we had been draging out a miserable existence, scarce
worth possessing with no kind of subsistence except bread and vinegar, and
water to drink.

This generosity of the United States to us their enslaved countrymen was of
inestimable value. It was more precious from being unexpected. No nation of
christendom had ever done the like for their subjects in our situation.

The Republican government of the United States have set an example of humanity
to all the governments of the world. -- Our relief was matter of admiration to
merciless barbarians. They viewed the caracter of Americans from this time in
the most exalted light. They exclaimed, that "Though we were slaves, we were
gentlemen;" that "the American people must be the best in the world to be so
humane and generous to their countrymen in slavery." The goodness of my country
I shall never forget.

Our money would now enable us to purchase some kind of provision, that we
might have something to eat at night, when we went to the Bagnio, that gloomy
mansion of horror and despair. But these avaricious sons of plunder and rapine,
would endeavor to extort this little relief out of our hands, and as they were
not allowed to take it by force, they would endeavor to get it by art. For
when we were in the Bagnio, and wished to buy any kind of provision, we must
pay them for going to buy it, and they really did give. In this manner they
cheated us out of one half our money. This supply was allowed us until the day
of our liberation, with the addition of three quarters of a dollar a month, for
the seamen, the officers being allowed the same they were at first, with no
addition.

About the first of Febuary, 1794, several Americans were attacked with the
smallpox. Of this epidemical disease four Americans died in the course of the
month, as follows, Samuel Milborne, Richard Wood, John Mott, and Thomas
Furnace. A short time after, the city was alarmed with the plague, which
carried off many Americans, whom I shall name hereafter.

On the 16th of April, as all hands were at work in the mountain, Joseph Keith,
and Peter Barry being very much fatigued, they went to a spring of water about
50 yards distant, and after having drank some water they felt faint, and sat
down upon the grass. The Guardian Bachi observing them, sent two taskmasters
and brought them to him and ordered them 100 bastinadoes each. -- This
punishment was inflicted for being about 5 minutes absent from their work. --
And many instances of this kind I have witnessed. Particularly on the 14th
August 1794, when a slave received 300 bastinadoes for no greater offense, than
pulling 6 hairs out of a horses tail, which belonged to one of the great men of
the Regency.

About the last of April, a Dutch Admiral arrived in the bay, with four sail of
the line, and two frigates, and in a few days effected a peace with the
Regency. He ransomed all the Dutch captives, which the Algerines had in their
possession. It being an old custom among the Algerines, when they make a peace
with any christian nation to oblige that nation, to ransom the Dey's Chief
servant, and sweeper of the palace, should they be of a different nation from
the one ransomed. Accordingly when the Dutch ransomed their captives, they also
ransomed one Philip Sloan, an American, who was captured in the year 1785, on
board the Ship Dolphin of Philadelphia, Commanded by Richard O'Brien, he being
at this time sweeper of the palace.

In the Month of Sept. they captured 201 Corsicans. The manner of capturing
them was somewhat singular. The corsicans, when they were under the government
of France had license from the Algerines, to fish for Coral on the coast of
Africa, from the bay of Bona, to the Island Galette. And having surrendered the
Island of Corsica, to the English, they supposed they still enjoyed the same
privelege. Accordingly they equiped about thirty boats for this purpose. They
sailed under the convoy of an armed brig. Having been a few days upon the
coast, a french frigate captured their convoy and several of the boats. The
rest took refuge in the harbor of Bona. The Aleaid or Mayor on their arrival,
not knowing their flag, (which is a white field with a Moors head in the
center) confined them all in the Mortimore, or dungeon, secured their boats and
sent and informed the Dey of Algiers what he had done, asking his orders
concerning them. The Dey commanded them all to be brought to Algiers, and made
slaves.

They remained in captivity until the month of March '96. And were then
ransomed by the English, at the rate of 1,200 dollars each.

We heard many encouraging stories during our captivity, but none proved to be
fact, until the month of July '95, when we were informed that David Humphreys
Esquire. and Joseph Donaldson jun. Esquire. had arrived at Gibraltar, and that Mr.
Donaldson was ordered for Algiers, to make a peace, for the United States. This
news was confirmed about the 10th of August, when a Spanish courier arrived
from Alicant, with a letter from Mr. Donaldson, to the Dey of Algiers for
permission to come and effect a peace with the Regency. At this time the Dey
being very anxious to have an American Ambassador come, and negociate with him
for a peace, and the redemption of the captives, he chartered a Ragusean
polacre, and and sent her to Alicant, to bring Mr. Donaldson to Algiers.

On Thursday the 3d Sept., 95, the wind being W. b, S. at 9 A. M. saw a sail
from the marine, bearing N. b W. standing direct for the harbor. At 11 A. M.
could discern that she had a white flag, at her foretop gallant mast head, the
American flag at the main top gallant mast head, and the Ragusa flag over her
stern. -- This being a flag of truce, and denoting the American Ambassador was
on board.

Our transports are more easily imagined than described. At 3 P. M. she being
within one mile of the mole, the harbour-master went on board with permission
from the Dey, for Mr. Donaldson to land when he thought proper. At 4 he landed
and was conducted by some of the chief men of the place, to a very elegant
house, which the Dey had provided for him, previous to his arrival.

Friday, 4th, being the Mohammedan sabbath, he could not do any kind of business
with the Dey. The suspense, the hope, fear, and agitation we suffered this day
may be conceived but not described. An Ambassador to redeem us had arrived.
What would be his success we knew not -- a whole day was passing away and
nothing done. Never was there a longer, more tedious day in the annals of
slavery -- Again we must repair to our mansion of misery and in suspense wear
out a night of sleepless anxiety.

Saturday, the 5th, about 11 A. M. Mr. Donaldson, was invited to the Dey's
presence. Accordingly he went, and about 12 o'clock the American flag was
hoisted on board the Raguscan polacre. And the banner of the United States was
saluted from the castles of Fenelle and Cordalares, with the thunders of 21
Cannon.

Sounds more ravishing never vibrated in the air; our hearts were joy. We
imagined ourselves already freemen. In idea, our chains were falling off and
our taskmasters no longer at liberty to torture us. In imagination we were
already traversing the ocean -- hailing our native shore -- embracing our
parents, our children and our wives. This delirium of joy was of short
duration; like a dazzling meteor in a dark night, which blazes for a moment,
making succeeding darkness more dreadful; our enchanting hopes left us to
despondency, horrible beyond description. In about five hours we were informed
that the cup of our sufferings was not drained -- that we could not be released
till our ransom was paid.

Never was there a more sudden or affecting change in the countenances and
conversations of men. Instead of sprightly looks, cheerful congratulations and
sanguine anticipations of finished bliss; there was nothing but faces of
sadness and the most gloomy silence, interrupted only with sounds of complaint,
or sighs of despair. "Not released till our ransom is paid?" How long* said we,
may our country neglect us! How many fatalities befall our redemption on its
passage! How many disappointments may yet occur! How long may our chains and
torments be continued!

After we had done work that evening and come to the Bagnio; myself, Abel
Willis and Thomas Billings were sent to the Ambassador's house; he informed us
the Dey had granted him three captives as servants to him, and that he was
responsible for our good behavior. We tarried with him and Mr. Barlow, until
the day of our liberation.

On Friday the 11th, Captain O'Brien was sent from Algiers, on board a Spanish
vessel, with dispatches for Mr. Humphreys at Lisbon. About the middle of March
'96, we understood that the Dey had got impatient with the delay of the money,
and had ordered Mr. Donaldson to leave the place, and declared that he would
send out the corsairs and bring in every American vessel they met with; that he
would never make a peace with the United States in his reign. At this we again
despaired of ever seeing a christian shore again.

On the 21st of March, a brig appeared in the bay, with the American colors
over her stern, and she proved to be the Sally of Philadelphia, commanded by --
March. She brought as a passenger, Joel Barlow, Esquire. Consul General of the
United States, for the city and kingdom of Algiers. This worthy gentleman,
whose compassionate services for his distressed countrymen, can never be
estimated too highly, nor praised too much, gave us all the encouragement he
could; assuring us he would never quit Algiers and leave us in slavery, although
at this time he was not permitted to enter the Dey's palace. While we were in
this suspense, we received the following letter from Col. David Humphreys, Esquire.
who likewise faithfully did for us all that could be done. Copy

Lisbon, Feb. 16, 1769. MY DEAR FELLOW CITIZENS.
THE object of this letter is to assure you, that you are neither forgotten or
neglected by your country. I have written to his Excellency the Dey, by this
conveyance, stating truly the inevitable obstacles which have retarded the
completion of our arrangements with the Regency until this period; and which
may perhaps still protract the delay for a considerable time to come. I have
also written explanatory letters, in a copious manner, on the subject, to
Messrs. Barlow (who I hope will soon be in Algiers) Donaldson, Cathcart, etc.

Impossibilities cannot be effected: But whatever is in its nature practicable,
will be done in your behalf.

Let me therefore my dear Countrymen, once more (and God grant it may be the
last time I may have occasion to do it;) exhort you to be of good courage, to
exert all your fortitude, to have a little more patience, to hope always for
the best, and to be persuaded that every thing is doing and shall be done,
which the nature of the circumstances will admit, for your relief.

In all events, be assured of my persevering efforts in your favor, and of the
sincere attachment and regard, with which I shall ever remain,

My dear Countrymen, Yours, etc. D. Humphreys.


A few days afterward, Mr. Barlow got permission to see the Dey, with whom he
made new arrangements, and our hopes were again revived.

About the first of April Mr. Donaldson sailed from Algiers destined for
Leghorn (as we were informed) to procure the money for our Redemption.

At the time of his departure, the Plague that fatal epidemical disorder, had
spread its alarm, in the country adjacent. And which soon made its appearance
in the city, and carried off many of my fellow countrymen, when they were
expecting every day to be called free men.

On the 9th of July we were informed by a letter from Mr. Barlow that we might
expect to be at Liberty within three or four days.

This filled our hearts with joy, and we imagined ourselves the happiest people
in world. For a long period we had been suffering the most inhuman slavery;
loaded with almost an insupportable weight of chains, and now expecting to
enjoy Liberty; the greatest blessing human beings ever possessed. And our
expectations at this time were not visionary nor unfounded, as had often been
the case with us before. For that worthy gentleman, Mr. Barlow had procured
money for our redemption from Mr. Machio Baccri, a Jew belonging to Algiers,
which should be paid as soon as it could be counted.

What a joyful night, was this, we passed it with praises to our kind
deliverer. And anticipations of ensuing freedom.

On the 10th at day break in the morning the Bagnio-keeper, informed us that
all taken under the American flag must stay in the Bagnio, and hold ourselves
in readiness to go to the Dey's palace, and receive our (tiscaras) or
pass-ports from the Dey, and that we should be embarked the next morning.

On the 11th after the slaves of other nations had gone out to work, we were
all called out of the Bagnio, and conducted by the Dey's chief clerk to the
palace where we received our pass-ports from the Dey, and at 9 A. M. we all
embarked on board a ship which had been captured by the French (formerly
English) and condemned at Algiers, and she now being the property of Mr.
Baccri, a Jew belonging to that place.

On board of this ship were also forty eight Neapolitans, who had been ransomed
three days before us.

On the 12th we received the provisions on board, and got ready for sea.

On the 13th, at 5, A. M, we got under way and stood to sea, at 7, A. M. we
found a Neapolitan below, sick with the Plague, we then tacked and stood into
the bay again, and made signals for the harbor master to come on board. He
boarded us at 9, and took the sick man on shore, we then tacked and stood to
sea again with a fresh breeze from the eastward, bound to Leghorn.

On the 14th, another Neapolitan was attacked with the plague. and died on the
16th.

On the 15th Captain Samuel E. Bayley was attacked with the plague, and we
finding the plague beginning to rage on board the ship, made all possible haste
for Marseilles. On the 17th capt. Bayley died, and on the 2^th we arrived at
Marseilles, and on the 22d, all hands, except twelve who were left on board to
take care of the ship, went on shore to the Lazaretto, where we performed a
quarantine of Eighty Days, and nothing particular happened, during our
residence here.

On the 7th October, we were visited by several Doctors, who finding us all in
good health, gave us Praddick, at 10, A. M. we were conducted by a company of
the city guards to the house of Stephen Catherlan, jun. esquire. Vice Consul of the
United States, for the city of Marseilles; he provided lodgings and provisions
for us all.

On the 8th, I shipped myself in the capacity of first mate, on board the ship
Fortune of Philadelphia, commanded by Michael Smith.

On the 17th November we sailed from Marseilles, bound to Bona, (in the state
of Algiers) where we arrived after a passage of twenty days, which brought it
to the 7th of December.

On the 21st we began to take on board our cargo, and finished loading on the
15th of January '97, and sailed for Marseilles on the 17th.

On the 24th, being in latt. 37, 26, N. and long. 6, 56, E. was boarded by his
Britannic Majesty's ship Pallas, treated politely and permitted to proceed on
our voyage.

Feb. 5th, at 6, A. M. Marseilles light house bore N. N. E. about nine leagues
distance, wind N. N. W. at 11, A. M. was captured by his Britannic Majesty's
ships, Inconstant and Blanch, and ordered to Porto Ferrajo, in the island of
Elba, where we arrived on the 15th and were all sent on shore on the 16th, and
not allowed to stay on board the prize or frigate, except we would enter in his
Britannic Majestys service, and none being willing to enter; George Tilley was
impressed on board the Inconstant; Richard Hales, Matthew Johnson and William
Lackey entered on board the Union, a British transport. The rest of us
determined not to enter, we procured a passage for Leghorn. Having been robbed
of the greatest part of our clothes, and all our money, by the captors, we
found it very difficult to subsist until the vessel was ready to sail.

We sailed for Leghorn on the 23d, and arrived on the 24th, and were kept in
quarantine until the 5th of March, on which day capt. Smith arrived from Porto
Ferrajo, and sailed for Marseilles on the 10th, with all the rest of the ships
crew, but myself and Moses Brown, Brown being sick in the hospital.

On the 20th I sailed from Leghorn in an open boat for Piombino, in the
dominions of the king of Naples, to which place Mr. Donaldson went by land. I
arrived at Piombino on the 21st, and Mr. Donaldson arrived the 22d; on the 23d
we sailed for Porto Ferrajo, and arrived the same evening.

On the 24th, we sailed for Leghorn, and arrived on the 26th.

On the 2d of April I embarked on board the Madona del rasario e san vincenzo
faeraro, of Ragusa, in the capacity of a passenger, bound to Philadelphia, and
sailed on the 4th, and on the 11th was captured by a Spanish privateer and
carried into Barcelona; was cleared on the 12th and sailed again, and on the
20th was captured by a French privateer and carried into Almeria, treated
politely and cleared on the 22d and sailed. On the 29th, the wind having been
contrary for several days, we run into Malaga, where we waited for a fair wind
until the 21st of May. We then sailed, and on the 22d was boarded by his
Britannic Majesty's ship Petterel, treated very well and permitted to proceed
on our voyage.

On the 23d at 6 A. M. was boarded by two Spanish privateers, (Gibraltar then
bearing W. N. W. 3 leagues distant) and carried into Ceuta, and I having struck
one of the privateers men with a sword, and wounded him on the arm; was put
into a dungeon, ironed hands and feet. Where I was kept about an hour and a
half, and then let out. The vessel was cleared the same evening, and we sailed
for Philadelphia.

On the 28th lat. 31, 54 N. long. 17, 25 W, was boarded by a Spanish privateer,
and robbed of a quantity of provisions, and the greatest part of our clothes,
and then permitted to proceed. On the 1st July was boarded by his Britannic
Majesty's ship Woolwich, treated politely, and permitted to proceed on our
voyage. We being very short of provisions, endeavored to get some from on
board the Woolwich, but could not be supplied, she being as short as ourselves.

On the 24th, lat. 38, 20. N. lon. 74, 10, W. spoke the brig Jefferson from St.
Croix bound to Philadelphia, from whom we got a supply of provisions, having
been about 40 days upon less than one biscuit per day, and nothing else except
oil, and wine.

On the 25th at 4 A. M. saw Cape May bearing W. b. N. about 6 leagues distant.
at 11 took on board a pilot and stood in for the land, wind N. W. on the 28th
arrived at Philadelphia, where I remained (being in an indisposition) until the
11th August.

I then sailed in the quality of a passenger on board the Schooner Jay,
belonging to Edgartown, commanded by David Smith, for Boston where we arrived
on the 17th. -- On the 23d I took passage for Newburyport where I arrived the
same evening.

Thus out of 9 persons who left Baltimore on board the Brig Polly, 4 only
returned, as follows: Michael Smith, first mate, Benjamin Edwards second Mate,
Moses Brown mariner, and myself, the rest all died with the plague.

A List of American vessels, and their Crews, captured by the Algerines, in
July, 1785, and October and November 1793.

Ship Dolphin of Philadelphia, Captured July, 30th 1785.
Peoples Names when died. of what disease. by whom liberated. Richard O'Brien,
Master. U. States, 11 Andrew Montgomery, Mate. July, 1796. Philip Sloan,
mariner. Dutch. Peleg Lorain mariner. July, 1 plague. [politans. James H^ll,
mariner. 1796 tak. by the Neo Charles Caldwell mariner. his friends. John
Robertson mariner. do. William Patterson. mariner. do. Peter Smith. mariner.
Jan. 18 1786. S. pox Robert Mc'Gennis mariner. June 23 '87. plague John Dorin.
mariner. July 10 '87. William Thasing. mariner. June 6 '93. Ja^o^us T^ssener
mariner. July 13 '93. Edward O'Riley. mariner. May 8 '88. Mad. Capt. Zach.
Coffin, passen. Nov. 22 '88. Consum Schooner Maria of Boston, Captured July
25th 1793.
Isaac Stephens Master. U. States, 11th July, 1796. Alexander Forsyth, Mate.
James L. Cathcart Mariner. George Smith, Mariner. own money. James Harnet,
Mariner. July 14 '90 plague Thomas Greg. Dillings. Mariner. Peoples Names when
died. of what disease. by whom liberated. Ship President of Philadelphia,
captured 23 October, 179^. William Penrose, Master. U. States, 11 July 1796.
Peter Barry, Mate. *Nicolo Francisco, Super Cargo. Spaniards. *James Allen. 2d
Mate. U. S. 1766. Nicholas Box, Mariner, July 21 '94. plague. John Thomas,
Mariner, June 18 '96. Plague. John Higdar, Mariner, U.S.1766 John Jones,
Mariner, U.S.1766. John Dix, Mariner, U.S.1766. Henry Pilson, Mariner,
U.S.1766. Anthony Russell, Mariner, U.S.1766. Isaac Brooks, Mariner, U.S.1766.
Brig George of New-Port (R. I.) Captured October, 11, 1793.
James Tailor, Master. U. States '96. William Prior, Mate. July 3 1794 plague.
Stanton Hazard, Mariner* Gideon Brown, Mariner. do. George Tilley, Mariner. do.
Abraham Flag, Mariner. do. Benjamin Church, Mariner. do. Richard Wi^^on,
Mariner. April 24 '94 consum do. Schooner Jay, or Gloucester, Captured Octaber
1793.
Samuel Calder, Master. U. States, 11 July 1796. John Walker, Mate. John
Edwards, Mariner. do. Walter Gibbins* Mariner. do. Abraham Simmonds, Mariner.
June 8 1796 plague. Thomas Manning, Mariner. do. Benjamin Ober, Mariner. do.
Ship Minerva, of Philadelphia, Captured October 1^, 1793.
John Mc'Shane, Master. June 16 '94. plague. Samuel Millborne, 1st, Mate. March
1 '94. Small Pox. John Mc'Farland, 2d, Mate. U States, 11 July 1796. John
Sutton, Mariner. Jean Fogereaux* Sail-maker. do. Abel Willis, Mariner. do.
Charles Smith, Mariner. do. Thomas Burton, Mariner. do. William Grafton,
Mariner. U. States, July 11, 1796. Joseph D^itz, Mariner. Thomas Burgess,
Mariner. do. Giovani Romes, Mariner. do. (...) Gazona, Mariner. do. Vi^^ent
Romes, Mariner. Spaniard. Juan Segra^e, Mariner. do. Joseph Rog^^s, Mariner.
July 12 1796 plague. John Mott, Mariner. Feb. 13 1794. S. pox. Brig Jane of
Haverhill, captured October 11, 1793.
Moses Mor^s, Master. U States, 11 July 1796. *Edward Harwood, Mate. James
Peace, Mariner. do. *Samuel Hendrick, Mariner. do. *Thomas Fry, Mariner. do.
Thomas Ximense Mariner. do. *Abraham Bur^l, Mariner. do. John Ramsay, Mariner.
May 17, '97 plague. Ship Thomas of Boston, Captured October, 1793.
Timothy Newman, Master. U. States, 11 July, 1796. George Wells, Mate. Richard
Harris, Mariner. do. Rosmus Morton, Mariner. do. John Woodman, Mariner. do.
Benjamin Bishop, Mariner. do. Barney Me'La^ghton, Mariner. do. Peter Lamer,
Mariner. do. William Dunbar, Mariner. do. Antonio Salamer, Mariner. Spaniar^^.
Brig Polly of Newburyport, Captured October 25th 179^.
Samuel E Bayley, Master. July 17 1796 plague. Michael Smith, 1st. Mate. U.
States, July 11, 17^^ Benjamin Edwards, 2d. Mate. do. John Fosse, Mariner. do.
Moses Brown, Mariner. do. Wal^ert H. P^el, Mariner. July 16 1794 do Thomas
S^a^ford, Mariner. July 13 1794 do. Enoch ^^st, Mariner, July 7 1796 do.
Nicholas Hartford, Mariner, June 2 1796 do. Ship ^ope of New York, captured
October 8, 1793.
Peoples Names when died. of what disease. by whom liberated. John ^urnham,
master. own money. Wm. Dixon, 1st mate. U. States, Peter Ingram, 2d mate. do.
James By^ne, Mariner. do. James Fox, Mariner. do. *Benjamin Lunt, Mariner. do.
Peter Sandy, Mariner. June 1, '94 strain. Harmon Old ^ick, Mariner. Christian
Hann^s, Mariner. do. John P. Peterson, Mariner. do. *Jacob Skoo^aker, Mariner.
do. Cornelius Tondroton, Mariner. do. M^rtin Duart, Mariner. do. Cornelius
Westerdunk, Mariner. do. Peter Vantorn, Mariner. do. *(...) F. Ricard, Mariner.
do. Peter C. ^r^er, Mariner. do. *(...) Ki^ku^r, Mariner, do. Brig Olive Branch
of Portsmouth, N. H. captured (...) Oct. 1793.
Wm. Furnace, master. U. S. July 11, '96. Richard Woo^, mate. Feb. 6 '94. S.
pox. Nathaniel Keen, mariner. do Daniel Fall, mariner. do John Earl, mariner.
do George ^a^kanan, mariner. do Thomas Furnace, mariner. Feb. 12 '94 do. Schr.
Dispatch of Petersburg, Virg. captured in October, 1793.
Wm. Wallace, master. Feb. 20 '96. Fall Joseph Keith, mate. June 16 '96. plague
*Peter ^age mariner. U. States, July 11, 1796. *James Hughes, mariner. Danniel
G^^lings, mariner. Aug. 1 '94. do George Osborne, mariner. do Brig Minerva of
New York, captured November 23, 1793.
Peoples Names when died. of what disease. by whom liberated. Joseph Ingraham,
master. U. States, July 11, '96. Edward Smith, mate. John Cooper, mariner. do
John Pa^^plin, mariner. do Philip New, mariner. do *Charles Polley, mariner. do
Scippio Jackson, mariner. Jan. 30, '96. choli^

N. B. Those marked with this * mark, were attacked with the Plague and
recovered.

Extract from a Poem on the Happiness of America, by Col. HUMPHREYS.
" But let us turn from objects that disgust,
Now other scenes in these blessed climes prevail,
The sounds of population fill the gale.
The dreary wastes by mighty toils reclaimed,
Deep marshes drained, wild woods, and thickets tamed:
Now fair Columbia, child of Heaven, is seen
In flower of youth and robes of lovely green,
Than virgin fairer on her bridal morn,
Whom all the graces, all the loves adorn.
Here planters find a ceaseless source of charms
In clearing sields and adding farms to farms --
It Is independence prompts their daily toil,
And calls forth beauties from the desert soil:
What untried pleasure sills each raptured sense
When sturdy toil through darkened wilds immense,
First pours the day-beams on the opening glade.
And glebes embrown'd with everlasting shade
Here equal fortunes, ease, the ground their own,
Augment their numbers with increase unknown --
Here hamlets grow -- here Europe's pilgrims come
From vassall'd woes to find a quiet home --
The eye no view of waning cities meets,
Of mouldering domes, of narrow, fetid streets:
Of grey-hair'd wretches who never owned a shed,
And beggars dying for the want of bread:
But often in transport round the horizon roves*
Over mountains, valleys, towns and stately groves;
Then dwells best pleased on cultivated plains,
Steeds, flocks, and herds commix'd with laboring swains.
Hail agriculture; by whose parent aid,
The deep foundations of our states are laid --
The seeds of greatness by thy hand are sown,
These shall mature with thee, and time alone
But still conduct us on thy sober plan,
Great source of wealth, and earliest friend of man!
Where lives the nation fraught with such resource,
Such vast materials for a naval force?
Where grow so rife the iron, masts and spars,
The hemp, the timber, and the daring tars?
Where gallant youths, inured to heat and cold
Through every zone, more hardy, strong and bold?
Let other climes of other produce boast,
Let gold, let diamonds grow on India's coast;
Let flaming suns from arid plains exhale
The spicy odours of Arabia's gale;
Let fragrant shrubs that bloom in region's calm,
Perfumes expiring bleed ambrosial balm;
Let olives flourish in Hesperia's soil,
Ananas ripen in each tropic isle;
Let Gallia gladden in her clust'ring vines,
Let Spain exult in her Peruvian mines;
Let plains of Barb'ry boast the generous steed speed;
Far-fam'd for beauty, strength, and matchless
But men, Columbia, be thy fairer growth,
Men of firm nerves who spurn at fear and sloth,
Men of high courage like their sires of old,
In labor patient as in danger bold!
Then wake, Columbia! daughter of the skies,
Awake to glory and to greatness rise!
Arise and spread thy virgin charms abroad,
Thou last, thou fairest offspring of a God!
Extend thy view where future blessings lie,
And open new prospects for th'enraptur'd eye!
See a new era on this globe begun,
And circling years in brighter orbits run!
See the fair dawn of universal peace,
When hell-born discord through the world shall cease!
Commence the task assigned by Heavens decree,
From pirate rage to vindicate the sea!
Bid thy live oaks in southern climes that grow,
And pines that shade the northern mounttain's brow,
In mighty pomp descending on the main,
With sails expanded sweep the watery plain,
Thy rising stars in unknown skies display,
And bound thy labors with the walks of day.
Bid from thy shore a philanthropic band,
The torch of science glowing in their hand.
Over trackless waves extend their daring toils,
To find and bless a thousand peopled isles --
Not lured to blood by domination's lust,
The pride of conquest, or of gold the thirst,
Not armed by impious zeal with burning brands,
To scatter flames and ruin round their strands;
Bid them to wilder'd men new lights impart,
Heavens noblest gifts with every useful art.
Bid thy young sons whom toil for glory forms,
New skill acquiring, learn to brave the storms,
To every region thy clad harvests bear --
Where happy nations breathe a milder air;
Or where the natives feel the scorching ray,
And pant and faint beneath a flood of day;
Or through those seas where mounts of ice arise,
The eternal growth of hyperborean skies,
Where feeble rayless suns obliquely roll,
Or one long night invests the frozen pole.
Then bid thy northern train to draw the line,
In ocean's caverns find a richer mine,
Then famed Potosi's or Golconda's ore,
Or all the treasures of the Asian shore.
Bid them with hooks delusive ply the flood,
And feed whole kingdoms with the finny food.
And bid thy youths whose brawney limb, are strung,
For bolder toils -- pursue those toils unsung --
Pursue through foreign seas with venurous sail,
The dreadful combat of the enormous whale:
Lo where he comes the foaming billows rise!
See spouted torrents cloud the misty skies,
See in the skiff the bold harpooner stand,
The murdering iron in his skilful hand;
From him alone the attentive youths await
A joyful victory, or a mournful fate:
His meas'ring eye the distance now explores,
His voice now checks and now impels the oars,
The panting crew a solemn silence keep,
Stillness and horror hover over the deep;
Now nigh he kens a vulnerable part,
And hurls with deadly aim the barbed dart;
The wounded monster plunging through the abyss
Makes uncoil'd cords in boiling water hiss;
And often the boat drawn headlong down the wave,
Leads trembling seamen to their watery grave,
And often, when rising on his back upborne,
Is dashed on high in countless pieces torn; --
But now afar see ocean's monarch rise,
Over troubled billows see how fast he flies,
And drags the feeble skiff along the flood,
Lashed into foam^ colored red with blood!
At length subsides the elemental strife*
His rage exhausted with his ebbing life;
As towers a rock on some sky-circled plain,
So looms his carcass over the dusky main.
Elate the victors urge the added toil,
Extract the bone and fill their ship with oil.
FINIS.

