Mr. Harper's Speech ON THE FOREIGN INTERCOURSE BILL, IN REPLY TO Mr. Nicholas
and Mr. Gallatin.

DELIVERED IN THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
UNITED STATES, On Friday the second of March, 1798.

THE following Amendment to the Bill providing the Means of Intercourse between
the United States and Foreign Nations, being under consideration, to wit, In
the Section which provides that the President shall not allow to any Minister
Plenipotentiary a greater sum than at the rate of nine thousand dollars per
annum, as a compensation for all his personal services and other expenses; nor
a greater sum for the same than four thousand five hundred dollars per annum,
to a Charge des Affairs; strike out the word "Plenipotentiary," and insert in
lieu thereof the words "to Great Britain, France or Spain;" strike out the
words "Charge des Affairs," and insert in lieu thereof the words "any Minister
to any other foreign nation:"

MR. HARPER DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING SPEECH.
IT was my wish, and my hope, Mr. Chairman, when this business was again called
up some days ago, after an intermission of three weeks or more, that we should
at length be permitted to come to a decision without further debate, on a
question which had so long occupied the attention of the House, and already,
perhaps, exhausted the patience of the public. I and those with whom I think on
this occasion, were willing, for the sake of an early decision, to pass by,
unanswered, many things which, though susceptible, in our opinion, of an easy
refutation, were calculated to make an impression to our disadvantage. We were
even content to leave unnoticed the violent philippic of the gentleman from
Virginia (Mr. Nicholas) who introduced this motion, and who, in support of it,
has allowed himself so great a latitude of invective against its opposers and
their adherents. We therefore repeatedly called for the question, and did all
in our power to close a debate in which such immoderate use had already been
made of the indulgence of the House.

But it did not so seem good to the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. Gallatin).
He yesterday pronounced a discourse of three hours and an half long, in which
he repeated assertions formerly refuted, and made them the ground of a long
train of reasoning; and advanced many new positions equally untenable, but
equally capable, if left undetected and unexposed, of misleading the mind.
These assertions, which the gentleman from Pennsylvania has not attempted to
prove, though they are the ground-works of all his reasonings, were advanced
with a boldness which nothing but a belief that he was to remain unanswered,
could have produced. His speech, when prepared in his closet, was evidently
intended for a concluding speech; and hence he has laid down positions which he
knew to be unfounded, with a boldness whereof even he himself has heretofore
exhibited no example. On these positions, he has built a gigantic structure of
argument to support the present motion; a structure which, like a vast edifice
resting on loose blocks, must fall and crumble in the dust, as soon as some
person shall take the trouble to discover and knock away its frail and
temporary props.

It is for this purpose, that I now rise once more to trespass on the
indulgence of the committee. The loose blocks which support this edifice I mean
to knock away; an operation which requires neither strength nor skill, which
may be performed by any person who stands near enough to discover the defect;
and then it will be seen with what speedy ruin a structure so large, and
appearing so solid, when viewed from a distance, will tumble to the earth.

Though called up, however, Mr. Chairman, by the assertions of the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, I shall not confine myself wholly to them, but shall
incidentally notice such observations of other gentlemen as may appear
reducible to any head of argument. There are some parts of the last speech of
the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Nicholas) on which, though they appear to have
no necessary connection with the subject, I cannot omit to make some
animadversions. Those I shall, in the first place, submit to the committee, and
then proceed to other and more important parts of the discussions.

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Nicholas) perhaps foreseeing that ample
retribution of praise which he has since received, employed a considerable part
of his last speech in a most pompous panegyric on his friend from Pennsylvania
(Mr. Gallatin). Had he stopped here, Mr. Chairman; had he contented himself with
extolling the virtues and talents of his friend and political associate, even
at the expense of every body else, I should have been disposed to pass it by
unnoticed. The gentleman from Virginia, no doubt, entertains this exalted
opinion of his friend from Pennsylvania, and I should never deny him the right,
or grudge him the pleasure of expressing it; nor have I any disposition to
detract from the merit of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, or diminish the
reputation which he may be supposed to possess. But the gentleman from Virginia
did not stop here. Not content with extolling his friend above all that is
great and distinguished in the country, he went on to impute the worst of
motives, the most base and contemptible passions, to those who do not partake
in his enthusiastic admiration. He told us that frequent attacks were made, in
this House, on the gentleman from Pennsylvania, and that those attacks
proceeded from envy of his superior talents, were a tacit acknowledgment of
that preeminence of ability, which every day's debate rendered more and more
conspicuous.

Mr. Chairman, I might, I know, be excused from taking any part of this
observation to myself personally; for it will be remembered that I have made
none of those attacks which are spoken of on the gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Perhaps this has been because I have, for my part, never felt that superiority,
never perceived that pre-eminence, from which the attacks are supposed to
proceed. That the gentleman from Pennsylvania has merit no body will deny, and
no body can be less disposed to deny it than me; but I confess that I have
never observed that superiority over many other members of this House, much
less over all, whereby the gentleman from Virginia has been so much dazzled.
And I would remind that gentleman, that all greatness is by comparison, and
that the comparison, in cases of this kind, is generally made, not between a
man and his antagonists, but between him and his associates. Even a rush-light
may seem a resplendent luminary, when compared to a glowworm; and in a dark
room, the smallest spark becomes bright and distinguished. I would submit it to
the gentleman from Virginia, whether he has not committed some mistake of this
kind. Amidst the thick gloom that is observed to rest on a certain description
of persons, a certain class of political opinion, in this country, I will not
say in this House, is it to be wondered at, if the glimmerings of sense and
capacity which are sometimes emitted from that quarter by the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, should dazzle the eyes of his associates? But they must not judge
of the eyes of the community by their own eyes, nor conclude that the
brightness of the sun is to be found in those flashes of light which,
undiscernable amidst the full blaze of day, are indebted for all their apparent
resplendency to the blackness of that night from whose bosom they are sent
forth. Let me advise the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Chairman, to forbear his
panegyrics. They produce no effect on the decision of the American public,
before which the gentleman from Pennsylvania, with his associates, and his
opponents, stands to be judged. This judgment will be formed on better premises
than the panegyrics or the invectives pronounced in this House. It will place
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, and those who appear with him on the political
scene, in their true positions; it will not only be impartial, but final and
conclusive; and to it all of us, whatever we may think or say of ourselves, or
of each other, must implicitly submit.

The gentleman from Virginia, having paid this large tribute of flattery to his
friend from Pennsylvania, who, to do him justice, has not been unmindful of the
proper retribution, went on to select from among his political associates
another object of enthusiastic adulation, whom he has extolled in terms still
more extravagant, and with allusions still more offensive. I mean, Sir, the
late minister to France; and as I shall have occasion to make some
observations, of no very flattering nature, on the conduct of that gentleman, I
beg leave to remark, in the first place, that for any thing which I may say
here, I shall not claim the protection of my seat, or shelter myself under its
privileges.

The gentleman from Virginia has represented the talents and accomplishments of
this person, the late minister to France, as so preeminently superior, not only
to the distinguished character (General Pinckney) who was sent to succeed him,
but to every other character in this country, to any person who might have been
sent, his qualifications as so extraordinary, his services as so great, and his
conduct as so exemplary, that his recall could be considered in no other light
than as the act of an assassin. Yes, Mr. Chairman, the gentleman from Virginia
has declared that the recall of the late minister to France was the act of an
assassin. And who is this assassin? It is Washington; for by Washington this
minister was recalled; and for this exercise of his constitutional powers as
President, he is branded by the gentleman from Virginia with the name of
assassin.

Mr. Chairman, were I to give way to the feelings which naturally arise in the
breast of an American at hearing the epithet assassin affixt to the name of
Washington, I should apply expressions to the gentleman from Virginia little
suitable to the dignity of this place, and little consonant with the respect
which I entertain for his personal character. But I will repress them; and
instead of giving vent to a just and natural indignation, I will content myself
with repelling this rude, this unlooked-for attack, upon the administration of
this government and its late venerable and illustrious chief.

This I am fortunately enabled to do in a manner the most easy and complete;
for the late minister to France has written a book. "Oh that mine enemy might
write a book!" was the affecting exclamation of a virtuous and suffering man of
old, unjustly accused, but conscious of rectitude, and wishing ardently for an
opportunity of confounding his accusers out of their own mouths! "Oh that mine
enemy might write a book!" ought also to be the exclamation of the American
government; which, to use the expression of its late illustrious chief,
requires nothing but a knowledge of the truth to justify its measures, and
cannot but be desirous of having this truth frankly and fully displayed. The
American government has been more fortunate than Job. His enemies wisely
confined themselves to the strong holds of dark, vague and general abuse. They
practiced the "Ambiguas in vulgum spargere voces" of the poet, and wisely
avoided the open field of facts and specific accusations. But not so the late
minister to France. Prompted by that restless vanity for which demagogues of an
inferior order are always remarkable, he has rashly and foolishly challenged
his enemy to combat on the open plain of dates and facts, and has written a
book. In this book is to be found the most complete justification of the
Executive for his recall, in every respect except that it was so long delayed;
for the book contains the most singular display of incapacity, unfaithfulness
and presumption, of neglect of orders, forgetfulness of the dignity, rights and
interests of his own country, and servile devotedness to the government of the
country to which he was sent, that can be found in the history of diplomacy. In
this book it appears that the late minister to France, took every occasion of
thwarting the views of the government by which he was sent, that he forebore to
do much that he was ordered, and did much that he was expressly forbidden; that
he, in all cases, set up his own judgment above the judgment of his government;
that he assured France, that this country was ready to submit to any violation
of its rights, to any infractions of its treaties which she might think fit to
practice, and that if she thought these violations and infractions advantageous
to herself she ought to persist in them, for in that case we should not only
submit, but acquiesce with cheerfulness and pleasure: that he made a direct
attempt to render this country tributary to France, in order to gain her
assistance for accomplishing, by force, objects which our government was then
striving to accomplish, and actually did accomplish by amicable negotiation:
that he did every thing in his power to involve this country in the war against
England, pursuant to the wishes and policy of France, and directly contrary,
not only to what he knew to be the desire and determination of our government,
but to the express letter of his instructions. All this, Mr. Chairman, appears
from this book, and it is but a small part of the catalogue which might be
presented. The book lies before me; its disgusting pages I will not open to the
House; the members no doubt have perused it, and to their own recollection I
refer for the proof of all that I have advanced. The late minister to France
stands self-convicted of every thing short of selling his country for a price.
Of this I do not accuse him, but nothing else, which his incapacity permitted
him to do, has he left undone.

And this, Mr. Chairman, is the man, for recalling whom the epithet of assassin
is applied to the name of Washington!

[Mr. Nicholas explained, by saying, that he had said, that after the full
disclosure of the conduct of Mr. Monroe, he was sorry to find that gentlemen
thought it necessary to make insinuations against him; but that since gentlemen
made it necessary to give an opinion on the subject, he had no hesitation in
declaring, that, in his opinion, the publication had proved that it was in the
power of the Executive to have preserved peace with France, but that they had
wantonly thrown it from us. He said he was convinced, that the discovery was a
very unpleasant one to gentlemen who had advocated certain measures; but he
thought it could not be condemned after the attacks made on that gentleman; and
that the effect was like the wounds of the assassin, who finds his enemy
unexpectedly prepared.]

I do not think, (continued Mr. Harper) that the gentleman from Virginia has
made the matter better by his explanation. It appears by that very explanation,
that he did apply the term assassin to General Washington for having recalled
the late minister to France; a term which, some years ago, surely could not
have been expected ever to be applied to that name within the United States,
much less within these walls.

I must beg leave, Mr. Chairman, to conclude these remarks with the declaration
wherewith I began them, that I do not intend to shelter myself under the
privileges of my place for any thing that I have said on this subject. If the
remarks which I have made on his friend should appear harsh to the gentleman
from Virginia, let him recollect that he himself provoked and gave occasion for
them, by declaring that General Washington had acted the part of an assassin.

Having disposed, Mr. Chairman, of this part of the subject, I will next advert
to the constitutional ground taken by the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr.
Gallatin). That gentleman prefaced his observations, by declaring that the
amendment under consideration went no further than to reduce the salaries of
certain ministers plenipotentiary from 9000 to 4500 dollars; but.
unfortunately, he forgot his tenet before he arrived at the middle of his
speech, for he soon confessed that the object of the amendment was to restrain
and control the Executive in the exercise of the power of appointing foreign
ministers, which is vested in it by the constitution, and having made this
acknowledgment, so contradictory to his first position, the gentleman from
Pennsylvania proceeded to show, by the utmost exertion of powers, that it was
right and proper for the House thus to interfere, thus to control the
Executive, and to use its power over appropriations, for effecting that
purpose. Indeed the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Nicholas) at the outset of the
business, expressly stated this to be the sole object of his amendment. With a
candor and openness characteristic of his usual conduct, he avowed that his
object was not to save money, but to restrict the President in the exercise of
this power. He told us that the diplomatic corpse had been improperly increased;
that the number of ministers had been improperly extended; that there was
danger of a further extension, whereby a dangerous executive influence in the
House was likely to be produced; and that it was right for the House to
interfere, prevent this extension, and bring back the establishment to its
original limits; and this he stated to be the object of his amendment. Hence,
then, Mr. Chairman, it is manifest, not only from the arguments of the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, but from the express declaration of the mover of
this amendment himself, that the question now agitated, is a question of power,
and not a question of money. It is manifestly not a question to know whether a
minister plenipotentiary shall have this, that, or the other salary, but
whether this House shall direct the President where he shall appoint ministers
plenipotentiary, where ministers resident, and where no ministers at all. The
question goes this whole length; for if the House can say, as the amendment
declares it can and ought, that no minister plenipotentiary is necessary at
Lisbon or Berlin, it can say, with the same propriety, and on the same
principles, that no minister plenipotentiary is necessary at London, Paris or
Madrid, or that no minister is necessary any where.

That such is the object of the amendment, that the question between us is a
question of power, and not of money, is further evident from the mode of
argument whereby the amendment is supported. Gentlemen do not pretend that 9000
dollars is too much for a minister plenipotentiary at Lisbon or Berlin, on that
ground we should cheerfully meet them, and agree to a reduction of the salary,
if it should appear to be too high; but they tell us, and attempt to prove,
that there is no need of a minister plenipotentiary at Lisbon or Berlin. In
answer, we allege, that by the Constitution, the President and Senate are
solely authorized to judge where ministers of this, that or the other grade
ought to be employed, and that this house has nothing to do with the business
but fix their salaries, which it is bound to do in a suitable manner. This
gentlemen deny; and thus the question of power, the sole question which has
been agitatated, or is considered of any importance, arises between us.

I say "the only question which is considered as important;" because the
supporters of the amendment have laid no stress whatsoever on the question of
expense. They have, on the contrary, shown themselves ready to abandon it, for
the sake of gaining the least additional chance of support in the great
question, the question of power. This is manifest from the motion of the
gentleman from Marylan (Mr. S. Smith) which was immediately agreed to by the
mover of the amendment. By the amendment, as first proposed, ministers
plenipotentiary were to be allowed only at London and Paris. The gentleman from
Maryland proposed, to allow one at Madrid also, because he had observed that
the impropriety of recalling our minister from that Court had been particularly
insisted on by some who opposed the amendment. The gentleman from Virginia
immediately consented to modify his amendment, so as to leave a minister
plenipotentiary at Madrid. From which it would appear most evidently, if we did
not know it before, that gentlemen care not how many ministers plenipotentiary
there are, nor how much money is spent in maintaining them, provided the House
of Representatives can obtain the power of controlling and directing the
appointment. It is to obtain this power, and not to save public money, that
gentlemen struggle; and provided the principle can but be established, they are
content to have ministers plenipotentiary as many as any body pleases; for they
know that the principle may be as completely established in the case of one
minister, as by turning out the whole diplomatic corpse.

And notwithstanding all this, the gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. Gallatin)
tells us that this is merely a question about salaries, a question of saving
9000 dollars, and wonders how it could lead to a controversy about the
constitutional powers of the President and the House! This proves that the
gentleman from Pennsylvania intended his speech for a concluding speech, or
that he entertains a most contemptuous opinion of the understanding of the
House.

I shall, therefore, Mr. Chairman, consider this amendment as having for its
object, and its sole object too, the establishment of this principle: that the
House of Representatives, by its power over appropriations, has a right to
control and direct the Executive in the appointment of foreign ministers. I
shall treat the question which arises upon this amendment, as a question of
power between this House and the President and Senate, and I shall endeavor to
show that the amendment, if carried, would be a direct breach of the
constitution, an alarming usurpation by this branch, on the constitutional
powers of the Executive department.

The supporters of this amendment, avowing its object to be the establishment
of a control over the appointment of foreign ministers, contend that this House
have a right to exercise that control, and rely on that part of the
Constitution which provides that "no money shall be issued from the treasury
without an appropriation by law," As this House, say gentlemen, must concur in
passing all laws, it follows that it may refuse its assent to appropriations.
In judging whether it will give or refuse this assent, it must be guided solely
by its own discretion, by its own opinion about the necessity or utility of the
object for which an appropriation is wanted. If it should think this object
unnecessary, or hurtful, it is bound in duty to withhold the appropriation.
Consequently, it may refuse to appropriate for a minister to Lisbon, Berlin, or
any other place, if it should think such minister, though appointed by the
President and Senate, unnecessary or injurious. This I take to be a fair state
of the argument.

But gentlemen while they lay such stress upon this part of the Constitution,
seem entirely to forget another part, that part which provides that the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint
foreign ministers and consuls. It will, however, be admitted, that these two
parts of the Constitution are equally authoritative, and must both have effect;
that the whole instrument, like all other instruments, must be taken together,
and so construed that none of its provisions may be defeated or rendered
nugatory. These two powers, therefore, the power of appointment in the
President and Senate, and the power of appropriation in the House, must be
reconciled to each other; must be made to act as mutual helps, not as mutual
obstructions. How is this to be done? Certainly not by admitting the doctrine
of this amendment, which would utterly destroy one of the powers; would give
the house an absolute control over the appointment of ministers, and reduce the
President and Senate to the mere power of making a nomination, which the house
might refuse or agree to, according to its good pleasure. This is the plain and
necessary consequence of admitting the principle, contended for in support of
this amendment, that the house, when called on to appropriate for an officer,
legally appointed, may, in the first place enquire, whether the appointment is
necessary.

Some other way of reconciling these powers, must therefore be found out; and
which is it? We contend, Mr. Chairman, that it is thus. An office must first be
authorized by law; for nobody pretends that the President and Senate can create
offices. When the office is thus authorized, the President and Senate exercise
their power of appointment, and fill the office. The House of Representatives
then exercises its constitutional power over appropriations, by providing an
adequate compensation for the officer. In the exercise of this power, they
cannot enquire whether the office was necessary or not; for that has already
been determined by the law which authorized it. Neither can they enquire
whether the office was properly filled; for that would be to invade the powers
of the President and Senate, to whom, by the constitution, the right of choosing
the officer is exclusively referred. What then is their power, and into what
may they enquire? They may enquire what is a proper and adequate compensation
for such an officer? They may fix the amount of his salary: and in fixing it,
they must be guided by a proper discretion; by a sense of duty; by the nature
of the office, the circumstances of the country, and the public service. Thus
the constitution would be reconciled, and each department would act within its
proper sphere. The President and Senate could make no appointment till the
office should be authorized by law, consequently there would be no danger of
abuse. When they had made the appointment, they could not fix the amount of
salary, or order the money to be paid out of the treasury; another guard
against the danger of abuse. When the appointment should be duly made, the
house, on the other hand, would be bound to provide an adequate salary; and
could not, by refusing it, defeat the law and the appointment, because they
might think the one unnecessary, or the other unwise, and this principle would
be a guard against any abuse of the powers of the house: would prevent it from
invading the province of the other departments, and subverting the principles
of the constitution.

Had gentlemen confined themselves within these limits, had they carried their
enquiries no farther than to the adequacy of this or that salary, this debate
would never have existed. We should have met them on the ground of sufficiency
of salaries, without any reference to constitutional points, or contention
about constitutional powers. But this was not their conduct. They expressly
declared, not that the salaries were too high, and ought to be reduced, but
that the appointments themselves were unnecessary, and ought to be abridged;
and thus they drove us into the constitutional question, and compelled us to
defend the Executive powers against their attacks in this house.

But, say gentlemen, is the house always bound to appropriate? If the President
should appoint an hundred ministers plenipotentiary, must the house, without
enquiry, give money to support them all? What guard would there then be, they
exclaim, against an enormous and abusive extension of the diplomatic
establishment?

To this I answer, Mr. Chairman, in the first place, that we have a security in
the responsibility of the President. He is elected by the people, and elected
every four years. All these appointments, though sanctioned by the Senate, must
originate with him: and therefore he is particularly, and almost solely,
responsible. His character is at stake. He is a single actor on a most
conspicuous theater; and all eyes are upon him. He is watched with all the
jealousy, which, in this country particularly, is entertained of Executive
power. He is watched by the gentlemen themselves who support this amendment,
and who are sufficiently prone to find fault with him and abuse him, even when
he acts properly. This he well knows, and consequently will take care to do
nothing which may strengthen their hands, by giving them ground for censure.
Should he act improperly, make foolish or unnecessary appointments, he must
disgust his friends and supporters, forfeit the public esteem, and lose his
election. He may be even turned out by impeachment before the time for (...)
election arrives. These, I apprehend, are sufficient securities (...) wanton
misconduct.

I answer, in the next place, that if the President (...) think fit to abuse
his powers, it is his own concern, and no (...) of this house, unless, indeed,
we choose to impeach him. We are sent here by the people, to exercise our own
powers, and not to watch ever the President; who, equally with us, derives his
powers from the people, and is amenable to them, and not to this house, for the
exercise of those powers. We may, indeed, as individuals, censure his conduct,
as we may that of any member on this floor, and endeavor to prevent the people
from re-electing him: but, as a body, we have nothing to do with him, or his
conduct, but impeach him. If he proposes measures to us which we do not
approve, we may reject them; in the same manner as he may reject bills which we
send up to him: but we have no more right to prevent him, either directly or
indirectly, from making such appointments as he pleases, than he has to prevent
us from passing such votes or resolutions as we please. The interference in one
case is equally unconstitutional as in the other. It has, indeed, become
fashionable, with some gentlemen on this floor, to consider this House as "the
people," and to speak and act as if the people had delegated to us their
general superintending power over the other departments: but this doctrine is
unknown to the constitution, to the utter subversion of which it directly
leads. It directly leads to that concentration of powers in one popularbody,
which it was the main object of the constitution to prevent, and which it was
and is the main object of those gentlemen to introduce: that concentration
whereto this amendment is considered and intended, by its supporters, as an
introductory step.

I answer, in the last place, Mr. Chairman, that if the President should
appoint an hundred ministers plenipotentiary, or commit any other such wanton
and foolish abuse of his power, it would be an extreme case, which would speak
for itself, and dictate the line of conduct which this House and the country
ought to pursue. But we never can legistate on extreme cases. They must be left
to suggest and provide their own remedies, when they occur. Suppose two-thirds
of both Houses, under the influence of some unaccountable madness, should pass
a law, in ipite of the President, for building fifty ships of the line, to be
given to France in order to augment her navy, or for any other violent purpose,
how ought the President and the country to act? I do not know: these would be
extreme cases, and they would carry their own evidence, and the indication of
their own remedies, with them. We may as well suppose extreme cases of one kind
as of another; and however our own self-love may induce us to think that there
is less danger from us than from the President and Senate, and that power,
however dangerous in their hands, is perfectly safe as soon as it comes into
ours, the constitution, and the framers of it, judged otherwise, and they
judged rightly. It is infinitely more dangerous in our hands, when
uncontrolled; because we have less personal responsibility, and are far more
liable to the influence of passion. When, therefore, these extreme cases occur,
we will act accordingly, and should they obviously require the breach of a law,
the necessity will be universally felt and acknowledged, and we must break it.
All that I contend for is, that the present is not an extreme case, and that
these appointments being authorized by law, a law must be broken before we can
defeat the appointments, according to the avowed object of this amendment. I
contend that when we undertake to defeat these appointments, we must consider
them as authorized by law, as much as the appointment of a Judge, or a
Secretary of the Treasury; and must enquire whether the motives are
sufficiently urgent, the case sufficiently extreme, to induce the necessity of
breaking a law. This is denied by gentlemen who support the amendment. They
contend that these appointments of foreign ministers are not to be considered
as completely authorized by law; and consequently that the House may withhold
the appropriation without breaking any law. This is the very point in dispute;
and to this point I shall direct such remaining observations as seem necessary
to be made on the constitutional question.

The question then is, Mr. Chairman, from what source is the office of minister
plenipotentiary, or any other foreign minister derived? The officer, we well
know, must be appointed by the President and Senate; but the office and the
officer are distinct things; and before an officer can be appointed, an office
must exist; unless gentlemen are disposed to admit, as I certainly am not, that
the President and Senate can create offices. The gentleman from Pennsylvania
(Mr. Gallatin) well aware that if the office of foreign minister could be
considered as legally existing previous to the appointment by the President and
Senate, and independently of it, the conclusion which we contend for would
irresistably follow, has denied this position; has denied that the office of
foreign minister becomes a complete and legal office as soon as the officer is
appointed by the President and Senate.

[Mr. Gallatin explained. He had asserted, he said, the very contrary; and had
admitted, though he considered it as a disputable point, that the office was
like that of a Judge, and became complete on the appointment by the President.
But he had denied that the House was bound to appropriate for the officer.]

(Mr. Harper continued) I know, Mr. Chairman, what the gentleman denied and
what he admitted; and it appears by his explanation, that I was right in my
first statement. The gentleman contended, and that was the leading point of his
argument, that the office of foreign minister was derived from the appointment
of the President; and why did he contend for this? Because he knows that the
President cannot erect offices; and consequently if the office of foreign
minister had no other origin than the appointment of the President, it could
not be considered as a legally existing and complete office, until this House
had concurred in it. This was the scope and object of the gentleman's argument,
and hence his solicitude to establish the position, that the office of foreign
minister originates in the appointment of the President. He said, indeed, that
he would admit these offices to be analogous to those of Judges; but he
immediately denied it again, by denying that the House was bound by any law to
appropriate for these offices, as they evidently are for Judges; and in denying
this, he denied every thing. The gentleman admitted, in form, but denied in
substance, and contended for principles directly at war with his seeming
admission. These are complete offices, according to the gentleman, but they
were derived from no legal authority, nor is the House bound by any law to
appropriate for their support. That is, they are legal and they are not legal;
they are offices, and they are not offices; and that is the amount of the
gentleman's admission and of his explanation. Thus he told the House, on a
former occasion, that he did not dispute the power of the President and Senate
to make treaties; he only contended that those treaties, when made, were not
binding till the House had concurred in them by granting appropriations: in
other words, that the President and Senate could make treaties, which, however,
though made, were in fact not treaties till ratified by the House; that is,
that there might be treaties, which were not treaties. This was the substance
and amount of that gentleman's reasoning on a former occasion; and it
exceedingly resembles his present argument, as just now explained by himself.

The question, therefore, between the gentleman from Pennsylvania and us, is
whether the office of foreign minister be derived from the appointment of the
President and Senate, concurred in by this House; or whether it must be traced
to a higher origin, and considered as completely existing before the
appointment takes place, in the same manner as the office of Secretary of the
Treasury, or of State, which completely existed as soon as the law was passed
establishing those departments, and before any officer was appointed? We
contend for the latter doctrine, and the gentleman from Pennsylvania for the
former. If he be right, it follows that the appointment is incomplete until
this House gives its sanction; for we well know that the President and Senate
cannot of themselves create an office. If we be right, it follows, that as soon
as an appointment is made to fill this office, this House is legally bound to
supply an adequate salary, in the same manner as for any other office created
by law.

There are two modes, Mr. Chairman, by which an office may exist; either by
law, or by the constituton; and from one or the other of these sources the
office of foreign minister must be derived. It is not derived from the
Constitution, like the office of President, Vice President, or Speaker of the
House; for the constitution speaks of it as already in existence. The
constitution does not say there shall be foreign ministers, and then go on to
direct how they shall be appointed, as in the case of President; but
considering the office as already existing, it merely directs how it shall be
filled. "The President, it says, by and with the advice and consent of the
Senate, shall appoint foreign ministers and consuls." Unless, then, gentlemen
are disposed to deny that there were foreign ministers previous to the
constitution, they cannot contend that the office of foreign minister is
derived from the constitution. It must, therefore, be derived from the law.

But from what law? Not from any act of Congress; for we know that there is no
such act. Congress has never done any thing more than to fix salaries for
foreign ministers, and vote money to pay them: And besides, the constitution,
which is previous to all acts of Congress, recognizes the office of foreign
minister as already existing, and directs in what manner the appointments to
fill it shall be made. From what law, then, is this office derived? Mr.
Chairman, it is derived from the law of nations.

In every civilized state there are two sorts of law, derived from two distinct
sources; the municipal law, and the law of nations. The law of nations,
deriving its origin and its force from the consent of nations themselves,
mutually given to each other, is independent of their municipal laws, which
have relation to their own internal affairs, and depend upon the acts of their
respective governments. The municipal laws of the United States consist in our
acts of Congress, and are derived from the authority given by the constitution.
The law of nations, as it respects us, has a higher origin, and became binding
on us from the moment when we erected ourselves into an independent state, and
entered into the pale of civilized nations. We then gave our consent to that
law, when we began to send and receive ambassadors, and to form treaties with
other powers. This law, then, became binding on us by our own consent and our
own acts, and this law establishes the office, regulates the duties, and
defines the privileges of foreign ministers. That office, consequently, was
estabblished among us, as soon as we submitted ourselves to the law of nations.
Accordingly we had foreign ministers before we had a President, before we had a
Congress, and before we had a constitution. Even before the first articles of
Confederation were entered into, we considered this office as existing; for
those articles do not establish the office, but merely declare how it shall be
filled, by whom foreign ministers shall be sent, by whom they shall be
appointed.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania, indeed, has told us that the office of
foreign minister originated in the appointment of the president and Senate. But
where did that gentleman learn that the President and Senate can create or
originate offices? He has said, that the office becomes complete when
sanctioned by an appropriation in this House. But all offices not existing by
the constitution, must be created by law; and where did he learn that this
House could concur in a law, by any other means than having a bill before them
and passing it with the usual forms? Where did he learn that this House could,
in this indirect way, by voting a sum of money, legalize an act not otherwise
legal, and give the force of a law to what otherwise would not be a law? The
gentleman has neither learned this in the constitutien, nor in the proceedings
of the House; but though we know not where he learned it, we are well apprized
of the purpose for which he introduced it here. That purpose I have already
explained.

It being manifest, then, Mr. Chairman, that the office of foreign minister is
established by the law of nations, it only remains to enquire whether that law
is complete and binding. Can there be a doubt that it is so within its proper
sphere? Do not our courts of justice acknowledge its existence, and yield to
its authority as to all objects on which it is calculated to act? Is any aid
required from acts of Congress or other municipal laws, in order to give it
efficacy? Certainly not. These two kinds of law, the law of nations and the
municipal law, are each supreme in their respective spheres. They operate,
indeed, upon different objects, and are executed in different modes; but each
is complete in its operation. From hence it results that an office existing by
the law of nations, has an existence as completely legal, as one which exists
by act of Congress: that the office of foreign minister is as much a legal
office, exists as much by the laws of this country, as the office of Chief
Justice, or Secretary of State; and that when one of these offices is filled by
the appointment of the President and Senate, the House is under as complete a
legal obligation to provide an adequate salary for it, as for the other. This
House can no more say this, that, or the other minister plenipotentiary is
unnecessary, and we will not provide for him, than it can say, a Chief Justice,
or a Secretary of State, is unnecessary, and we will not provide for him. It
would as much be guilty of a violation of law in one case as in the other.

But, Mr. Chairman, if these conclusions, and the premises whereon they are
founded, should be erroneous, if the doctrines of the gentleman from
Pennsylvania should be correct, still this amendment cannot be supported. It is
in direct contradiction with the principles whereon its supporters rely, and is
refuted by the very arguments adduced to defend it.

What is the doctrine of the gentleman from Pennsylvania? That the office of
foreign minister originates with the appointment of the President, and becomes
completely established when this House has sanctioned it by an appropriation. I
state this to be his doctrine though he did not lay it down in these express
words. This is the substance, for otherwise he must admit, in direct
contradiction to his whole argument, that the office not only originates, as he
says, but also becomes complete, by the appointment of the President and
Senate: in other words, that the President and Senate can create offices. When
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, therefore, told us, that although the office
of foreign minister origina es with the appointment of the President and
Senate, yet the House is not bound to appropriate a proper salary, as he admits
it to be bound in case of an office erected by law; the office of Chief
Justice, for instance, he told us, in substance, that this office, though
originating with the appointment of the President and Senate, remained
inchoate, did not become a complete and legal office, till sanctioned by an
appropriation in this House. This, Mr. Chairman, is the true doctrine of the
gentleman from Pennsylvania; and it is precisely analogous to his doctrine of
inchoate treaties, about which we heard so much on a former occasion. His
doctrine about treaties was this; that a treaty, though made by the President
and Senate, is but an inchoate act, till completed by the assent and sanction
of this House. The House, he said, was in no wise bound to give this assent;
but when it should be given, the treaty would then become complete.
Accordingly, after this House had assented to the British treaty, by passing an
appropriation for carrying it into effect, that gentleman told us that the
treaty was complete, and had become as much the act of this House as of the
President and Senate. This position he has repeated more than once; and in the
debates on the President's speech, during the summer session, he laid it down
in the most emphatic manner. I presume, Mr. Chairman, that an "inchoate office"
is like an inchoate treaty, and may become perfect in the same manner. The
gentleman admits, nay contends, that what he calls an inchoate treaty, becomes
perfect and binding, to all intents and purposes, on this House, and every body
else, as soon as the House gives its sanction by an appropriation. Hence it
irresistibly follows, that this inchoate office of foreign minister, this
office originating, according to the gentleman from Pennsylvania, in the
appointment of the President and Senate, but not binding on the House, and
therefore not complete, must become complete and binding from the moment when
it receives the sanction of the House. If not, it never can be complete and
binding; must always remain an inchoate thing, which would be atmost manifest
absurdity.

If, therefore, the sanction of the house can legalize and complete that office
of foreign minister which originates in the appointment of the President, this
sanction has already been given, and these offices of minister plenipotentiary
to Lisbon and Berlin, which it is the object of this amendment to destroy, have
already been legalized and completed by the assent of this house. They are,
consequently at this time, according to the principles of gentlemen themselves,
completely legal offices; as much so as those of President, Chief Justice, or
Secretary of State; and these gentlemen, in attempting to destroy them, by
withholding an appropriation, are guilty of as direct, and as great an
infraction of the law and the Constitution, as if they were to attempt to drive
the President of the United States from his office, by refusing the annual
appropriation for payment of his salary. An office must either be legal or not
legal. If legal, it is equally binding, in whatever mode it became so, whether
by the law of nations, an act of Congress, or the appointment of the President
and Senate, sanctioned by this house; and there exists the same obligation on
the house to provide an adequate salary in one case as in the other.

Will gentlemen ask when these offices of minister plenipotentiary to Lisbon
and Berlin, received the sanction of this house? Lest they should have
forgotten, I will tell them. The first received it in May 1796, and the second
from this present Congress, in June, 1797. It will appear by a reference to the
files of the house, that on the 28th of May 1796, the President of the United
States sent a message to the house informing it that he had appointed ministers
plenipotentiary to Madrid and Lisbon, instead of ministers resident, and that
this augmentation of the grade would require an additional appropriation. In
censequence of his message, a bill was passed on the fifth of June following by
which the necessary appropriation was made. Thus the office of minister
plenipotentiary to Lisbon received the express sanction of this house.

Surely we cannot have forgotten what passed in this house last June, during
the first session of this Congress. We were informed by the estimates from the
department of state, that 13,500 dollars would be wanted for the salary and
outfit of a minister plenipotentiary to Berlin. A bill was brought in
containing this appropriation. The appropriation was opposed; but, after full
discussion, it was carried, by a great majority, and the bill passed. Thus the
office of minister plenipotentiary to Berlin received the express sanction of
this present House of Representatives.

If these offices, therefore, were inchoate before, according to the doctrine
of the Gentleman from Pennsylvania, they became complete, on his own
principles, as soon as these appropriations were consented to by this house;
for he has told us over and over, that an inchoate treaty becomes complete as
soon as this house gives its assent by an act of appropriation; and, by the
whole tenor, and the very terms of his argument, he places an inchoate treaty
and an inchoate office, on the same footing: Consequently, he is now bound to
appropriate for this office as much as he admits himself to be bound to
appropriate any sums which may still be wanted for carrying into effect a
treaty once sanctioned by this house. And yet that gentleman, and those who
agree with him on the present occasion, are content, for the sake of effecting
their favorite object, the establishment of a control over Executive
appointments, to act in direct opposition to their own principles, in manifest
inconsistency with those very doctrines for which, on former occasions, they
have so strenuously contended! The truths, that they shape their doctrines to
the purposes of the moment; and abandon them, without difficulty, when those
purposes require it. When they had resolved to defeat the British treaty in
this house, they introduced the doctrine of inchoate. They alleged that the
house was under no obligation to carry a treaty into effect, because it was
only an inchoate act till sanctioned by this house; but they admitted, in the
most explicit manner, and made it a part of their doctrine of inchoate, that
when this house had given its sanction, the treaty became complete and
obligatory. Now that their object is to turn certain ministers plenipotentiary
out of office, and to establish a precedent of the control of this house over
the executive in the exercise of its constitutional functions, they discard
their favorite doctrine of inchoate, which is no longer adequate to the
purpose. They go farther, and contend that the house, by its power over
appropriations, has a right to control all the acts, to stop all the movements
of the other departments: that it may withhold appropriations, in all cases,
according to its own good pleasure or caprice; which the gentlemen dignify with
the name of discretion. There cannot be a doubt that the doctrine now contended
for, would enable this house to drive the Secretaries, the Judges, and even the
President, from office, by withholding the appropriation for their salaries, if
ever they should become personally obnoxious to a majority of this house. The
step from the present doctrines to that point, would be far shorter than from
inchoate to the present doctrines; and the right of encroachment being once
established, there will be nothing to set bounds to it, but the good pleasure
of the house. I have heard it avowed, Mr. Chairman, that the affairs of this
country can never prosper until all the present heads of departments shall be
driven from office; and I have no doubt that the means of effecting that
purpose, so desirable to these gentlemen, are intended to be furnished by this
amendment. Should it provail, it will establish a precedent that may easily be
extended to that or any other object; and have we reason to believe, from what
we now see and have witnessed on former occasions, that the extension will not
be attempted?

Let not gentlemen, therefore, Mr Chairman, accuse us of too much jealousy,
when we zealously oppose these attempts, and charge them with supporting
principles which lead to the utter overthrow of the Constitution. I view their
principles in that light; and in this view I am fully confirmed by the most
mature reflection, not only on the consequences of those principles, but on the
manner in which they have been introduced and supported here.

But, say gentlemen, what interest can we have to subvert the Constitution? Why
should we harbor designs of overthrowing the Government, and introducing
anarchy and confusion? Have we not as much at stake, as much to lose, as you?
Have we not equally concurred in the establishment of this Government? And what
inducement can we have to wish for its destruction?

Since gentlemen, Mr. Chairman, make this appear to their motives, I must be
permitted to offer a few observations on that subject, before I dilate, as it
is my intention to do, on the object and tendency of their political system.

As to motives, Mr. Chairman, I have no difficulty in declaring, that I believe
the far greater part of these gentlemen to be actuated by the purest motives. I
do not say all; because I am not bound to answer for the motives of all. There
are some among them of whose motives I know nothing; but far the greater part
of those who support the system whereof this amendment is a leading member, are
actuated, in my opinion, by motives as pure, I will not say as my own, because
perhaps those gentlemen may deny me the merit of pure motives, but as those of
the best and purest men in this country: and if I could find security against
the consequences of men's actions in the uprightness of their intentions, I
never should apprehend harm from these gentlemen. But, Mr. Chairman, does
history, experience, or common sense, inform us that such security can be
found? Do we not confine lunatics, and keep knives and razors out of the hands
of children? Why? Not because we are afraid of their intentions, but of their
actions; because we are justly apprehensive of their doing mischief without
intending it. Is there a description of people on earth, who have inspired the
world with a firmer confidence in their good intentions, than the Quakers? And
yet we dread the consequences of some of their attempts. This society, so
virtuous, so praise worthy, and whose institutions are formed on principles so
beneficial and benevolent, have, however, adopted it as part of their creed,
have made it a tenet of their religion, that Personal Slavery ought to be
abolished; and they go forward with unwearied perseverance, to the
accomplishment of this object, without regard to risks or consequences. In vain
do well tell them that their attempts, if successful, must render the Southern
States a new St. Domingo, a mournful-scene of massacre, pillage and
conflagration; must end in the common destruction of the blacks and whites, the
slaves and their masters. In vain do we hold up to their view the recent and
neighboring example of the French Islands, where similar maxims have reduced
the most flourishing and beautiful provinces to one great Slaughter-pen, have
every where mingled the blood and bones of the wretched inhabitants, with the
ashes of their dwellings. They answer, that they have no intention to produce
these consequences, and do not apprehend them; that it is their duty to
proceed, and that the consequences are with God. Suppose the agents and
missionaries of this society, whom we see so often attending this House, should
address themselves to the gentleman from Virginia who moved this amendment, or
to his friend from North Carolina (Mr. Macon) who claim so much indulgence for
their system on the score of their good intentions, and should say, We have the
best possible intentions: nothing can be more pure than our motives: we mean no
doubt to free all your slaves, but good, not evil, will result from the
measure: we can have no interest to produce massacres, plunder and
conflagration throughout your country; and you ought therefore to be perfectly
easy as to the consequences of our attempts. Those gentlemen might believe all
this, and no doubt would believe it, as firmly as I believe them when they make
similar protestations; but would they think it sufficient reason for indulging
the Quakers in their wishes; or sufficient security against the consequences of
their system? I believe not. I believe those gentlemen would act like men of
sense, and would say to the Quakers, We have no doubts about the purity of your
motives; but while we remain persuaded, as we now are, that your plans, however
well-intentioned, lead to the most direful calamities, not only to us and our
families and our country, but also to the objects of your care, we shall oppose
them with all our might. This would, no doubt, be the language of the
gentlemen, and it would be the language of good sense; and this same language I
now address to them.

In fact, Mr. Chairman, does not history teach us there is nothing more common
than for men to do mischief when they mean to do good? Did the L. F. yeties,
the Rochefaucalds, the Liencours, the Lameths, and the C^e^monts of France,
when they first taught the doctrines of insurrection, and stirred up the mob to
resist the government, intend to pull down ruin on their country, their
families, and themselves? Did they intend to procure their own death or
banishment, and the confiscation of their estates; to send to the guillotine
hundreds of thousands of the best citizens, including their own families and
friends, to drench the whole country in blood, and transfer the most absolute
power into the hands of the vilest of mankind? Certainly they had no such
intentions; and yet we find that these consequences did result from their
measures; France and the world have groaned and are groaning under these
consequences; nor are they less real, or less deplorable, because their authors
intended to do good and not mischief. Fanatics never, or very rarely indeed,
intend to do mischief; and yet all experience proves that no description of men
is half so mischievous. They rush blindly on, without reflection or hesitation,
and aim directly at the accomplishment of their designs, without being delayed
or turned aside by any considerations of the result.

This, Mr. Chairman, is the nature, the peculiar characteristic of all
fanaticism, whether religious or political. It hurries on its votaries, with an
impetuous and inconsiderate fury, which renders them equally deaf to the voice
of reason, and blind to the consequences of their actions. Thus the Quakers
rush forward to the liberation of the blacks; thus the falsely-named
philanthrophists of France involved the French colonies in flames and
slaughter; and thus a set of political fanatics, in the same country, in
pursuit of their wild and visionary theories, put arms into the hands of the
mob, taught the populace the doctrine and practice of insurrection, overthrew
the government, and were themselves, with their families, their fortunes, and
their country, crushed under its ruins. Their fanaticism impelled them to pull
down a stupendous fabric, the work of fourteen centuries; which by its fall
spread death and devastation over the whole extent of the finest country on
earth.

With these awful examples before us, shall we trust fanatic men with power by
reason of their upright motives; or fit regardless of the consequences of their
actions, because we are convinced that their intentions are pure? So far
otherwise, Mr. Chairman, that, in my opinion, their honesty is an additional
reason for dreading them. Of your cool, calculating, political knaves I am
never afraid. Such men are not apt to be much trusted, and moreover they never
do mischief but when there is something to be gained by it. They never do
mischief for mischief's sake; and being, for the most part, men of sense and
reflection, you may generally convince them that their own interest lies in
avoiding mischief. But it is the sincere, the honest fanatic whom I dread, and
whom I think myself bound to restrain, as I would confine a maniac. His
honesty, his zeal, and his good character, enable him to inspire confidence and
gain proselytes: the consciousness of upright intentions renders him as bold as
he is blind. He rushes directly forward, without looking to the right hand or
the left; pulls down all that stands in his way, regardless on whom it may
fall; destroys a country, in order to make it free; inflicts unheard of
calamities on the present generation, for the happiness of posterity; and makes
experiments on governments and nations, with the sang-froid of an anotomist
desecting the body of a malefactor. These are the men of whom I am afraid, and
whom I think it my duty, at all times and places to withstand: men whose
projects and experiments have brought ruin on other countries, and will bring
it on this, unless they are resisted and restrained by the sober and reflecting
part of the community.

After all, Mr. Chairman, I am not much afraid of these men. There was indeed a
time when their efforts might have been formidable; because that phrenzy of
revolution which seemed to have been poured out upon the earth like a vial of
wrath, which had fallen upon mankind like a plague, did once extend its
dreadful influence to this country, where, in a greater or less degree, it
infected every description of people, and made them eager for change and ripe
for revolution. But it has passed away never to return. Fortunately before the
disease had risen to its height here, time was given for observing its terrible
effects elsewhere; and the American people profiting by example, and aided by
the peculiar happiness of their situation, first resisted, and have finally
subdued this dreadful malady, the love of revolution.

In this, I repeat again, they have been aided no less by their own happy
situation, than by the mournful experience of other countries. For revolutions,
Mr. Chairman, are brought about in all countries by three descriptions of men;
philosophers, jacobins, and sans-culottes. They exist in all countries, and
accordingly in all countries are to be found the materials of revolution; but
they exist in different proportions, and according as these proportions are
greater or less in any country, so is the danger of revolution wherewith it is
threatened.

The Philosophers are the pioneers of revolution. They advance always in front,
and prepare the way, by preaching infidelity, and weakening the respect of the
people for ancient institutions. They are, for the most part, fanatics, of
virtuous lives, and not unfrequently, of specious talents. They have always,
according to the expression of an ancient writer, "Satis eloquence, parum
sapienti;" eloquence enough, but very little sense. They declaim with warmth on
the miseries of mankind, the abuses of government, and the vices of rulers; all
of which they engage to remove, provided their theories should once be adopted.
They talk of the perfectibility of man, of the dignity of his nature: and
entirely forgetting what he is, declaim perpetually about what he should be.
Thus they allure and seduce the visionary, the superficial, and the unthinking
part of mankind. They are for the most part honest, always zealous, and always
plausible: whereby they become exceedingly formidable. Of the three classes
employed in the work of revolution, they are infinitely the most to be dreaded;
for until they have shaken the foundations of order, and infused a spirit of
discontent and innovation into the community, neither the jacobins nor the
sans-culottes, can produce any considerable effect. The army cannot find
entrance until these forerunners have corrupted the garrison to open the gates.
Of these men we, in this country, have enough and more than enough.

Of Jacobins we also have plenty. They follow close in the train of the
philosophers, and profit by all their labors. This class is composed of that
daring, ambitious and unprincipled set of men, who possessing much courage,
considerable talents, but no character, are unable to obtain power, the object
of all their designs, by regular means, and therefore perpetually attempt to
seize it by violence. Tyrants when in power, and demagogues when out, they lay
in wait for every opportunity of seizing on the government per fas ant nefas,
and for this purpose use all implements which come to their hands, neglect no
means which promise success. Unable to enter at the door of the sheepfold,
they climb in at the windows, and devour the flock. Although they use the
assistance of the philosophers in gaining entrance, they dread their honesty,
their zeal, and their influence with the public: and accordingly the first use
they make of power, when they can obtain it, is to destroy the philosophers
themselves.

As the philosophers are the pioneers, these men are the generals of the army
of revolution; but both pioneers and generals are useless without an army; and,
fortunately, the army does not exist in this country.

This army is composed of the sans-culottes: that class of idle, indigent, and
profligate persons, who so greatly abound in the populous countries of Europe,
especially the large towns; and being destitute of every thing: having no home,
no families, no regular means of subsistence, feel no attachment to the
established order, which they are always ready to join in subverting, when they
find any one to pay them for their assistance. These were the men, who, in the
pay of a wealthy jacobin, and under the guidance of fanatic philosophers,
overturned all order and government in France, and will overturn it in every
other country where they exist in great numbers, and are not opposed with great
force and unceasing vigilance. But fortunately for America, there are few
sans-culottes among her inhabitants, very few indeed. Except some small
portions of rabble in a few towns, the character is unknown among us; and hence
our safety. Our people are all, or very nearly all, proprietors of land, spread
over a vast extent of country, where they live in ease and freedom; strangers
alike to oppression and want. Those who reside in the largest towns are
possessed of property, have homes, families, and regular occupations; and among
such a people the principles of sans-culottism never did, and never will make
much progress. If a new Duke of Orleans were here, with a Mirabeau for his
privy-counsellor, and an annual revenue of three hundred thousand guineas to
supply the means of corruption, he could not raise a mob sufficient to drive
this body from their seats, or overawe their deliberations. We have jacobins
in plenty, and philosophers not a few; but while we are free from
sans-culottes, and it is probable that the nature of our government, and the
abundance of untilled land in our country, will secure us from them for ages,
we need not apprehend great danger. We ought, no doubt, to watch and withstand
the enterprises of the pioneers and generals; but while they remain without
troops, they are not much to be dreaded.

Having made these observations on the purity of gentlemen's motives,
observations which were due not only to candor and truth, but to the respect I
feel for their personal characters, I hold myself at full liberty to explain
the tendency of the present amendment, and of that system of policy whereof it
is a part; and I mean not to impute any ill intentions to gentlemen, when I
declare, and attempt to prove, that this tendency is to the utter subversion of
the present government. It is my firm and most deliberate opinion, that the
amendment new under consideration, and the principles of that system to which
it belongs, lead directly to the introduction of anarchy and revolution in this
country, and if not steadily opposed, must sooner or later produce that effect.
This opinion it is my purpose to support, by the observations which I am about
to offer: and it is by a full convicton of its truth, that I have been induced
to confider it as a most sacred duty, to combat the system at all times, and by
all the means in my power.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. Gallatin) has denied this to be the
tendency of his system, and contends that our principles, not his, lead to
revolution and anarchy. Revolution and anarchy, he tells us, in emphatic
language, are the results of a system of expense, of war, of oppression, and of
arbitrary sway, the last leaf of that book in which are written the excesses of
tyranny. I agree fully with the gentleman in this position; but there is
another question anterior to this, which he has omitted to discuss. It is by
what means tyranny, by what means the excesses of arbitrary government are most
likely to be produced? This question I propose to discuss with the gentleman
from Pennsylvania; I mean to compare his system, his principles, with our's,
and to enquire which of the two is most likely to introduce arbitrary
government into this country. And I hope to convince, not that gentleman
himself, but the House, that if ever arbitrary government should exist here, it
must owe its existence to the system of policy which that gentleman supports.

How, let me ask. Mr. Chairman, have the governments of other countries been
converted from free into arbitrary governments? By one of two ways; either a
military chief, possessing little political authority, but hereditary, and
having at his disposal the military force of the State, has availed himself of
the frequent wars, whereby neighboring states are so frequently afflicted, has
augmented that military force, and finally employed it in extending and
confirming his own authority; or in states where no military chief of this
description existed, popular leaders, possessed of talents, and actuated by an
inordinate ambition, have formed a strong party among the people, have invaded
and finally subverted the authority of the government, and erected to
themselves an absolute dominion. Every state that has lost its liberty since
the foundation of the world to the present day, except in cases of conquest by
a foreign power, has lost it by one or the other of these two methods. The
first is the natural death of free monarchies, the second of free republics;
and both ancient and modern history furnish many examples of both. It was by
the first that all the feudal states were converted into absolute monarchies
except England and Poland, the former of which was protected, by its insular
situation, from the necessity, and also from the consequences, of a great
military power in the hands of its chief, and thus preserved its liberties,
while in the latter powerful individuals retained the military force in their
own hands, divided it among themselves, kept their chief in subjection, and at
length, by their feuds and civil broils, destroyed the strength of the state,
and delivered it over to be subdued and divided by the neighboring powers. It
was by the concentration and exercise of military force in the hands of an
hereditary chief, that the Cortes of Spain were broken under Ximines, and the
States General of France under Richlieu and Mazarine. It was thus that the
great princes of Germany became absolute in their respective dominions, and
that the Russian despotism was founded on the ruins of feudal aristocracy.

This danger, however, does not exist in popular governments. They have no
great military chief, of hereditary power, who, disposing absolutely of the
public force, may use it for the extension of his own authority: and of all
republics that ever have existed, none ever was so little threatened with
danger from that quarter as our's. It is needless to dwell on the reasons of
this peculiar advantage; for they are obvious to every one. When republics
fall, they fall by other means; by gradual inroads on the principles of their
governments; by popular encroachments on regular authority; by the
concentration of their powers in some popular body, where artful, able and
aspiring demagogues, obtain sway, and establish arbitrary power under the name
of the people. This is the quarter from which all popular governments have been
assailed, for the most part with success; and from which our's will be
successfully assailed should the principles of the gentleman from Pennsylvania
ever be adopted. Thus fell Rome under the power of Caesar; thus fell the
republic of England under the power of Cromwell; and thus will fall the United
States under some future Caesar or Cromwell, unless a steady opposition be
given to the system of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, whereof this amendment,
let it be repeated, forms a part.

When the examples of the ancient republics was adduced by my friend from
Massachussetts (Mr. Thatcher) the gentleman from Pennsylvania denied it to be
applicable, because the government of those republics was different from ours.
I know, Mr. Chairman, that our government is different from that of Athens or
Rome, and I wish to keep it so. That is the object of all my exertions; of all
my zealous opposition to motions like the present. To make our government like
those of Athens or Rome, is in my apprehension, the object and tendency of the
system advocated by the gentleman from Pennsylvania. How is this to be
effected? By inducing this house, sometimes under this, and sometimes under
that plausible pretense, to establish precedents of encroachment on the other
departments, to practice on these precedents, and extend them further and
further, until at length all power shall be concentrated in this house, and
exercised according to the good pleasure of those members who can obtain
influence here. In Athens, all power was concentrated in the hands of one body,
and it was abused at the pleasure of those who by their eloquence, their
wealth, or by any other means, could obtain the confidence and influence the
determinations of that body. In Rome, the case was somewhat different; but even
there, for want of a well fixed balance in her government, the mass of the
people gradually usurped all power, and transferred it to their favorites, or
their purchasers. By pursuing the principles of the gentleman of Pennsylvania,
the same effect must be produced here. This house first begins the attack on
the President. It controls his appointments, directs his measures, gives him
orders under the name of advice, and if he refuses to obey them, withholds all
the supplies for the service of the government. All this is justified under the
gentleman's doctrine of appropriations. A favorable moment is seized for
laying the corner stone, for fixing the principle, and plausible pretexts are
adduced. A treaty is made, and a popular clamor is excited against it.
Advantage is taken of this clamor to refuse an appropriation for carrying the
treaty into effect, and thus a precedent of interfering in treaties is
attempted to be established. A foreign minister is appointed, the reasons for
whose appointment are capable of being obscured or misrepresented. The occasion
is seized to deny an appropriation; and, under the pretense of saving public
money, and preventing the expense of an useless appointment, an attempt is made
to acquire a control over the appointments of officers. These points being
carried, the precedents are soon drawn into practice, and further enterprises
are undertaken in due season. Every success gives further strength and boldness
for new assaults, the cannon of every bastion that is taken, is immediately
turned on the remaining works: and finally the President is reduced to the
condition of the chief officer of this House, and the heads of departments
become the first clerks of its committees.

The President being demolished, the party proceeds with new vigor, and
greater forces, to attack the Senate, which deprived of the support of the
Executive, is speedily overthrown. The House says to the Senate, Unless you
conform to our will, we lay our hands on the purse strings, and stop the wheels
of government. Should a contest ensue, we are sure to be uppermost; for we are
the immediate representatives of the people; we adore the people; nay we are
the people themselves. Therefore beware of a contest in which you have every
thing to lose, and we are certain of gaining.

The Senate, enfeebled and dismayed, yields by degrees to these powerful
arguments, and this House remains victorious with all power in its hands. It
proceeds to appoint a Committee of Exterior Relations, a Committee of Interior
Relations, a Committee of Justice, a Committee of Finance; and so on, and a new
French Convention arises to view, where principles are set at naught, caprice
is law, and the whim of the moment, disposes of all public and private rights.
Then follow confiscations and banishments, and the long train of tyrannical
excesses ever attendant on popular bodies in whose hands the whole powers of
government have been concentrated, from the assemblies of the people at Athens,
and the Commitiae at Rome, down to the Rump Parliament of England, and the
French Convention. Then will the member who shall possess the most art, the
greatest eloquence, and the most daring spirit of enter-prize, speedily form a
party, by means of which he will enslave the House, and rule the country.
Should there be several of equal or nearly equal strength, they will first
divide the power among themselves; but their union will be fallacious and
short. They will be employed in attempting to circumvent or undermine each
other; divisions will soon arise, and mortal quarrels will ensue; till at
length the rest will sink beneath the overbearing genius of one, and he will
establish his dominion uncontrolled. This is the liberty which gentlemen,
should their schemes succeed, will, sooner or later, bestow on the country, the
liberty of a few bold, able, ambitious men to do what they please, and of the
rest of the community to obey them. This, Mr. Chairman, may be very pleasant
liberty for those who are to be possessed of power; but for me, and the rest of
the community, it has no charms; and I shall, therefore, omit no opportunity of
resisting its first and most distant approaches.

Should any one object, that this state of things must be extremely distant, I
beg him to recollect how short a space intervened between the throne of Louis
the Sixteenth and the scaffold on which he bled; between the absolute power of
Neckar, and the despotism of Marat; between the splendid fortune of so many
distinguished families, and the dungeon or the guillotine. Governments like
our's, Mr. Chairman, may be compared to the planetary system, whose
preservation depends entirely on the exact preservation of its balance. The
exact balance between the centrifugal force and the power of gravitation,
retains the planets in their orbits; but should some angel of destruction push
them out of those orbits, though in ever so small a degree, the balance is
lost; one power gains what is taken from the other; and these immense bodies,
whose beautiful and regular play furnishes the greatest wonder of creation, fly
out, and are lost in boundless space, or rush to the sun, with increasing and
incalculable velosity, and there are mingled in one mighty ruin. Should the
gentleman from Pennsylvania succeed in his present attempt, he becomes the
angel of destruction to our beautiful constitution. He destroys the happy
balance of its powers; and the approximation of the different departments,
though slow and gradual at first, would become more rapid as it advanced, and
speedily produce that concentration of power in this house, which seems to be
the object of all that gentleman's labors and cares.

It is this view of the subject, Mr. Chairman, that stimulates me to oppose
this amendment with the utmost perseverance and zeal; not that I apprehend
great mischief from this particular measure, could it be viewed singly and by
itself; but that I regard it as a part of a system wholly incompatible with the
existence of this government, or the happiness of this country. I regard the
gentleman from Pennsylvania and his friends, in the light of an enemy who has
commenced a siege against the fortress of the constitution. He proceeds at
first by cautious steps, and endeavors to make a lodgment by surprise in some
strong and advantageous outwork, from whence he may direct a more efficacious
attack against the citadel itself. On this advanced ground, in this outwork, I
hold it wise to resist him; convinced that success here would be the prelude to
a bolder and more dangerous assault; and that all the guns which he can now
carry, will immediately be turned upon our remaining fortifications.

I must now be allowed, Mr. Chairman, to say a few words as to the expediency
of this measure, as to the utility of foreign ministers. To one side of the
House, to me and those with whom I usually act, it is sufficient to say that
the President has thought fit to appoint foreign ministers; for we are
convinced, that the right of judging on this subject, has been given
exclusively to him and the Senate by the people of this country, and that when
he and the Senate have thought fit to exercise this right by appointing a
minister to this or that place, or of this or that grade, nothing is left for
this House, but to provide an adequate salary. But other gentlemen hold a
different opinion; and content that we may not only enquire how much the salary
ought to be, but also whether the appointment itself be necessary. To gentlemen
who sincerely hold this opinion, I address my remaining observations.

The gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. Gallatin) has asserted, that ministers
have nothing to do with the interests of commerce, except to make commercial
treaties; while the care of seeing those treaties duly executed, and the
commercial rights of individuals properly protected, belongs to Consuls. Hence
he infers that foreign ministers are useless; because we have no need to form
more commercial connections, and ought to have no political connections, with
foreign nations. In order to prove that we ought to make no more commercial
treaties, he contends that we have received much more harm than good from those
already made. This is the whole amount of this part of the gentleman's
argument, which includes two-thirds of his long and ingenious speech, and it is
wholly built on the assertion, that commercial interests are managed by
consuls, while ministers have nothing to do with commerce except the making of
treaties for its regulation. This assertion has been already refuted, and the
gentleman from Pennsylvania, though he has made it the groundwork of his whole
reasoning, has not attempted to prove it. For this he had very good reasons;
for he well knows it to be wholly unfounded; and therefore he has contented
himself with asserting it and taking it for granted. I say he well knows it to
be unfounded, because that gentleman is well read in the law of nations, the
writers on which, as well as its maxims and doctrines, we often see him adduce
with much dexterity and learning, when they suit his purpose. Now, Mr.
Chairman, I may, I think, venture to affirm, that there is no student in any
college, who has read the indexes of some elementary books on the law of
nations, but knows that it is the peculiar business of ministers not only to
make commercial treaties, but to watch over their execution, and to take care
that the commercial rights of their country, under the law of nations as well
as under treaties, are preserved inviolate. This is a business with which
consuls never interfere, and to which they are wholly inadequate; not only from
the nature and powers of their appointment, but also from their local
circumstances and situation. All this the gentleman from Pennsylvania well
knows; and yet he has asserted that every thing respecting the interests of our
commerce in foreign countries, except the formation of commercial treaties, can
be, and is, transacted by consuls, without the interference of ministers. This
assertion is the loose block whereon, for want of a better foundation, he has
rested the whole edifice of his reasonings; and this block I mean to knock
away. A very slight stroke will be sufficient for the purpose.

In what manner, Mr. Chairman, is the observance of a treaty of commerce with
any country to be enforced? In what manner are infractions of such a treaty or
of the laws of nations, to be prevented or redressed? Is it not by applications
to the government of that country; by representations, by remonstrances, by
negociations? The gentleman from Pennsylvania will not answer in the negative.
I know he will not. By whom then, and where, are these applications to be made,
these representations, these remonstrances to be presented, these negociations
to be carried on? Must it be at the seat of government, by agents residing
there; or at the seaports of the countries, where the consuls reside? If the
former, these agents will be ministers. You may call them by a different name,
but the thing will be the same: for a public agent of one country, charged with
the management of its affairs, and residing at the seat of the government of
another, is the very definition of a foreign minister, by whatever name you may
think fit to call him. As these transactions are, from their very nature, to be
with the government itself, let us see whether they could possibly be managed
by consuls.

In the first place, consuls, by the established law and usage of nations, have
no public official character, and cannot be admitted to any intercourse
whatever with the governments of the countries where they reside. We may, if we
please, exclaim against this usage, and call it absurd, or foolish; but it is
the established usage of nations, and while it remains so we must comform to
it. Suppose, therefore, that any injury should be done to the commerce of our
citizens by French privateers, for instance, or French municipalities, in
contravention of our treaty, or against the law of nations, but under color of
certain acts of the French government. Could redress be obtained by means of
consuls? So far from it, that it could not even be applied for; since the
consuls could have no access to the government. And yet the gentleman from
Pennsylvania tells us that the interests of our commerce in foreign countries
can be managed by consuls!

In the next place our consuls in foreign countries, are for the most part,
natives of the countries where they reside; with very few exceptions they are
mere private merchants; and except in the single case of the consuls to the
Barbary powers, who, according to established usage, are a species of
ministers, they receive no salaries. Are men of this description adequate to
the protection of our commercial interests? Can they be expected to possess the
requisite knowledge for conducting affairs of this kind, or the requisite
influence or weight of character? Will they abandon their own private affairs
to attend at a remore capital, and solicit the restitution of vessels, the
revocation of injurious orders, or indemnification for improper seizures? If
they were qualified for this business, and willing to undertake it, they
certainly would not do so at their own expense. When our consul at Bourdeaux,
Nantes or Marseilles, for instance, should be applied to on any business which
would require an application to the French government, would he go to Paris,
and remain there to finish the business at his own expense? Certainly not. We
must pay him, not only his expenses, but a compensation for his time and
trouble. As these applications would frequently occur, he could not go
specially for each one; but must remain always there; and we must give him a
salary sufficient to induce him to do so. He would then be a minister in fact,
and in expense. He would want nothing of the character but the name, and the
capacity of usefulness. This is the establishment which the gentleman from
Pennsylvania wishes to substitute in the place of our present diplomatic
appointments. The consuls, in order to perform the duties which he says ought
to be assigned to them, must be turned into ministers; equally expensive with
the present corpse, but far less efficacious.

In the third place, we should have a multitude of these new-fashioned
consul-ministers; for we have a variety of consuls in each of the great
maritime nations of Europe. There is one in every considerable trading town. In
France, for instance, we have six or seven; perhaps a much great number. Each
of these, upon the plan of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, must reside at
Paris; for it would be impossible for them to be perpetually running backward
and forward between their respective seaports and Paris, as often as any
affair might occur requiring an application to the government. If any gentleman
should doubt of this, let him look at the list now on the table of between four
and five hundred American vessels, carried into the different ports of France,
or detained there, contrary to the treaty, and redress for the capture and
detention of which must be obtained, if obtained at all, from the French
government by means either of a minister or of consuls. The consuls, therefore,
if they are to do the business, must all reside at Paris; and instead of one
minister we should have nine or ten; perhaps a greater number. These
observations will apply, with a greater or less degree of force, to every other
country with which we have a considerable commerce. And yet the gentleman from
Pennsylvania tells us that our commercial relations ought to be left to consuls!

Having seen, Mr. Chairman, what the duty of consuls is not, let us now
enquire, for a moment, what it is. We shall find them very necessary agents,
though wholly inadequate to the business usually committed to ministers.

In the first place, it is their duty to settle disputes which may arise
between seafaring people of their own nation, arriving in the foreign ports
where they respectively reside. These disputes, we know, are apt to arise
between the masters of ships and their crews, between the crews themselves, and
between the masters or crews of different ships; and these consuls are usually
empowered to terminate them in a manner less tedious and expensive than could
be done by the local laws of the country.

In the next place, they are to assist seafaring people of their own country,
who may happen to have any disputes with the people of the place; are to make
advances to them when in distress; and procure redress for them in all cases
where it can be afforded by the local authorities of their respective ports.

And lastly, they are to act as agents between the people of their country, and
the minister: to inform him of cases which require his interference with the
government, and to facilitate to the sufferers the means of applying to him.
They are to be his agents in all the seaports; while he is the general and
immediate agent of his country with the government. They are to keep him
informed of all the cases which occur in their respective ports, of violations
of treaties or of neutral rights; so that he may be enabled to take the proper
steps for obtaining redress.

The duties of these agents whom we call consuls, are therefore distinct from
those of a minister, so necessary in themselves, and so incapable of being
performed except by persons residing in the seaports, that were all the present
consuls, according to the plan of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, to be
immediately sent to the capitals, and converted into ministers under a new
name, their place must instantly be supplied by other agents, whom, perhaps,
the gentleman would not choose to call consuls, but who must be invested with
the same powers, and perform the same duties. Such is the wise and notable
scheme of the gentleman from Pennsylvania; and thus it is he is to rid us of
the expense of ministers!

Let me be permitted, Mr. Chairman, to propose another question to the
gentleman from Pennsylvania. If ministers have nothing to do with commercial
relations except making treaties of commerce, how comes it to pass that the
gentleman is willing for us to have ministers of the highest grade with those
two nations with whom we have treaties of commere, and where, according to him,
ministers can have nothing to do? I mean France and England; with both of which
nations we have commercial treaties, and where the gentleman consents to our
retaining ministers plenipotentiary. To be consistent with himself he ought to
attempt the recall of these two ministers, by refusing an appropriation for
their salaries, and to leave untouched those of Lisbon and Berlin, who may
possibly have something to do. But this is not the gentleman's object. He has
another; which is to establish the principle of controlling the Executive in
the exercise of this part of his constitutional functions, and thus effect a
breach in the intrenchments of the constitution; and he will pardon me for
considering this doctrine, about which he has discoursed so much, and with such
ingenuity, as a mere pretext to cover his attack.

So much, Mr. Chairman, for the utility of ministers in general, who appear to
me essentially necessary, not merely for making commercial treaties, but for
protecting the rights of our citizens in forign countries, according to
treaties where there are any, and under the law of nations, where there are
none.

But gentlemen point particularly to the mission to Berlin, and triumphantly
demand what benefit is to be expected from sending a minister to Berlin? What
have we to do, say gentlemen, with the King of Prussia, or the politics of
Germany? To me, Mr. Chairman, let me repeat it, it is enough that the President
has judged it proper to send a minister to Berlin; for to him and the Senate,
in my belief, and not to this House, has the constitution confided the right to
decide on this subject. But to gentlemen who are not satisfied with this
answer, I will give another, and one which, I promise myself, they will find
satisfactory. Have gentlemen who object to this mission, adverted to the
peculiar situation of Europe at this moment? Have they adverted to our own
peculiar situation? We have a most disagreeable dispute with the French
republic. France has made peace with the Emperor; and a Congress is now
sitting, if not already terminated, to settle the affairs of Germany, and
adjust the balance of Europe. In this congress interests of the utmost
magnitude in themselves, and in the highest degree important to France, are to
be discussed; no less than to determine whether France shall extend her borders
to the Rhine, or be restricted to the Meuse; whether more than two millions of
souls, formerly subjects of the German empire, shall become citizens of the
French republic. In this congress the King of Prussia is mediator; a youthful
monarch, enterprising, warlike and ambitious, at the head of three hundred
thousand of the finest troops in Europe, and with a treasury replenished by
four years of peace, while the coffers of his neighbors are in a most
exhausted condition. With these advantages, joined to his local position, he
holds in his hands the balance of France and Germany. Prepared to strike in
every direction, he is dreaded and courted by all parties; and especially by
France, who feels that after Austria, now exhausted and desirous of repose, he
is the only power capable of checking her ambitious designs. Hence she has the
greatest possible interest to soothe and conciliate him. This monarch possesses
all the finest ports in the Baltic, and a great extent of maritime territory.
His predecessor, the great Frederick, sensible that commerce alone can supply
money, the sinews of military strength, always felt the greatest solicitude to
render his states commercial; and one of the means by which he hoped to effect
this purpose, was to form connections with commercial nations. This was the
spirit of his Government, and became a standing maxim in his system of policy.
Accordingly, having discovered that the United States must speedily become a
great commercial nation, he was among the first to form a treaty of commerce
with us. Is there not reason to expect that the same views may be entertained
by his successor now on the throne? And was it not wise to do every thing in
our power for keeping up a good understanding with a monarch who has it in his
power to serve us so essentially? How is this to be done? By sending a minister
to his court, renewing our treaty with him which is about to expire, and
holding out to him the prospect of commercial arrangements, not injurious to
us, but perhaps highly desirable to him, and sufficient to procure his good
offices and interference in the adjustment of our differences with France.
Would this interference be unavailing? I apprehend not; for France has too much
interest in keeping well with this monarch to refuse attention to his
mediation. His interference, if he should choose to interfere seriously, would,
on the contrary, be more efficacious, in all probability, then fifty ships of
the line.

I do not know, Mr. Chairman, that this interference will be obtained, or ought
much to be expected; but I am fully persuaded that it was wise to use the
means, to send the minister, and make the attempt; from which I have no idea
that we ought to have been deterred by the paltry consideration of saving nine
or ten thousand dollars.

But gentlemen constantly repeat that we ought to have no political connections
with the nations' of Europe. This is about as wise as to say that a man ought
never to have a fever. A fever, no doubt, is a very bad thing, and political
connections may also be bad things; but we already have them, and the question
is not whether they are good or bad, but how we shall get rid of them. We not
only have political connections, but disputes of a most disagreeable nature,
growing out of those connections. This is attested by all the papers on the
table, by various acts of the House, and more strongly still, by the universal
capture and condemnation of our property. It is vain, and foolish, therefore,
to repeat continually that we ought not to have foreign connections; but our
business is to enquire how they may be best got rid of. How is this to be done?
I answer by settling our present differences, and avoiding new ones. Unless
gentlemen mean to submit, and if they do I have nothing to say to them, having
already had opportunities, on former occasions, to say all that seemed
necessary on that subject. Unless they now mean to submit, I repeat that the
only method of getting rid of those foreign connections, about which they so
loudly exclaim, is to settle our present differences in the best manner we can,
and avoid new ones. For this porpose we must employ ministers; and none could
be more wifely employed than the one to Berlin.

This diplomatic intercourse, therefore, about which gentlemen raise so great
an outcry, is perfectly consistent with a wish to get rid, as fast as we can,
of foreign connections; and if gentlemen were sincere in that wish, it appears
to me that instead of opposing these appointments, they would applaud and
support them. Gentlemen must excuse me if I say that I do not think them
sincere; that in my opinion foreign relations are merely a stalking-horse,
behind which they advance to attack the Administration, and the system of
policy which it has adopted. To foreign relations, and foreign intercourse, in
my opinion, gentlemen have no objection, provided those relations can be such
as they wish, and conducted in the manner which they defire. It is against the
nature of these connections, and not to foreign connections in themselves, that
the hostility of gentlemen is directed. For the proof of this position, I
appeal to the history of the measures pursued by those gentlemen since the
commencement of this Government.

I ask gentlemen, Mr. Chairman, who think with me that the present attempt
ought to be resisted, whether they can separate it from that system of measures
which its supporters have so zealously and perseveringly pursued, since the
commencement of the war between France and England? I cannot. I am compelled to
view it in connection with that system, and it is this connection which makes
me dread it. Viewing it in this connection, the time which is chosen for making
the attempt is to me its most alarming feature. This extension of foreign
intercourse, which is made the pretext for the present attempt, is not a
measure of this day. It was adopted in May, 1796, and that was the time for
opposing it, if the reasons for the opposition were really such as gentlemen
allege. But no opposition, or at least none of any censequence, was made at
that time. I have looked over the debate which took place on that occasion; and
I find that although some objections were made, they rested on a ground wholly
different from that now taken. They were confined to the expediency of the
measure; but not one word was said of the danger of Executive influence, or the
necessity of checking Executive patronage. Among others I was most struck by
the observations of a gentleman from Pennsylvania (Mr. Findley) which agree
precisely with our present doctrines, and appear to me so solid and important
that I cannot forbear presenting them to the committee. They are found in the
debate of May 30th, 1796, on the extension of foreign intercourse, and in these
words:

Mr. Findley said, that he had voted against this measure in the committee of
the whole, and he thought he was right in doing so: but he was now of opinion,
that except the House had information sufficient to convince them that the
appropriation was necessary, they ought to grant it. He wished as much as any
one to save the money of the public; but he believed our government was, in
some degree, obliged to conform to European practices. If we had ministers
plenipotentiary at one court, he did not know where to draw the line. He
believed they should do best in leaving the executive to settle this matter.

The committee, Mr. Chairman, will doubtless be struck, as I have been, with
the contrast between these sentiments and those which the same gentleman, and
those with whom he acts, have expressed on the present occasion. The gentleman,
no doubt, has good reasons for his change of opinion, but as I do not know
them, I must seek for them in the change of our situation. I should be sorry to
say, or believe, that it is to be found there; but the appearance of the thing
to my mind is so singular, and so alarming, that I cannot conceal it. -- At
that time we had no dispute with France; now we have. At that time, the French
government had not declared us to be a people divided from our government; now
it has. At that time, we were not on the eve of a conflict in which it was to
be proved whether the people of this country shall be governed by France, or
themselves; now it is to be feared that we are. In this awful, this momentous
situation of our country; when we know that France, in her hostile measures,
proceeds on the persuasion that our people are divided from our government, and
this house against the Executive; when we see measures here introduced and
prosecuted with unequalled zeal, whose plain and direct tendency is to set this
house at war against the Executive; to degrade the President, and hold him up
to public view as the enemy of liberty, and unworthy of confidence; can we
avoid observing, how exactly these attempts are calculated to promote the views
of France? Can we avoid the impression of a concert with those on the other
side of the water, the impression that gentlemen are playing into the hands of
a Foreign government, which is pursuing every hostile measure against this
country? This impression I wish to resist; but I fear that the public mind will
not resist it; nor can I easily resist it, when I advert to that system of
alliance with France and war against England, which was at an early period
imported into this country, and has been ever since pursued with so much
activity and perseverance in this house.

When I say this system of alliance and war was imported into this country, I
have no allusion to any member of this house. I have no doubt that it was
imported by a member of this government, but not of this house; and it was a
part of the system adopted by the revolutionists of France, when they resolved
to wage war against all their neighbors, especially England, for the purpose
of subverting the government of their own country, and gratifying their own
personal ambition. This war, we know, was resolved on long before it was
declared; and it was then determined that the United States should engage in it
on the part of France. A regular scheme was concerted, according to every
appearance, for drawing them into it; the missionary arrived who was to convert
us to this new faith; and this missionary was a citizen of our own, who was
recalled from a public employment in that country, to fill a high official
station here. Notes by Mr. Harper. For avoiding mistakes, I declare, that in
this, and the succeeding passages, I allude to the present Vice President of
the United States, whom I consider as the author and secret mover of this
system of War against England, and alliance offensive and defensive with
France: a system which, far from being ahandoned, is, in my opinion, now pushed
with more zeal than ever, by the same party. Hence all their efforts to keep
the country disarmed, to deprive the government of the public confidence, and
to compel it, by those means, to break anew with England, in obedience to the
orders of France. For when this breach is once made, they know that a war must
be the next step, and then the alliance with France, or rather subjection to
her under the name of an alliance, follows of course; an I these gentlemen
would rule the country, under the orders of a French Minister, as is now
actually the case in Holland. I consider the letter to Mazzie, and Genet's
charge about "a language official and a language confidential," joined to the
general tenor of this gentleman's conduct, and the book of his friend Mr.
Monroe, as full proofs that, an opinion is well founded.
Not long after a French Minister was sent over to second his efforts, and he
came furnished with ample instructions, and fortified with ample means of
seduction.

Before this ministerarrived, accounts reached us that the war between England
and France was commenced. As we had extensive and important relations, both of
a commercial and political nature, with those two nations, it immediately
became a question, of the greatest importance and solicitude, how we should act
in this critical situation. In the deliberations which took place, on this
subject, in the cabinet of the executive, two very opposite opinions
immediately appeared; one for war on the side of France, and the other for a
firm neutrality: and there were two men These two men were Jefferson and
Hamilton. The first was for war, the second for neutrality.
at that time in the councils of the President who supported these two
opinions. The advocate of the war system, did not venture openly to oppose the
system of neutrality, which he knew to be the wish of the country. To have
opposed it openly; to have declared, in plain terms, that we ought not to
remain neutral, but to engage in the war, with finances so deranged, a
government so imperfectly established, and a condition of affairs so unsettled;
would, as he well knew, have disgusted and alarmed the people, and ruined the
project. He therefore acted with more art and address. He labored to the
utmost to induce the President not to decide, himself, upon the question of
neutrality; but to convene Congress, and refer the decision to them. Why?
Because it was known that a popular body, like Congress, was infinitely more
susceptible of enthusiasm, more easily wrought on by management and intrigue,
more obnoxious to the influence of popular clamor, mobs, and venal presses,
than the cool, deliberative councils of the President. It was also known that
in case of a reference to Congress, the neutral system would lose the aid of
its author's talents, who was precluded, by his official station, for a seat in
that body. To this point then the author of the war system directed his whole
force. He labored to convince the President that it did not belong to him to
decide the question of neutrality; but to Congress, to whom the constitution
required it to be referred; and in this effort, it is well known that he was
aided, to the utmost, by that description of people who have, since that time,
omitted no opportunity in their power of hurrying us into a war against England.

Fortunately, however, the President saw and avoided the snare. His sound
judgment, and penetrating discernment, enabled him to perceive all the hazards
of such a reference: his good sense prevented him from entertaining a doubt
about his constitutional power to decide this question; and his firmness
enabled him to make, and support the decision. The proclamation of neutrality
accordingly appeared.

It no sooner made its appearance, than the war-party and their chief, raised
an outcry against it from one end of the continent to the other. The French
minister (Genet) who arrived soon after, remonstrated; the popular societies
formed under his auspices, published resolutions; and the venal presses, the
principal of which Note by Mr. Harper. The National Gazette, whose editor,
Philip Frenan,, was a confidential clerk of Mr. Jefferson. This paper was the
vehicle of all the most violent attacks against the proclamation of neutrality.
was under the immediate direction of the author of the war system, poured
forth abuse against the proclamation of neutrality, the minister who advised
it, and the President by whom it was issued. In short, Mr. Chairman, no
expedient which disappointed intrigue, and an artful, enraged spirit of party
could devise, was omitted for raising an universal popular indignation against
this proclamation of neutrality, and for preparing Congress to condemn and
reverse it. The changes were rung from town to town, from state to state, and
from one end of the union to the other, on pusillanimity, on national
degradation, on ingratitude to France, on servile submission to England; and
this proclamation was furiously assailed, with the very same weapons which we
have since seen employed against the British treaty, which was justly
considered as a part of the same system of neutrality.

The efforts of the friends of war and their chief were, however, unavailing.
The people of America indeed felt a warm, an almost enthusiastic partiality for
France, whom they considered as contending for liberty, and on this partiality
the party founded strong hopes of success. But the good sense of the people
enabled them to discern that whatever might be their wishes for the success of
France, the interest of their own country lay in preserving peace: and they
gave, throughout the union, the most unequivocal proofs of approbation to the
proclamation of neutrality. When Congress met, this sentiment had become so
strong and universal, that the war-party did not dare to oppose it. The
proclamation was approved of by Congress; and the party and their chief once
more had a hook put into their nose.

Though a second time disappointed, they did not, however, lose courage, nor
abandon their schemes. But as a system of neutrality had now been adopted, it
was too late to talk of war; and the next step, therefore, was to explain this
neutrality in such a manner as would render it, in effect, an alliance with
France, and a state of hostility against England. This was attempted
accordingly; but as the author of the war system held an official station under
the executive, he could not openly appear in it. The French minister came
forward, and advanced the pretensions, which it was the part of the other
personage to second and support in the President's council. A right was claimed
on the part of France to arm, fit, and commission ships of war in our ports; to
exclude British ships of war under pretenses which would have applied to every
possible case; to inlist crews among our citizens; to raise armies in our
country; and to preclude our courts of justice from all cognizance of prizes
taken and brought in by vessels acting under French commissions. It was
contended on the part of France, that we ought to resist, by force, the right
claimed by England, and clearly acknowledged by the law of nations, to take the
goods of her enemies, when found on board of our neutral vessels. It requires
no discernment, Mr. Chairman, to see that these pretensions, had they been
agreed to, would have placed the direction of our affairs in the hands of
France, and must instantly have induced a state of war between us and England.
This was well understood by the war-party; and therefore, as every body
recollects, they aided and supported the French minister to the utmost of their
power. These pretensions, indeed, were repelled by the President, who adopted a
system wholly different; a system of national independence and fair neutrality:
but it is well known to have been adopted contrary to the opinion, and in spite
of the efforts of the chief of this party. When it was adopted, he did indeed
defend it, in his official character; but he has taken care to declare Notes by
Mr. Harper. In the letter to Mazzie, where he stigmatizes this very system, as
a system of ingratitude and injustice to France.
his abhorrence of it, and the French minister did not fail to accuse him of
duplicity for having written officially in its defense. See Genet's letter to
Mr. Jefferson, of Sept. 18. 1799. Pages 70 and 73, of the printed
correspondence.
While officially defended by their chief, the party themselves assailed it
with the most persevering violence. The haranguers exclaimed, the self-created
societies resolved, the presses devoted to the party teemed with abuse; and
that in particular which was under the immediate direction of the chief, poured
forth one continued torrent of virulent invective. Afraid to attack the head of
the executive department himself, whose tried virtue, whose splendid services,
whose great and well-earned popularity, could not fail to rouse the public
indignation against any who might impeach the purity of his conduct, all the
shafts were levelled at the counselor by whose advice the system was supposed
to have been adopted, and by whose talents it was ably supported. It was every
where declared, and every where most industriously propagated, that this person
had enslaved the mind of the President, and misled his judgment. Every where,
by every press and every club, was this person branded as a speculator, a
thief, a plunderer of the public treasury which was under his superintendence,
a wretch in the pay of England; in fine, the most profligate of traitors, the
most dangerous of public enemies. These calumnies, asserted within these walls,
circulated by members of this House, where industriously wafted from state to
state, for the purpose of overwhelming with obloquy and public hatred the
author and prop of the neutral system, as an essential step toward the
destruction of the system itself. When the public mind was thought to be
sufficiently prepared, a direct attack was made on him in this House, for the
purpose of driving him from his office, so that the President deprived of his
counsels, might the more easily be brought to concur in the designs of the
war-party and of France. The charges before circulated in a vague and indirect
form, were reduced to specific accusations, and brought before this house, as
the grounds of a vote of impeachment. But although the party had met with some
success while they confined themselves to their strong hold, to the "Ambiguas
in vulgum spargere voces" which I mentioned in the beginning of my
observations, yet when they ventured to fight on the open plain of fact and
proof, they were totally routed, when their vague calumnies assumed the shape
of resolutions, they were easily refuted. Every charge was repelled by a vast
majority of this house; and the wise and virtuous statesman to whom his country
is so much indebted, rising triumphant from the contest, established his fame
and his system on a basis more solid than ever. Like some mighty oak whose
roots are more strongly fixed, and new vigor added to its growth, by those
storms which seem to threaten its overthrow.

Thus the war party were again discomfitted; and in spite of all their efforts,
aided by the efforts of the French minister, a system of fair and impartial
neutrality, calculated to preserve justice to all, and keep peace with all, was
completely established.

Though beaten, however, Mr. Chairman, they were not subdued; nor could they be
induced to relinquish their favorite object of war and alliance. They waited
for a favorable opportunity of renewing the attack, and that opportunity the
unjust aggressions of England on our trade too soon supplied. These
aggressions, joined to the (...) contest with that power, and the resentments
remaining from her former injuries, raised a flame of indignation throughout
the country, which pervaded all classes and distinctions of people, and
prepared the public mind for measures of hostility. The occasion was seized by
the war party, and used with an activity and zeal which gave them the fairest
prospects of success. The attempts were not direct; because in that case the
people might have been brought to reflect. The great object then as before, was
war against England, and alliance with France; but not one word was said about
war or alliance, words which might have created alarm, and given rise to
hesitation. But measures were proposed whose direct and inevitable tendency was
to widen the breach with England, and inflame the two countries more and more
against each other. These measures assumed various shapes, to suit the feelings
and catch the passions of particular individuals, or classes of men, and were
urged with unremitting zeal, and indefatigable industry: Sometimes commercial
restrictions on the trade of England, were attempted; sometimes the intercourse
between the two countries was to be out off, and sometimes confiscation and
sequestration were resorted to. Many of our best citizens, and the firmest
friends to peace and neutrality, were impelled by the warmth of the moment, and
the insinuations of this party, to favor, and even to propose or advocate
these measures; and nothing was omitted to raise a storm of popular resentment
and public odium, against all those who had the firmness to withstand them. To
speak of negotiation, was branded as pusillanimity; to speak of attempts at
amicable adjustment, was pronounced to be little short of treason. Gentlemen
for their opposition to these hostile measures, were stigmatized, on this
floor, as the agents of England; mobs were hired to burn them in effigy in
various towns in the union; the presses devoted to the war party, assailed them
with continued vollies of calumny; their names were coupled with every
disgraceful epithet, with every vile accusation; in the toasts of clubs, and
the resolutions of societies; and finally, by all these means, aided by the
continued aggressions of England, an universal slame was excited in the
country, and the party saw itself approach rapidly to the moment of its triumph
over the system of peace and neutrality.

When the country was thus on the point of rushing down the precipice, the
President of the United States, destined so often to become its savior, again
stretched out his paternal hand, and prevented the fall. Interposing the powers
of his office, and his immense personal popularity, between the legislature and
the gulf, at the very brink of which it had almost arrived, he arrested its
career, and afforded the country time to recover from its delirium. He sent an
envoy-extraordinary to make one further attempt at an amicable adjustment of
our differences with England, before we should resolve to terminate them by the
sword; and by this step he again broke the measures of the war-party.

Their rage was proportioned to their disappointment, and it hurried them into
the most furious invectives against the President, against the envoy, and
against all who were understood to favor the measure. Every body remembers,
Mr. Chairman, how they accused this envoy of being a tool of the British
ministry, an enemy to liberty, and even an opposer of the independence of this
country. Every body remembers what clamours were raised about the
unconstitutionality of his appointment; how the clubs toasted, the orators
harangued, and the societies resolved. Every body remembers how all the presses
under the influence of this party loudly alleged that the friends of the
negotiation were a faction devoted to England, and that the President of the
United States, by sending the envoy, had placed himself at the head of this
faction. Every one remembers how the leaders of this party did not refrain from
repeating these accusations within the walls of this House, and even on this
floor. It was in vain that the friends of the measure, and of peace, spoke to
them in language like this. Let this attempt at negotiation be made, and if it
fails, we will join you in war. Should England refuse to do us justice, when
thus peaceably applied to, we will join you in every measure of compulsion. We
consider this as the last effort at negotiation; and so the President has
announced it in his message for nominating the envoy. No! These gentlemen now
so peaceable, when France repels with contempt, two successive efforts at
negotiation, and meets all our advances by new measures of hostility, could
then be satisfied with nothing less than immediate measures of coersion and
irritation against England. A single attempt to negociate they reprobated as
pusillanimity, and the very idea of a compromise, they treated as a surrender
of the rights and honor of the country. When the envoy arrived, and presented
a memorial, stating all our claims, and urging satisfaction, but urging it in
the usual forms of diplomatic civility, these forms were converted into a cause
of accusation, a most violent outcry was raised against this civility, by the
very gentlemen who now proclaim their unbounded, and even enthusiastic
approbation of the conduct of the late minister to France, who in his first
address to the government of that republic assured it solemnly and publicly,
that this country was ready to submit, and to submit cheerfully, to any
infractions of its treaties or vsolation of its rights, which France might
think it for her own advantage to commit! Note by Mr. Harper. See Mr. Monroe's
book, pages 10 and 34, 35, where this declaration is acknowledged and justified.
Whence this strange inconsistency, but from an eager desire of war against
England, and a blind, servile devotedness to France? And will gentlemen, after
all this, deny that the whole scope of the measures, the whole drift of the
system of their party, has been war against England and alliance with France?

The envoy, however, continued to negociate, and at length concluded a treaty,
whereby ancient differences were adjusted, and the foundation laid for amity in
future. No sooner did this treaty arrive in the country than every artifice was
used to inflame the public mind, and excite against it the popular prejudices.
Nothing was omitted to defeat it in the Senate, and when ratified by that body
it was attacked by every coffee-house politician of the party before it was
published, by all their presses, and by the resolutions of all the clubs. When
made public, the most unheard of means were used to overwhelm it with general
odium, to raise an universal cry against it, and deter the President from
giving it his sanction. In every town mobs were assembled, under the more
respectable name of town meetings; those of a different opinion were silenced
by clamor, intimidated by threats, or actually driven away by violence; and
all opposition or discussion being thus prevented, these assemblages of
ignorant and illiterate men, were prevailed upon to vote by acclamation for
resolutions which they were incapable of understanding, and could not even hear.

Thus the appearance of a formidable popular rising in various parts of the
continent, was exhibited, and the phrenzy caught. It spread wider and wider,
and, aided by various auxiliary passions, drew into its vortex great masses of
the best and most well intention citizens. The country again seemed on the
point of rushing down the precipice; but fortunately its guardian genius yet
presided over its affairs. The President of the United States again placed
himself in the breach, and received on his buckler all the strokes aimed at the
happiness of the country. He spoke to the people; they heard the voice of their
father, they listened and became calm. He ratified the treaty; and the people
said "it is done, and must it not be supported," he has done it, and is it not
right? They listened, and were appeased; they read, and were convinced; they
discovered their first errors, acknowledged and renounced them:

But not so the party whose object was war against England at all events. They
saw in this treaty the death of their hopes, the final frustration of all their
projects; for this treaty took away all cause of quarrel between the two
countries: and they resolved to make one grand effort for its destruction;
which being accomplished, all the ancient disputes would be reinstated, with
new aggravation; and a rupture would be rendered by so much the more certain,
as there could be no faith in any new accommodation. To this object they bent
their whole force; and this house was the place for the attack. When the treaty
came before this house to be carried into effect, doctrines new to the
constitution, and incompatible with its existence, were introduced in order to
destroy it. The treaty-making power was attempted to be rendered subject to the
control of this house; as the power of appointing foreign ministers is now
attempted to be rendered subject. The treaty was attacked through the sides of
the Constitution; a war was sought by the overthrow of our government, and the
violation of our plighted faith. But a firm resistance was given to these
attempts. Enlightened discussions spread the truth before the eyes of the
people. Warned by the errors into which they had before been drawn, and roused
by the magnitude of the danger, they rose in their might, and the party was
dismayed, they spoke and it trembled; they put forth their hand and touched it,
and it sunk to the earth.

Thus again, Mr. Chairman, were the projects of these gentlemen confounded.
Thus again were they prevented from effecting their purpose, so much desired,
of driving this country into a war with England and the fraternal embraces of
France.

The remaining history is known. The French, under pretexts so frivolous that
not one gentleman on this floor has been found hardy enough to defend them,
have quarrelled with us on account of this treaty; because by terminating our
differences with England, it cuts off all hope of our being drawn into the war
against her. In this quarrel, France, proceeding avowedly on the ground of our
being a divided people, opposed to our own government, and attached to her,
repels all our amicable advances, meets them with new injuries, and declares
that before she will listen to us, we must tread back all our steps, reverse
our whole system of policy, break our treaty with England, and admit her own
construction of her treaty with us. In this critical and alarming situation of
affairs, the same description of persons, the same individuals even. who have
so perseveringly attempted to bring us into the war against England according
to the views of France, who have so uniformly, and with so much zeal, supported
all the pretensions of France, now come forward and make a direct attack on the
Executive, the tendency of which necessarily is to divide it from this house,
when there is the utmost need of union, and withdraw from it the considence of
the people, when that confidence is more than ever essential. What is this but
a continuation of the same system? And an we be blamed for seeing in this
attempt a new effort to throw this country into the arms of France, by
rendering the government unable to resist her; by forcing it, from weakness, to
submit to her mandates; to break, in obedience to them, its treaty with
England, and substitute in its place, an alliance offensive and defensive with
her?

If this be not the object of gentlemen; if it be not their intention thus to
serve their country by reducing it to the situation of Holland, how are we to
reconcile their present with their former conduct; their eagerness for hostile
measures formerly, with their tame submissive spirit now; their zealous
opposition to every thing like negotiation formerly, with their equally zealous
opposition to every thing like resistance now? If this be not their system,
then all that I can say about their present measures, contrasted with those
pursued by them on a former occasion, about their former eagerness for alliance
with one foreign nation, and war with another, contrasted with their present
declamations against all sorts of foreign connections or intercourse, is to
exclaim, in the eloquent language of the gentleman from Pennsylvania, that
those measures form the last leaf of that book wherein are written the
inconsistencies of party.

Whether this system of war and alliance, this system of fraternity with
France, such as the Dutch now enjoy, and hostility, under her orders, against
all her enemies; this system so steadily pursued, but so often defeated, shall
now at length begin to triumph, I consider as the question now to be decided.
It is now to be decided whether an important step shall be taken toward
compelling our government, through debility, to submit implicitly to France,
toward laying this country, bound hand and foot, at the feet of that haughty,
domineering nation. To take this step, to commence the triumph of the fraternal
system. I take to be the object, as I know it to be tendency, of the inroad on
the executive power attempted by this amendment. Hence it is that I oppose it
with the warmest zeal and with all my might; and if my opposition shall
contribute in the smallest degree to its defeat, I shall neither regret the
time I have occupied, nor apologize for the trouble I have given to the
Committee.


