NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY AND SUFFERINGS OF Mr. EBENEZER FLETCHER, OF
NEWIPSWICH, Who was (...) at Hubbarston, in the year 1777, and taken prisoner
by the British, and, after recovering a little from his wounds, made his escape
from them, and returned back to Newipswich.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

Printed by SAMUEL PRESTON, AMHERST. 1798.

A NARRATIVE, and.
I, EBENEZER FLETCHER, listed into the Continental Army, in Capt. Carr's
Company, in Colonel Nathan Hale's Regiment, as a fifer, and joined the Army at
Ticonderoga under the command of General Saint Clair, in the Spring of 1777, at
which place I was stationed till the retreat of the Army which was the 6th of
July following.

Early on the morning of the same day, orders came to strike our tents and
swing our packs. It was generally conjectured that we were going to battle; but
orders came immediately to march. We marched some distance before light. By
sunrise the enemy had landed from their boats, and pursued us so closely as to
fire on our rear. A large body of the enemy followed us all day but kept so far
behind as not to be wholly discovered. Their aim was to attack us suddenly the
next morning, as they did.

Having just recovered from the measles, and not being able to march with the
main body, I fell in the rear. The morning after our retreat, orders came very
early for the troops to refresh and be ready for marching. Some were eating,
some were cooking, and all in a very unfit posture for battle. Just as the sun
rose, there was a cry "the enemy are upon us." -- Looking round, I saw the
enemy in line of battle. Orders came to lay down our packs and be ready for
action. The fire instantly began. We were but few in number compared to the
enemy. At the commencement of the battle, many of our party retreated back into
the woods. Capt. Carr came up and says, "My lads, advance, we shall beat them
yet." A few of us followed him in view of the enemy. Every man was trying to
secure himself behind girdled trees, which were standing on the place of
action. I made shelter for myself and discharged my piece. Having loaded again
and taken aim, my piece missed fire. I brought the same a second time to my
face; but before I had time to discharge it, I received a musket ball in the
small of my back and fell with my gun cocked. My uncle Daniel Foster standing
but little distance from me, I make out to crawl to him and spoke to him. He
and another man lifted me and carried me back some distance and laid me down
behind a large tree, where was another man crying out most bitterly with a
grievous wound. By this time I had bled so freely, I was very weak and faint. I
observed the enemy were likely to gain the ground. Our men began to retreat and
the enemy to advance. Having no friend to afford me any relief, every one
taking care of himself, all things looked very shocking to me; to remain where
I was and fall into the hands of the enemy, especially in the condition I was
in, expecting to receive no mercy. It came into my mind to conceal myself from
them if possible. I made use of my hands and knees, as well as I could, and
crawled about two rods among some small brush and got under a log. Here I lay
concealed from the enemy, who came instantly to the place I lay wounded at.
What became of my distressed partner I know not. The enemy pursued our men in
great haste. Some of them came over the log where I lay. Some came so near I
could almost touch them. I was not discovered by the enemy till the battle was
over. When they were picking up the dead and wounded among the brush and logs,
I heard them coming toward me. I began to be much terrified, least I should be
found. I flattered myself that our men would come back after the battle was
over and take me off; but to my great surprise, two of the enemy came so nigh,
I heard one of them say, "Here is one of the rebels." I lay flat on my face
across my hands, rolled in my blood. I dared not stir, being afraid they meant
me by saying, "Here is one of the rebels." They soon came to me and pulled off
my shoes, supposing me to be dead. I looked up and spoke, telling them I was
their prisoner, and begged to be used well. "Damn you, says one, you deserve to
be used well don't you? What Is such a young rebel as you fighting for?" One of
these men was an officer, who appeared to be a pretty sort of a man. He spoke
to the soldier, who had taken my shoes, and says, "Give back the shoes and help
the man into camp." My shoes were given back by the soldier according to order.
The soldier then raised me on to my feet and conducted to the British camp.
Here I found a number of my brother soldiers in the same situation of myself. I
was laid on the ground and remained in this posture till the afternoon, before
my wound was dressed. Two Doctors came to my assistance. They raised me up and
examined my back. One of them says, "My lad, you stood a narrow chance; had the
ball gone in or out half its bigness, you must have been killed instantly." I
asked him if he thought there was any prospect of my getting well again. He
answered, "There is some prospect." I concluded by his reply, he considered my
case hazardous. The Doctors appeared to be very kind and faithful. They pulled
several pieces of my clothes from my wound, which were forced in by the ball I
received.

Some of the enemy were very kind; while others were very spiteful and
malicious. One of them came and took my silver shoe buckles and left me an old
pair of brass ones, and said, exchange was no robbery; but I thought it robbery
at a high rate. Another came and took off my neck handkerchief. An old negro
came and took my fife, which I considered as the greatest insult I had received
while with the enemy. The Indians often came and abused us with their language;
calling us Yankees and rebels; but they were not allowed to injure us. I was
stripped of every thing valuable about me.

The enemy soon marched back to Ticonderoga, and left only a few to take care
of the wounded. I was treated as well as I could expect. Doctor Haze was the
head Doctor, and he took true care that the prisoners were well treated. Doctor
Blocksom, an under surgeon, appeared to be very kind indeed: he was the one,
who had the care of me: he never gave me any insulting or abusive language: he
sometimes would say, "Well, my lad, think you will be willing to list in the
King's service, if you should get well? My answer was always no. The officers
would flatter me to list in their service; telling me they were very sure to
conquer the country, since they had got our strongest post. I told them I
should not list.

But among all the troubles I met with, I received particular favors from two
of the British. This conduct appeared to me very remarkable; why or wherefore
it should be, I knew not; but he, who has the hearts of all men in his hands,
gave me favor in their sight. They would often visit me, and ask me if I wanted
any thing to eat or drink. If I did, I had it. The first time one of these
friends came to me, was soon after I was brought to camp. As I lay on the
ground, he asked me if I did not want a bed to lie on I told him I did: he goes
and gets a large hemlock bark, and finding many old coats and overalls, taken
from the dead and wounded, and putting them in the bark, made me a bed, and
laid me into it. He built a shelter over me with barks, to keep the rain from
me, which was a great kindness as it rained exceedingly hard the next night. He
went to a spring and brought me water as often as I wanted, which was very
often, being very dry; my loss of blood occasioning much thirst. He asked me,
also, if I wanted to eat. I answered yes; for having eat very little that day,
I was very faint and hungry. He told me, he did not know as it was in his power
to procure any thing for me, but would go and try. After an absence of
considerable time (certainly the time seemed long) he returned with a piece of
boiled pork and broiled liver, telling me this was all the food he could get. I
thanked him and told him it was very good.

The next day he came and told me he had orders to march and must therefore
leave me; was very sorry he could stay no longer with me; but hoped somebody
would take good care of me; taking me by the hand he wished me well and left me.

The loss of so good a friend grieved me extremely; but I soon heard that my
other friend was ordered to stay behind to help take care of the wounded. My
spirits, which before were very much depressed, when I heard of this, were much
exhilarated; and once more I felt tolerably happy. The difference in mankind
never struck me more sensibly than while a prisoner. Some would do every thing
in their power to make me comfortable and cheerful; while others abused me with
the vilest of language; telling me that the prisoners would all be hanged; that
they would drive all the damned rebels into the sea, and that their next winter
quarters would be in Boston. They certainly wintered in Boston; but to their
great disappointment and chagrin, as prisoners of war.

But to return. My wound being now a little better, I began to think of making
my escape from the enemy. Two of my fellow prisoners agreed to accompany me;
one of them being well acquainted with the way to Ottercreek. This plan,
however, failed; for, before we had an opportunity for making our escape,
Doctor Haze called upon my companions to be ready to march for Ticonderoga;
telling them that the next morning they must leave this place. Thus I found,
that as soon as the prisoners were able to ride, they were ordered to
Ticonderoga. Being thus disappointed I begged of the Doctor to let me go with
them. Says he, "You are very dangerously wounded, and it is improper for you to
ride so far yet; but as soon as you are able you shall go." Being thus defeated
I again resolved to run away, even if I went alone, and it was not long before
I had an opportunity. As all the prisoners were sent off except us, who were
badly wounded, they thought it unnecessary to guard us very closely. I soon was
able to go to the spring, which was at a little distance from camp. Thither I
often went for water for myself and the Hessians, who, by the way, appeared to
be pleased with me, for I often waited upon them; brought them water, made
their beds. etc. and I found I fared the better for it. I often walked out into
the woods where we had the battle; went to the tree where I was shot down;
observed the trees that were very much marked with the balls. One day as I was
looking around, I found a few leaves of a bible; these I carried into the camp
and diverted myself by reading them; for I felt much more contented when I had
something to read. My friend, whom I have before mentioned, one day brought me
a very good book, which he told me to keep as a present from him. This I
heartily thanked him for, and whenever I was tired by walking, would lay down
and read.

On the 22d of July, a number of men came down from Ticonderoga, with horses
and litters sufficient to carry off the remainder of the wounded. Doctor Haze
came to us and told us, that tomorrow we should all be carried where we should
have better care taken of us. Says he, "I will send the orderly sergeant, who
will see that your bloody clothes are well washed." This, he thought, would be
very agreeable news to us. I pretended to be very much pleased, though I was
determined never to go. I told the person, who lay next to me, that I intended
to run away; desired him to make them believe I had taken the north road, if
they inclined to pursue me, for I should take the south. Says he, "I will do
all in my power to assist you, and wish it was possible for me to go with you."

I made it my business that day to procure provision sufficient for my journey.
I had spared a little bread from my daily allowance, and although dry and
moldy, yet it was the best to he had. I had left, a large jack-knife the enemy
had not robbed me of; I sold this for a pint of wine, thinking it would do me
more good on my march than the knife, as I found afterward it did. The wine I
put in a bottle and carefully stowed it in my pocket. I was hard put to it to
get my shirt washed and dried before evening. However, agreeing with some to
make their beds if they would dry my shirt, it was ready to put on by dark. I
then went to my tent, took of my coat and jacket, and put on my clean shirt
over my dirty one, and having filled my pockets with the little provision I had
saved, I began my march homeward shoeless; reflecting what I should do for so
material part of my clothing. It came into my mind that one Jonathan Lambart a
day or two before had died of his wounds and left a good pair of shoes.
Supposing my right to them equal to any other person, I took them and put them
on, hereby reversing the old proverd, He that waits for dead men's shoes will
go barefoot.

It being dark I went out undiscovered and steered into the woods. After going
a little way, I turned into the road and made a halt. Now was the trying scene!
The night being very dark, every thing before me appeared gloomy and
discouraging; my wound was far from being healed; my strength much reduced by
the loss of blood, pain, and poor living: thus situated to travel alone, I knew
not where, having no knowledge of the way, I thought it would be highly
presumptuous. How far I should have to travel before I could reach any
inhabitants, I could not tell: Indians, I supposed, were lurking about, and
probably I might be beset by them and murdered or carried back; and if I avoid
them, perhaps perrish in the wilderness. Reflecting upon these things, my
resolution began to flag, and I thought it most prudent to return and take my
fate. I turned about and went back a few rods, when the following words struck
me as if whispered in my ear: Put not your hand to the plough and look back. I
immediately turned about again, fully resolved to pursue my journey through the
woods; but before morning, had I been possessed of millions of gold, I would
freely have given the whole to have been once more with the enemy. The road in
which I had to travel, was one newly opened, leading from Hubbartston to
Ottercreek. The night being dark and the road very crooked, I found it very
difficult to keep it; often running against trees and rocks, before I knew I
was out of it; and then it was with much trouble that I found it again, which
sometimes I was obliged to do upon my hands and knees and often up to my knees
in mire.

About 12 o'clock I heard something coming toward me, what it could be I knew
not, I, however, halted and looked back; it was so dark, I was at a loss to
determine what it was; but thought it looked like a dog. That a dog should be
so far from inhabitants, I thought very strange. I at once concluded that he
belonged to the Indians, and that they were not far off. I however ventured to
speak to him, and he immediately came to me; I stroked him and gave him a piece
of my moldy bread, which he eat and soon appeared to be fond of me. At first I
was afraid he would betray me to the Indians; but soon found him of much
service to me; for, after he came to me, I had not gone far, before, I heard
the noise of some wild beast. What it was, I dould not tell. I had just set
down to rest me, with my back against a tree, my wound being very painful. As
the beast came toward me, my dog appeared very much frightened; lay close down
by me and trembled as if he expected to be torn in pieces. I now began to be
much terrified; I however set very still, knowing it would do no good to run.
He came within two rods of me, and stopped. I was unable to determine what it
was, but supposed it was a wolf. I soon found I was not mistaken. After looking
at me sometime, he turned about and went off; but before long returned with a
large reinforcement. In his absence I exerted myself to the utmost to get
forward, fearing he would be after me again. After traveling about half an
hour, I was alarmed with a most horrid howling, which I supposed to be near the
tree which I rested by. Judge what my feelings were, when I found these beasts
of prey were pursuing me, and expecting every minute to be devoured by them.
But in the midst of this trouble, to my infinite joy, I discovered fires but a
little way before me, which, from several circumstances, I was sure were not
built by Indians; I therefore at once concluded they were the fires of some
scouting party of Americans, and I made great haste to get to them, lest I
should be be overtaken by the wolves, which were now but a little behind. I
approached so near the fires as to hear men talk, when I immediately discovered
them to be enemies. Thus disappointed, I knew not what course to take: If I
continued in the woods, I should be devoured by wild beasts; for having eat of
the bodies which were left on the field of battle, they continued lurking for
more. If I gave myself up to the enemy, I should certainly be carried back to
Ticonderoga, and from there to Canada, and probably fare none the better for
attempting to run away. Which way to escape I knew not; I turned a little out
of the path and lay down on the ground to hear what was said by the enemy,
expecting every minute they would discover me; the darkness of the night,
however, prevented. These howling beasts approached as near the fires as they
dared, when they halted and continued their horrid yell for some time, being
afraid to come so nigh as I was. After the howling had ceased, I began to think
of getting round the enemy's camp; being pretty certain, that as yet, I was not
discovered. I arose from the ground and took a course, which I thought would
carry me round the enemy. After traveling a little way, I came to the foot of
a high mountain; to go round it I thought would carry me too much out of my
course; I resolved therefore to ascend it; with much difficulty I arrived at
the top, then took a tack to the right; traveling that course sometime, I
found I was bewildered and lost, and which way to go to find the road again I
knew not, having neither moon nor stars to direct me; so I wandered about in
this wilderness till almost day, when I became so fatigued and worried, that I
was obliged to lay down again: Judge what a persons feelings must be in such a
situation.

I now repented of my ever leaving the enemy. Here I was lost in the woods with
but a very little provision, my wounds extremely painful, and, to sum all,
little or no prospect of ever seeing human beings again. Thus I lay and
reflected, my dog walking round me like a faithful sentinel, till at length I
fell asleep; but was soon alarmed with the noise of cannon, which I concluded
by the direction must be at Ticonderoga. Never was sound more grateful to my
ears than this cannon. I thought I might possibly live to reach the place, and
though an enemy's camp, I would have given any thing to be with them again.

Soon after the morning gun was sired, I heard the drums beat in the camp which
I had visited in the night; this noise was still more grateful, for I was now
sure they were not at a great distance. With much difficulty I got on to my
legs again, with a determination to go to their camp. I found however I could
scarcely stand, for having laid down when I was very sweaty, I had taken cold,
and was so stiff and sore, could hardly move. I now had recourse to my little
bottle of wine, which relieved me very much, and then began to march toward
the drums, which still continued beating.

After traveling a little way, I heard a cock crow, which appeared to be near
the drums. I thought it of little consequence which object to pursue, both
being nearly in the same direction. But the noise of the drums pretty soon
ceased, and I stared for the other object, which soon brought me into open land
and in sight of a house. I got to the door just as the man arose from his bed,
who met me. After the usual compliments, I asked him how far it was to the
British encampment? He answered about fifty rods. "Do you want to go to them?"
says he. I never was more at a stand what reply to make. As none of the enemy
were about the house, I thought if I could persuade this man to befriend me, I
possibly might still avoid them; but if he should prove to be a tory, and know
from whence I came, he would certainly betray me. I stood perhaps a minute
without saying a word. He seeing my confusion spoke again to me; "Come, says
he, come into the house." I went in and sat down. I will tell you, says I, what
I want, if you will promise not to hurt me. He replied, "I will not injure you,
if you do no injury to us." This answer did not satisfy me, for as yet I could
not tell whether he would be a friend or foe. I sat and viewed him for some
minutes, and at-last resolved to tell him from whence I came and where I wished
to go, let the event be what it would. I was a soldier, said I, in the
continental army, was dangerously wounded and taken prisoner, had made my
escape from the enemy, and, after much fatigue and peril, had got through the
woods, being directed, to this house by the crowing of a cock. He smiled and
said, "You have been rightly directed, for had you gone to either of my
neighbors, you undoubtedly would have been carried to the enemy again; you have
now found a friend who will if possible protect you. It is true they have
forced me to take the oath of allegiance to the king; but I sincerely hope the
Americans will finally prevail, for I believe their cause to be just and
equitable; should they know of my harboring rebels, as they call us, I
certainly should suffer for it. Any thing I can do for you without exposing my
own life, I will do." I thanked him for his kindness, and desired him not to
expose himself on my account.

After giving me something to eat and drink, he concealed me in a chamber,
where, he said I might stay till the dew was off, and then must go out into
some secret place in the bushes, there to continue till night; this he said was
necessary as the enemy were often plundering about his his house, and if I
continued in it, would probably be discovered, which would ruin him. A little
boy was set as a sentinel at the door, who was to give notice if any of the
enemy came near. I had not been in the house half an hour, before a number of
them came in, but with no other design than to buy some rum and milk, and to
borrow a pot for cooking.

As soon as they were gone, the woman came into the chamber to dress my wound.
She washed it with rum, applied dressings, and bound it up as well as she
could. She showed every mark of kindness to me; but her husband, whose name was
Moulton, in a day or two after I got to his house, was pressed by the enemy to
bring stores from Skeensborough with his team, and I never saw the good old man
any more. His wife was in much trouble, least the enemy should find me in the
house and be so enraged as to kill all the family. She permitted her little boy
to guide me to the bushes, where I might secret myself; she gave me a blanket
to lie on. The boy went with me to my lurking place, that I might be easily
sound, so as to receive refreshment. When night came on, I was called by the
boy to the house again, and took my old stand in the chamber; the woman fearing
I should receive injury by lodging out of doors. She informed me that a man
would lodge there that night, who was a tory, and brother-in-law to her
husband; one who had actually taken arms against his country. I told her, I
apprehended danger from tarrying in the house; she said there would not be any;
I then lay snug in my straw.

In a short time the tory came for some drink; the indiscreet woman told him
she had an American in her chamber, who had been taken prisoner by the British
and had escaped. He asked her what kind of a man I was: She told him I was a
young fellow and wanted much to get home, and begged that I might not be taken
back to the enemy or betrayed. His answer was very rough, and I began to think
I was gone for it. I expected to be forced back; but the woman interceding so
hard for me, softened the ferocity of my tory enemy. Knowing I was discovered,
I crawled from my hiding place and began a conversation with the man. He asked
me if I belonged to the rebel service? I told him I belonged to the continental
service. "What is that, says he, but the rebel service." He addressed me in
very insolent language, and said he was very sorry to have me leave the king's
troops in the manner I had done, and he would have me to know I was in his
hands. I was patient and mild in my situation, telling him I was at his
disposal. My good mistress often put in a word on my behalf.

After some time spent in this way, the man asked me if he should chance to be
taken, and in my power as I was in his, whether I would let him escape? I told
him I should. "Then, says he, if you will promise this, I will not detain you;
also, that if you are retaken before you reach home, you will not inform, that
you have seen me, or been at my brothers." I gave him my promise. His advice to
me was immediately to set out, for if I should stay long I might be picked up
by some body or other; "And, says he, I advise you to travel in the night and
hide in the day, for many volunteers are reconnoitring up and down the
country." I concluded to travel; but my feeling landlady thought it best to
stay a few days longer. My friend tory said it was best for me to travel as
soon as possible. "If you are determined to go to night, said the woman. I will
dress your wound and give you food for your journey." I told her I would go as
soon as possible. she then dressed my wound far the last time, and filled my
pockets with good provision. After thanking her for her kindness, it being all
the compensation I could make, and I believe all that she desired, I left her.

But before I proceed on my journey, I must just tell you, that my dog, who had
accompanied me through many dangers, I was obliged to drive from me; when in
the chamber he would commonly lay at the foot of the stairs. Mrs. Moulton often
told me, she was afraid he would betray me, for as the enemy were often in,
should they see the dog, might suspect that somebody was in the chamber. I told
her, with much regret, to drive him away; she with her little boy tried all in
their power to get rid of him, but in vain; the dog would stay about the house;
at length she called me to drive him away; I came down, and after much
difficulty effected it.

But to return. After being told the course I must take, I began my journey in
the night, which was dark and cloudy, through the woods. I had not traveled
more than two hours, before I got lost. I concluded I had missed the road, and
having reached the end of the one I was then in, I began to think of going
back. My wound began to be very painful, and I was so fore, I could scarcely
go. While I was seeking for the road again, there came up a thunder shower, and
rained extremely fast. I crawled into an old forsaken novel, which was near,
and lay till the shower was over; then went back about half a mile and found
the road once more. The road being newly opened through the woods was very bad,
and it was with much difficulty I could get along, often tumbling over roots
and stones, and sometimes up to my knees in mire. I once fell and was obliged
to lay several minutes, before I could recover myself.

About twelve o'clock at night, as I was walking in this wilderness, I was
surprised by two large wild animals, which lay close by the road, and started
up as soon as they saw me, run a sew rods and turned about toward me; whether
they were bears or wolves, I could not tell; I was however exceedingly
terrified, and would have given any thing for my dog again. One of them
followed me for a long time; sometimes would come close to me, and at others,
kept at a considerable distance. At last, he got discouraged and left me, and
certainly I did not regret his absence.

At day light, I came into open land, and discovered a house belonging to Col.
Meads. I was not a little rejoiced to see his house, as I knew he would be a
friend to me; but my joy was of short continuance, for as soon as I looked into
the door, I saw marks of the enemy; every thing belonging to the house being
carried off or destroyed. I thought it not prudent to go into the house left
some of the enemy might be within; so I passed on as fast as possible; it now
began to grow light, and what to do with myself I could not tell. My friends
had advised me to lay concealed in the day time and travel in the night.

When I viewed the depredations the enemy had made on the inhabitants, and
finding many of them fled; not knowing how far I must travel to find friends,
and my wound being very trouble some, I reflected long, whether to tarrg and be
made prisoner, or push forward through a dreary wilderness; death seemed to
threaten me on all sides; however, I collected resolution sufficient to make to
the east; I conceived myself exposed by my uniform and bloody clothes; to
prevent a discovery by any who should be an enemy, I took off my shirt and put
it over my coat, by which my uniform was covered; in this line I marched: it
being the orders of the British for all tories, who came to join them, to
appear in this dress; I considered myself protected. I traveled till the
middle of the day, before I saw any person; I then met a man driving cattle, as
I supposed to the enemy. He examined me closely, and enquired if I was
furnished with a pass? I gave him plausible answers to all his questions, and
so far satisfied him as to proceed unmolested. I enquired of him, if he knew
one Joshua Priest; he told me he did, and very readily directed me to the place
where he lived. Leaving this man, I had not traveled far, before I met a
number more, armed; being within about fifty rods of them, I thought to hide
myself; but found I could not: I then made toward them, without any apparent
fear. Coming up to them, I expected a strict examination; but they only asked
me how far it was to such a town: I informed them as well as I could, and
pushed on my way.

Being within a mile and a half of said Priest's, I saw two men making toward
me: They came to a sense and stopped I heard them say, "Let Us examine this
fellow, and know what his business is." One of them asked me where I was going:
I told him to Joshua Priest's: He asked me my business there: I answered him,
upon no bad errand: He says, "You are a spy:" I told him I was no spy; I did
not like the fellow looks, therefore dropped the conversation with him,
believing he was one of the enemy. I resolved not to converse with any one,
till I had arrived at Priest's, unless compelled to. Being almost overcome with
fatigue, I wished for rest; however, these men seemed determined to stop me or
do me some mischief, for when I walked on, they followed me upon the (...) and
in great rage told me, I should go no farther, until I had made known to them
who and what I was; saying, they had asked me a civil question, and they
required a civil answer. I told them if they would go to Priest's, I would tell
them all the truth, and satisfy them entirely, repeating to them I was no spy.
They say they did not mean to leave me till they were (...) respecing me. I
then, in short, told them what had besel in the whole, and added, that I was
well acquainted with Priest, and intended to tarry with him some time.

We all arrived at Priest's, who at first did not recollect me. After some
pause, he told me he was surprised to see me, as my father had informed him I
was slain at Hubbardston. I told him, I was yet alive; but had received a bad
wound. His family soon dressed my wound and made me comfortable. I then in the
presence and hearing of my tory followers, told Priest the story of my
captivity and escape, also repeated the insolent language used by the tories
toward our people. When prisoners with the enemy; finding Priest my friend, I
said many severe things against the tories, and fixed my countenance sternly on
those fellows, who had pretended to lord it over me and stop me on my way. They
bore all without saying a word; but looked as surly as bulls.

I soon found these tory gentry had premeditated carrying me back, and were
seeking help to prosecute their design. My friend Priest loaded his gun, and
said he would give them a grist, if they dared come after me; but failing of
getting any persons to join them, I was not molested.

I could often hear of my tory follower's threatenings against me, to take me
back, saying, I should be able to sight again, and do injury to the enemy. I
feated these tories would do hurt; but my fears were quieted by finding the
neighbors were my friends, and would afford me their protection. Put I will
write no more of tory plans.

After being at Priest's about ten days, there came, one morning, a number of
persons to see me, and appeared very friendly and much concerned, lest I should
be taken by the enemy. They informed me a man had arrived from Burgoyne's army,
and said a party of Indians was to be sent forward to guard the town where I
was, and protect the tories and their property; our people coming twice while I
was at Priest's to take tory property. These people told me an honest story,
and advised me to travel immediately. Being desirous to get home, I told my
friend Priest I would not stay any longer. He says, "Don't be scared, I
apprehend no danger from the Indians; tarry yet awhile for your wound is not
healed; your are not able to travel through the woods; but do as you think
best." These men cried out, "Escape, escape, for your life; the Indians will be
upon you before tomorrow night."

Having resolved to go on, my friends furnished me with provision sufficient
for my journey. Without doubts and fears I went on my way, and, after
traveling all day, I arrived at a place called Ludlow. From this town the
people all fled and left their habitations: Great was my disappointment! I
spent the night in a melancholy manner; having neither fire nor bed to comfort
my shivering and impaired bodies.

About day, I set out from the dreary house, which had sheltered me in the
night. By traveling, I found I had taken cold, and that my wound was very
painful. Desponding, I thought it best to go back about seven miles to some
inhabitants, rather than to proceed homeward. Just before night, I arrived
(...) the place of the inhabitants, seven miles back, who received me kindly,
and took special care of my wound.

Just before sunset of the third day after my departure, I came to my old
friend Priest's again, who (...) betray them; their reports afterward proving
all false.

At my old friend, I stayed six weeks; in the mean time my wound was almost
healed. I was hospitably entertained by him.

Having heard that one Mr. Atwell, who belonged to New-Marlborough, was in the
neighborhood with a team to move a family, I agreed with him for a horse to
ride. After a journey of a few days I safely arrived at New-Ipswich, and once
(...) participated the pleasure of seeing (...) my friends and acquaintance
having (...) enemy to make me afraid.

THE END.

