AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT LITCHFIELD, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, IN THE YEAR M,DCC,XCVIII.

By James Gould.

PRINTED BY T. COLLIER.

RESOLVED, That the thanks of the gentlemen, collected at Litchfield, on the
occasion of the celebration*of the twenty-second Anniversary of the
Independence of the United States of America, be presented to JAMES GOULD,
Esquire, for his Oration, delivered this day; and that a copy of the same be
requested for publication.

RESOLVED, That the Hon. TAPPING REEVE, FREDERICK WOLCOTT, and AARON SMITH,
Esquires, be a Committee, on the part of the Meeting, to wait on Mr. GOULD with
their thanks, and to superintend the publication.

JAMES MORRIS, CHAIRMAN.

Advertisement.
MOST of the following pages were written in the year 1795, and pronounced, on
the Anniversary of American Independence, before the Cincinnati of Connecticut,
at New Haven. The invitation, which the writer received, to prepare an Oration
for the same occasion, at Litchfield, was given at so late a period, as to rend
it impossible for him to finish, in season, an entirely new composition, of any
suitable length. For the same reason, those topics, which, at the present
crisis of the political affairs of the United States, are most interesting to
the public, occupy a smaller proportion of the whole performance, than would,
otherwise, have been devoted to them.

LITCHFIELD, JULY 5, 1798.
AN ORATION.
THE attention of mankind was never directed to political events, more
important than those, which have signalized the present age. At this time,
especially, national revolutions are following each other, in hasty succession;
the civil establishments of the earth are daily assuming different forms; and
maxims of government, till lately unknown, are rapidly transforming the
political aspect of the world. So extraordinary in their nature, progress, and
tendency, have been those great events, which have characterized the present
century, as an age of revolutions, that they can scarcely be contemplated, but
as preparatory to some general change in the condition of the human race.

While violent commotions are agitating many parts of the political world, it
becomes the duty of a people, far removed from scenes of havoc and desolation,
and confirmed in the enjoyment of those blessings, for which others are
languishing, to improve their peculiar advantages, in such a manner, as shall
most effectually conduce to their own lasting benefit, and to that of mankind.

The objects, which particularly on this occasion, solicit our attention, are
numerous and important. -- To acknowledge, with gratitude to the Great Disposer
of all events, our national prosperity; to contemplate the important ends of
civil society; to familiarize the relation, in which we individually stand to
each other, as members of the same common family, and to trace the obligations
thence resulting; to cherish those sentiments, and encourage those offices, of
benevolence and patriotism, which mark the character of a free, enlightened,
and generous people; to promote, in our several spheres, a cheerful submission
to the laws, a ready cooperation with the laudable measures of our government,
and general harmony, in the community, of which we form a part; and finally, to
realize the justice, which we owe to our country, and to the world; are among
the duties, which it becomes us to associate with the festivities of this
anniversary. On this auspicious day, which patriotism has consecrated to the
celebration of American Freedom, the voice of our Country emphatically reminds
us of the many obligations, under which we are laid, to prove ourselves worthy
of those inestimable privileges, in the possession of which we are eminently
distinguished from other nations. Civil liberty is a plant, which can never
flourish, without careful and assiduous culture. The invaluable benefits, which
accrue to mankind, from governments, wisely organized, and laws, faithfully
administered, cannot be perpetuated, where their importance is not duly
regarded. In the present state of things, blessings are not to be secured, nor
are evils to be avoided, but by unremitted care and prudence. It, therefore,
behooves the citizens of the United States, while in the enjoyment of national
prosperity, to be studiously cautious, lest, by neglecting to preserve, or by
misimproving it, they betray an unworthiness of the rich possession.

It may not be improper to repeat, on this occasion, what has already indeed,
been often repeated, that our condition, as a people, is such, as any other
nation existing, might justly covet. Our civil and religious rights are
secured, as far, perhaps, as constitutional securities can avail, against the
assaults of ambition, injustice, and venality: Education, industry, and the
useful arts, unite their influence, to promote our national respectability,
strength, and opulence: Our extent of territory is amply sufficient for the
population of remote posterity: The soil, which we cultivate, as fertile, as is
consistent with the salutary habits of industry, in the necessaries, the
conveniences, and many of the delicacies of life: And the voice of health and
prosperity is heard in our borders. If blessings, like these, are worthy of
preservation; the means of preserving them demand our constant, and most
serious attention.

To place our present political condition in a more impressive point of view,
let us turn our attention, for a moment, to the situation of those unhappy
nations, on which the sun of liberty never shone, or from which his genial
beams have been long withdrawn. Contemplate the degraded native of
South-America; who, through the severity, or connivance, of government, is
doomed to wear out, in chains of servitude, the miserable span of an existence,
which Nature designed for the enjoyment of freedom and happiness. In that
treasury of nations, behold MAN, the pride of this lower creation, literally
reduced to a passive instrument of his own oppression, -- condemned to toil
upon the sultry surface, or in the noxious caverns, of the earth; to groan
under loads of wealth, which he cannot enjoy; to purchase, by his personal
hardships, delicacies, which he can never taste; and to perform the drudgeries
of a beast of burden, for the convenience, or criminal pleasures, of a being,
like himself! Unless we believe, what daily experience contradicts, that Nature
has been strangely partial to the favorites of Fortune, may we not rationally
suppose, that, under the veil of this servile condition, there have been
concealed from view, talents, which, if duly improved, might have enlarged the
sphere of knowledge, and virtues, which, if nurtured by education, and called
into exercise, might have reflected honor upon humanity?

" Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
" The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
" Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
" And waste its sweetness on the desert air. GRAY.
"
In a condition, still more abject, is human nature exhibited, in many parts of
Africa. The natives of those torrid regions, seized, like timid animals of
chase, and, by their tyrannical brethren, devoted to servile labors; or
converted into mere merchandise, and transferred to those, on whom the accident
of birth has bestowed a fairer complexion, stand forth, miserable monuments of
the perversion of the laws of nature, and of the complicated calamities, which
avarice and ambition have entailed upon mankind. And even of those African
tribes, which are exempt from this peculiarly ignominious fate, little more can
be said, for the consolation of the philanthropist, than, that their condition
is barely preferable to that of the greater part of their bartered brethren.
Among the most fortunate of these comparatively favored communities, we can
hardly discover any semblance of civil liberty, or rational happiness.
Ignorance, barbarism and tyranny, combine to perpetuate their depression. Even
those once flourishing states, which extended along the Northern confines of
Africa, and which emulated the over-bearing power of Rome herself, have been,
long since, reduced, from national independence, to provincial slavery.

If we turn our view to Asia, we behold, comparatively speaking, less, perhaps,
of personal, but more, if more be possible, of civil, bondage. In that
extensive and fruitful quarter of the globe, our attention is attracted,
principally, by a voluptuous, and dispirited race of men, prostrating
themselves, in adoration, at the feet of their earthly Deity, an ignorant,
effeminate, but imperious, monarch. To the pleasure and caprice of this royal
automaton, the services and lives of obsequious millions are implicitly
devoted: The winged messenger of fate awaits his nod; his glance spreads
terror, and his word dispenses death. Exulting in his own unhallowed splendour,
and in the humiliation of his species, he conceals, under the garb of royalty,
the meanness of a slave to pleasure, and dissipates, in sloth and riot, the
wealth of his stupid and obedient subjects. "The dishes of luxury cover his
table; the voice of harmony lulls him to rest in his bowers; he breathes the
fragrance of the groves of Java; and sleeps on the down of the cygnets of
Ganges. JOHNSON.
" But how impious and contemptible is that spurious, artificial greatness,
which is built upon the miseries of human kind, and on the ruins of whatever is
dignified or estimable in the character of man! Yet, such is the description of
Asiatic royalty. Among those immense multitudes of human beings who compose the
Oriental nations, there are none, who enjoy even the appearance of freedom,
except the piratical banditti, who scour, for prey, the Arabian desert, and the
barbarous hordes, who traverse the inhospitable forests of Tartary.

In those three divisions of the globe, already mentioned, we discover little
else of human nature, than its ignorance, oppression, and degradation.

On turning our eyes to Europe, we are presented with a different prospect. We
here cease to contemplate that unvaried picture of human debasement; which, in
the present survey, has, thus far, engrossed our attention. The character and
condition of the European nations, like the surface of the territory, which
they inhabit, are greatly diversified. Without particularizing individual
governments, we may remark, of the European people in general, that they are
placed in an intermediate state, between absolute slavery and rational freedom.
But, though Europe affords not more than one example of a government, literally
despotic, it cannot be denied, that, in most of her states and kingdoms,
oppression, under various forms, has, in a great measure, defeated the original
designs of civil society. It is much to be regretted, that in that quarter of
the world, in which the intellectual powers of man have made the most
extraordinary advances, in the attainment of knowledge, the rights of human
nature should have been, so long, but imperfectly understood, and still more
imperfectly enjoyed. Europe has been, both in ancient and modern times, the
nursery of liberal science, and of all the useful improvements of civilized
life. The researches of the human mind have been there pursued to an extent,
which has distanced the boasted inventions and discoveries of Oriental sages:
But, amidst this glow of intellectual improvement, the laws of moral right have
been too frequently perverted by governmental logic, or superseded by
overbearing power.

But, notwithstanding the comparative elevation of Europe, in point of civil
liberty, and mental improvement, the present posture of her affairs has become
"a subject of awful meditation." The hopes, which were once entertained, of an
accession to her liberties, from a revolution, which has lately attracted the
attention, and excited the astonishment, of the world, are now at an end: "From
the tomb of the murdered monarchy of France, there has arisen a vast,
tremendous, unformed spectre," which riots among the neighboring nations,
without control. The beauties of nature are blasted by his presence; the
invaluable works of art and industry are trampled down, in his career; the
bounties of providence are scattered, by his touch, to the winds of heaven; and
the haggard retinue of Poverty, Famine, Rapine, Pestilence and Death, attend
his progress. -- The nations of Europe have long experienced, from the
enormities the French Revolution, evils, which, without experience, cannot be
known. Public disasters are calculated to excite general and anxious attention:
But, by a distant spectator, whose mind is employed, in calculating the
political tendencies of the great events, which have lately taken place, on the
European continent, the humble, but numberless distresses, which the progress
of "this dreadful innovation" has imposed upon private life, are, in a great
measure, unpitied, and over-looked. These, however, are the calamities, which
are most exquisitely felt: Calamities, which national disgrace, though it may
conceal them from distant view, cannot bury in oblivion; and for which the
empty pomp of a national triumph can never compensate.

It would be useless, in this place, to trace, minutely, the character, and
present consequences, of this revolution, through the painful history, which it
has furnished, of civil and domestic discord; of religion and virtue, disgraced
and banished; of independent governments, made tributary and subverted; of
towns and cities, demolished and burnt; of fruitful countries, pillaged and
desolated; of defenseless and peaceful inhabitants, expelled from their
dwellings, violated, and murdered. These are but a few of the unnumbered evils,
for which the world is indebted to the revolutionists of France; and under
which many of the nations of Europe are, at this time; groaning.

When we survey the miserable depression of human nature, in the unenlightened
parts of the world, and the prevailing oppression, together with the present
temporary calamities, of more civilized foreign countries, we must surely
discover much reason to rejoice in our own political fortune.

But while we enjoy the most valuable blessings of civil society, it concerns
us to beware, lest public prosperity betray us into a heedless imitation of the
destructive habits and practices of those nations, whose fate we hope to shun.
Propitious fortune has, too often, proved a Siren to public, as well as
personal, virtue. But, it is devoutly to be wished, that the United States of
America may, by their own example, prove to mankind, that the enjoyment of
national prosperity is not, by any fatality in human affairs, connected with
its abuse; that the arts of refinement may subsist, without its usual vices;
and, that the exaltation of a people is not, necessarily, the harbinger of
their decline.

I shall not, probably, advance a novel idea, by observing, that, in many of
those fond predictions, which, since the establishment of our independence,
have been hazarded by our countrymen, with respect to the future unrivaled
greatness and glory of America, there is too strong a tincture of political
enthusiasm. It is of great importance, that the attention of a people should be
directed, rather to their actual condition and prospects, than to fanciful and
extravagant anticipations of future aggrandizement.

That, notwithstanding the unfavorable aspect of our foreign relations, our
present situation, as a people, is singularly fortunate, cannot, indeed, be
denied. The continuance of our prosperity, and the increase of our importance
and respectability, among the nations of the earth, we ought, as friends to our
country, to desire, and, from our national resources, may rationally expect.
But when we consider, how many of those great changes, which have taken place
among mankind, were entirely, or in a great measure, unforeseen, till they were
nearly accomplished, we shall, perhaps, deem it the part of prudence, not to
rely, implicitly, upon the precarious credit of political prophecies, or the
flattering promises of mere probability; but rather, to depend, for the
preservation of those blessings, which we have already acquired, and for the
attainment of whatever else is essential to our national welfare, on a steady
perseverance in those laudable and manly efforts, which set difficulty and
opposition at defiance.

The great and frequent revolutions of empire, holden forth to view, in the
history of mankind, inculcate this obvious, but interesting truth, That the
fortune of every community must depend, chiefly, upon the character and conduct
of its members. Public prosperity can never be long enjoyed, where it has
ceased to be deserved. From the earliest ages of civil government, Empire, like
Science, has been, literally, an itinerant upon earth. In the course of
national events, obscure and barbarous tribes of men, distinguished from their
neighbors, by no other remarkable characteristics, than those of ignorance,
poverty and apparent weakness, have, in contradiction to all human probability,
risen, in the period of a few generations, to overbearing greatness, and given
laws to the obedient world. These new favorites of fortune, having, like their
predecessors in power, attained to a degree of strength and pre-eminence, which
appeared to exempt them from the danger of humiliation, have, in the heedless
enjoyment of extensive dominion, insensibly generated their own destruction,
and in their turn, submitted, like unwi^^^lly sensualists, to the domination of
new and insolent rivals. The once flourishing and powerful empires of
Semiramis, Cyrus, and Alexander, have been, long since, buried in the ruins of
their ancient greatness. Babylon and Persepolis, Balbec and Palmyra, the former
boasts of Oriental wealth and magnificence, have, respectively, bowed beneath
the arm of desolation. "The fortresses or their high towers are brought low;
and their gates of brass are broken down." ISAIAH.


But the most illustrious example, with which the history of the world presents
us, of the instability of national power and prosperity, when unsupported by
wisdom and public virtue, is exhibited in the fate of Imperial Rome. Founded in
a barbarous age, by a slender band of obscure, but enterprizing characters,
under the guidance of a youthful adventurer; bordering upon neighbors, more
powerful than herself, and who regarded her, as an object, rather of contempt,
than jeasousy; protected, by her poverty, against the attempts of foreign
rapacity, but, in a great measure, destitute of the ordinary means of
aggrandizement; she suddenly rose, from a state of insignificance, to a degree
of opulence and strength, unequalled, perhaps, by any other nation of ancient
or modern times. Her jurisdiction embraced the most valuable regions of the
Eastern hemisphere; and her banners waved in triumph, from the Tigris to the
Atlantic, from the Danube to the confines of Zaara. Her name was proverbial for
national greatness; her senate was distinguished for political wisdom; her
citizens for patriotism, and her soldiery for valor. Her wealth and power, her
dominion over tributary nations, her military prowess, her victories and
triumphs, long excited the terror and admiration of mankind; and later ages
have designated her empire, by the appellation of the Roman World. -- But the
laurels of her conquests have faded; and the insolence of her power has been
humbled by those, whom she long despised. A train of fatal causes, silently and
gradually produced, by the abuse of wealth and dominion, have leveled her
grandeur with the dust; and her former existence can now be traced, only in
scattered ruins, and historical records, -- "The spider has wove his web in
the Imperial palace; and the owl has sung her watch-song on the towers of
Afrasiab!"

On the causes of these memorable revolutions it is unnecessary to enlarge. It
may suffice to observe, that the loss of national power and prosperity has
usually, if not always, resulted, in a great measure, from popular degeneracy.
These reverses in the fortune of nations inculcate, therefore, upon us, who
enjoy the opportunity of deriving warning and instruction from former examples,
the great importance of guarding, with unremitted care and vigilance, against
the influence of those silently-operating causes, which undermine the basis of
public virtue, relax the springs of national energy, and turn the scale of
Empire.

From these, and the many similar changes, which, in different ages, have taken
place among the communities of the earth, it has, indeed, been generally
inferred, that national greatness and prosperity are, in their nature,
transient, and necessarily connected with the causes of their own decline. It
is still, however, to be hoped, that future experience may prove the fallacy of
this unqualified conclusion: A conclusion, which, if universally believed, must
forever damp the ardor of patriotic virtue, and, by declaring useless,
discourage, the laudable endeavors of the philanthropist, to promote the
dignity, and perpetuate the happiness, of his species.

A late philosopher HUME.
has asserted, that "here is an ultimate point of exaltation, as well as of
depression, from which human affairs naturally return, in a contrary progress:"
That "every government must come to a period;" and that "death is unavoidable
by the political, as well as by the animal body."

That there is, short of perfection, a point, which the human race, in their
present state of imperfection, cannot pass, is a proposition, which needs not
the support of argument. But that, having attained to the highest degree of
exaltation and improvement, of which, in their present state, they are capable
(if such an attainment can be ever made) they cannot, according to the
constitution of things, continue stationary, but must, necessarily, revert
toward their primitive condition, is not yet demonstrated. We have, indeed,
much reason to believe, that, in the improvements of the mind, mankind will
continue to advance, without arriving, and perhaps, without the possibility of
arriving, at an impassable limit. And that these improvements will greatly
contribute to the order, stability, and happiness of civil society, cannot
reasonably be doubted. It would, therefore, be a difficult task, to define the
exact boundary, which the mind of man will reach, but never (...); or the
ultimate degree of melioration, of which the condition of human society will
admit. To consider the past, or present, as a standard for the future,
seize of mankind, either in the science of government, or in whatever
else may contribute to social happiness, is, surely, in the highest degree,
irrational. It is observed by a modern writer, that no man ever knew to what an
extent, or to what effect, his own faculties, either mental, or corporal, might
be xerted. This remark may, with propriety, be extended to nations, or to the
collective body of the human race. It has frequently happened, that one
generation has boldly pronounced visionary, absurd, and impossible, what the
experience of its immediate posterity has shown to be real, rational, and
practicable. There is too strong a propensity in human nature, to confound
difficulty with impossibility. That man should ever be able, by artificial
means, to measure the distance of a planet, to hold his course unerring through
the pathless ocean, or to draw the lightning from the clouds, would, once, have
been as incredible, as is, now, the most improbable of all events, not
demonstrably impossible. It is not fully known, nor will speculative reasoning
ever decide, how far those institutions, which are intended to promote and
perpetuate whatever is estimable in the human character, or useful in society,
may, hereafter, be rendered subservient to the ends of their formation. It is,
however, in the highest degree, probable, and has already been partially taken
for granted, that the progress of knowledge and civilization, if not
interrupted by adverse causes, will continually tend to the advancement of
rational liberty, civil order, and general happiness. And when we consider the
vast advantages, which modern ages enjoy, over those of antiquity, for
enlarging the (...), and perpetuating the duration, of useful improvement, we
discover much reason to distrust the humiliating hypothesis, That, in human
affairs, depression must forever succeed exaltation.

The analogy between the "animal and political body," is rather fanciful, than
real: And the supposition, that the latter, like the former, is necessarily
subject to dissolution, from causes, universally operating, is built on
experience, too slender to establish any general doctrine, not supported by
arguments, drawn from reason, and the nature of things. The animal system is
the workmanship of the God of nature; and, as such, cannot, by human efforts,
be essentially altered, or subjected to any inherent laws or principles, not
ordained by its Author. Political fabrics being, on the contrary, the creatures
of man's invention, are capable of being modified, or radically changed, by his
powers. The institutions, which human folly has framed, human wisdom may surely
improve; and to what extent the improvement may be carried, the experience of
the world has not determined. That former governments have been perpetually
fluctuating, is a very inadequate proof of the necessary instability of all
others: And though the most flourishing and powerful dynasties of antiquity
have fallen; there has, yet, been discovered no physical or moral
impossibility, that others may experience a different fortune.

Of all the sciences, cultivated among mankind, that of civil government has
made, indeed, the slowest progress. The reason, however, is obvious; and the
fact affords a very insufficient support to the conclusion, of which it has
been made the basis. -- Most other kinds of practical science, being
susceptible of illustration, from such examples and experiments, as the
ingenuity and observation of an individual may furnish, have been, and still
may be, greatly improved, by the native energy of a single mind. But national
policy is a fabric, the construction of which requires the collected wisdom and
experience of successive enlightened ages. The examples, from which political
maxims are deduced, as they are necessarily the result of long experience, have
consequently, been too rare, to establish a complete system of principles,
which may, with safety, be universally adopted. We may, however, on rational
grounds, suppose, that, as this branch of knowledge has made slower advances,
it is still capable of greater additional improvements, than any other.

On the subject of civil government, theory and experience have, indeed, been
often at variance. But unless, in the constitution of things, there is an
insuperable wall of partition, between the researches of the human mind, and
the laws, which regulate human affairs; these inconsistencies may, probably, be
removed. Instead of checking, they should, therefore, animate, the spirit of
rational enquiry, and incite the patriot to perseverance, in his laudable
endeavors, to promote the happiness, by improving the institutions, of civil
society. While every other human science is rapidly advancing, from one degree
of refinement, to another; what fatality, in the economy of nature, has
rendered that of national policy, the most important of all, insusceptible of
similar improvements? We have surely the highest reason to believe, that, as
the knowledge of the world increases, many of those evils and defects, which
have long been represented, as interwoven with the very existence of civil
government, may, in a great measure, be remedied, by the application of new
principles to practice.

Of modern policy, in its most improved state, and as distinguished from the
prevailing constitutions of antiquity, the most remarkable characteristic is
the doctrine of Representative Legislation. This late and invaluable
improvement, like the discoveries of an Archimedes, or a Newton, has wrought an
almost total change in the science, upon which it has been ingrafted. Exempt,
on one hand, from the oppressive rigor of monarchical and aristocratic sway,
and from the licentious turbulence of democracy, on the other, it forms the
most rational, and, as experience has shown, the most effectual, plan, that
human wisdom has ever yet devised, for the purpose of uniting social liberty
with social order. The extremes of absolute monarchy, and simple democracy,
are, respectively, calculated to operate, though by different means, their own
dissolution: The former, by provoking rebellion; the latter, especially in
extensive communities, by indulging licentiousness. The one enforces
unconditional obedience, till it becomes intolerable to obey; the other is,
from its nature, destitute of those primary and indispensable properties,
order, stability, energy, and coherence. These opposite systems, therefore,
comprize in themselves, the efficient principles of their own downfall: And the
more enlightened the people, among whom such forms of dominion prevail, the
more probable, in either case, will be the event of a speedy dissolution. Under
any political system, less simple than these, and among a people, who can form
any adequate notions of rational liberty, the probability of such an event
will, perhaps, in the common course of things, be greater, or less, as the
principles of that system are friendly, or hostile, either to despotism, or
anarchy. There will, therefore, be no great hazard, it is presumed, in
concluding, that a well-organized representative government is, of any,
hitherto devised, the best adapted to an enlightened state of society, the most
stable in its nature, and at the greatest remove from those opposite evils,
which originate in the excess, or the weakness, of civil power.

If these remarks are founded in truth, we may justly regard the political
fortune of our own country, as singularly prosperous. It may be safely
affirmed, that no system of government was ever framed, under circumstances,
more auspicious, or ever promised greater length of duration, than that of the
United States of America. It did not, like many others, originate in accident,
or considerations of temporary convenience: It was not accepted by the implicit
acquiescence of an ignorant ancestry, and ratified by the hereditary and
unquestioned usage of barbarous ages; nor imposed by the hand of lawless power:
But formed by the wisdom, and sanctioned by the deliberate approbation, of a
free and enlightened people. It was not reared upon the mouldering foundation,
nor composed of the jarring materials, of ancient political structures; but
founded on that durable basis, the rights of human nature, and constructed in
the genuine spirit of public justice and rational freedom. To preserve from
violation, to improve, by future experience, and to transmit, with
improvements, to posterity, this Palladium of civil liberty and social order,
should be the object of our united endeavors.

It is not intended, nor is it necessary, to attempt a panegyric on the
constitution, under which we live. It has answered, in practice, the
expectations of those, who were friends to its adoption, and, in a great
measure, removed the objections of such, as, from honest motives, originally
opposed it. It has sustained the scrutiny, and received the approbation, of the
wisest of men, both in this, and in foreign countries; and its principles have
already acquired an unrivaled celebrity among the remotest nations of the
civilized world.

But, whatever may be the excellencies of our political economy, let us still
remember, that it is not solely to constitutional forms, that this, or any
other nation must, eventually, owe its preservation and prosperity. The great
ends of civil government cannot be answered, without a wise and equitable
system of fundamental laws; nor by these alone. The people themselves are the
ultimate guardians of their own civil welfare. Their character and conduct
must, at length, determine their political condition. Without their
cooperation, therefore, every constitutional, and legislative provision for
national happiness, will eventually be vain.

The justice, which a free people owe to themselves, involves a catalogue of
duties, too numerous, to be severally considered. The first of these, is to
vindicate and defend the rights of their national sovereignty, against the
claims and aggressions of foreign powers. To oppose such claims, and chastise
such aggressions, are measures, not merely of local, or temporary expediency;
but of general and universal justice. In the conduct of nations, as in that of
individuals, there are certain extreme limits, beyond which, forbearance under
injury and insult, loses its name, as well as character, and becomes, not only
contemptible, but criminal. It is a moral duty, incumbent on every sovereign
community, to resent indignities, offered to its national character, and, more
especially, to resist usurpations upon its independence. This duty, always
sacred and important, becomes more peculiarly so, when the aggressing nation is
formidable, not merely for its power, but for its principles, and detestable
for its crimes: When, if uncontrolled, it threatens, not only to subvert the
liberties of the world, and to bring the human race into subjection; but to
force them into a practical contempt for religion, laws, and moral principle.

It can hardly be necessary to remark, that these observations are most
emphatically applicable to the present situation of the United States, in
relation to the government of France. The course of events in that country, has
lately exhibited to the world, a most awful and alarming spectacle: An immense
and powerful nation, once civilized and respectable, literally transformed, by
the ascendancy of pernicious principles, and the prevalence of lawless
passions, into a horde of robbers, incendiaries, violators, murderers,
blasphemers, and atheists! In attempting to delineate the character, or
describe the transactions, of the French republic, the historian, the orator,
and the poet, must forever feel and deplore the barrenness of language in terms
of abhorrence and execration. Her history is a continued, and
dreadfullyvariegated tissue of all, that is cruel and rapacious; all, that is
base and perfidious; all, that is insolent and impeiorus; all, that is
audacious and impious; all, that can degrade and brutalize the human character.

The way was prepared, for the introduction of her present system of vice and
impiety, violence and outrage, by a scandalous renunciation of all those rules
of action, which form the basis of civil order and social happiness. Her whole
revolutionary system is, not only not the same, but the very reverse, and the
reverse fundamentally, of all the laws, by which civil life has been hitherto
upheld, in the governments of the world. BURKE.
All the baser passions of the human soul have been cultivated with care, and
pressed into her service; crimes of the darkest dye have been countenanced and
rewarded, as civic virtues; while every appearance of religious faith, of moral
virtue, of sympathizing humanity, or even of remorse, has been tortured into
treason against the "Indivisible Republic!" Encouraged to the commission of
enormities, by the abolition of all moral discipline, by the example of those
in power, by an assurance of temporal impunity, and by a reliance on the future
immunities of "death and eternal sleep," it is not, indeed, surprising, that
the French people, of all descriptions, should have been abundantly prepared,
for the perpetration of those "deeds of horror," those numberless and nameless
crimes, for examples of which we shall search in vain, in the histories of all
other nations, ancient or modern, civilized or barbarous.

We here discover the origin of that pernicious system of policy, which, for a
long time past, has spread havoc and desolation throughout many parts of
Europe: A system, which has entombed religion, morals, laws, and freedom,
together; and converted France into one vast altar, for the immolation of human
victims. The government of that country, unlike all others, which have ever yet
existed, has not only openly derided, and delighted to shock, the moral
sentiments of the rest of mankind; but, with shameless effrontery, has even
boasted of its vices, courted the indignation of the world, and set the
vengeance of heaven at defiance! In addition to the ordinary crimes, which mark
the characters of tyrants, robbers, and assassins, the revolutionists of France
have dared, through mere wantonness of impiety and sacrilege, to proscribe the
religion of their fathers, to ridicule the Savior of mankind, to violate the
sanctuary of the Almighty, and to disturb, with atheistical orgies, the
mansions of the dead!

It is not my intention to attempt, it would exceed my powers to execute, a
detail of the countless atrocities, which stain the history of the French
Revolution: They have been perpetrated, and are daily repeated, in the view of
the world; they are already written in characters of crimson, and must have
repeatedly roused the indignation of every honest man, who has heard the name
of the French Republic.

The subsisting controversies between that government and our own, have now
arrived at a crisis, in which, our choice of measures is confined to a manly
resistance, or unconditional submission. The time has come, when, to attempt
further conciliatory measures, would be worse than in vain. However laudable
may have been the views of those, under whose auspices the French Revolution
commenced; however happily the change of government, originally attempted,
might have issued for the nation, or the human race; however fondly the
American people may have anticipated the effects of such a change; we are, at
present, to contemplate France, in no other character, than that, in which she
presents herself to our view, and to that of the world.

The present is, indeed, a period, critical and eventful to the United States.
The French revolutionists, after having conquered, pillaged, and laid waste, in
their mad career, many of the most free and flourishing states of Europe, are
now meditating the extension of their power and usurpation to this favored
country, the last, and only remaining, refuge of rational liberty. One, among
the many preposterous novelties, which have signalized the triumphs of Jacobin
fury and infidel philosophy, is, that a nation, styling itself a republic, and
proudly boasting to be the patroness of freedom, has subverted, within a span
of time, almost every government in Europe, great and small, which partook of a
republican form; plundered its treasury, desolated its territory, and murdered
its citizens; while every throne upon earth, the Papal excepted, has been
permitted to rest upon its basis. These champions of the rights of man consider
Liberty, under whatever form she appears, as their natural game. They have
scented her through all her secret retreats; they have chased her into her
strong holds, and strangled her with the cords of jacobin fraternity. No object
is too small to invite, none so great as to discourage, their rage and
rapacity. They have tigers to fall upon animated strength; they have hyenas to
prey upon carcasses. BURKE.


The views of France, with respect to the United States, are no longer a matter
of doubt. Her scheme of usurpation and universal dominion, is imprinted upon
all her acts, in characters so legible and conspicuous, that "he who runs, may
read" them. -- Regardless of that vivid enthusiasm, which, from the dawn of her
revolution, the American people and government felt, and manifested, in her
favor; of the lively interest they took in the cause, for which she professed
to be contending; of the joy, which they displayed, ather triumphs over the
powers, combined against her; of the rigid fidelity, and even munificence, with
which her conventional claims on this government have been allowed and
anticipated; and of the pacific and friendly disposition, which the executive
of the Union has discovered toward her, in its repeated overtures for an
amicable adjustment of differences; she has inflexibly persevered, in offering
us, as a nation, every indignity, which the boundless versatility of French
insolence could devise, and every injury, which her resources have enabled her,
with safety, to inflict. She has shamelessly violated, at the expense of the
United States, and in almost numberless instances, the laws of nations, and the
faith of treaties. She has insulted and calumniated our national rulers;
excited sedition against our government; levied war upon our commerce; made
captive, scourged, and imprisoned our fellow-citizens; and is now endeavoring,
by arts of intrigue, and menaces of violence, to wrest from our hands, our
political independence!

After such a display of national villainy, nothing more could reasonably have
been expected from our diplomatic overtures, than we have actually received. On
our repeated and importunate appeals to her justice, she girds herself with
terrors; repudiates our messengers of peace; and insolently bids the American
government, become tributary, to obtain the privilege of being heard, or
suffer, and be silent! Nay more: She threatens vengeance, in the event of
noncompliance; and boasts of her "means" to disunite the American people, to
distract their councils, and to subvert their government! -- But I am weary of
ascending the climax of her wickedness and infamy. -- If that ardent and manly
spirit, which, in SEVENSIX, animated some of us, and many of our fathers, still
slumbers; if our resentments are not roused into energy, by injuries and
indignities, like these; we richly merit the contempt and pity of the world: We
deserve, I had almost said, to be hurried out of the highway of heaven, into
all the vices, crimes, horrors, and miseries, of the French Revolution. BURKE.


But, however justly we may execrate the measures of the French Republic, we
ought to remember, that the evils, which we suffer from her insolence and
rapacity, are not altogether without a domestic origin. Her claims and
depredations have long been encouraged and invited, by the language and conduct
of a faction, intoxicated with her principles, and devoted to her views, in our
own country, and even in our public councils. The principal implements, which
she is now wielding, to sap the basis of our national honor and independence,
are wrought from materials of American growth! -- If, after all, that we have
seen and heard; if, after the disclosures, made in the recent communications of
our ministers from Paris, any American can disbelieve this fact; his
incredulity may be pronounced incorrigible.

In such a state of things, the good sense and patriotism of the American
people will, it is hoped, point out, and lead them to adopt, the course, which
their duty, their safety, and the honor of their country, require them to
pursue. To support the government of their choice, and to repel, with
promptitude and firmness, whatever attempts are made, to humble and disgrace
it, are the first duties, which, as freemen, they owe to themselves, and to the
world. Fortunately, a spirit of indignation has gone forth among them, which,
we trust, will spread and glow, till it withers the hopes of those, who have
combined, to prostrate in the dust, our private rights, and our national
independence.

Our prospects, though alarming, are not discouraging. The people of America,
if united, may oppose, with success, the hostile attacks of any foreign power.
The present, therefore, is a season, not for despondency, but for preparation
to meet danger, and repel it. -- On the anniversary of that ever-memorable day,
on which our fathers executed the Great Charter of our independence, and boldly
proclaimed it to the world, may all the active energies of their posterity
rally around it, and guard it from violation!

But, while we contemplate the civil obligations, which are imposed upon us, by
the situation of our foreign connexions, let us not be unmindful of those
equally sacred duties, which spring more immediately from our internal
relations. Among these, may be ranked that debt of approbation and gratitude,
which we owe to an administration, nobly tenacious of our rights, and ever
watchful over our welfare. -- The right of a free and well-informed people, to
approve and arraign the conduct of their rulers, is productive of this twofold
benefit: That it not only guards against the errors and abuses of delegated
power; but affords to a virtuous administration the highest rewards of
patriotism -- the applause and benedictions of a grateful people. It is
necessary, however, to be remembered, that this privilege, though one of the
most valuable, that freemen can enjoy, is liable to extreme abuse. A due
attention to the preservation of our civil rights, is equally distant from
causeless suspicion, and thoughtless security. Habitual vigilance toward the
conduct of rulers, may be laudable and necessary; but hasty jealousy, toward
those, to whom we ourselves have voluntarily committed the management of our
national concerns, impeaches our own rectitude, in exercising the right of
suffrage.

With a proper attention to the duties, already enumerated, every people ought
to unite a constant and scrupulous regard to the real honor and dignity of
their own national character: And it is, perhaps, unnecessary to observe, that
these are inseperably connected with habits of public virtue. Under given
circumstances, whatever would, in a moral view, disgrace the name of an
individual, would tarnish the honor of a nation; and whatever stains the
reputation, will eventually injure the welfare, of either. If, therefore, under
the most perfect system of national policy, there be a want of integrity, in
those to whom the immediate administration of government is entrusted, or, of
public virtue in the people, by whom the important trust is conferred; the most
valuable interests of the latter must inevitably languish. The voice of
history, and the examples of many degraded nations, now existing, announce, in
expressive language, the ruinous consequences of popular vices, those poisonous
inhalations, which corrode the vitals of community. If the source, from which
the authority of government is originally derived, be itself contaminated, the
streams must be impure, and their influence destructive.

In effecting the decline of national prosperity, intestine vice has usually
been a more operative principle, than external violence. It, therefore,
concerns the citizens of the United States, to be continually on their guard,
against the introduction of those seductive habits and practices, which
originate in the abuse of propitious fortune, and which are diametrically
opposed, not only to the spirit of republican virtue, but to the welfare of
every community. Luxury, dissipation, venality, and the arts of popular
intrigue, are among the most formidable engines of national ruin. The secret,
slow, and silent attacks, which vices and practices like these, make upon the
interests of society, are distinguished from the assaults of direct and open
violence, by this dangerous peculiarity, that, like "the pestilence, which
walks in darkness," they seldom excite alarm, till to be alarmed, is
unavailing. Like the dagger of an insidious enemy, they wound, ere danger is
suspected; and, before opposition is meditated, become irresistible. These, if
not watched with a jealous eye, and seasonably repressed, may give to this
nation, as they have given to others, a deadly blow. And since, by the
unforeseen relation of causes and effects, our greatest ills have, thus far,
been converted to our greatest glory; it highly concerns us to beware, lest we
"lose by gaining, and by rising, fall."

The most stable props of public virtue are honest industry, and good
education. Idleness in community, is the parent and nurse, not only of poverty
and effeminacy, but of every immoral habit: And immorality, of every
description, even though not punishble by the laws, is still an offense against
the welfare, of society. It is, therefore, the part of a wise people, to
imitate that bright example of wisdom and patriotism, the illustrious
CINCINNATUS, by encouraging and honoring useful labor. This is the only
original source of wealth, and of every acquired enjoyment. The implements of
industry, if polished by use, reflect the images of plenty, temperance, health,
and prosperity.

The importance of education, especially in a republican government, though
universally acknowledged, can scarcely be too often inculcated. The
dissemination of useful knowledge among all ranks in society, is one of the
most worthy objects of public encouragement; and by their early and singular
attention to this momentous concern, several of the United States have already
raised themselves to a distinguished rank, among the communities of the earth.
-- The human race were not surely formed for ignorant, selfish, and merely
sensitive beings. Their mental faculties and social affections were designed,
by the Author of nature, for cultivation and improvement.

-- " Why was man so eminently raised
" Amid the vast creation; why ordained
" Through life and death to dart his piercing eye,
" With thoughts beyond the limit of his frame;
" But, that the Omnipotent might send him forth,
" In sight of mortal and immortal powers,
" As on a boundless theater, to run
" The great career of justice; to exalt
" His generous aim to all diviner deeds,
" To chase each partial purpose from his breast;
" And through the mists of passion and of sense,
" And through the tossing tide of chance and pain,
" To hold his course unfaultering; while the voice
" Of truth and virtue, up the steep ascent
" Of nature, calls him to his high reward,
" The applauding smile of Heaven?" AKENSIDE.

It is unnecessary to dilate upon the salutary influence, which useful
knowledge produces on the mind, by enlarging those narrow views, and by
restraining and correcting those perverse habits, sentiments, and passions,
which, in a state of ignorance and barbarism, disgrace the human character.
"There is no effectual method," says a late writer, "of preventing vice of all
kinds, but by deeply inculcating the principles of integrity, honor, and
religion, upon the minds of youth, in a severe and virtuous education." Where
the laws of morality are not theoretically known, it is indeed irrational to
expect, that they will be practically obeyed. -- The general diffusion of
knowledge is an object, no less important in a political, than in a moral view.
Whatever conduces to the support of morality, and to the dignity of the human
character, is invariably subservient to the highest interests of civil society.
Ignorance, being, by nature, allied to one of those odious extremes,
licentiousness, or slavery, cannot long consist with the enjoyment of rational
freedom. That government must be deemed the best, which combines the greatest
reconcilable degrees of liberty and order: But order and liberty can never be
united, where wisdom to form the union is wanted. And it is morally impossible,
that the rights of human nature should be preserved among those, by whom they
are not understood.

From the earliest ages of the world, liberty and learning have, generally,
risen and declined together. And even in those singular instances, in which the
latter has flourished under despotic governments, it has been uniformly
confined to a very inconsiderable part of community; while the people at large
have been as destitute of information, as of freedom. But it is inconceivable,
that any people, among whom the elements of useful knowledge are generally
disseminated, should long continne oppressed.

We may, therefore, rationally anticipate great accessions to human happiness,
from the future progress of the human mind. And it is here observable, that the
state of the world is, at present, more peculiarly favorable, than it has been,
at any former period, to the universal diffusion, and lasting preservation, of
every species of science. Before the discoveries and inventins of modern times
had placed the improvements of mankind, upon their present stable and permanent
basis, the arts and learning of ages might have been swept into oblivion, by a
single inundation of hostile barbarians. But to such a degree have the means of
information been multiplied and improved, in later times, that, according to
human probability, they can never be destroyed, but by some unexampled and
incalculable mode of devastation. Unless, therefore, mankind shall become
inattentive to their own welfare, in proportion, as they shall understand and
enjoy the means of promoting it; there can be little doubt, that the great ends
of society will be more effectually answered in future, that they have been in
former, ages. Science and the arts have "struck an everlasting root," in both
hemispheres: The dominion of absolute barbarism is already contracted to a
comparatively narrow span. And since the entire revolution, which has taken
place in the art of war, has given so decided a superiority to civilized, over
savage, forces; learning and civilization have little to fear, from the hostile
attacks of the latter. We may, therefore, with some degree of confidence,
predict, that unless the apparent order of nature shall be changed, mankind
will never experience a return of that intellectual darkness, which, during the
decline of the Roman empire, suspended, for ages, the operations of the human
mind. The modern invention of the mariner's compass will facilitate the
propagation of knowledge, to the most distant regions of the habitable world;
and the art of printing will ensure its preservation to the latest posterity.
-- The great and invaluable improvements, on which the useful institutions of
social life are founded, being thus secured against all probable contingencies;
we may perhaps on rational grounds, indulge the pleasing hope, that,
notwithstanding the disastrous phenomenon, which are, at present, exhibited in
the political world, the cause of bleeding Justice will eventually prevail, and
every succeeding age increase the knowledge, the virtue, and the happiness, of
the human race.

END.

