A Short Sketch, OF THE LIFE OF MR. LENT MUNSON.

"Honor and shame from no condition rise;
Act well your part; -- there all the honor lies."
LITCHFIELD: Printed by Thomas Collier

A short SKETCH, etc.
MR. LENT MUNSON, the son of Lieut. Levi Munson, now of Harwinton, in
Connecticut, was born in Wallingford, the 3d of March 1768. In the 10th year of
his age, he entered as a musician into the Continental Army, where he continued
until the establishment of peace; after which he joined the family, who had in
his absence removed to Harwinton. Here he resided until the year 1787, when he
again entered into the service of his country, in the corpse raised by Col.
David Humphreys, with the rank of Sergeant-Musician. The short duration of that
command soon left him again under the direction of his parents, where he
continued until the year 1788, -- when he once more determined upon a military
life. Accordingly he went to Hartford, and engaged for the term of three years;
and joined the army at Fort Harmer, in the Western Country; where he performed
the duty of Musician until early in the year 1789, when he was advanced to the
rank of Quarter Master-Sergeant to the garrison, in both of which stations his
conduct was unexceptionable. In December 1790, orders came out at Fort
Washington, where Mr. Munson then was stationed, for re-enlisting the men. He
engaged for three years more, and was soon after ordered to Connecticut on the
recruiting service. He was stationed at Middletown, where he continued in that
duty until 1793, when he joined the army again at Fort Washington. During his
residence at Middletown, he cultivated an acquaintance with many respectable
inhabitants of that city, who notwithstanding his humble rank in life,
discovered his ^^^l (...) and treated him with the politeness and respect (...)
^^served. The attention paid him at this and other (...) had a tendency to wean
him from the army, and (...) drawn up in his mind a determination, after the
(...) his present engagements, to obtain his bread (...) means. But not long
after he had joined the army, (...) sent on a detachment, as an escort to
provision, (...) the command of Lieut. Loury. On the 17th of October, the party
was attacked by the Savages, and totally defeated: The officers, and many of
the soldiers, were killed: Mr. Munson, being with others missing, was supposed
to be amongst the slain.

The melancholy tidings of this unhappy affair, were communicated to the
family, and other friends, who lamented his untimely end, with all the
bitterness of grief natural to the circumstances of his supposed death.

But Providence had reserved him for other scenes. Finding no hopes in flight,
he had determined to act the part of a soldier, and sell his life as dear as
possible; but being quite spent with fatigue, he was soon disarmed by the
Savages, and stripped of all his clothes, except shoes, socks, and overalls. They
gave him in exchange an old Indian coat, and the second day an old shirt. In
this dress he was driven five or six days; the Indians on horseback still
riding upon his heels, till his strength was almost wholly exhausted, and he
more than once concluded, he could struggle no longer with his fate, but must
seek a refuge in the shades of death. On the third day after his capture they
painted him, in token of life and pardon. Each night he was fast bound, and
placed between two Savages; so that there was no possibility of escaping from
them. They moreover had left the place of action in such haste, for fear of
pursuit, that they could take but very little provision; in consequence of
which the prisoners had the additional misery of hunger to encounter. There
were eleven taken; but one of the unhappy number, being unable to travel at the
unmerciful rate the Savages required, was killed: The other ten arrived at an
Indian town, belonging to the Ottawa tribe. For several days after their
arrival, Mr. Munson was ^^able to walk: On the 11th of his captivity they (...)
hair, and put a jewel in his nose; they attempt^^ (...) cut his ears, which he
resisted with such spirit (...) ^^^^^verance that they finally did not insist
on his (...). His principal diet was corn either parched (...) water, without
salt. It Is true they had (...) custom was to let it putrify before they ate it,
he could not partake of their repast, and to stay in their huts at meal time
was almost intolerable.

In this wretched situation he continued for eight months, compelled to hard
labor; -- almost without clothing exposed to the inclemencies of the winter
season, far removed from all his friends who, ignorant of his fate, supposed
him beyond all the troubles of this life. -- His fortitude, however, did not
forsake him; -- he revolved in his mind various plans for escaping from them:
But being a stranger to the country through which he must pass, ignorant of the
course he ought to steer, and beset with the jealous vigilance of his enemies,
he still found insurmountable obstables before him. Having however by much
complaisance and seeming tranquillity, flattered his Master into a security, he
came to the determination of taking his gun, and trusting himself to fortune:
But before he had put this hazardous experiment in execution, he happily met
with an English trader, who suggested a safer method. After receiving from this
trader the point of compass he ought to observe, and other useful directions,
on the 17th of June he left them in a profound sleep; and assisted by the light
of the moon, which was now rising, he took his unknown way through the
uninhabited wilderness, amid the solemn silence of the night. He traveled till
the dawn of day, when he secreted himself in some weeds and grass, about 15
rods from a kind of road in which he traveled. In this situation he saw two of
his enemies pursuing after him on horseback. In about an hour and a half they
returned the same way. The next night he pursued his course, and arrived at
some French settlement, where the people showed him kindness. Having washed the
paint from his face, and refreshed himself, about daybreak he continued his
rout, and traveling 26 miles, about 11 o'clock he came to another settlement.
He had but just stepped into the house, when accidentally looking out at the
window, he saw twelve Indians crossing a river within twelve rods of the house.
The gentleman proved to be friendly, and concealed him in an upper loft for his
security in case they had entered: But they pursued the (...) which he came; so
that had he been ten minutes later, he must inevitably have fallen into their
hands, -- the fatal consequences of which are easily conceived. Here he stayed
two days, and the people showed him much kindness. The Lady gave him a good
shirt, and a hat, the first which had been on his head in eight months; -- they
procured him a passage by water to Detroit, and gave him a sufficient quantity
of provisions for the journey. Such are the blessed fruits of benevolence! --
When he arrived at that fortress, Col. English, the commanding officer, was no
less benevolent: He gave him a plenty of provisions, and a passport; -- put him
on board of a vessel in his Majesty's service, and sent him to Niagara, where
he met with a number of New England gentlemen, whose liberality supplied him
with necessaries to complete his journey. Capt. Guernsey, late of Durham, and
Mr. Salmon Goodrich, of Berlin, were of the number of these gentlemen, whose
kindness did honor both to themselves and their country, and whose names Mr.
Munson has frequently mentioned with gratitude.

Here, after eight months of almost incessant fatigue of body and mind, he took
a short repose; and afterward getting a passage by water to Skenectady, on the
21st of July he again arrived at his Father's house. The joy and surprise of
his Parents, on receiving again that Son to their arms whom they had thought no
longer an inhabitant of this world; -- whom they had mourned as dead for many
sorrowful months, is much better conceived than expressed.

Mr. Munson's military career here ended. After staying a short time with his
friends, in Harwinton, he repaired to Middletown, where he gladdened the hearts
of his acquaintance, and with whom he consulted upon the future plans of his
life. As the seas seemed to open the fairest prospect for him toward wealth
and respectability, he applied himself to the study of navigation, and soon
became master of it. His earnest desire of perfecting himself in the maritime
profession, induced him to ship on board a vessel as a raw hand, in an European
voyage. The several duties to which he was called, during the undertaking, were
performed with so much (...) and dispatch, that in his settlement with the
owners, on his return, they allowed him Four Dollars a month for extra
services. He remained with his friends a short time, arranging his affairs for
another voyage, which he undertook for the West Indies. This voyage proved his
last: He was captured by the French, and carried into the island of St. Croix a
prisoner, where he was seized with a violent fever, which in a short time put
an end to his labors. He died on the 21st of Sept. 1796; -- after a toilsome
life of 28 years, 6 months, and 18 days, -- 11 years and four months of which
was spent in the service of his country.

In the course of his travels, he had contracted an acquaintance with many
worthy and respectable people: As their friendship for him was wholly
disinterested, the unusual warmth of their affection, affords us the highest
encomium upon his character. -- "The opportunity I had of knowing him (says
one of these, Cap^ JOHN PRATT, of Middletown, in a letter to Mr. (...) dated
December 9th, 17^6
) licenses me to declare, that he was honest, prudent, charitable, and just in
all his dealings: -- That possessing these qualities, together with an amiable
disposition, he bid fair to honor society, make his family happy, and himself
respected. Those who knew him, loved and respected him; those who may know his
character, if they have any regard to merit, will revere his memory. The above
observations I have made to you without solicitation: I have offered them as a
testimony of my great esteem and regard for a deceased friend; and let me
assure you, they fall far short of the evidence I feel within me."

Lieut. Munson whose family, consisting of eight sons and a daughter, had many
of them often been engaged in the service of the public, and consequently
dispersed into various parts of the country, had the pleasure of seeing the
most of them together on the 11th day of January ^^^2, -- a pleasure well known
to those who are parents. (...) consequence of this favor, he had desired his
neighbors and friends to meet with him and his family at the House of GOD, on
the 11th of January 1797, to offer at the foot of his Altar public Thanks for
his goodness. But in the mean time arrived the sad news that one of this Family
was no longer amongst the living. The proposed Meeting of course gave place to
another on a different occasion, -- when the following DISCOURSE was delivered.
The Mourners requested a Copy of it; and as our duty requires us on such
occasions to deny them no means of consolation, it is humbly requested the
courteous Reader will accept THIS, as some apology for the publication.


