THE SPEECH OF ALBERT GALLATIN, DELIVERED IN THE House of Representatives OF
THE UNITED STATES On the first of March, 1798 UPON THE FOREIGN INTERCOURSE BILL.

SECOND EDITION.

WITH AN APPENDIX.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY RICHARD FOLWELL, No. 38, CARTER'S-ALLEY. 1798.

THE following amendment to the bill providing the means of intercourse between
the United States and foreign nations, being under consideration, to wit: In
the section which provides that "the President shall not allow to any minister
plenipotentiary a greater sum than at the rate of nine thousand dollars per
annum, as a compensation for all his personal services and other expenses; nor
a greater sum for the same than four thousand five hundred dollars per annum,
to a charge des affairs;" strike out the word "plenipotentiary," and insert in
lieu thereof, the words "to Great Britain, France or Spain;" strike out the
words "charge des affairs," and insert in lieu thereof the words "any minister
to any other foreign nation."

MR. SPEAKER,
THE amendment proposed to this bill fixes the salary of ministers, employed at
foreign courts, not according to the grade of those ministers, as has
heretofore been the case, but according to the courts to which they may be
sent. Its object is to reduce the diplomatic establishment nearly to what it
was before May, 1796, by confining the salary of 9000 dollars a year to the
ministers at London, Paris and Madrid, and allowing only 4500 to all others.
The shape of the bill precludes an amendment more simple in its nature, and by
which the same object would have been attained. The present permanent
establishment, which the framers of the bill mean to support, requires an
annual appropriation of sixty-four thousand dollars; and yet twenty-four
thousand dollars of that sum are thrown (...) ^^ section, (...) temporary (...)
for the present (...), thereby presenting us from proposing a reduction in the
sum which is openly asked for the support of the permanent establishment.

Before we are permitted to enter into the merits of the question, we are
arrested in the threshold of discussion by constitutional objections. It is not
indeed insisted that the amendment itself is unconstitutional; it is not denied
that the legislature has a right to fix the salaries of public ministers; but
the reduction of the establishment, is supposed, in its operation and tendency,
to affect the legitimate authority of the president. We are charged with a
design of subverting, by our doctrine, the principles of the constitution, and
we are thus drawn, in an incidental manner, into a previous discussion of a
constitutional question.

The 2d section of the 2d article of the constitution, amongst other things,
provides, that "the president shall nominate, and by and with the advice and
consent of the senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls, judges of the supreme court, and all other officers of the United
States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which
shall be established by law." The first inference, attempted to be drawn from
the clause, is, not only that the appointment of ministers is exclusively
vested in the executive, which position is self-evident, but, that an unlimited
number of offices of ambassadors, and other diplomatic agents, is created by
the constitution itself, and that the president, in appointing, only fills
those pre-existing offices. It appears to me, that it would be more correct to
say, that the possible existence of those officers is recognized by that
section, but that the office of minister to any foreign court, where we have
not had any before, is created by the president making the appointment. And it
may even be thought doubtful whether a law may not be necessary to create the
office, before an appointment takes place. This clause recognizes the existence
of judges of the supreme court, as well as that of foreign ministers, and gives
the same unlimited power of appointment in both cases to the executive. Nay,
the case of judges is stronger than that of ministers; for, upon these, the
constitution is silent in every other part, whilst not only it is here
declared, that judges of the supreme (...), as well as public ministers, may
exist, but the 3d article o^ the constitution positively enacts, that there
shall be a supreme court, and fixes its jurisdiction. Yet it has not been
contended that the office of judges of the supreme court was created by the
constitution, or could be created by the mere appointment of the president,
without the previous authorization of a law. It has not been contended that the
president had, by the constitution, the power of appointing any unlimited
number of those judges, to be fixed by his own discretion. On the contrary, a
law had passed defining their number, before any appointment took place; and it
is not insisted that the executive can appoint more than six, as fixed by that
law. Had that power, contended for in relation to public ministers, existed in
the case of judges, that part of the law, which declares that there shall be
six judges, and no more, must be unconstitutional, as we have no right by law,
and even with the consent of the president, to divest him of any of his
constitutional authorities. Still, it is not my intention to lay any stress
upon this argument; some nice discrimination may perhaps be drawn between the
two offices; a different construction has heretofore prevailed in the case of
ministers, and it is not necessary, in order to prove the constitutionality of
our doctrine, to contend for the construction of this section. I would not,
therefore, have made these preliminary observations, had it not been to show,
that the power of the executive to appoint ministers without the previous
sanction of a law, from which it is attempted to derive by implication the
right of controuling the legislature in the exercise of its own constitutional
powers, is itself of a doubtful nature, and can only be admitted by a very
liberal construction of that clause of the constitution.

On the other hand, the constitution his expressly and exclusively vested in
congress, the power of raising, granting, and directing the application of
money. The 8th section of the ^st article declares, that "congress shall have
power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, and to borrow
money on the credit of the United States." The 1st section emphatically states,
that " all legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a congress;"
and (...) 9th section provides, that "no money shall be drawn from the
t^^^sury, bu^ in consequence of appropriations made by law.'

We say that congress having the sole power of granting money, are judges of
the propriety or impropriety of making a grant, and that they have a right to
exercise their discretion therein; whilst those who oppose the amendment upon
constitutional grounds, contend that the power of creating the office of public
ministers, vested in the president, imposes an obligation upon congress to
provide an adequate compensation for as many as he shall think fit to appoint.
We say that the power of granting money for any purposes whatever, belongs
solely to the legislature, in which it is literally vested by the constitution:
they insist that that power in this instance attaches, by implication, to the
president, and that congress are bound to make provision, without having a
right to exercise their own discretion.

In order to establish this doctrine, it is asserted that, by our constitution,
each department may have checks within itself, but has none upon the others;
that each department is self-independent, has its own share of powers, and
moves uncontrouled within its sphere; that, therefore, whenever a certain
authority is, by the constitution, vested in any one department, it must
possess the means to carry that authority into effect, and that the other
departments are bound to lend their assistance for that purpose.

These positions will not stand the test of investigation. Whenever the powers
vested in any one department are sufficient to complete a certain act, that
department is independent of all the others, and it would be an
unconstitutional attempt in any of the others to try to control it. But
whenever the powers have been so distributed between two departments, in
relation to another certain act, that neither of the two can complete the act
by virtue of its own powers, then each department is controuled by the other,
not in relation to the operation of its appropriate powers, but in relation to
the act itself. Each department, in that case, may go as far as its own
authority will permit, but no farther. The refusal of the other department, to
exercise its powers in relation to that act, in the same direction and in
concurrence with the first department, is no abridgment of the legitimate
powers of the first. It is the constitution which, in that (...) ^ridges the
powers of both, and which has rendered the concurrence of both necessary for
the completion of the act. If either of the departments, in that case, after
having exercised its own authority toward the completion of the act, shall
pretend to have a right to force the pow^^s of the other in the same direction,
so as to have the act completed against or without its voluntary consent, it is
that department which abridges the legitimate exercise of the powers of the
other. Thus, in the instance before us, the president may appoint as many
public ministers as he thinks fit, and if he can send them to their intended
mission without the assistance of any act of the legislature; if he can, as in
the case of consuls, find men who will serve without a salary, he has a right
to do it, and thus to act uncontrouled by the legislature; because, in this
supposed instance, his own authority is sufficient to carry into effect his
intentions. But farther than that he cannot go; for the constitution, in no
part, gives him any power to force the legislature to grant the money which may
be necessary to pay the ministers. In the same manner the legislature have a
right to appropriate a sum of money, for the purpose of paying twenty public
ministers, if they shall, in their judgment, think so many necessary. But
farther than that they cannot go; they cannot force the president to appoint
twenty ministers, if he does not think them necessary. In this instance, the
act is placed partly under the jurisdiction of the executive, and partly under
that of the legislature -- under the jurisdiction of the executive so far as
relates to the creation of the office and to the appointment -- under the
jurisdiction of the legislature so far as relates to granting the money; and
the concurrence of both departments is necessary to complete the act.

The contrary doctrine leads to a palpable absurdity; for, if it be true that
any department, having expressed its will in relation to an act, upon which it
can operate but partially, binds the other departments to lend their
assistance, in order that its will may be completely carried into effect, it
follows, that whenever two department shall differ in opinion as to a certain
act, we shall have two different wills acting in contrary directions, and each,
however, binding the other respectively; that is to say, that there is a
necessity (...) the act should at the s^^e time be done in two different ways,
or, in some instan^es, that it should, at the same time, be done and not be
done. But the fact is, that the true doctrine of those gentlemen, though not
openly avowed on the present occasion, is not, that each department may act
uncontrouled in the exercise of its own appropriate powers; but that they have
two standards, one which they apply to the executive, and another by which they
measure the powers of the legislature; and that in their opinion the powers of
the executive are paramount, and must limit and control those of the
legislature, whenever they happen to move in the same sphere, whenever the
execution of an act depends upon the concurrence of both.

This doctrine is as novel as it is absurd. We have always been taught to
believe that in all mixed governments, and especially in our own, the different
departments mutually operated as checks one upon the other. It is a principle
inherent to the very nature of those governments: it is a principle which flows
from the distribution and separation of legislative and executive powers, by
which the same act, in many instances, instead of belonging exclusively to
either, falls under the discretionary and partial authority of both: it is a
principle of all our state constitutions: it is a principle of the constitution
under which we now act: it is a principle recognized by every author who wrote
on the subject: it is a principle fully established by the theory and practice
of the government of that country, from which we derive our political
institutions. In Great Britain, the power of declaring war is vested in the
king; but the power of granting supplies, in order to support the war, is
vested in parliament. It has never been contended there, that parliament were
bound by the act of the king to grant money for that purpose; it is, on the
contrary, fully understood that a concurrence of opinion is necessary, before a
war can be carried into effect, that the two departments, in that respect,
control and check each other, and that war is never declared by the king,
unless he can depend on the support of parliament.

Wh^^^^ is found that the constitution has distributed the powers in a manner
different from that contended for, although there is no clause, wh^^^ ^ire^^s
that congress shall be bound to appropriate money is order to carry into effect
any of the executive powers, some gentlemen, recurring to metaphysical
subtleties, and abandoning the literal and plain sense of the constitution,
say, that, although we have a constitutional power, we have not a moral right
to act according to our own discretion, but are under a moral obligation, in
this instance, to grant the money. It is evident, that where the constitution
has lodged the power, there exists the right of acting and the right of
discretion. Congress is, upon all occasions, under a moral obligation to act
according to justice and propriety. We do not claim the absurd privilege of
acting without sufficient motives, but we wish every proper motive to have its
due weight. The opinion of the executive, and, where he has a partial power,
the application of that power, to a certain object, will ever operate as
powerful motives upon our deliberations. I wish it to have its full weight; but
I feel averse to a doctrine which would place us under the sole control of a
single force impelling us in a certain direction, to the exclusion of all the
other motives of action which should also influence us.

The last clause of the 8th section of the 1st article of the constitution,
which declares, that congress shall have power to make all laws which shall be
necessay and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all
other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the United
States, or in any department or officer thereof, was introduced ye^^^^day, in
order to prove that congress were bound to pass the laws necessary to carry
into execution any of the powers vested by the constitution in the president.
But it is evident, that this clause gives a power, and does not impose duty: it
does not say that congress shall make laws, but shall have power to make laws;
that is to say, shall exercise their own discretion. This clause, contrasted
with the language of the constitution in another part, affords an additional
proof in support of our arguments.

It ^^nno^ have escaped observation, that the doctrine of some gen^^^men on
this floor would, by transferring to the executive (...) ^ower of determining
the amount of an appropriation, ^^ve him a legislative power, the power of
doing what it within the province of a law, the power of fixing the rule by
which a certain act is to be executed; whilst the legislature, being bound to
carry into effect the intention of the president, would, in that instance, be
transformed into an executive power. That such was not the intent of the
constitution, appears, from its not using, in the last mentioned clause, the
same mode of expression which is applied to mere executive duties. The 3d
section of the 2d article directs, that the president shall take care that the
laws be faithfully executed. Here no discretion is left: the con^tion does not
here say, that the president shall have power to execute the laws; but, by the
phraseology, he is bo^nd to have them executed. When, therefore, the
constitution means to impose a duty, it is sufficiently explicit, and
positively directs the act to be done; and we may safely conclude, that where
it gives no such direction, where it impowers instead of commanding, the reason
is that it meant to leave a discretion.

It is also objected that congress cannot, in every case, exercise that
discretion we contend for, as those clauses of the constitution which provide
"that the president and judges shall rece^ve, for their services, a
compensation, which shall not be diminished, etc." would be defeated, by the
refusal of the legislature to appropriate for that purpose.

The constitution recognizes the existence of public ministers as well as that
of the president and judges. It goes no farther on the subject of ministers;
but declares, that the president and judges shall have salaries, etc. Had the
framers of the constitution also intended that congress should be bound to make
provision for ministers, they would have introduced a similar clause in respect
to them. The constitution is explicit in one case, and declares, that salaries
shall be given; it is silent in the other, and does not declare that salaries
shall be given. The objection, therefore, cannot reach farther than the
specific case upon which it is grounded Permit me to add, that in respect to
the president and judges, the discretionary power of the legislature to grant
money is limited only by the constitution, and is not transferred to any other
department. For the number of those officers being determined, in respect to
the president by the constitution, and in respect to the judges by law, the
amount of money necessary for their support, which must be in proportion to
their number, is fixed in the first instance by the legislature and not by the
executive. The limitation of the legislative power does not go farther there,
than to bind subsequent legislatures for a certain time, by the acts of former
ones. But, in respect to public ministers, should the doctrine, against which
we contend, prevail, as their number would be fixed, not by the legislature,
but by the president, the amount of money, necessary for their support, would
also depend upon him; and the power of granting money, in that instance, would
be transferred from the legislature to the executive.

Some gentlemen, embarrassed by the clause respecting appropriations, have
attempted to diminish its force, by connecting it with the following one, which
directs the publication of the accounts of receipts and expenditures of the
public money, and representing it as a mere matter of form. It is strange
indeed that an attempt should be made to represent appropriation clauses in the
constitution as mere matters of form, as nominal provisions, whilst the only
security against standing armies, contained in the constitution, consists in
the clause which provides that no appropriation of money to raise and support
armies shall be longer than two years. But the ingenuity of those gentlemen
cannot erase the obnoxious clause: and so long as it shall remain a part of the
constitution, so long shall it be necessary that a law be passed before any
money can be drawn from the treasury -- so long shall it be necessary that
money drawn from the treasury be applied only in such manner, to such extent,
and for such purposes, as shall have been previously ascertained by law. It is
this clause which completes the power vested in congress over money. And it
should be well understood that the doctrine, for which we contend, is that
constitutional principle, which gives to the legislature an exclusive authority
of raising and granting money; an authority which our opponents wish to place,
in several cases, the present one, and that of treaties, in the hands of the
executive, allowing him thereby to raise and to expend money without the
control of congress. I say to raise money; for it is immaterial to me, whether
he does it directly, or whether the legislature are bound to do it according to
his discretion.

In this investigation, I have confined myself strictly to the constitutional
question, wishing to ascertain what the constitution was, and not what it
should be. Before I make any observations on the tendency and consequences of
the two opposite constructions, I wish to make some on the merits of the
amendment itself.

We conceive that the effect of the amendment will be, to prevent an extension
of our political connections with foreign nations, at the same time that it
will reduce any e^^enditure of money, which, if unnecessary, may be applied to
give an undue influence to the executive, through the means of patronage, even
over the legislature. But, we do not believe that this amendment will injure
our commercial intercourse with those nations, or cause any prejudice to our
commercial interest.

The commercial intercourse between nations is regulated by the law of nations,
by the municipal laws of the respective countries, and by treaties of commerce.
The application of those different laws to individual cases, the protection of
individuals against acts of oppression not consonant with those laws, the
protection of our seamen and of our citizens trading to foreign countries, fall
within the province of those agents known by the name of consuls. Consuls are
appointed for that specific purpose: we have them in all countries with which
we trade, whether we have there public ministers or not; they protect our
commerce as effectually at Hamburgh, in Denmark or Sweden, where we have no
diplomatic characters, as it is protected in Spain or Holland, where we have
ministers. It is only when we wish ^o obtain a change in the regulations
provided by the acknowledged law of nations, or by the municipal laws of the
country, that public ministers are necessary, as they alone can negociate with
a foreign government, as they alone can form treaties of commerce. But it is
only the application of laws and treaties to individual cases which require a
continual attention and a permanent residence. The extraordinary occasions on
which it may be necessary to negociate treaties, may be provided for by special
missions, by extraordinary envoys; and it is worthy of remark, that the two
only treaties, which have yet been made, under the present constitution, with
foreign nations, those with Great Britain and Spain, have both been formed by
extraordinary envoys (Mr. Jay and Mr. Pinckney) although we had at that time
public ministers at those two courts. The proposed amendment affects only the
permanent diplomatic establishment; it applies neither to consuls, nor to such
extraordinary missions as circumstances may render necessary.

It must be acknowledged, however, that it is not improbable that the extention
of our diplomatic establishment may tend to increase the number of our
commercial treaties beyond those which might result from extraordinary
missions. But is this a definable object? It would, indeed, be extremely
advantageous to obtain from all nations, such general alterations in the law of
nations, as would secure the freedom of the sea, and effectually protect the
flag of neutral powers, against the danger of capture or detention in all
possible cases. But have we yet ever formed a commercial trea^y, in which those
provisions were not connected with some commercial restrictions of a different
nature, and which did not even contain some clauses of a political nature? I
will go farther, and I will ask, whether we have derived any commercial
advantage from the commercial treaties we have heretofore made? Let me remind
gentlemen on this floor, with the situation of our commerce before the
organization of this government. The treaties of commerce we had at that time
with France, Holland, Sweden and Prussia, had not prevented its depression. And
to what cause must we ascribe the vigor it had acquired before the present
European war? Not to commercial treaties; for we had formed no new ones. To the
want of a general government, having a power of making general commercial
regulations, was due, the languid situation of our trade; and its revival was
owing to the adoption of that government, to our own regulations, to ourselves,
and not to any compact made with foreign nation.

The restrictions which we have laid upon ourselves, by our commercial
treaties, have been attended with political consequences fatal to our
tranquillity. We had made two treaties with France, one of alliance avowedly of
a political nature, another of commerce unconnected with the first. I need not
remind the house of the difficulties in which we have been involved by several
clauses of the commercial treaty. The articles relative to the admission of
prizes of one nation into our ports, and to the exclusion of those of another,
were the cause of long and critical diplomatic discussions. We have now
extended to the other belligerent power the same clauses, with a reservation of
our prior engagements, but to the exclusion of nations with whom we had no
treaties, and have not thereby lessened our difficulties.

But I will again ask, what commercial advantage have we derived from our
commercial treaty with France, which we would not have enjoyed without that
treaty? Have we derived any from the commercial part of our treaty with Great
Britain? Is our commerce with that nation on a better footing than it was
without the treaty. I do not mean to allude to the conventional part of that
treaty, by which our differences were arranged. I do not mean to allude to the
political consequences of that treaty: they are foreign to the present
discussion. I speak only of commercial advantages. All we know on that subject
is contained in the two acts of parliament communicated to us by the president.
It results from them, that England has opened the East India trade to us under
the restrictions provided by the treaty, and to all neutral nations without
those restrictions. Whether she means to include us in the general provision,
which relates to all neutral nations, or to keep us under the treaty
restrictions, I will not pretend to say, and it is not material to the present
question. But it is evident, that we are placed, by the treaty, in a worse
commercial situation, in respect to the East Indies, than we were, in fact,
before the treaty, or than we might be by the sole effect of the municipal laws
of Great Britain. It also appears by that act of parliament, that England has
laid a countervailing duty on our imports there in American vessels. This they
had a right to do without the treaty; but they had not attempted to do it until
the treaty took place, because we had till then the natural right of defeating
that measure, by our own regulations here. We have abandoned that right by the
treaty; we have, in order to obtain some supposed commercial advantages, laid a
restriction upon our natural power of making our own general commercial
regulations. This act of parliament, however, is the only effect, in relation
to commerce, which has as yet resulted from the treaty. What its consequences
upon our trade may be, I cannot judge; but it places us precisely in the
situation in which we were before the year 1789, when we had no efficient
general government, when we could not make commercial regulations of a general
nature. If the commercial part of our former treaties has not been attended
with any beneficial ^^nsequences; if, on the contrary, it has involved us in a
critical situation, we may be permitted to doubt, whether commercial treaties
are not as likely to check as to protect our commerce.

It is not denied that an extension of our political connections with Europe
would be injurious to us; but it is said, that our having no ministers in
foreign countries will not prevent foreign nations sending their ministers
here, and that our ministers abroad will not increase our political foreign
connections. I do not mean to make any personal allusions to the conduct of our
ministers in Europe; but we may judge -- from past events, we may judge from
the conduct of foreign ministers here, that diplomatic characters are not
likely to be inactive. From the nature of their appointment, from the nature of
man, we know that they will try to acquire importance with their own government
and credit to themselves; they are placed in a dangerous vortex, and they will
all, more or less, according to circumstances and to their personal character,
take a part in the political intrigues or quarrels of Europe; they will attempt
to do something -- they will attempt to involve us in the political vortex of
Europe -- they will try to make for us new connections, or to break ancient
connections.

Whether foreign nations, with whom we have no public ministers, will send
ministers here, cannot be absolutely foretold, but we know that it is not
usual; at all events, it cannot be wise to invite a greater number of foreign
ministers here, by extending our diplomatic establishment to countries where we
have not heretofore sent ministers. The amendment under consideration has no
tendency to annihilate that establishment, but it will effectually check its
extension. If our ministers abroad are necessary for the protection of our
commerce, or on account of our political situation in respect to the
belligerent powers, this amendment will not withdraw their compensation. Its
avowed object, its only possible effect, is, to reduce the establishment to
what it was in 1796, when we had no minister at Berlin, and when our minister
at Lisbon, with a sa^^ry of 4500 dollars, rendered us the same services as if
he had had 9000.

But, we are told, that this is not the time to make a reduction, that our
situation in respect to Europe forbids it, and that our differing in opinion
with the President on this subject, will prove us to be a divided people. I am
much afraid, that if now is not the time, it will be with this reform as with
all others, it will never be time. To evince to European nations that we wish
not to mix in their political sphere of action, that we are not desirous of
forming political connections, that we wish not to interfere, especially at
this time, with their political interests, is, in my opinion, the best mode in
our power to prevent their interfering with us, and the most likely to produce
a termination of our present dispute. Nor can I conceive how our expressing on
this ground, a difference of opinion with the executive, will tend to prove
that we are not united on the subject of self-defence. But I believe that now
is the time to express our opinion, because the object of the extension of our
diplomatic establishment having been explained to us by the President, it is
our duty, if we think the object contemplated to be dangerous, not to be silent
upon this occasion. Our information is derived from the following paragraph of
the Presiden^^^ speech at the opening of the last extraordinary session of
c^^^^^ss:

Although it is very true, that we ought not to involve ourselves in the
pol^^ical system of Europe, but to keep ourselves always distinct and sepa^^^e
from it, if we can; yet, to effect this separation, early, punctual and
continual inf^rmation of the current chai^ of events, and of the political
projects in contemplation, is no less necessary, than if we were directly
concerned in them: It is necessary in order to the discovery of the efforts
made to draw us into the vortex, in season to make preparations against them.
However we may consider ourselves, the maritime and commercial powers of the
world will consider the United States of America as forming a weight in that
balance of power in Europe, which never can be forgotten or neglected. It would
not only be against our interest, but it would be doing wrong to one half of
Europe at least, if we should voluntarily throw ourselves into either scale. It
is a natural policy for a nation that studies to be neutral, to consult with
other nations engaged in the same studies and pursuits: At the same time that
measures ought to be pursued with this view, our treaties with Prussia and
Sweden, one of which is expired, and the other near expiring, might be renewed.

Permit me, before I proceed to make any remarks upon that part of the
President's speech, to contrast it with the sentiments contained in the late
President's address to the people, on his retiring from office.

The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is, in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. -- Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence, she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships or enmities.

Our detached and distant situation, invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance..... Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit
our own to stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with
that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toil of
European ambition, rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice? It Is our true
policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion of the foreign
world, so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it.... Let those
engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But, in my opinion, it is
unnecessary and would be unwise to extend them.

Supported by this authority, may I hope to escape the censure of arrogance,
if, on this occasion, I dare express an opinion in some degree opposed to the
very respectable authority of the president of the United States.

The object of both the late and the present president is perfectly the same;
it is that we may not be involved in the political system of Europe, that we
may not be drawn into the vortex. But they do not seem altogether to agree on
the means by which to obtain that object.

The president of the United States conceives that it is a natural policy for
us to consult with other nations engaged in the same studies and pursuits; and
that measures ought to be pursued with this view. The late President thinks it
unwise, by interweaving our destiny with Europe, to entangle our peace --
unwise to implicate ourselves by artificial ties -- unwise and unnecessary to
extend our engagements. His opinion is emphatically expressed by these words,
"Here let us stop."

As to that balance of power in Europe, which never can be forgotten or
neglected, it is a system, which, so far as relates to Europe itself, it is not
necessary for us to discuss. And yet, without examining all the useless wars to
which it has served as a cause or a pretense, we must recollect, at what late
period the British ministry wanted to involve the British nation into a war
with Russia, for the purpose of preserving that balance, which might, in their
opinion, be affected by the transfer or Oczackow, situated as it is in a remote
corner of the black sea, from the hords of Tartars which rule Turkey, to the
Tartar hords which inhabit Russia. But, however interesting that balance may be
to Europe, how does it concern us? We may lament the fate of Poland and Venice,
and I never can myself ^ee, without regret, independent nations blotted from
the map of the world. But their destiny does not affect us in the least. We
have no interest whatever in that balance; and by us, it should be altogether
forgotten and neglected. If we ever think we have an interest in it, shall we
not be induced to throw our weight in the scale. -- shall we not involve
ourselves in the destinies and the wars of Europe? If we act on our own ground,
is it likely that other nations will ever consider us as forming a weight in
their balance?

But if we adopt the policy to consult with other nations -- if measures are to
be pursued with that view -- if we are to form new foreign political
connections; how can we hope to escape being unavoidably drawn into the vortex?
It was, after having thus communicated his intention -- it was in pursuance of
that plan, that the president thought fit to send a minister to Berlin. With
Prussia, we have no commerce. Had commerce been the object of that embassy,
Sweden, Denmark, the Hanse-towns, or Italy, would have been preferred. The
mission is avowedly and evidently of a political nature; and if we are to
consult and to form connections with nations, who may, in our opinion, be
engaged in similar pursuits with ourselves; if Prussia is considered as such,
with what nation in Europe, may we not and shall we not, according to
circumstances, consult, concert measures, and form political arrangements? It
is from this view of the subject, that I have been induced, however
reluctantly, fully to state all the reasons which impress upon my mind a
conviction of the importance of the present amendment, of the importance of
checking at this time, and in its birth, a system which tends to increase our
political connections with Europe.

So much has already been said on the subject of patronage, on the danger which
might hereafter result from an influence obtained through those means over the
legislature, and on the system, said to be adopted by the administration, to
exclude, from every description of office, men who do not subscribe to a
certain political creed, that I think it useless to add any observations on
that subject. As, however, the patronage, now vested by law in the executive,
has been stated as very insignificant, I will merely state its real extent.

It consists in appointment to offices and in the disposal of public moneys by
contracts. The annual pay of the officers in the different departments of the
treasury, of state and of war, and all the subordinate offices of loans, mint,
etc. of the officers in the North West Territory, of the attorney general,
surveyor-general, Indian-agents, diplomatic characters, agents for the
protection of seamen, agents and commissioners appointed by virtue of certain
treaties; in fine, the pay of all civil officers, whose appointment depends
upon the executive or some branch of the administration, including therein all
the clerks, but excluding the judiciary department, added to the pay and other
emoluments of the commissioned officers of the army and navy, forms an
aggregate of about 420,000 dollars. The salary and other emoluments of the
officers employed in the collection of the impost and of the internal revenues,
including therein post-masters, amount to about 430,000 dollars. These two sums
amount together to 850,000 dollars yearly, received by officers who derive
their appointment from the executive.

The amount of moneys disposed of by contracts, and it is well known that
lucrative contracts may be made a powerful engine of influence; that amount
calculated on some objects upon an average of three years, and including those
relative to the mint, to the printing of the several offices, to the printing
of the laws, those for the transportation of the mail, for supplying the
provisions, clothing, horses, medicines, cannons, arms, of the army, for Indian
goods, and all the immense details of the quarter-master's department, for
building and furnishing all the supplies of the navy, for building
light-houses, and for several other contingent expenses, exceeds 1,200,000
dollars a year.

The aggregate of the two sums exceeds 2,000,000 dollars, a sum by no means
despicable, when compared with our population and wealth, when compared with a
revenue which till last year never exceeded seven millions of dollars.

After having stated these considerations, which appear to me immediately
applicable to the present discussion, I would not encroach any longer on the
patience of the committee, had not some gentlemen brought into view a number of
topics of a more general nature, in which, it may not be altogether useless to
follow them.

The first position they assume is, that there is a natural tendency in the
legislative department to encroach upon the executive, and they attempt to
prove, by historical facts, that in all countries, where a republican form of
government ever existed, the executive has in fact been swallowed up by the
legislature. The instance of the Greek republics and their subversion by Philip
of Macedon, and that of Rome, have chiefly been insisted upon. Both are
altogether inapplicable to the American constitution. The question is not,
whether governments, constructed on different principles from ours, have been
destroyed by the effect of those principles, but, whether the history of those
similar to our own will support the assertion?

The small Greek republics, Athens especially, were governed directly and
immediately by the people themselves. In Rome, where the constitution, though
imperfectly, was better balanced, the popular branch of government was also an
assembly of the whole people of the city; and when their virtues and their
manners, which could alone support such a system, had been corrupted by the
spoils of a conquered world -- when the dregs of every other town of Italy,
admitted to the rights of citizenship, had resorted to a corrupt metropolis --
when a few citizens, enriched by the treasures of Asia, had it in their power
to bribe that mixed mass, which, alone, and without being controlled by the
other parts of an extensive empire, disposed of every office of honor or power
-- when these offices, thus obtained, placed ambitious leaders at the head of
the standing armies, which constituted, at that time, the sole military force
of the nation; we cannot be at a loss to discover the causes of the civil wars
and contests for power which terminated in the establishment of despotism.

These instances are inapplicable to our own situation, because those
governments essentially differed from that of America; in that, that the
legislative power was there lodged in the people residing in a single city, and
that it is here vested in the representatives of the whole people. There, not
only there was no proper or precise distribution of powers; but there also the
people themselves had the authority of deliberating and of enacting laws, and
here they have only that of electing the persons who are to make laws for them.
All that can be proved by this, is, that power ought not to be vested in the
body of the people. But, because the heterogeneous mass, which constituted the
body of the citizens in Rome, abused the power they had, ought we to conclude
that the people of America will abuse the power they have not? Or, that because
a government, where the principle of representation was unknown, was destroyed
by the corruption of the people, and the ambition of their demagogues, the
representative government of the United States will be destroyed by the
representatives themselves? The history of those ancient republics may indeed
teach us to cherish that principle of representation, which is the leading
feature of our constitution and the safeguard of our liberties. It may teach us
another lesson applicable to all times and to all men; that money accumulated
in the hands of a single man, or of a few, may be applied with success to the
destruction of any government. The foreign gold of Philip gave the last blow to
the expiring liberty of Athens. And the same engine in the hands of the
citizens of Rome was not attended with less fatal effects.

But if we turn our attention from a view of obscure antiquity, to modern
Europe, how shall the assertion be supported, that, in representative
governments, the legislature usually swallows up the executive? History tells
us, that, three centuries ago, representative forms of government existed
throughout Europe, in which the representatives of the people, or of a part of
the people, had more or less power and influence, according to the various
circumstances under which they respectively arose. But, if we look at the
present situation of that country, such at least as it was before the French
revolution, where can we discover traces of those institutions? What has become
of the Cortes of Spain? of the States General of France? Of the Diets of
Denmark? Every where we find the executive in possession of legislative, of
absolute powers. The glimmerings of liberty, which for a moment shone in
Europe, were owing to a decay of the feudal system. When the princes were
deprived of the personal services of their vassals and of the revenues derived
from their ancient domains; when industry and commerce rendered money the
principal engine of power; those popular assemblies which had the ^^^l-then
unimportant right of raising taxes and granting supplies, arose, at once, into
consequence. And as the executive, either by force, or by fraud, or by the
folly of the people themselves, succeeded in wresting that power from them,
they fell again into misuse or insignificance.

The fate of the European republics would lead us to similar conclusions.
Venice, the greater part of Switzerland and Holland, would show us the
legislative powers equally merging into the executive, and a self-created
council or hereditary Stadtholder usurping, by artifice, the legitimate
authority of the representative bodies. Almost every vestige of liberty was
erased from the continent of Europe; and it is to England that we are indebted
for the preservation of those principles, which from the basis of our
constitution.

It is from England that we have borrowed our political institutions. Taught by
her example, we have improved them, and adapted them to our own situation; but
her history is still that which is most applicable to ourselves; for,
notwithstanding the happy modifications which we have introduced, the great
outlines of representation, and distribution of powers, are the same; and
notwithstanding the strong distinguishing features, there has never existed a
government more similar, upon the whole, to our own, than that of that country.

Some gentlemen, leaving out of view that period in the British, history, which
should naturally attract our attention, have attempted to draw from the events
of the reign of Charles the first, a proof of their favorite doctrine, the
danger to be apprehended from the encroachments of the legislature. They have
forgotten that those events were not the effect of the slow progress of an
established government, but the result of an unsettled constitution. The
precise boundaries of power were not ascertained; parliament contended for the
acquirement of rights which had been usurped or enjoyed by the kings. In its
beginning, the contest was between the king in his own right and parliament in
the right of the people. Convulsions, a civil war, a revolution ensued. But the
position, which we controvert, is not that the people, or a popular assembly,
may, by a convulsion, ^rest, from the executive, powers originally obtained by
fraud or violence. It is that, when a representative government, with properly
distributed powers, is once established, the legislature will finally encroach
upon the executive. This position cannot be illustrated by the events of
Charles's reign; but that period, which extends from the revolution of 1688 to
the present reign, after the constitution had been settled and ascertained, is
that to which we must recur as immediately applicable to our own situation.

It is during that period that a progressing patronage, and a systematic,
corrupting influence have sunk parliament to a nominal representation, a mere
machine, the convenience used by government for the purpose of raising
supplies: the medium through which the executive reach, with ease, the purse of
the people. And now, when the farce of obtaining even the nominal consent of
parliament is sufficiently understood, the ministry dispense with the ceremony,
and have carried so far their contempt for that body, that the sum spent during
last year, without the consent, exceeds the amount spent with the consent of
parliament. The executive, there, have acquired the unlimited and uncontrouled
power of raising and expending money, and the house of commons is under a moral
obligation of making the necessary appropriations.

But, is it to be apprehended, from the structure of our own constitution, that
the executive will be destroyed by the legislature? The legislative powers,
vested in congress, seem to have been given under such efficient checks, as
should remove any fears of that nature. They are not given to a single popular
branch, but to two distinct bodies. -- The consent of both is necessary to do
any act, and one of them, elected not immediately by the people, but through
the medium of the state legislatures, is, at the same time, united with the
executive in the exercise of its most important powers, that of appointing to
offices, and that of making treaties. Thus, no encroachment can be made upon
the executive powers, without the consent of the senate; and this body never
will give their assent to any act, which, by weakening the executive, would
necessarily diminish their own authority. But, should ever such an act pass
both houses of congress, it must not be forgotten, that the constitution has
vested the president with a modified negative. That negative, already twice
exercised, was, on both occasions, effectual; and, it is an absurd supposition,
that, at any time, the president should not be supported, by at least one third
of one of the two branches of the legislature, ageanst any unconstitutional
attempt to deprive him of his legitimate authority.

To these constitutional barriers, may be added, in respect to any supposed
encroachments of this house, the greater degree of permanency in the senate and
president, and the systematic line of conduct, which a single magistrate, whose
powers are always in action, and a permanent body, who, like the senate, are
only renewed by thirds, are enabled to pursue; contrasted with the insulated
efforts of this house, liable to a total renovation every two years, and
composed of members occasionally in session, but dispersed, through this
extensive country, the greater part of the year. Nor should the gentlemen, who
attach so great a degree of influence to the supposed popularity of this house,
forget, that to us belongs the most obnoxious share of government, that of
laying taxes, whilst the executive enjoys the m^^e grateful employment of the
individual application of the public money.

The object of our constitution has been, to divide and distribute the powers
between the several branches of government. With that distribution, and with
the share allo^ted to us, we are fully satisfied. We only wish to preserve the
equilibrium intended by the constitution. -- The constitutional right, which is
the subject of this discussion, is of a negative kind. By this exercise, we may
prevent, but we cannot act; nor is there any power, claimed by us, which does
not equally attach to the senate, and lays us under their control. In this
instance, we ask only, that the powers, which the constitution has separated,
may not be blended; that the power of raising and granting money may remain
inviolate in they legislature, and that of appointing to offices, or even, in
the case of public ministers, of creating offices, in the executive. But the
doctrine, introduced by some gentlemen, tends, in its immediate effects, to
blend those powers, and by vesting that legislative authority* which they
represent as so formidable, in the same hands where the executive power is
lodged, to overset every barrier and to destroy the most fundamental principles
of our constitution.

In the same manner, as in this instance, they insist that we are bound to
appropriate, they, in the case (...) treaties, also claim for the executive, a
power of abridging the constitutional authority of congress of raising and
granting money, and vest in that department what they take from this. Nor do
they stop there. The most important powers entrusted to congress, exclusively
of that over money, consist in regulating; commerce, raising armies, providing
a navy, and declaring war. And all these are swept away, and transferred to the
executive, by the construction put upon the treaty-making power, which rests on
the same foundation with that which is now claimed. The executive has the power
of appointing public ministers, of making commercial treaties, of making
subsidiary treaties, of making treaties of alliance offensive and defensive.
The same principle which should bind us in one case, binds us in every other.
If we are under a moral obligation to lend our assistance, in order to carry
into effect the constitutional powers of the executive; if we have no
discretion left in the exercise of our own; if it be not true, that when an
act, in order to be completed, requires the concurrence of two departments,
each department has an equal right to give or to refuse its assent; if, in the
instance of public ministers, we are bound to appropriate; if, in the instance
of commercial treaties, we are bound to repeal or to make commercial
regulations, in conformity with the provisions of the treaties, the inference
is unavoidable, that where the executive has formed a subsidiary treaty, we are
also bound, without any discretion being left to us, to appropriate the sums of
money necessary to pay the subsidy, to raise the required number of auxiliary
troops, and to provide the stipulated number of ships of war; that where a
treaty of alliance offensive has been made, we are under a moral obligation to
make war. Thus would the important powers entrusted to congress by the
constitution, be reduced to those of coining money, passing penal lays,
granting patents, and establishing post-roads. The rule of cons^^uction which,
in one instance, vests in the executive the power of granting money, or any
other legislative authority, makes the transfer in all the cases I have
enumerated. Any construction which shall except a single case, shall restore
our discretion in all.

Can any fatal consequences attend the full exercise of the constitutional
discretion of congress, in granting money? Its general effect must be, to
diminish the expenditure of public money. By restraining it, you take away the
most efficient check, provided by the constitution, to control and to keep
within proper bounds that expenditure. Thus, applied to the present amendment,
the exercise of that discretion, may prevent too large a sum of money being
applied to the support of foreign ministers. It never can be used to increase
that sum. Thus it may prevent an appropriation, for the payment of a subsidy to
a foreign nation; it may prevent an extension of our political foreign
connections; it may prevent the raising of troops, or the equipping of a fleet;
it may prevent a war. But it never can create an expenditure of money, an army,
a navy, a war, which, upon the ground of the doctrine supported by our
opponents, would not equally take place. The checks intended to prevent those
evils, and their inseparable attendants, taxation and public debts, cannot be
too strong. For it is the natural tendency of governments, and I will add, it
is the natural tendency of every administration, and of every executive, to
increase the rate of expenditure beyond the necessary demands, and the real
abilities of the nation. It is here, indeed, that we may appeal to the history
of other countries: it is here that it will afford us instructive lessons,
applicable to all times, and to every form of government.

Wherever the executive have acquired an uncontrouled command over the purse of
the people, prodigality, wars, excessive taxes, and ever progressing debts,
have unavoidably ensued. Not to speak of Spain and Holland, weakened by those
causes; not to speak of France, whose example is still more awful, the fate of
England is sufficient to warn us against the dangers of that system. In vain
did the insular situation of that nation preserve it from foreign invasions; in
vain did she alone, amongst the great powers of Europe, enjoy the advantages of
laws which protected property and encouraged industry; in vain did her
agriculture arrive to a superior degree of perfection; in vain did she obtain
the commerce of the world; in vain were the treasures of India poured in her
bosom; in vain did the industry of her inhabitants, and the incalculable
effects of machinery, raise her manufactures to their unrivalled present state;
in vain did she enjoy a century of uninterrupted and unparalleled prosperity.
The folly and extravagance of government have kept pace with all the efforts of
industry, with every improvement of the individuals. The whole surplus of the
labor of the industrious part of the community, has been destroyed by
expensive wars; or, if any part escaped annihilation, it was what was plundered
by the direct or indirect agents of government -- it was applied to the
accumulation of wealth in the few unproductive consumers. And now she stands on
the brink of ruin, overburthened by a debt of four hundred and fifty millions
sterling, and by taxes amounting to twenty-five millions sterling a year, and
yet insufficient to support her peace-establishment. See Note at the end.


Can we hope for a greater prosperity -- for a more fortunate concurrence of
circumstances? Have we any security that we shall be preserved from those
evils? And yet, this is the system which flows from the doctrine which would
wrest from the legislature their exclusive control over the expenditure of
money; that would vest in the executive, in certain specific but widely
extended cases, the power of raising and applying money. It is the system which
seeks for support in the influence of patronage, by increasing the number of
offices, and avowing a determination to distribute them exclusively as rewards
amongst men of a certain description. It is the system which entangles us in
new political connections, raises standing armies, builds navies, squanders the
public money, swells the public debt, and multiplies the burdens of the people.

Shall we be told that the frequent elections of the executive are a sufficient
safeguard against every danger? Doubtless they will, provided we are not
altogether lost to ourselves. They afford us that remedy to which hereditary
governments cannot resort. But should we, on that account, suppose that we are
not open to danger? No one can set a higher value on the benefits resulting
from an elective government than myself. But let us never forget, that the
forms of a constitution afford us security, only as they preserve us from
abuses, and that they will become useless, whenever they shall be applied to
cover, protect and defend abuses.

May we not be alarmed, when we hear the gentleman from Delaware (Mr. Bayard)
in accents of regret, telling us that our executive is the most weak, the
infirm branch of government, and that danger is to be apprehended from its
weakness; contrasting the scanty provision and insignificant patronage of our
executive, with the immense army, the incalculable navy, the church patronage,
the nobility-creating power and the civil list of the monarch of Great Britain?
And concluding, by delivering an opinion, that, notwithstanding all those
sources of corrupting influence, the house of commons, were the venal boroughs
abolished, would lop off every prerogative of the crown, till, though the
features of monarchy might remain, the substance would be gone.

A government which loses the substance, however it may retain the features of
monarchy, is in substance a republic; and the last idea of that gentleman is
only, that a pure representation and monarchy are incompatible. But in his
opinion, provided an equal representation is established, monarchy is
destroyed, and a substantial republic may exist, notwithstanding an
accumulation of power and influence equal to those possessed at present by the
king of England. And, when this follows his declaration of the dangers, to be
feared from the weakness and infirmity of our executive, are we not
irresistibly forced to infer, that he thinks, that the introduction of armies,
navies, patronage and civil list are necessary to strengthen our executive, and
would not injure the principle of our constitution?

To such doctrines avowed on this floor, to such systems as the plan of
government, which the late secretary or the treasury (Mr. Hamilton) had
proposed in the convention, may perhaps be ascribed that belief in a part of
the community, the belief, which was yesterday represented as highly criminal,
that there exists in America a monarchico, aristocratic faction, who would wish
to impose upon us the substance of the British government.

I have allowed myself to make this last observation, only in reply to the
gentleman who read the paper I allude to. It is painful to recriminate: I wish
denunciations to be avoided, and I am not in the habit of ascribing improper
motives to gentlemen on the other side of the question. Never shall I erect
myself into a high priest of the constitution, assuming the keys of political
salvation, and damning without mercy whomsoever differs with me in opinion. But
what tone is assumed, in respect to us, by some gentlemen on this floor?

If we complain of the prodigality of a branch of the administration, or wish
to control it, by refusing to appropriate all the money which is asked, we are
stigmatized as disorganizers; if we oppose the growth of systems of taxation,
we are charged with a design of subverting the constitution, and of making a
revolution; if we attempt to check the extension of our political connections
with European nations we are branded with the epithet of jacobins. Revolutions
and jacobinism do not flow from that line of policy we wish to see adopted.
They belong, they exclusively belong, to the system we resist: they are its
last stage; -- the last page in the book of the history of governments under
its influence. It is after centuries of extravagance, vice and oppression, that
the people make revolutions; and it is then, it is during the general
convulsion that ensues, that the dregs of the nation rise to the surface, and
overwhelm in a common ruin both the oppressors and the deliverers of the people.

Are gentlemen serious in their fears? Do they, from us, apprehend revolutions,
plunder and massacre? Have we not an equal stake with themselves? I speak not
of myself; but I will ask what benefit could those men, who are commonly called
jacobins, derive from a convulsion? Have they less property? Have they less to
lose or more to hope from a change? If you think us deprived of common
integrity, you might, at least, allow us some share of common sense. But if no
confidence is to be placed in ourselves, some might be put in the people of
America and in their situation. In a country, where a scattered population
covers an extensive territory, where the means of subsistence are easy, where
the dangerous class, which constitutes an European mob, does not exist, where
actual oppression is yet unknown; the people who enjoy those advantages, who
enjoy a better government and more happiness than any other nation of the
globe, are not the people ready for a revolution. Nor should it be forgotten,
that those parts of the union, that are commonly charged with a design of
oversetting the constitution, are those, which, on account of their peculiar
situation, on account of the unhappy race of men they contain, would be exposed
to the most dangerous convulsion by an internal revolution.

But the evils we wish to prevent, are precisely those which attach to a nation
in our situation; they are such as are easily engrafted in the body-politic in
its infancy; not calculated in their origin to create much alarm, and supported
by a powerful number of men who derive an immediate benefit from them, and to
whom they are the means of acquiring wealth and power.

Still, in the same style of denunciation, by whom, it is triumphantly asked,
"by whom are those charges made? By men who have rendered services to their
country? A Hampden or a Sidney alone have a right to assume the language of
opposition." Was I to answer in the name of those gentlemen, with whom I
generally agree in political principles, a recapitulation of their services
would easily repel this attack. Was I to answer as an individual, I would say
that I can claim no right of that kind: I derive none from birth, none from
personal merit, none from personal services. But as a representative of the
people, I feel it a right, and not less a duty than a right, to resist, upon
every occasion, those systems, which, if adopted, must, in my opinion, prove
fatal to America. Should I ever, from any personal considerations, think myself
unauthorized to exercise that right, I would tell my constituents, -- Resume
your trust; send, as your representative, a man, who, to the same zeal and to
the same principles, may unite those qualifications, which I want, and which
will enable him to fulfill his trust. And, notwithstanding the partiality they
have, heretofore, evinced in my favor, they would find no difficulty in
supplying my place.

But, by what strange fatality did the gentleman from Connecticut (M. GOODRICH)
mention Hampden and Sidney? Surely, his evil genius must have suggested the
names; for, in the long list of English patriots, no two could be more
applicable to the present discussion.

Whenever we hear of Hampden, we must recollect that event in his life, which
has immortalized his name. The doctrine of the crown, in the case of ship money
-- the doctrine, against which Hampden made his noble stand, was, that the king
being, by his constitutional authority, entrusted with the defense of the
country, was the sole judge of the danger, and of the necessity of the measures
proper to be adopted; that he must possess the means necessary to carry into
effect his constitutional powers; that he had a right to fix the sum of money
necessary for that purpose; and that he might, by a tax, raise that money from
the people. It is true that it is not attempted here to claim this lost power
for the executive. Hampden's trial has settled this point. But, in all its
other parts, the doctrine of ship money, and the modern doctrine supported on
this occasion, are the same -- the object the same -- the arguments on which
they are grounded the same. It is still the power of raising and applying
money, claimed by, or for the executive, in certain cases, with the only
difference, that Charles the first exercised it by levying a tax without the
consent of parliament, and that here, it is to be carried into effect, by
depriving the legislature of the right of with holding their consent, through
the means of amoral obligation imposed upon them.

Sidney has left in his writings a still more permanent monument of his
talents, Permit me, since his name has been mentioned, to trouble the committee
with quotation from that work, written against the divine right of kings, which
brought him to the block.

"Men are naturally propense to corruption; and if he, whose will and interest
it is to corrupt them, be furnished with the means, he will never fail to do
it. Power, honors, riches, and the pleasures that attend them, are the baits by
which men are drawn to prefer a personal interest before the public good; and
the number of those who covet them is so great, that he who abounds in them
will be able to gain so many to his service as shall be able to subdue the
rest. It Is hard to find a tyranny in the world that has not been introduced
this way; for no man by his own strength could ever subdue a multitude; none
could ever bring many to be subservient to his ill designs, but by the rewards
they received or hoped. By this means, Caesar accomplished his work, and
overthrew the liberty of his country, and with it, all that was then good in
the world. They who were corrupted in their minds, desired to put all the power
and riches into his hands, that he might distribute them to such as served
him.....

"They speak of employing the revenue in keeping the king's house, and look
upon it as a propriety to be spent as he thinks convenient: which is no less
than to cast it into a pit, of which no man ever knew the bottom. That which is
given one day, is squandered away the next: The people are always oppressed with
impositions, to foment the vices of the court: These daily increasing, they
grow insatiable, and the miserable nations are compelled to hard labor, in
order to satiate those lusts that tend to their own ruin....

"The base, slavish, and so often subdued Asia, by the basest of men revenged
the defeats they had received from the bravest; and by infusing into them a
delight in pomp and luxury, in a short time rendered the strongest and bravest
of nations the weakest and basest. I wish our own experience did not too
plainly manifest, that these evils were never more prevalent than in our days,
when the luxury, majestic pomp, and absolute power of a neighboring king, must
be supported by an abundance of riches, torn out of the bowels of his subjects,
which renders them, in the best country in the world, and at a time when the
crown most flourishes, the poorest and most miserable of all the nations under
the sun. We too well know who are most apt to learn from them, and by what
means and steps they endeavor to lead us into the like misery. But the bird is
safe when the snare is discovered, and if we are not abandoned by God to
destruction, we shall never be brought to consent to the settling of that pomp,
which is against the practice of all virtuous people, and has brought all the
nations that have been taken with it into the ruin that is intended for us."

The gentleman of Connecticut (Mr. GOODRICH) actuated by the purest motives,
has invited us to state our grievances, and to meet on some ground of
reconciliation. To operate at once a reconciliation of parties, inflamed as
they now are, is perhaps impracticable, but we may not be altogether
unsuccessful in establishing at present some principles, which may hereafter
produce that desirable object. Yet, ^ad I no other hearers but the gentleman of
Maryland to my left (Mr. CRAIK) and the gentleman who spoke last from New York
(Mr. WILLIAMS) I would not make any observation on that point.

The first of those gentlemen going upon the ground of an organization of
parties, avows an intention of opposing party by party. -- He looks upon us as
incorrigible -- he declares that his observations are not addressed to the
house, but to his constituents, and I believe, it is the first time, that a
gentleman told the house that he meant to use them only as a medium, through
which to make an electioneering speech. When that gentleman made that
declaration, I could not think him in earnest; and I waited with impatience for
arguments, or something that approached toward arguments; but half an hour of
hearing convinced me of his sincerity, and of my mistake. -- Whilst he remains
blinded by such rooted prejudices, no observations of mine could, I am sure,
produce any effect upon him.

The gentleman from New York, in the extraordinary history of parties he gave
us, seems to have described the fluctuations of his own mind, rather than those
of other men, and he appears to have laid a claim to a knowledge of the motives
of all parties, because he had, by turns, been acquainted with all. A great
portion of his speech was employed in proving the unconstitutionality of
refusing an appropriation, for the purpose of carrying into a effect the powers
of the president, or an existing law. The first attempt of the kind which I
witnessed, was, that made, two years ago, to withhold the appropriations for
the support of the mint established by law. That gentleman cannot have
forgotten who made the motion for that purpose, and by whom it was most
strenuously supported? I need not address that gentleman on the subject of a
reconciliation of parties: he may safely be trusted on that point to himself:
his own good sense and the next vibration will, doubtless, bring him back to
support our principles.

Whatever difference of sentiment may exist between us on a variety of topics,
there is a ground on which we must certainly meet -- on which, throughout the
United States, there can be -- there is, but one opinion. The importance, the
necessity of preserving the union, are too universally acknowledged to require
any comments at this time. The constitution, which binds us together, cannot,
in my opinion, be made an instrument to sow divisions of a fatal nature. If it
met with strong opposition, when it first made its appearance, the objections
have long been buried in oblivion; and it is a fact, that they have never since
been made the instrument of opposition. Nor do I apprehend any real danger from
the geographical situation of the different states: the natural bonds of union,
which result from their mutual wants, and from their relative situation, will
forever counteract the effect of the slight diversity of interests, which may
exist.

Without recurring to any abstract discussion, has not experience taught us,
that the two important subjects of division have heretofore been, money systems
and foreign politics? May we not, with truth, ascribe to those two causes, the
party spirit which now rages in America? Is there any real danger to be
apprehended from any other quarter? And if we are satisfied that the systems of
debt and taxation, which have been so obnoxious to us, shall be permitted to
subsist without any attempt on our part to disturb them; if we are satisfied,
that our subsisting compacts with foreign nations, however dangerous some of
them may have appeared to us, shall remain inviolate; will the gentlemen, with
whom it is our misfortune to differ, agree, that those money-systems, those
foreign connections, shall not be extended beyond their present state? We ask
not for the redress of past grievances, but, with the late President, we
exclaim, "Here let us stop."

May we not hope that a fixed determination to prevent the increase of the
national expenditure, and, so far as our present engagements will permit, to
detach ourselves from any connection with European politics, will tend to
reconcile parties, and that our united efforts may then prove not altogether
unsuccessful in promoting the happiness of America, and conciliating the
affections of every part of the Union?

Note on page [28.]
THE funding system of Great Britain, like that of the United States,
originated during the war which resulted from their revolution (that of 1688)
and established their liberty.

In 1701, at the conclusion of the reign of William III. after the end of the
revolutionary war of Great Britain, and before they had been involved in any
new contests, the debt of that country amounted to 16,394,702 l. sterling,
Sinclair's Hist of public revenue, part 2d, chap. 4th.
equal to dollars, 72,865,342. At that time the revenue of that nation was
3,895,205 l. Ditto, part 3d, chap. 1st.
equal to dollars, 17,312,022.

On the first of January, 1796, the debt of the United States (after deducting
the stock of the bank held by the United States, and the sums redeemed by the
sinking fund) amounted to dollars, 79,811,187 Report of the secretary of the
treasury, dated 28th Dec. 1796.
and the revenue for the year ending on the 30th September, 1796, amounted to
-- dollars, 6,665,685. Ditto, including a statement of receipts and
expenditures, dated 15th Dec. 1796.


Thus, the apprehension of a fate similar to that of Great Britain cannot be
looked upon as unfounded, when we find that our debt at the end of our own
revolutionary war, of the war which gave the first birth to that debt, exceeds
by seven millions of dollars, that contracted by England during the war which
also created their debt; at the same time, that the population and resources of
that country, at that time, were more than double, and their revenue almost
treble of our own. The present situation of Great Britain is as follows: Total
amount of the debt contracted before 1788, L.255,789,287 Funded and unfunded
debt, contracted during the present war, 177,778,225 433,567,512 Deduct Stock
purchased by Comsinking fund 23,334,200 Due in 1797, 410,233,312 Morgan on
finances, 1797, sect. 5th.


And if to that sum be added the Imperial loan, and the enormous expenses
attending the latter part of 1797, and the beginning of 1798, estimating the
same in proportion to the expenses of the war establishment for 1796 (viz.
32,837,994 l. of which 14,952,776 l. were expended with; and 17,885,218 l.
without the previous consent of Parliament) the sum of 450 millions sterling,
cannot much exceed the present amount of the public debt.

The amount of annual taxes is as follows: Nett amount of land tax, L 1,950,000
Malt ditto, 600,000 Customs, 4,000,000 Excise, 6,800,000 Stamps, 1,300,000
Miscellaneous, 1,800,000 16,450,000 Sinclair's 3d part, chapters 3d and 5th.
Nett produce of taxes imposed in 1793,94,95, 2,400,000 Morgan on finances,
1797. Sect. 5th.
Ditto of ditto in 1796 and 1797, 3,700,000 Nett revenue in 1797, 22,550,000
Expenses of collection of all taxes laid before the present war, bounties, etc.
2,350,000 Sin^lai^'s 8d part, chap. 5th.
Total of taxes, exclusively of charges of collection on new taxes, 24,850,000

Those taxes, which, therefore, exceed twenty-five million sterling, fall short
of the expense of the peace-establishment by a sum of 2,200,000 l. sterling.

For the permanent expenses are, Interest and charges on funded debt, L
15,500,000 Ditto on unfunded debt, 2,700,000 Peace establishment, navy and army
5,650,000 Civil list, 900,000 24,750,000 From which deducting the nett revenue,
22,550,000 Leaves a deficiency of 2,200,000 sterling: Which last sum, added to
the 1,200,000 l. annually appropriated for the sinking fund, makes an annual
deficiency of near three millions and a half sterling. The additional tripled
assessed taxes, estimated at seven millions sterling, are not included in the
above account.

We need not be astonished at that immense increase of debts and taxes, when we
find that since the revolution of 1688 to 1797, the war expenses of
Great Britain have exceeded 614 millions and a half, sterling, viz. for the
navy 244,380,685 l. before, Sinclair's 3d part, chap. 2d.
and 44,926,955 l. during the present war, Morgan sect. 5th.
in all 289,307,640 l. and for the army and ordnance 270,272,512 l. before, and
55,001,765 l. during the present war, * in all, 325,279,277 l. And to these
sums should be added, 500 millions sterling, paid during the same period, for
interest, charges and principal of the debt (viz. 390 millions before, and 110
millions since the year 1788 *) making the enormous aggregate of 1100 millions
sterling consumed in the wars of about a century.

APPENDIX.
TOWARD the close of the debate, the position, that every department was
independent of the others, was at least nominally abandoned, and another
argument was introduced, on which it is proper to make a few observations.

It was said, that whenever a law had been enacted, it became the duty of each
branch of the legislature, to do any other act, which might be wanting fully to
carry that law into effect: that, for instance, if an office had been created
by law, it was the duty of the legislature to appropriate the money necessary
to pay the officer. And it was then inferred, that the same obligation existed
in the case of foreign ministers, whose office was created, in the opinion of
some gentlemen, by the constitution, and according to others, by the law of
nations.

It will not be denied, that there are some laws, which, from their nature,
impose an obligation upon future legislatures. Laws making, or authorizing
loans of money, or contracts, impose the same obligation to discharge the
debts, thereby created, under which any individual is to pay his own debts. And
the constitution has, in some cases, that of judges for instance, expressly
enjoined that duty. But, in cases, where the constitution is silent, and where
no obligation, in the nature of a debt or contract, results from the law, it
remains to be proven that the right of discretion does not exist in that body,
where the power is constitutionally lodged.

Not only, no such proofs are advanced, but the opposite doctrine can be
supported by the constitution itself. The 8th section of the 1st article,
provides, that Congress shall have power to raise and support armies; but no
appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years.
The object of that provision is, to prevent standing armies without the consent
of every succeeding congress; it is to prevent a legislature from passing a
perpetual law for that purpose, which could not be repealed without the consent
of all the branches of future legislatures; and that object is obtained, not by
saying, that no law for raising armies shall last longer than two years, but
that the appropriations for that purpose shall be limited to that period. To
say, therefore, that the appropriation is to last no longer than two years, is
to say, that every succeeding congress may, by refusing an appropriation,
prevent the army being kept on foot; it is to say, that the consent of every
branch of the legislature must be obtained every other year, in order that the
army may be continued. But, if the doctrine obtains, that, where a law is made,
future legislatures are bound to appropriate, in order to carry that law into
effect, this clause of the constitution proves altogether nugatory. At this
very moment. the law, which regulates the military establishment of the United
States, -- which decla^es that an army shall be raised, which creates a number
of offices, is perpetual. It cannon be repealed w^^^out the consent of every
branch of the legislat^res; (...), ^f that doctrine prevails, it follows, that
Cong^ess is bound to make the necessary approp^iations for the support of the
army, for the pay of the offices created by that law and thus the constitution
is made to say, that "appropriations shall be for no longer time than two
years;" -- but, that appropriations shall necessarily be renewed at the end of
every period of two years. The constitution is made to say, that the consent of
every succeeding house of representatives is necessary to support an army --
but, that every succeeding house is bound to give its consent. Either that
clause of the constitution means nothing, either that clause must be erased
from the constitution, or it admits that there exists a right to withhold
appropriations for the support of an establishment or office created by law.
Otherwise the constitution, in order to obtain the intended object, would have
declared, not that appropriations should be limited in their duration, but,
that the laws creating an army and military offices should be temporary. It is
remarkable, that in Great Britain, the same object, that is to say, a power in
the house of commons, to prevent the existence of a standing army, is obtained
through similar means. The mutiny-bill, which subjects the army to that
discipline, that alone can insure its existence, is always annual; and it has
never been denied, that it was for that purpose, that that bill was not made
perpetual. Yet, according to the modern doctrine of moral obligation, as the
laws of England for raising armies are not temporary, it would follow, that the
house of commons is bound to pass the mutiny-bill yearly; and, therefore, that
the custom of making it an annual law is perfectly nugatory.

The second position assumed, in support of the doctrine of moral obligation,
to appropriate for the support of foreign ministers, is as unfounded as the
first. Neither the constitution nor the law of nations, create the office of
foreign ministers. Both recognize the possible existence of those offices; both
declare that those offices may, but neither directs that they shall exist. To
say, that because the United States and Turkey are two independent nations, and
may, respectively, send public ministers one to the other, it follows, that the
office of ambassador from the United States to Turkey existed from the day of
the declaration of independence, is to revive the scholastic entities of the
13th century. To say, that because the constitution has vested in the
executive, the power of appointing public ministers, it follows, that the
office of ambassador from the United States to Turkey, now exists; or to say,
that an office ha^ been created more than twenty years, and yet has never
existed, are metaphysical subtleties, far beyond my understanding, and which I
cannot under take to reconcile.

But, it may confidently be asserted, that the supporters of that strange
doctrine, do not themselves suppose that either the law of nations, or the
constitution, go any farther than a recognition of the possible existence of
the office. For, if it was true, that the offices of public ministers from the
United States, to every other independent nation, were actually created by
either, it must follow, that, in the same manner, as congress is said to be
bound to appropriate for their support, so the president must also be bound to
fill, by appointments, all those pre-existing offices. He must be bound to fill
the office of ambassador to Austria, to Turkey, and to the Pope, created by the
law of nations, or by the constitution: that is to say, created by a
pre-existing and controuling law, in the same manner as he is bound to fill the
offices of judges, or collectors of the revenue, which have been created by
law. It is not insisted, that in this last case he has any discretion, and it
is not denied, that in the case of ministers, he may or he may not appoint. The
two cases, therefore, are not similar. The legal obligation which binds his
discretion in one case, does not bind it is the other. In the first instance,
he is bound, because the offices are created by a pre-existing law: in the last
instance, he is not bound, because the offices are not created by any
pre-existing law.

It was of importance, that the assertion should have been refuted, that those
offices were created by the law of nations or by the constitution, or in any
manner existed before any appointment had ever been made by the executive; not
only in order to establish the constitutional powers of congress, but also in
relation to another point, which was discussed in a former part of the debate.

When speaking of the danger, which might hereafter arise from an extension of
the executive patronage, if left unchecked by the power of congress over the
expenditure of money, it was observed, that the offices of public ministers to
foreign courts were precisely those, which, from their nature and the rate of
salary, would be most acceptable to gentlemen who held seats in the
legislature. In support of that observation, it was stated, that from the
beginning of the year 1794, to the present time, only five public ministers
(exclusively of envoys extraordinary) had been sent to Europe, and of those
five, four were taken out of congress, viz. Messrs. Munroe, Murray, King, and
W. Smith. But some further observations were made on the subject of the
appointment of this last gentleman. At the beginning of the last extraordinary
session of congress, there were five ordinary ministers in Europe, to wit: four
ministers plenipotentiary to Great Britain, France, Spain and Portugal,
respectively, and a minister resident to Holland, and the sums appropriated by
law, were fixed according to that establishment. During the course of that
session, the president of the United States appointed Mr. Adams, (who had been
appointed minister plenipotentiary to Portugal, by the late president,)
minister plenipotentiary to Prussia, where, till then, we had no minister. A
new embassy was thus created, which, being filled by the removal of the
minister to Portugal, left this last office vacant. An additional appropriation
was asked from congress for that purpose; it was debated, and opposed in the
house on the 3d of July. Mr. Smith, then a member, argued and voted in favor
of it. The motion, made in a committee of the whole, to refuse that
appropriation, was rejected on the same day; and on the succeeding day, the
bill making that, and several other appropriations, passed the house. On the
following day, the 5th, Mr. Smith was officially informed, that the president
meant to appoint him to the embassy of Portugal, and on the 6th, his nomination
was accordingly laid before the Senate. On the same day, the propriety of
making the appropriation was discussed before that body, the question was taken
by yeas and nays, and carried in the affirmative, and the bill passed that
house with ^n amendment. The bill finally passed both houses on the 7th, and
became a law on the 10th of the same mouth.

Had the additional appropriation been refused, the sums already appropriated
would have enabled the president to pay the salaries of the ministers to
England, France, Spain and Holland, and also that of the new embassy to
Prussia; for those sums were appropriated generally, and though merely
sufficient to pay five ministers, might, according to his discretion, be
applied to pay ministers to any five foreign countries he chose: but he could
not then have appointed a new minister to Portugal. Mr. Smith, therefore, was
appointed to an office which could not have been filled, without that
appropriation made by that congress of which he was a member, -- without that
appropriation for which he voted himself. A view of those circumstances induced
me to express an opinion, that that appointment was improper, and contrary to
the spirit of the constitution, which enacts, (article 1st, section 6th,) that
"no senator or representative shall, during the time for which he was elected,
be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States,
which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been
increased during such time." Had Mr. Smith been appointed minister to Prussia,
instead of Portugal, I would have said that the appointment was contrary to the
letter of the constitution itself; but as the mode adopted was to create a new
embassy, to fill that embassy by the minister to Portugal, and then to give the
vacancy thus created to the member of congress, I was of opinion, although the
money voted by congress, was in fact applied to pay his salary, that the
appointment could only be said to be contrary to the spirit of the
constitution. That opinion was altogether grounded upon the principle that the
office of public minister to a foreign country, where we had not an before, did
not begin to exist till the first appointment took place. But if the fanciful
doctrine is admitted, that those offices were created by the law of nations or
constitution, that although not existing in fact, yet they were pre-existing;
it follows, that the salutary provisions of that clause of the constitution
shall be rendered ineffectual, and that, at some future period, the executive
may appoint members of congress, during the time for which they were elected,
to as many new offices of ambassador, as it may be necessary, not to create,
but to fill, in order to obtain a majority that shall think themselves under a
moral obligation to make the requisite appropriations.

When it was thought fit to abandon the position that the several departments
might have checks within themselves, but could not be checked by the others, an
enumeration of the cases in which those checks might exist was attempted; and
it was said that a department might be checked by another first, when the power
was expressly given by the constitution, as in the instance of the negative of
the president to any law of congress; secondly, when any department acted
contrary to the constitution, as in the instance of the judiciary, declaring a
law to be unconstitutional; thirdly, when a general power was given to one
department, and a specific one, which might be carved out of the general one,
to another department, as in the instance of the general power of making
treaties given to the president and senate, and of the specific power of
declaring war vested in congress, which last power must be supposed to be an
exception to the treaty making power. This was the first time that a concession
was made that the treaty-making power was limited in any instance by the
specific powers of congress; but the concession went farther than was intended;
for, upon the same principle, it must be conceded, that the specific power of
regulating commerce, vested in congress, is, also an exception to the power of
making treaties: and it would be extremely difficult to show how the power of
making treaties, or of appointing ambassadors, could be carved out of, and make
an exception to the power of granting and appropriating money exclusively
vested in congress.

It must, however strike the most careless observer, that the three instances,
where the concession was thus made, were not brought in, in order to illustrate
the classification, but, that the classification was made, in order to suit the
three cases, which it was thought convenient to concede. It is absurd to
suppose that departments can check one another respectively, except when one of
them acts contrary to the constitution, or when the power of checking a
constitutional act, is given by the constitution. And that power is given in
two different manners, either by first giving full power to one department, and
then declaring, that that power shall not, however, be exercised without the
consent of another department, as in the case of the negative of the president;
or, by dividing the power in the first instance between two departments, giving
only a partial power to each over the act to be completed, as has already
sufficiently been explained.

It will not be improper here to repeat what was observed in the former part of
the debate, that this was the first time when a constitutional objection was
made to the power of the house, to refuse an appropriation in this case. When
the first law was passed, providing the means of intercourse with foreign
nations, which was in the year 1790, the following observations were made by
Mr. William Smith, of S. Carolina. "The arrangement which some gentlemen talked
of, laid with the president and senate. It was they who were to determine when
and where to send ambassadors and other public ministers; all that the house
had to do, was to make provision for their support. The question then is not
whether any should be appointed, because it does not lay with the house to
determine; to be sure, if they were of opinion that all intercourse with
foreign nations, should be cut off, they might decline to make provision for
them, but he did not believe this was the intention of any gentleman: perhaps
gentlemen may think it questionable, whether the president can send them,
unless they are previously established by law; but for his part, he thought it
was a business clearly within the executive branch, and with which the
legislature had nothing to do, but to provide for the payment of their salaries
and expenses, and this, if it was properly considered, was a competent check;
if the house at any time neglected to provide for such officers, the president
must either recall them or pay them out of his private purse." ( See
Congressional Register-vol. 3, p. 115, 116.)

On the same principle, it is, that the bill has been uniformly limited to two
years; and it is the only law, fixing the salaries of officers, which is thus
limited. Mr. Lawrence, who moved the clause to limit the act, said, that "it
was proper to do it, because the circumstances of the union might require a
less sum perhaps than was contemplated at present." (do. p. 177.) Was not this
allowing that congress must be judges of the circumstances? for, if the
executive alone was to judge, and if congress was bound to ap^^^priate, what
danger could result from making the act perpetual? or what advantage could be
derived from the limitation?

The only idea thrown out in relation to the constitutional question, which has
not been notice^, is, that as we had agreed, that, after having made the
appropriations necessary to carry a treaty into effect, that treaty, however
inchoate it might be before, became then binding upon the nation and upon
congress; thus, in this instance, as congress had agreed in 1796, to
appropriate at the rate of 9000 dollars each, for the ministers to Spain and
Portugal, and in 1797, to appropriate for the minister to Prussia, those acts
must also be binding upon us at present. It is almost an insult to the sagacity
of the reader, to observe, that the annual appropriations, made for those
ministers, can give no congressional sanction to the office, beyond the period
of time to which they extend; and that the reason why appropriations, made to
carry a treaty into effect, render that treaty binding upon the nation and
congress, is because they express the assent of the legislature to a compact
with another nation.

Note to Page 12, on the Duties of Consuls.
That consuls were adequate to the protection of commerce, in the cases here
specified, and in common times had been fully conceded in the course of the
debate by a gentleman well acquainted with the subject (Mr. Pinkney.) Their
duties are defined by Marten's Law of Nations, (book 4, chap. 3, sect. 8.) to
be, "to watch over the commercial interests of the state, particularly the
observation of the treaties of commerce, and to assist with their advice and
interposition, those of their nation, whom commercial pursuits or connections
have led to the place for which they are named." But when the law of nations or
treaties are infringed by government itself, as has frequently been the case
with the belligerent powers during the present war, the interference of
diplomatic characters, of public ministers, becomes necessary. The amendment
proposed, would not, if adopted, have affected the ministers to any of the
belligerent powers, and could not, therefore, be charged as withdrawing all
protection from commerce. But, it is remarkable, that, when the inconveniences
arising from the conduct of the belligerent powers were described, when it was
stated that consuls, residing in seaports, could not attend at the seat of
government, and specially at Paris, to protect the interests of their fellow
citizens, whose fate was generally decided there, and when from thence a
conclusion was drawn, that consuls were inadequate to protect commerce, no
mention was made of the consequence of the extraordinary situation in which our
commerce was thus placed in France. The consequence was, that a number of
extra-ministerial duties, falling on the public minister there, which were not
strictly within the province of his office, it became necessary to appoint a
consul general to reside at Paris, to correspond with the different consuls in
the seaports, and to attend to the commercial interests of our citizens at the
seat of government. In the same manner, the numerous captures of the British,
have rendered a new appointment necessary in that country, in order to attend
to those duties which do not fall within the province of a public minister, and
a special agent has been appointed there, to assist our citizens in prosecuting
their claims before courts of justice -- an office pretty similar to that of
consul general at Paris.

FINIS.

