DESCRIPTION OF THE PRINCIPLES AND PLAN OF PROPOSED ESTABLISHMENTS OF SALT
WORKS, etc.

DESCRIPTION OF THE PRINCIPLES AND PLAN OF PROPOSED ESTABLISHMENTS OF SALT
WORKS; FOR THE PURPOSE OF SUPPLYING THE UNITED STATES WITH HOME MADE SALT.

BY JAMES FENNEL.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN.

MDCCXCVIII.

TO JOHN ADAMS PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
Sir,
From a conviction that every object which tends to promote or secure the
independence and happiness of the United States must be interesting to your
mind, I take the liberty of dedicating to you the following fruits of a series
of laborious and repeated experiments.

I am, Sir, with the greatest respect, Your obedient humble servant, JAMES
FENNEL.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
I HAVE three reasons for publishing what follows: The first, originates in a
desire to obviate those unfavourable impressions which the suggestions of
ignorance and prejudice have caused respecting the works which are the subject
of this treatise, and to exhibit my plans to the judgment of sensible men, such
as they really are.

The second, originates in a hope that in consequence of the success of the
abovementioned desire, I may induce others to become adventurers in an
undertaking, which in its promise of advantages embraces every individual in
the union.

The third, though the least personally advantageous, not the least impressive
on my mind, results from a hope of being of some service to the country in
which I live.

While I am writing this preface, I think I may venture to assert, that there
are not six men in the world who are perfectly acquainted with the principles
upon which this undertaking has been founded; yet has it been in the mouths of
thousands a subject of decided disapprobation, censure and ridicule; many who
have even disavowed having the smallest idea of the plan, have with a
directorial assurance denounced the attempt in general as fruitless, and some
have meanly dared to insinuate that I have adopted it as the vehicle of
imposition on the public, and the forerunner of deception and fraud.

During a series of four years I have made the establishment of Salt Works in
the United States, the primary object of my wishes, and every intervening
employment (the variety of which has sometimes subjected me to the imputation
of instability,) I have made subservient, to this one great object, -- with an
unshaken perseverance, frequently thought blameable, I have pursued it through
innumerable obstacles, and under the most distressing embarrassments; and
firmly confident of the eventual success, and the propriety of my own
intentions, I will pursue it while I have life and sense, were it even possible
that the difficulties I have already experienced from the pursuit could be ten
times trebled to oppose me.

In the flood tide of discouraging opinions, in the storms of insolent and
insulting suggestions, I have erected my judgment and my integrity as my rock
of rest. I have patiently suffered the waves to beat with violence against them
in the most implicit confidence, that I shall one day or other withdraw them
from the tempest perfectly honored and uninjured. The object I am in pursuit
of is great; necessity, every child is told, and truly so, is the mother of
invention; (I confess it so of mine), and it, consequently, not unfrequently
happens that where inventive minds allow the imagination free scope, the most
extensive plans are conceived by persons the least capable of executing them.

For the execution of my design I want money, and friends to the undertaking;
if I procure them by this publication, my grand obstacle will be removed; and
adventurers are hereby invited by an assurance on my part, of a conviction
founded on experience, that the works will succeed at least so far as to yield
such a profit as any reasonable man will be contented with.

If the following plan should be deemed by sensible men to be founded on
philosophical principles and reasonable prospects of success, a question will
naturally occur, how so much time could have elapsed without my having placed
myself in a situation to extend the works without the necessity of publishing
to convince the world of their utility; I can only here remark, that I am
unwilling to trouble the public with what does not concern them; but if any
person, thinking favorably of the undertaking, should wish for further
satisfaction than what is contained in this publication, I shall at any time be
ready to make it the subject of private communication.

Much might be urged on the political necessity of having such establishments
within the United States, but the advantages thereof are too obvious to every
thinking mind to need any dilate discussion; the price of salt consequent on
the difficulty of procuring it during the last war is fresh in the memory of
every American, and the impossibility of its being dispensed with, is a
consideration that should encourage such undertakings upon terms much less
favorable than those here proposed.

It is my wish that the undertaking, if approved of, should be forwarded by the
purchase of shares entitling the holders thereof to the delivery of an
ascertained quantity of salt every year for ten years, that after the
expiration of that term the claims of the purchasers should cease on the
payment of a stipulated sum by me, or my assigns.

It is my intention in order to accommodate all ranks of purchasers to issue
these shares, in small portions, entitling the holders thereof to one hundred
bushels per year for each; These shares will be delivered by me, at first, at
150 dollars each -- 100 dollars payable by the purchaser on the delivery of
each share, and 50 dollars on the (...) delivery of the 1st 100 bushels of salt.

Reserving to myself the privilege at all times, in case of accidents, of
remitting to the share holders, or their agents, cash at the rate of 75 per
bushel for the quantity of salt due.

As the works progress, and the security of the shares becomes better
ascertained, they will naturally rise in value and find their market price.

The number of shares issued by me or my agents at 150 dollars per share, shall
not exceed two hundred. After these shall have been sold, the price of future
shares will be raised as circumstances shall direct, and when fixed in price
and number, public notice thereof shall be given to the original subscribers,
and during a stipulated period they shall be allowed the exclusive privilege of
purchase; after the expiration of which period the sale of the remaining shares
shall be public.

Drawings of the works to which the following pages have reference are left at
Mr. Shaw's medicinal warehouse Chestnut St. near the corner of 4th Street, where
further explanations, if necessary, may be had.

My whole plan and intentions are now laid open to the public; if they think
proper to encourage the undertaking, I have no doubt but that in the course of
a few years, the United States may be furnished with salt from their own
factories at as cheap, or perhaps a much cheaper rate, to every individual than
that at which it is now purchased.

SPECIFICATION of the Principles and Plan of a newly invented Machine for
procuring Salt from Sea water or Salt springs, by JAMES FENNEL, citizen of the
State of Pennsylvania.
THE principle upon which this machine is founded, is that of producing the
speediest evaporation of the fresh particles of sea water or brine without the
use of fire. This is effected through the medium of sand which operates in the
three following capacities, viz.

1st, As a retainer; by reserving when wetted with salt water a certain portion
of it.

2dly, As a destroyer of cohesion, by separating the particles of sea water.

3dly, As an evaporator, by its natural repulsion of water, and by offering a
greater quantity of surface thereof to the action of the Sun and Air.

This being the principle. Ten (more or less) wooden vats are constructed in a
regular line, the one about a foot lower than the other, so that the water may
empty itself with ease from the first into the second, and so on. These vats
are furnished with two (or more) reservoirs, the one for the purpose of having
always a quantity of salt water in readiness, of sufficient height to command
the whole of the works; the other, for the purpose of receiving the brine from
the last vat, and keeping a supply of it in readiness for crystallization. The
bottom of each vat is covered with sea sand, small gravel, or fine earth, about
three inches deep.

The sand is for the purpose, of retaining in each vat when wetted a certain
portion of sea water, and when raked and stirred about, of exposing the fresh
particles thereof to evaporation; the salt remaining with the sand.

When, in consequence of frequent wettings and dryings, the sand becomes
considerably impregnated with salt, the salt is extracted by washing the sand,
by passing a quantity of sea water through each vat, from first to last, and
raking and stirring up the sand and water in each as it passes, thereby making
it dissolve the salt left with the sand in each, till, by repeated
accumulations, it becomes in the last vat saturated with salt; when it is drawn
off into a covered reservoir, there to remain till all impurities have
subsided; when, in fine weather it is drawn off, by such portions as are
requisite, into a large shallow vat called a crystallizing canal, where, after
being exposed a few hours it begins to crystallize, and the salt is removed at
pleasure.

The principal always remaining the same, the number, size, and form of the
vats may be varied as local or other circumstances require.

PLAN, and Description of a newly invented Machine for procuring Salt from the
Sea water or Salt springs, with the Method of Working it; Observations etc. by
JAMES FENNEL, Citizen of the State of Pennsylvania.
IT is necessary to premise that it would be attended with great difficulty, to
exhibit one plan which would be suitable to all situations -- local
circumstances, such as inequality in the height of banks, differing positions
of shores, and other causes may render requisite considerable variations in the
construction of the works, and the relative positions of the vats, pond, pumps,
reservoirs etc. The principle, however, upon which this plan is founded, will
remain the same under every variation in the mode of building. The most concise
and explicit plan is therefore adopted here, supposing the works to be erected
on a level bank from six to twenty feet above the surface of the water.

The following description is divided into three subjects, viz. Explanation of
the plan of the buildings, with references to, and observations on each part
thereof.

Method of working the Machinery.

And observations on the most effectual mode of regulating the work, of
profiting by the casual advantages of good weather, and lessening the casual
disadvantages of bad weather.

EXPLANATION OF THE PLAN OF THE WORKS.
The Works consist of

(A) A Pond. This pond is for the purpose of receiving the sea water, at high
tide, and retaining a sufficient quantity thereof for the use of the works. By
means of this pond, the works may, at the most convenient times, be supplied
with the best sea water; and the natural evaporation therefrom during a period
of fine weather, will considerably strengthen the water, and consequently
enable the same quantity to yield more salt, than if immediately taken from the
sea or river.

(B), A pump. Common hand pumps are exhibited in the drawing of this plan for
the sake of conciseness, but it is to be understood that horse pumps are
supposed to be used; at least where (as contemplated in this plan) the vats are
of such a size as to require a horse to rake the sand.
This pump communicates with the pond, by means of a spout or tube; and is for
the purpose of raising the water into the reservoir (C).

(C,) A reservoir, into which the water is raised from the pond; this
reservoir, being sheltered from the rains by the one above it, secures the
water which has been strengthened in the pond, and being by one half nearer the
pond than the other, the same force will secure double the quantity of water in
the time requisite to raise it to the upper reservoir. And as the usual time
for filling this reservoir will be on the apparent approach of rain, after the
water has been strengthened by a continuance of fine weather, the nearer it can
be brought to the level of the pond the better; that the necessary quantity of
water may be the sooner secured; and both reservoirs being covered (though not
so represented in the drawing,) the upper one may be being filled during the
continuance of misty or rainy weather, at which time the horse and man will
have no other occupation in the works.

(D), A pump communicating with the lower reservoir and drawing the water
therefrom into the upper reservoir (E).

(E), The upper reservoir of sufficient height to command the whole of the
works. In this reservoir, (which is covered,) a regular quantity of water is to
be kept for the supply of the vats.

(F), Ten vats, about sixteen inches deep, the one lower than the other, so as
to suffer the water to run off from the first to the second and so on. The
bottoms of these vats are covered with sea sand about three inches deep
regularly spread over them.

(G), A horse, and rake or fine harrow; this machine is for the purpose 1st. of
stirring together the sand and water to enable the water the more effectually
and speedily to dissolve the salt previously left with the sand; and 2dly,
after the water is drawn off, to rake the sand into little ridges, thereby
exposing the greatest possible quantity of moist grains thereof to the action
of the sun and air, and promoting the evaporation of the fresh particles of the
sea water.

(H), A reservoir, to receive the brine saturated by the accumulation of saline
particles during the passage of the water through the vats. In this reservoir,
(which has temporary covers,) the brine is left to settle and deposit its
impurities, and is thence drawn off as wanted into the crystallizing canal (I).

(I), The crystallizing canal, (with sliding covers) into which the brine is
let in fair weather for the purpose of extracting the salt. The brine, if
perfectly saturated, being let into this canal about two inches deep on a fine
warm day, will begin to crystallize in the course of a few hours and continue
so to do till night, when, if the salt is wanted fine, it must be taken out; if
coarse, a greater depth of brine must be admitted, and the salt suffered to
crystallize unmolested for several days, care being taken every evening, and on
the approach of rain, to cover the canal from the dews and bad weather.

(K), The warehouse, into which the salt is taken from the crystallizing canal.
(L), The wharf.

The plan being drawn chiefly for the exemplification of the principle; it was
thought necessary to exhibit it in the most simple shape; therefore, the little
necessary appendages, which must be obvious to every mind, and which would only
have created confusion in the drawing, have been omitted; such as, the covers
to the reservoirs, the spouts, frames for the pumps, etc. etc. For the same
reason one crystallizing canal only is in the plan, whereas it is necessary to
have ten of the size of one vat, or one containing as many square feet as are
contained in all the vats, that the crystallization may keep pace with the
saturation of the water.

METHOD OF WORKING THE MACHINES.
WHILE describing the method of working the machines, I will suppose a regular
succession of fine weather for several days, and afterward observe on the
consequences of rain, etc.

Previously to the commencement of the regular process, the works must be
prepared in the following manner, viz.

The bottoms of the vats must be covered with sand about three inches deep
regularly spread over them.

That done, the pond must be filled with water let in from the river by a
sluice, which must be then stopped, and the reservoirs supplied with salt water.

That being done, the first vat must be supplied with water to the depth of
nine inches (or there about) above the sand; (this quantity of water will be
about sufficient to reach and wet the last; as the sand in each vat will absorb
and retain about one third of its bulk of water, viz. one inch). The water must
then be drawn off from the first into the second, thence, into the third, and
so on; the water will be found to diminish as it progresses, one inch in each
vat, and by the tenth all that has reached it will be absorbed.

The vats being all wetted in this manner; the sand is immediately raked into
ridges by the horse and machine (G), passing from one vat to the other, and is
then left to dry In fine weather the sand should be raked two or three times
a day.
. The horse is then taken from the harrow and put to the pump, to supply the
reservoirs with the quantity of water used in wetting the vats, of which the
fresh particles evaporate, the sand becomes dry, and impregnated with salt.

This process of wetting and raking the sand, and re-supplying the reservoirs
is the business of the first day. The same process must be repeated (for the
sand will generally dry once in four and twenty hours) four or five days
successively, after which the sand will be sufficiently impregnated with salt
for the commencement of the regular work of making salt, which is as follows.

N. B. In describing the following process, I will, (to avoid interrupting
remarks), suppose the weather to be regularly good, and the sand to dry once
every day, and will hereafter observe on contingent circumstances.

The first thing in the morning, the man attaches the horse to the harrow in
vat No. 1; then lets into the vat from the reservoir (E) one inch more water
than on the preceding days, so that when every vat has been worked there may be
one inch of water remaining in the last. The vat No. 1 being thus supplied with
water, the man drives the horse up and down the vat, raking and stirring up the
sand and water together, that the water may dissolve the salt left with the
sand from the preceding dryings: this being accomplished, the man removes the
harrow to the second vat, and draws off into that the water so strengthened
with salt; here, the water, diminished in quantity but increased in strength,
receives an additional supply of salt, by dissolving what it finds in the
second vat: it is then let into the third vat, and so on, the same process
continued in each, till the water having increased in strength in proportion as
it diminished in quantity, what remains unabsorbed by the sand after having
been admitted into the tenth vat, will have become perfectly saturated with
salt, or what is commonly called brine. It is then let off into the covered
reservoir (H) where having remained some time for the impurities to subside, it
is drawn off into the crystallizing canal, and in the course of an hour or two
the salt begins to crystallize.

During the intervals of leisure from the vats, the man and horse are employed
in raising water for the supply of the reservoirs.

If the salt is wanted fine, it is taken from the crystallizing canal the first
evening after crystallization, and conveyed to the warehouse: if wanted coarse,
the canal must be covered at night and the salt suffered to crystallize
uninterruptedly for several days.

The above described process is continued regularly every fine day, and by it a
regular quantity of salt is obtained according to the size of the vats every
day during fine weather.

One industrious man properly instructed in the management of the business,
with one good horse may with ease do all the work necessary for machinery that
will yield one hundred bushels of salt to the store per day on the average
throughout the year. This remark will be more fully illustrated, and proved, by
the following observations on the most effectual mode of regulating the work.

OBSERVATIONS
On the most effectual mode of regulating the Work; of profiting by the casual
advantages of fine weather, and lessening the casual disadvantages of bad
weather.
It is readily admitted that the process of conducting works on the foregoing
plan, is subject to very great irregularities from the vicissitudes to which
the climate is liable; it is also admitted that the management of them should
be entrusted only to a person perfectly acquainted with those branches of
natural philosophy implicated by such an establishment; a person, capable of
calculating, of reasoning, and forming an accurate judgment of those causes and
events, which may cooperate with, or militate against the end contemplated.

A complete knowledge of the subject, can alone form the basis of a sound
conduct; that complete knowledge, involves information of so various a nature,
that the discussion thereof would induce a dissertation too diffuse for the
purpose designed here. I shall, therefore, content myself with observing on the
principal circumstances to be attended to, without entering into an elaborate
lecture on those branches of science requisite to turn such circumstances to
the greatest advantage; supposing in every one concerned that intelligence
necessary for the adoption of measures advised.

THE POND
Offers itself as the first object of consideration.

The general intention of this pond involves two purposes.

1st, That of having a quantity of good water always at hand for the supply of
the works.

2dly, That of profiting by every opportunity afforded by a continuance of fine
weather, of suffering the water to strengthen therein as much as possible.

Any persons accustomed to make observations on the winds and weather, may
judge pretty accurately at any time, of the kind of weather about to prevail
for a few days to come. The tides at different places are heightened by
different winds; and the higher the tides in places contiguous to the sea, the
stronger the water. By such calculations the quantity of water to be admitted
into the pond, and the times of admission are to be regulated.

For instance, (and in mentioning this instance, I will suppose the situation
of all others the most difficult to judge in.) Imagine the works to be erected
on an inlet, bay, or river, where the Easterly wind produces the highest tides.
It would in that case be imprudent to admit water to the pond during the
prevalence of a South or North Wester; unless water was immediately wanted,
under all disadvantages, which care should be taken to prevent.

Again -- easterly winds in this country, are generally attended with rain, and
are of several days continuance. It would, therefore, be lost labor to
introduce the water on the first high tide produced by such winds, when the
water would probably be weakened by the succeeding rains. The best time, in
such cases, of introducing the water would be on the first prospect of a
change; easterly winds being generally succeeded by a north or south wester.

Suppose then, the water to be introduced at such a time; the quantity thereof
must be determined,

1st, By the deficiency of water in the reservoirs.

2dly, By the probability of the continuance of fine weather.

If the reservoirs are nearly empty, (which is not likely after a series of bad
weather, though they may have become so in consequence of intermitting rains
having prevented a supply from the pond,) and there is to be expected a
continuance of fine weather, a larger quantity must be admitted; although even
this must be regulated by the consideration of the approaching spring or neap
tides.

After the water is admitted, the depth of which in the pond should not in
general exceed six inches; it should be suffered to remain there till the next
appearance of rain, (unless a portion of it be wanted for the immediate supply
of the works) when, if the weather has continued fine for some days, it will
have been considerably strengthened.

It will readily occur that after a succession of fine weather, the contents of
the reservoirs will be considerably lessened; of course, on the apparent
approach of rain, after such a season, they will be capable of receiving a
great supply. This is, therefore, the important time to secure in the lower
reservoir as much of the strengthened water from the pond as possible. These
occasions should be carefully watched; and, the power of the lower pump being
calculated, proper time should be allowed for filling the lower reservoir
before the rain comes on.

The average quantity of salt contained in sea water is one bushel in thirty.

Though the natural evaporation in this country is only about fifty six inches
in the year; yet the evaporation during a week of fine weather will frequently
exceed three inches.

Suppose then water which originally contained one bushel of salt in thirty, to
have been admitted into the pond to the depth of six inches, and three inches
thereof to have been evaporated during a fine week; fifteen bushels of the
remaining quantity of water will yield one bushel of salt. A circumstance^ like
this will double the produce of the vats, without increasing the expense of
working them.

These are advantages which it must be confessed do not occur frequently in
this country; but when they do occur they are great, and if properly attended
to, will considerably contribute to the success of such undertakings.

A series of fine weather for three or four weeks, may reasonably be expected
three or four times every year. It is proper always to be prepared for such
occasions, and when they do happen they will amply repay the trouble of
preparing for them.

This pond has a sluice by which it empties itself into the river at low water,
after rain or when occasion requires.

In winter, this pond will be still more advantageous, and to it a more regular
attention is then necessary than in summer.

In the beginning of winter a severe frost frequently operates during the
night, and a proportionable thaw during the day.

When such weather is expected, the use made of the pond should be this,

Only a small depth of water should be admitted, proceeding accordingly to the
supposed strength of the succeeding frost, from two or three inches, upwards.
The contents of the pond being exposed to the frost during the night, the part
found condensed in the morning will consist alone of fresh particles, the
remaining fluid containing all the Salt originally contained by the whole. --
This then, or so much of it as necessary, must be pumped into the lower
reservoir before the thaw begins; and the sluice opened immediately to let off
what remains in the pond, as the thaw renders it fluid. In the evening, if
circumstances permit, a quantity of sea water must be admitted by the other
sluice, as before, and so on.

As the winter advances, the quantity of water admitted into the pond must be
greater; as the frost will have the greater effect -- but it is impossible to
give rules for the work of every day throughout the year; the operator must
reflect, judge, and act accordingly.

But when the winter is well set in, the attention to the pond will be less
varying and troublesome, but more requisite and profitable.

What is generally called the setting in of frost, is less a matter of doubt
than the expectation of fine weather in summer, and may, therefore, with
greater confidence be relied on.

Attention to the admission of water at high tides, is not so necessary in
winter as in summer; as the frost operates with greater force on the weaker
water; therefore,

On the approach of a severe frost, it would be (generally considered)
advisable to let into the pond as much water as it will contain, which should
not exceed two feet in depth, and remove the water from under the accumulating
ice, only as it may be immediately wanted; as it will become stronger and
stronger every day during the continuance of the frost. -- Upon the
commencement of the breaking up of the frost, all diligence must be applied to
the securing of the strengthened water in the lower reservoir, which will serve
for use during the succeeding thaw while the ice is dissolving in the pond and
retiring through the sluice into the river.

If the frost should at any time be so severe, as to leave only a small
quantity of water uncongealed, more must be admitted from the river, and a
large hole made in the ice near the admitting sluice to suffer the fresh supply
to run under it.

It would greatly facilitate the security of any quantity of water strengthened
by the pond in summer or winter, to have an additional reservoir, (if
circumstances would admit of it) sunk below the level of the bottom of the
pond, so that on the approach of rain in summer, or thaw in winter, the
strengthened water might, by a capacious sluice, be at once let into it. This
indeed would be necessary where extensive works required a large pond, as it
would be difficult or at least expensive, to raise a very great body of water
between the appearance of approaching rain, and its arrival, whereas, by
introducing this last mentioned reservoir of sufficient capacity, the whole
might be at once secured in a few minutes; nor would the raising the water
therefrom, produce an additional expense to the yearly establishment, as the
man and horse, or men and horses, might be employed during wet weather, (when
they could do nothing at the vats), in filling the other reservoirs therefrom.

It would also be the means of affording the man more leisure to cover the
crystallizing canal, and prepare the rest of the works against the arrival of
rain, as will be hereafter explained.

Having now observed every thing that I believe to be necessary to convey a
just idea of the proper management of the pond, I shall proceed to the
consideration of the other parts of the works.

THE PUMPS
Come next in course. These should be worked by a horse, under cover, as they
will be generally used during moist or wet weather when nothing can be done at
the vats. No particular remarks appear necessary on this subject, excepting
that the height of the water raised by the lower one should be as little as
possible, that the greater quantity may be secured in a short time; the raising
the water from the lower to the upper reservoir, being a work of more leisure,
the height of the pump for this purpose may be greater without inconvenience.

THE RESERVOIRS.
Respecting the Reservoirs few observations are necessary. The principal care
requisite is to keep them properly supplied. Some evaporation may be expected
from them, and in winter considerable additional advantages may be derived from
them by frost -- by removing the ice formed on the surface of the water. These
reservoirs being constantly covered, nothing need be observed on them
respecting rain, from which the water contained in them is secured.

We now come to the vats, the principal object in the works.

THE VATS.
I have before mentioned that sand is used as the principal instrument of
evaporation, and given the reasons therefore. I shall now consider its effects.

Water when imbibed by sand, and the sand so moistened spread regularly over a
level plane and occasionally raked, will evaporate at least four times as fast
as it will in a fluid state exposed to the same sun and air.

Sand will absorb and retain about one third of its bulk of water, and will, on
the average, if properly attended to, evaporate the same in four and twenty
hours.

Suppose then ten vats, of sufficient capacity to contain each, when spread
regularly over its bottom, 300 bushels of sand.

Suppose each of these vats to absorb, and evaporate daily 100 bushels of
water. Suppose each 100 bushels of water to contain 4 bushels of salt.

After six successive wettings and dryings the sand in each vat will contain 24
bushels of salt.

On the seventh day, let into vat No. 1, 1,100 bushels of salt water,
containing at 4 bushels per hundred, 44 bushels of salt. This water, being
stirred about with the sand, will dissolve the salt found with the sand, in
addition to what it brought with it, and having dissolved it, will then contain
68 bushels, or about 6 per hundred.

On letting the water into the 2d vat, the sand in the 1st vat will retain
thereof 100 bushels, and with them the quantity of salt contained in those 100
bushels, viz. 6 bushels.

The 1st vat will then stand thus;

1000 Bushels of water, containing 62 of salt, will run off into the 2d vat,
where they meet 24 bushels more of salt; which having dissolved, the water
stands thus -- 1000 bushels containing 86 of salt or about In these
calculations I have not been very particular about small fractions.
8 per hundred; 900 of which being let off into the 3d vat,

The second will stand thus,

900 Bushels of water, containing 76 of salt, being let into the 3d vat, meet
there 24 more of salt; which having dissolved, the water stands thus, 900
bushels containing 100 of salt or about 11 per hundred; 800 of which being let
off into the 4th vat,

The 3d will stand thus,

800 Bushels of water, containing 89 of salt, being let into the 4th vat, meet
there 24 more of salt; which having dissolved, the water stands thus, 800
bushels containing 113 of salt, or 14 per hundred; 700 of which being let off
into the 5th vat,

The 4th will stand thus,

700 Bushels of water containing 99 of salt, let into the 5th vat, meet there
24 more of salt, which having dissolved, the water stands thus; 700 bushels
containing 123 of salt, or about 17 per hundred; 600 of which, being let into
the 6th vat,

The 5th will stand thus,

600 Bushels of water, containing 105 of salt, let into the 6th vat, meet there
24 more of salt; which having dissolved, the water stands thus; -- 600 bushels
containing 129 of salt, or 21 per hundred; 500 of which being let off into the
7th vat,

The 6th will stand thus,

500 Bushels of water, containing 107 bushels of salt, let into the 7th vat,
meet there 24 more of salt; which having dissolved, the water stands thus; 500
bushels containing 131 of salt, or 26 per hundred; 400 of which being let off
into the 8th vat.

The 7th will stand thus;

400 Bushels of water, containing 104 of salt, let into the 8th vat, meet there
24 more of salt, which having dissolved, the water stands thus; 400 bushels
containing 128 of salt, or 32 per hundred; 300 of which being let off into the
9th vat,

The 8th will stand thus;

300 Bushels of water, containing 96 of salt being let into the 9th vat, meet
there 24 more of salt as in the other vats, but, being incapable of dissolving
more than it already contains, I have taken the contents of the water when let
into this vat as the saturating quantity, to avoid intricacies in the
calculation; the above elucidations being intended only to show how the water
progressed toward saturation, I did not think it material to stop at the exact
point.
the 200 bushels when let off into the 10th vat will leave the 9th thus:



200 bushels of water, containing 64 of salt, let into the tenth vat meet there
24 more of salt; but being incapable of dissolving more than it already
contains, 100 bushels when let off into the reservoir will leave the sand in
the tenth vat as follows:



100 Bushels of brine let off from the 10th vat into the reservoir, after
depositing its impurities will be ready on the first fine weather to be exposed
for crystallization, and will yield 32 bushels of salt, or thereabout.

It will readily occur to every one, from the quantity of salt left in the
vats, that a much larger quantity of water might have been saturated; but it is
much better to leave the sand richly impregnated, than to impoverish it by
removing all the salt, or as much as possible at once. Reasons shall hereafter
be assigned for this remark.

32 Bushels of salt, (or 100 bushels of brine containing that quantity) have
then been procured by this process on the seventh day.

The fresh particles of the water left with the sand, having evaporated, and
the sand having become dry, the same process should be continued on the eighth
day, when the same quantity of saturated brine will be yielded as before, and
the vats on the 6th, 7th, and 8th days, will have been left as in the following
table.

Vat. 6th Day. 7th Day. 8th Day. No. 1 Sand contg. Bush. of Salt. 24 6 4 2 Sand
contg. 24 8 5 3 Sand contg. 24 11 7 4 Sand contg. 24 14 8 5 Sand contg. 24 17
11 6 Sand contg. 24 21 14 7 Sand contg. 24 26 19 8 Sand contg. 24 32 26 9 Sand
contg. 24 56 75 10 Sand contg. 24 56 88 Total. 240 248 260

It is unnecessary to pursue these calculations further; what has been done is
sufficient to show the progress of saturation, and the manner in which the end
contemplated is effected.

The process is regularly continued during fine weather, and every time the
sand dries, the fame quantity of brine may be procured, and the vats will be
left more and more impregnated with salt.

The principle advantages arising from leaving the vats strongly impregnated
with salt are the following.

It will sometimes happen that the sand may not be sufficiently dry, when it
will be necessary on many accounts to wash the vats; less water will of course
in that case be retained by the sand in each vat, and of course the greater
quantity remain in the tenth -- if, therefore, there was only salt enough left
with the sand to saturate one hundred bushels of water, 150, or 200 bushels
being left to be drawn off into the reservoir, would be unfit for immediate
use, and if drawn off into the reservoir would weaken the brine before
contained therein, and thereby probably put a stop to the regular process of
crystallization.

Again, on the approach of rain, the vats should always be washed, that the
sand may be left fully saturated with salt water, and with a smooth surface;
that the rain, when it falls, may remain on the surface unmixed with the sand
or salt water; and on the return of fine weather quietly be drawn off through a
hole in the bottom of each vat. Now, the sand being left strongly impregnated
with salt, will always afford sufficient to saturate the extraordinary quantity
of water used for this purpose, which, however should never be more than
necessary to pass through all the vats and leave the sand a smooth, wet and
compact mass; which being done, the rain will fall on the sand without doing
any material injury, and may be let off from each vat on the return of fine
weather as fresh, or very nearly so, as it fell.

It would be generally prudent, during the summer, to wash the sand in the
evening, when the weather is calm or doubtful, leaving the raking of it till
the morning.

This answers two purposes, it leaves the sand prepared against accidental
rains during the night, and the vats are the sooner ready in the morning for
evaporation.

But, when the night is expected to be fine and evaporating, the raking should
not be postponed unless the washing is postponed also.

During dry windy weather, and particularly when it happens during the night,
when the machines cannot so easily be watched, the sand should not be suffered
to dry as in calm hot weather, but should be kept regularly moistened: this may
be done by permitting a stream of water proportionate to the evaporation to run
constantly from the reservoir, draining from the first vat into the second, and
so on: this not only prevents the sand from being blown away, but forwards
evaporation very considerably.

Care must in general be taken to lose no advantages of fine weather, by doing
that kind of work in the middle of the day, such as wetting the sand etc.
during the most powerful evaporation, which may as well be done in the morning
or evening when the evaporation is less.

In spite, however, of the greatest care and attention, accidental
circumstances may sometimes bring into the tenth vat, a quantity of water not
fully saturated; this should by no means be admitted to the reservoir (H) To
provide against difficulties of this nature it would be proper to have a spout
running under the vats to convey the water on such occasions back to the lower
reservoir (C). This would be attended with no other disadvantage, but that of
raising such a quantity of water a second time to the upper reservoir (E).

It is to be observed, that all the foregoing calculations have been made on a
supposition, that the water issues from the upper reservoir (E) containing four
bushels of salt in one hundred of water, or one bushel in twenty five. The pond
and lower reservoir being well attended to, it will never contain less, but
frequently and generally more.

For instance. Suppose 6 inches of water to have been admitted into the pond,
and during a series of fine weather three inches thereof to have been
evaporated; if the water originally contained one bushel of salt in thirty, it
will then contain one bushel in fifteen.

If two inches only should have been evaporated, it will contain one in twenty,
and so on.

Water, so strengthened, being secured in the lower reservoir, will
considerably increase the profits of the works; and as attention to the pond is
attended with very little difficulty, and no expense, (circumspection being the
principal requisite while the water is strengthening, and care to secure a
sufficient quantity when strengthened,) it must be owing to bad management
alone, if the water, by the time it arrives in the upper reservoir, does not
contain more than one bushel in twenty five on the average throughout the year.

The vats in winter are in general more profitable in producing brine than in
summer, but require a different process. The business then is this.

In the beginning of winter, on the evening preceding an expected frost, after
having washed the sand, and extracted all the salt possible; a quantity of
water must be let into each vat, proportionate to the expected density of the
frost, and there suffered to remain all night; in the morning, before it begins
to thaw, the strengthened water must be drawn off and returned by the spout
under the vats to the lower reservoir: as it begins to thaw, the cocks leading
from one vat to the other must be stopped, and the plug in the bottom of each
vat opened, to let off the condensed part as it becomes fluid. All being gone
the plug must be stopped if the weather is fine, the sand raked and exposed to
evaporation.

But, as the winter advances, this daily trouble will not be requisite; for,
when it ceases to thaw during the day, the water may be continued in the vats,
and exposed to the frost till it is nearly saturated; when it must be drawn
off; and if the frost continues, the ice removed, and a fresh quantity of water
exposed for condensation; or if a thaw attended with rain is expected, the
trouble of removing the ice may be avoided by opening the plug, and letting it
run out as dissolved.

Calculation at the time of operation must determine the propriety of adopting
either of these expedients; I shall only add that by a careful attendance to
the pond, reservoirs, and vats, during the winter, an immense quantity of
strong salt water may be secured ready for the operation of spring, and which
will treble the produce of the sand, when by the retiring of the frost it is at
liberty to operate.

With respect to the reservoir for the brine, little is necessary to be
observed. No brine should be received in it till perfectly saturated, nor
withdrawn from it, till perfectly settled and clear.

The crystallizing canal (or canals,) should be about a foot deep, with sliding
covers, which may with ease be drawn off or on as the weather requires. These
covers should consist of light pine frames with painted canvas tightly
stretched over them. The brine, when let into this canal will begin to
crystallize in a few hours, in small white cubes, which will increase in size
so long as they are suffered to remain undisturbed.

When the salt is to be taken out, baskets should be placed, (at regular
distances), so as to drain into the canal: the man then goes into the canal and
shovels the salt into these baskets, where having remained about half an hour,
it becomes sufficiently dry for storing; the man then attaches the horse to the
cart, and driving along the side of the canal fills the cart with the salt, and
takes it to the warehouse; having taken out as much as necessary, he slides on
the covers, and leaves it till the morning, when, if the remaining fluid
contains no more marine salt, it is let off, unless wanted for the purpose of
making Epsom or Glauber salts, which with very little trouble it would produce
in abundance.

I have now entered into a complete description of every part of the works, and
the method of managing them; from which it must appear that after such
machinery is erected, the business may be carried on at a very small expense. I
have already ventured to observe that one man and one horse could, without any
other expense, from works sufficiently capacious, make one hundred bushels per
day on the average throughout the year; and I believe it to be the fact.

It is unnecessary to make minute calculations on the expense of erecting such
works, as the prices of timber, boards, labor, etc. vary according to
situation. Works, in any situation, where the above articles were easily
procurable, which would produce 100 bushels of salt per day on the average
throughout the year or 36,500 bushels per year might, I am sure, be erected for
less than 15,000 dollars; and smaller or larger works in proportion.

Miscellaneous Observations.
MUCH expense may be saved in the erection of these works, by choosing a
convenient spot for the purpose; and much may be added to the produce, by
adopting a situation, where the soil and air are generally dry, and not subject
to fogs, mists or damp exhalations.

There are many situations on the banks of salt water rivers, formerly the
habitation of Indians, where the upper stratum of the soil consists chiefly of
oyster and other fish shells; such a situation, if suitable in other respects,
would be peculiarly advantageous, not only from its natural warmth, but from
its porosity suffering the rains as they fall to sink beyond the reach of
evaporation, and leaving the surface dry, thereby preventing that saturation,
or rather that approach to saturation of the air, which in calm hot weather
generally succeeds heavy rains, in situations where the soil being less porous
suffers the water to stagnate on its surface.

Air is always in search of water, and where the soil, powerfully acted upon by
the sun, yields it freely, will soon saturate itself* hence that vibratory
motion in the air often visible in calm hot weather, when the heated soil
exhales more moisture than the stagnating air will immediately dissolve.

Air, though in a dead calm it may be said to have no positive motion, has yet
a relative one, that is, though in a large body it may not be moving from one
place to another, yet is there constantly a circulating motion of its particles
within itself; like the circulation of the blood through the body of an animal
though the animal itself be at rest.

Now suppose a large body of air positively stationary over a tract of ground
remaining a long time wet after heavy rains, (on which such works are erected)
and yielding freely its moisture to the air; does it not necessarily follow
that that air fed equally from every part of the land, must be soon saturated
with water, and remain a dead, though perhaps invisible mist, having no
evaporating power, till the whole body be driven away by a succeeding current?

Suppose, on the other hand, a similar body of air to remain stationary, over a
dry tract of ground, on which such works are erected, yielding only scanty
exhalations; will it not naturally occur that the air will seek for food where
only it can be supplied, and attacking the vats for moisture, which sand
naturally repels, feed itself from them? A number of particles being fed,
relative motion immediately succeeds, from two causes; increased gravity of the
particles, and the changing angles of refraction of the solar rays; partial
motion being obtained, a general (relative) motion will soon take place; for,
the solution of water in air is similar to the solution of salt in water;
impregnate a part, and that impregnation will soon be dispersed throughout the
whole. If this hypothesis be just, the advantages to be derived from fixing the
works on a dry soil must be very great, by forcing a large body of air in calm
weather to feed itself from the moisture of the vats, when it would otherwise
be saturated by the surrounding exhalations.

There are some places where natural ponds are formed near the water, which
with a little expense, may be adapted to the purpose desired in these works.

By choosing a situation for the vats where the ground has a declivity of 18 or
20 feet, the expense of raising the reservoir and vats may be avoided.

It is not very essential to have them close together; of course, the more
compact works of this nature are, the better; but, if the ground would not
afford a sufficient descent for the vats if close together, they may be placed
at the distance necessary for that advantage, and communicate with each other
by means of a spout. Some little inconveniences may occur from an adoption of
this plan, but they may be easily obviated or counterbalanced by a judicious
manager.

The bottoms of the water reservoirs, vats, and crystallizing canal, may be of
pine boards, if good: The lining of the reservoir for the brine, should be made
entirely of two or three inch plank well caulked and pitched: the bottom of the
crystallizing canal should be pitched all over: this will accelerate the
crystallization, and prevent the brine from soaking through the bottom.

The sides of the vats and crystallizing canal should be made of one plank in
depth cut feather edged, the lower edge being about four inches thick, the
upper, one.

If the vats are built in the shape of a rectangular paralellogram; care should
be taken to place the sides toward the south, letting the vats extend east and
west; otherwise, a great part of them will be shaded from the morning and
evening sun.

In planning the vats, it appears best to have them long and narrow, that the
boards may be laid crossways; the breadth of the vats being determined by the
length of the boards, to prevent waste and buttings: by having them in this
manner, the boards when jointed may be wedged up very tight, and no caulking
will be necessary. Besides, if the vats are worked by a horse, this plan
obviates three great disadvantages which would otherwise occur; frequent
turnings, walking constantly on one board, and treading between the joice.

I shall now dismiss the subject with a firm hope and belief that some time or
other I shall have it in my power to say, "my labor has not been in vain."


