SERMON Preached at the Church in Brattle-Street, BOSTON, THURSDAY, September
27, 1798. A Day religiously observed on Account OF The EPIDEMIC now prevailing
in this Town, AND Several other Seaports in AMERICA.

BY JOHN LATHROP, D. D.

Printed by the Desire of many who heard it.

BOSTON: Printed by BENJAMIN EDES, in Kilby-Street, 1798.

A SERMON.
AMOS, III. 2. YOU ONLY HAVE I KNOWN OF ALL THE FAMILIES OF THE EARTH,
THEREFORE I WILL PUNISH YOU FOR YOUR INIQUITIES.
THE prophet was directed to speak in the name of the Lord, to the children of
Israel, -- You only have I known, of all the families of the earth, therefore I
will punish you for your iniquities.

IN as much as the things which were written aforetime were written for our
learning, it may be a proper and useful exercise for us, on the present serious
occasion, to consider some of the reasons, why those subjects of moral
government, who have received particular favors, and have abused them, have
been marked out, in divine providence, by particular punishments.

GREAT caution however is to be used, in making up our judgment, with respect
to individuals, or societies of men, from the sufferings of the present life.

THE friends of Job, we find had embraced an opinion, at that age of the world,
that the greatest sufferers, are the greatest sinners. This also was the
opinion of the Jews, who supposed those unhappy persons, who were destroyed by
a tower in Siloam, which fell upon them, were the greatest sinners in
Jerusalem. But this opinion, however popular, was discountenanced and rejected
by the great teacher of mankind. He exhorted all who heard him to repent, as
they hoped to escape destruction.

BUT while we use great caution, in making up our judgment with respect to
individuals, or societies of men, from their circumstances in the present
(...), we have authority from the scriptures to say, that individuals, and
nations of men, have been (...) on account of their virtues, and (...) of their
vices. While the (...) world, is to be considered, as (...) government by the
operation of laws which he has established, so that in a general way, neither
love or hatred can be known by the circumstances of the children of men, it
must be granted, that obedient subjects, have, in many instances, been
encouraged by rewards, while obstinate and rebellious sinners, have been
punished for their crimes.

HAVING made the foregoing observations, I will proceed to offer some reasons
why those subjects of moral government, who have received particular favors
and have abused them, have been marked out in divine providence, by particular
punishments.

AND Is It. The honor of divine government may require, that singular
punishments, under certain circumstances, should be inflicted, even in the
present life.

ONE reason, and perhaps, the greatest of all, why the children of Israel were
delivered from the bondage of Egypt, with a high hand, and conducted through
the sea, and through the wilderness with an outstretched arm, was to show the
heathen nations, in a strong and convincing light, that Jehovah is infinitely
superior to all who were called Gods, and that He alone is to be worshipped.

GOD knew Israel as his peculiar people. He declared himself, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Having made a solemn covenant
with those patriarchs and their children, and granted them many important
favors; having revealed to them his will, and given them commandments and
ordinances to observe, his honor, as the Governor of the world, was connected
with their conduct.

WHEN it was known among the heathen, that God sent plagues on the Egyptians,
because their King refused to release the seed of Jacob from unreasonable
servitude; -- that he destroyed Pharaoh and his host in the red sea; -- that he
settled his redeemed people in a country which had been long promised them, and
protected them when exposed to the numerous and powerful enemies round about
them, there were particular and very strong reasons why they should be careful
to obey all the commandments which the Lord their God had given them. When they
discovered their ingratitude by forgetting their deliverer, and by practicing
those things which had been strictly forbidden, there were particular and
strong reasons why they should be punished.

THE prophets and ministers of the most High, were careful to proclaim abroad,
that God had chosen Israel to be his inheritance, -- a people to show forth his
praise: and therefore when Israel chose to be the inheritance of others, and to
show forth the praise of strange Gods, the honor of Jehovah required, that
Israel should be punished. The sin of forsaking the true God, and giving that
worship to idols which is due to Jehovah, was a public sin; it was therefore
highly proper, that some punishments of a public nature should be inflicted.

THE propriety of inflicting particular punishments on the children of Israel,
after they had abused the singular favors which had been conferred upon them,
will farther appear, when we consider they were threatened with distressing
calamities, in order to guard them against apostasy and rebellion.

WITHOUT consulting any other parts of the sacred volume, the xxviiith chapter
of the book of Deuteronomy will furnish sufficient evidence of the care which
Jehovah exercised over the morals of his ancient covenant people, both by
promising blessings to the obedient, and threatening punishments, varying in
degree, but dreadful in the end, on all such as resolved to do wickedly.

WE go on to say,

IIdly. ANOTHER reason why singular punishments are inflicted on such members
of God's moral government, as have received particular favors and have abused
them, may be to promote the reformation and real good of transgressors
themselves.

IN order to qualify imperfect creatures for advancement in happiness, it seems
necessary, that in some stage of their existence, they should be subjected to a
course of trial and discipline. -- Nor are we to suppose it has been the
peculiarly hard lot of mankind to be placed under such circumstances. Beings
superior to us have been tried. What were the particular circumstances of trial
to which the angels were subjected we know not. We know, from the sacred books,
a number of them fell from their first estate -- left their own habitation, and
are reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day.

OUR parents, made in the image of God, and free from sin, were tried and fell.
We all have our trials. We are all in a state of discipline. Some of the
children of men have greater trials than others. It has so happened, that some
who were under the most favorable discipline, and possessed the highest
advantages for moral and religious improvement, have been overcome in the day
of trial, and have wandered in the way of sin. In mercy to such persons God
has corrected them. By sufferings he has taught them the evil of
transgression. To this point we have the testimony of David, a man, in many
respects, highly favored, but extremely irregular in his conduct. Before I was
afflicted, says, he, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. Like good
effects of affliction have been experienced by serious people in all ages.

SUCH are the imperfections of human nature, and of the present life, that
small has been the number of those who have maintained purity of moral
character, and a truly devotional spirit, during a course of uninterrupted
prosperity, and worldly enjoyment. When Agur prayed that he might possess
mediocrity of circumstances, he knew that uninterrupted prosperity very often
draws off the heart from God. Give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me with
food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord?

WHEN people are drawn away from a sense of dependence of God, and from the
path of duty, by their successes, and by the abundance which they possess,
afflictions and disappointments, may do them good.

IN the course of discipline in which we are placed, we either improve in
virtue and knowledge, or we degenerate: The means which are used with us in
providence, will either have a good effect, or leave us less susceptible of
good impressions.

THERE are those, who by the bounties of heaven, are filled with gratitude: who
study to know what returns they shall make for divine favors: who endeavor to
honor God, and to make their fellow creatures happy, in the use which they
make of their substance. Such men are good stewards: they feel the pleasure of
doing good, and their reward will be great in Heaven.

OTHERS there are, who are proud of what they possess. Prosperity makes them
vain and selfish. When they ought to be more pious, they are more irreligious:
When they have more power to do good, they have less of the disposition. They
reject the solicitations of the poor and needy, that they may have the more to
consume in the gratification of their appetites and passions.

WHEN men who were once sober and virtuous, who in moderate circumstances,
attended to the duties of religion, and felt the sufferings of the needy and
afflicted, lose their good impressions; and in more elevated circumstances,
show that they regard nothing but their own pleasures, it may be a mercy to
correct them. When they show that they cannot bear success, but the more they
have, the more they increase in pride and folly, it may be a mercy to strip
them of their substance, and humble them by losses and sufferings.

THAT the purposes of God are kind and benevolent, in the sufferings which he
brings on the children of men, we are clearly taught in the sacred writings. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. If need be we are
in heaviness. The fruit of affliction is to take away sin.

WE add once more,

IIIdly. GOD may inflict particular punishments on such members of his moral
government, as have received particular favors, and have abused them, in order
to afford suitable warning to others.

ONE important end for which the judgments of Heaven fell upon the disobedient
children of Israel, was the conviction which their sufferings afforded, even to
the heathen nations, that the ways of God are right; and that he will not
suffer the workers of iniquity to escape the effects of his displeasure. Thus
we read, in the xxxixth of Ezekiel: The heathen shall know that the house of
Israel went into captivity for their iniquities: -- because they transgressed
against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of
their enemies.

MORE solemn warnings cannot be given to the wicked children of men, than those
which were given to the children of Israel, both by the words which were spoken
to them, and by the punishments which in the course of divine providence, were
inflicted upon them.

THEY were the peculiar people of the most High. God chose them from the
nations of the earth, that by them his name might be known, and that they might
show forth his praise. He delivered them from the bondage of Egypt: He
protected them when exposed to their enemies: He fed them with bread from
Heaven: He established with them his covenant: He gave them particular
instructions with respect to their conduct: He promised them the highest
temporal felicity as the reward of obedience, and threatened them with extreme
wretchedness, in case they rejected his law, and chose to rebel against him.

IT shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes, which I command
thee this day, that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.

CURSED shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in the field.
Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy
body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of
thy sheep. Cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed shall thou be
when thou go out.

THE Lord shall send upon thee, cursing vexation and rebuke, in all that thou
set thine hand unto, for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou
perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou have
forsaken me.

THE Lord shall bring thee and thy King which thou shall set over thee, unto a
nation which neither thou, nor thy fathers have known; and there shall thou
serve other Gods, wood and stone. And thou shall become an astonishment, a
proverb, and a byword, among all nations, whither the Lord shall lead thee. --
All these curses shall come upon thee and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee,
till thou be destroyed: because thou hearkenest not unto the voice of the Lord
thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee.

BETWEEN eight and nine hundred years afterter the date of the solemn charge
given by Moses to the children of Israel, in which you will find the sentences
we have now repeated, the (...) threatenings were executed in the captivity,
(...) whole family, which God brought up from the land of Egypt.

ABOUT seven hundred and twenty years before Christ, the King of Assyria, took
the capital of the ten tribes, and carried the inhabitants into captivity.

FIVE hundred and ninety years before Christ, Jerusalem was taken by the king
of Babylon, the Temple was burned, and the once highly favored people of God
were subjected to a humble and suffering condition, which continued seventy
years.

THIS captivity was predicted by Jeremiah, and by several other prophets.
Surely thus says the Lord, so will I give Zedekiah the King of Judah, and his
Princes, and the residue of Jerusalem that remain in this land, and them that
dwell in the land of Egypt. And I will deliver them to be removed into all the
Kingdoms of the earth, for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt
and a curse, in all the places whither I shall drive them. And I will send the
sword, the famine and the pestilence among them, till they be consumed from off
the land which I gave unto them and their fathers! Jeremiah xxivth Chap.


IN the history of the Kings of Israel and Judah, we find this prophecy very
exactly fulfilled. ^ Kings xxv.


THE judgments of Heaven, which were inflicted on the whole family of the
children of Israel, stand as solemn warnings to all who live in wickedness: If
God spared not the seed of Abraham his friend, but accomplished the things
which he threatened, when they rebelled against him, no other nation surely can
expect to be treated with more tenderness.

TO answer valuable purposes in the moral government of the world, certain
periods are marked with the record of awful judgments, which God has seen fit
to inflict on the children of men.

THE deluge, in the time of Noah, was brought on the inhabitants of the earth,
as the punishment of the wickedness which every where prevailed.

SODOM and Gomorrha, and the cities about them, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

BESIDES the judgments which were inflicted on Judah and Israel, in consequence
of their ingratitude and rebellion, the history of later ages, informs us of
seasons, when the inhabitants of the world have been thinned and wasted away by
desolating calamities.

IN the year of our Lord 542, a pestilential disorder appeared first in Egypt,
on the eastern channel of the Nile, from thence, tracing as it were a double
path, it spread to the East, over Syria, Persia, and the Indies; and penetrated
to the West along the coast of Africa, and over the continent of Europe. This
Plague, the greatest and most general on the annals of the world, continued
fifty-two years: -- Its progress was every where marked, with desolation and
ruin. Such were its dreadful ravages, that in strong language it is said to
have "depopulated the earth." Gibbon, Vol. iv. Dublin. Murator. Tom. 1. pt. 1.
p. 426.


SOME have supposed one third part of the inhabitants of the world were
destroyed by the plague which we have now mentioned: but no facts have been
preserved to sustain an account, or even a conjecture, of the numbers that
perished in this extraordinary mortality. Many cities of the East were left
vacant: the decrease of the human species, during that season of affliction,
has never been repaired in some of the fairest countries of the globe.

FROM 1346 to 1350, the principal countries of the world were again visited
with an extensive Plague. It broke out in China in 1346, and passed into the
East Indies, Syria, Turkey, Egypt, and Africa.

THE next year it raged on the other side of the Mediterranean. In 1348, and
1349, it raged in Hungary, in Germany, in Spain, in France, in Belgium and
Denmark, in England, Scotland and Ireland. Mead on Pestilential Contagion.
The Plague, at the time now mentioned, was almost general, and the destruction
of mankind by it, was beyond calculation.

MANY pages of history are filled with accounts of pestilential diseases which
have thinned off the inhabitants of the world. At some periods the evil has
been general, and at other times it has been confined to particular places.

IN 1656 the Plague was brought from Sardinia to Naples. It raged with
excessive violence, and in less than six months carried off 400,000 of the
inhabitants.

IN the latter end of 1664 several persons died of a pestilential disorder at
Westminster, and in the spring after, London was visited with a dreadful
Plague. In the months of August and September, the mortality was distressing
beyond what had been known in that city before.

ABOUT the beginning of September the disease was at the height. Eight, and ten
thousand, and even "twelve thousand died in a week."

WITH such dreadful effect did the Plague continue to rage, until it had
carried off, as some computed, about one hundred thousand people. Dr. Hodge's
History of the Plague in London, 1665.


IN 1720, Sixty thousand died of the Plague in the city Marseilles.

WHEN we consider the manner in which the inhabitants of the Earth have been
chastised at one time and another, what reason can be offered why we, on this
quarter of the globe, should hope to escape? Countries to all appearance as
favorably situated for health, as the American States, have been scourged by
the pestilence, and consumed by the judgments of Heaven.

LET us now apply the subject, and endeavor to have our hearts impressed with
the thoughts which have been suggested.

ALTHOUGH we can claim no particular relation to the God of Heaven, in
consequence of a covenant made with our Fathers, like that which was made with
the Hebrew Patriarchs, we may gain important instruction from their history.

WHILE it is not pretended that the first English planters of this country were
protected by miraculous interpositions of providence, it will be acknowledged
their enterprise was astonishingly succeeded. A small number were protected
among savages in an inhospitable wilderness, three thousand miles from their
native country. They increased and multiplied, their posterity are now a
powerful and numerous people.

THE inhabitants of no part of the earth have possessed, or do possess the
means of happiness to higher perfection, than the inhabitants of the American
States have possessed, and do generally possess, at this very day.

WE have, and we do enjoy all the civil and religious advantages which
reasonable creatures, while in the present life, have any right to expect. The
inhabitants of our country have enjoyed, and (except in some of the seaports,
and great towns) do now enjoy as much health as the inhabitants of most other
countries have enjoyed. -- And what have been the effects of divine goodness?
What fruit have we brought forth? Have we expressed that gratitude to a
heavenly benefactor, -- that contentment with our portion in life, which we
ought to have expressed? And further let me inquire, What is the state of
Religion? We blush to say. -- We are obliged to confess, that while iniquity
has abounded, the love of many has waxed cold. The friends of God and of
Religion, may adopt the words of Jeremiah, with little variation and say, The
ways of Zion mourn, because few come to the solemn feasts. Never was there a
time, when sacred things were treated with more neglect. Multitudes speak of
Religion as a thing of no consequence; while many treat its institutions with
contempt.

IF our fathers were too strict in the observance of the Christian Sabbath, and
the rites of religion, the present generation has certainly gone very far to
the other extreme.

THE indifferency -- the luke-warmness of many who have professed a general
friendship for the Christian Religion, has, we fear, encouraged its open
enemies to blaspheme the name by which we are called; and insult the authority
of God. --

THE prophet was ordered to say, unto the whole family of the children of
Israel, You only have I known, of all the families of the earth; therefore I
will punish you for your iniquities.

As the inhabitants of this land have been, and are now in possession of many
advantages which they have not duly esteemed, -- some of the most precious of
which they have neglected or abused, there is reason to fear God will visit
them with his judgments; and make them know, as he did his people in ancient
times, what an evil thing it is to despise his goodness, and trample on his
laws. This to be sure, is not a comfortable thought: but if past dispensations
of providence, excite such fears and apprehensions, we should be unwise to put
them from us, however unpleasant.

THE judgments of God are now abroad in the earth, and some of them have
already fallen upon the American States.

WHILE the most powerful nations of Europe are suffering the horrors of war,
and are made the instruments in providence of chastising each other, the
inhabitants of the principal Cities and Towns on this Continent are afflicted,
and many are consumed by a pestilential Epidemic.

THE Capitol of the United States, which a few weeks ago, was full of people,
-- the seat of government, -- the resort of strangers who visit our country, --
the abode of the industrious and of the rich, is now a city, almost left
solitary.

THY Pestilence has marked its way, with awful destruction: many have fallen
before it. To escape its malignant breath, multitudes have fled. Men, women and
children to the number of fifty thousand, it is said, have left their houses
and their occupations, and sought protection in towns and villages where they
had reason to hope, there was no infection. It is not possible for us to
conceive of their afflictions and sufferings. We pray God to remove the stroke
of his hand: to have compassion on his people: to heal and comfort them.

NOR is Philadelphia the only City which is distressed with the pestilential
disorder, which has put on so threatening an appearance in our country.
New York, New London, and several other Towns are suffering, in a greater or
less degree, the same calamity.

BOSTON has not escaped. -- We had pleased ourselves too much, with the idea,
that our northern situation, and healthful climate (under Providence) would
have been our protection. We find ourselves mistaken. The wasting disorder has
already carried off a considerable number of our inhabitants. Our young men
have fallen before it: Nor have gray hairs been a defense. Parents have been
taken from children, and children from parents: The tenderest connections have
been suddenly broken up and dissolved.

THIS new disorder, which has in many instances attacked with violence, and
hurried our friends and neighbors out of the world, has produced a serious
alarm. -- Look at many of our streets, and to the storehouses, which have been
usually full of merchandise, and of business, and your eye will affect your
heart.

ALTHOUGH the number which has fallen by the pestilential Epidemic is small,
compared with the returns which have been made of the dead in Philadelphia and
New York, it is however enough to excite our apprehensions; and ought to awaken
within us very serious meditations. By collecting the returns which have been
made by the Sextons, and the accounts which have been published by Order of the
Selectmen of the Town, I find 1^^ have died of the prevailing Epidemic, from
the 21st of June, when it first appeared, and the ^th of October, -- the time
at which this Discourse was published, i. e. 118 in 8^ days.


WHEN suffering other calamities, such as have been occasioned by wars and
civil commotions, we have been accustomed to cast the blame on some of our
fellow creatures: But when the Pestilence which walks in darkness, comes to
our houses, we are silent. We bow, and acknowledge the hand of God.

BUT we find support in trouble, when we consider, He who holds the winds, and
directs the clouds where they shall drop the rain, has the Pestilence and all
diseases which afflict mankind, under his absolute control. Let us therefore
make him our fear, and there will be nothing that we shall have need to dread.

LET us pour out our souls before him and say -- Spare us O Lord, we beseech
thee; O spare thy people, and bless thine inheritance. Remove thy stroke away
from us, and consume us not in thine anger. Then will we praise thee for the
health of our countenance. We will offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving for ever
and ever.

AMEN
APPENDIX.
With the hope of doing good, a few thoughts are offered on the causes of
Contagion, and Pestilential Diseases, and the means of guarding against them.

CONTAGION is propagated by three causes, The air, diseased persons, and goods
transported from infected places. Dr. Richard Mead,


IT is the first cause, which at the present time, engages our particular
attention. As we have no reason to suppose the seeds of the Epidemic, which has
given us so much distress, were imported, it is generally agreed, the cause is
in the air.

WE are therefore naturally led to inquire, what is there in the air we
breathe, which may be considered as the cause of contagion and pestilential
disease?

THE researches of the philosophers and chemists of the present age, will help
us, perhaps, to an answer.

NEARLY three quarters of the elastic fluids which compose the inferior stratum
of air which we inhabit, Lavoisier Elements of Chemistry.

Fourcroy Elements of Chemistry.


are noxious, and incapable of supporting life. It is by the presence of the
other quarter, that health and life are preserved.

THE vital, or life-supporting part of the air, in the modern language of
chemists, is called oxygen: the other parts, azote.

THE azote, or "mephitic part of atmospheric air," consists of vapors from
mud, marshes, stagnant waters, fermenting and putrefying substances of all
kinds; together with the air which has suffered the destruction of its vital
part by passing the lungs of all the living creatures, and by supporting all
the fires which are burning in all parts of the world.

A redundancy of the non-respirable part of air now mentioned, may be a cause
sufficient to produce pestilential disorders of the worst kind.

LONG continued heat without winds and storms, will produce such a redundancy.
Long continued heat will not only produce noxious vapors, but by rarefying the
atmosphere near the earth, it will so lessen the pressure, as to suffer those
vapors to rise high enough to be received into our lungs -- some of those
vapors are so much heavier than the common air, in a temperate state of the
atmosphere, as to creep along just above the surface of the earth, and settle
down in valleys and low grounds. In the Grotto del Cano, the noxious air will
kill the dog, who carries his nose near the ground, while a man, erect,
receives no injury.

BUT if the cause of the most fatal pestilential diseases is to be found in the
air, how shall we guard against them? We cannot prevent the heat. We have no
command over the winds. The changes of the weather are, in no degree under our
control. -- We can however remove many of those substances, which in hot
weather, send forth poisonous effluvia. We can keep our streets clean. We can
fill up or cleanse those docks and slips which receive, and which expose the
most filthy substances, when the water retires. We can bury, or sink in the
sea, those things which would offend and injure us, if left above ground.

WE can, from exhaustless springs on our own peninsula, or from fountains in
the vicinity, we can, every day, through the summer, send refreshing streams,
from elevated situations to all the lower parts of the town.

WE can plant trees on every vacant spot, which will repay us, not only by
their beautiful appearance, but by drinking up the azotic gas, and breathing,
from their leaves, the purest air.

WE can keep ourselves clean: We can keep our houses, and particularly our
lodging-chambers clean: We can refrain from full meals of animal food, and from
inebriating liquors: We can do many things to guard against contagious and
pestilential diseases: And when we have done all in our power, we may trust the
providence of God, with an easy mind.


