AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED ON THE Twenty-Second Anniversary OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE, BEFORE THE CITIZENS OF NORWICH.

By JAMES LANMAN, Esquire

Our independence is the general property of the citizen; not to defend is to
relinquish; -- And who is so senseless as to renounce his share in a common
benefit, unless he hopes to profit by a new division of the spoil?

NORWICH: PRINTED BY THOMAS HUBBARD, JULY 5, 1798.

You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together; the independence and
liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint efforts, of
common dangers, sufferings and successes.

Washington's farewell Address. AN ORATION.
WHEN a great nation, impatient of the slow progress of its infancy, or
indignant at the oppressive arm of power, imposing restraints on its natural
rights, rises to rank itself, among the empires of the world; an object is
exhibited to mankind, worthy its admiration and applause. In such a scene, the
good find scope for the anticipations of benevolence, while the great exult in
the hope, of spreading a field of glory, wide, and rich with the deeds of
ambition. The day we commemorate ushered into birth, a glorious event. One,
which animated, not only the sage philosopher, and the enterprising statesman,
but which spread a jubilee of joy, as far as civilization and science had
announced its existence, or furnished the means of appreciating its value. It
was seen, how fruitless were the mild obedience of virtuous citizens, and the
firm fidelity of the children of freedom, to quell the passion for power, which
prompted the claims made upon our country. How fruitless the love of peace and
industrious tranquillity, to check and control the pride of usurpation. In
exchange for the birthright of our forefathers and their latest posterity, in
their own native land, where nature invited a receipt of her choicest
productions, and held happiness out, as the sure reward of industry and virtue,
were offered, unconditional servitude or death. It would not have been
wonderful, if the hopeless prospect from opposition, joined with that love of
peace which is the offspring of industry, had yielded, to an ancient powerful
and imperious nation, a bloodless victory over the future millions of our
countrymen. The impudence of power is too often triumphant, while the meekness
of honest merit, surrenders at discretion a force, which resistance would have
rendered respectable. But it was not for those whose ancestors had fled for
freedom to the deep recesses of an American wilderness, to balance in such an
alternative. Poor in the manufactured means of hostility; untaught in the wiles
and artifices, which warlike experience furnishes; though strong in that
spirit, which springs from a deep sense of injury, the bloody banner was
unfurled by America. Persuaded she could not mistake the designs of her
unnatural parent, the bravely unmasked her resolution. On this day disrobed
herself forever of the allegiance she had borne, and asserted her independence.
On this day my fellow citizens, (...) commemorate a period, when our people
were armed in the land of their nativity, not for conquest of riches or
territory, nor the glaring glitter of military glory; but to defend their own
altars, and the tombs of the dead, against an unprovoked aggressor. The
gauntlet was taken up. The sword left its scabbard. A thick cloud rose, and
spread over our country, for seven long years it is sombre shade. All Europe
waited with anxious expectation, on the portentous event. The time would fail
me to recount the distressing scenes which attended this period. Painful would
be the task, to replunge into the bosom of the father, a recollection of the
dagger, which pierced the bleeding vitals of his only son. How often has he wept
at his memory! How severe has been the conflict in his breast, between the fire
of patriotism, and the tender stream of parental affliction! Do our villages
wrapped in flames, or our cities in the dust, require a record to perpetuate
their remembrance! Will not the stones of Valley-Forge, red from the bare and
bleeding feet of our marching regiments, be more lasting memorials, than even
the faithful page of history itself! How many mothers still pine with anguish,
while memory paints the famine which reduced their infant offspring! How many
wives still mourn the partners of their youth, who fell the virtuous victims to
their country's cause! How many and dreadful are the events which crowd on the
imagination, from the first blood which bedewed the plain at Lexington, to the
brilliant triumph at York Town and Gloucester! These were the rich price of our
national independence. Such the sufferings which purchased our freedom.
Scarcely recovered from the struggles, with which the revolution convulsed us,
behold another storm lowers in fury over our devoted heads! In a day which
tried men's souls, France was once our friend. Whether excited by the rival
jealousy incident to neighboring nations; her ancient resentment against
Britain; or a more generous motive, it is not necessary to decide. She smoothed
the rugged walk of war. She divided with us, the dread burden of martial
service. How painful is it to the mind, to contrast this view, with our present
relation to that powerful empire. Animated with a passion for liberty which she
caught in our revolution, we have seen her rise indignant against the despotism
which enslaved her; raze the Bastile, at whose sight Liberty herself trembled;
dash from his throne the monarch she adored; and exterminate at a stroke the
royal blood. We have seen constitution piled upon constitution, revolutions,
counter revolutions, massacres and proscriptions, banishment and
assassinations, blended in one dreadful mass of undistinguished horror. By an
unnatural perversion of the order of Justice, conviction preceding trial; and
death itself inflicted on the innocent by the guilty, without even the solemn
mockery of arraignment. The tender ties of domestic life given to the wind.
Private virtue abandoned as hypocrisy, and fit only to amuse the weak. Religion
itself made a crime. And the sacred (...) of its worship, robbed, to decorate
scenes of most profligate paganism.

These things are on long record. Though it is hoped for the honor of humanity,
that virtuous posterity will hardly credit the monstrous detail. Inflated with
wild ideas of liberty, and conscious of great internal strength, through the
reciprocal aids of intrigue and force, France has imposed on most of its
neighbors, involuntary freedom. At once the most polished and populous country
in Europe, what government has escaped the shocks of its fraud or its force!
What people remain unimpressed, with a sentiment of its design, to make its
dominion broad as the earth, and extensive as the ocean. Were cases demanded of
its unsolicited benevolence, its inhuman tenderness, its fraternal tyranny; how
easy might be named the Batavian Republic, Geneva, Venice, Genoa, and
Switzerland! A country hitherto dear to America, from a sympathy excited by a
similarity in its fortunes! Dear too, as the strongest asylum of European
freedom. How ardently was it hoped, that when expelled from the plains, the
strong holds and fastnesses of thy mountains, would have lent her a lasting
retreat! These countries, and others which might be named, have laid aside
their sovereignty, and on the bended knees of submission, accepted a tenancy at
will, from the mercy of France. But why look abroad for testimonies of her
haughtiness and violence? What wave of the Atlantic is not a swift witness, of
her illegal capture of our vessels, and spoliation of our trade! What harbor on
our coast, whose languishing commerce, does not mourn for injuries which she
has inflicted! What goal in our country, does not contain some wretched
bankrupt, an innocent victim of the perfidy of France! And do we merit this, on
terms of national faith and justice? A stroke of the eye, at the conduct of our
people and government, will readily evince.

When the European world became convulsed, by the engagement of France in the
cause of reforming her government; and the avowal of principles which were
unfriendly to its royal cabinets; it was easy to be perceived, that a coalition
would form against her. That neutrality and inaction against her, would be
deemed treason against mankind. The first republican minister therefore who
visited these western shores, (...) to our government, both his wishes and
sentiments on the attitude it should (...) Accustomed to view in France the
friend of our country, and the guardian angel of our independence, an interest
was felt in her fortunes, unusual to nations in amity. Though it was an event
of great hazard, a neutral stand was taken. And the American Executive
accredited with open aims the agent of the new Republic. Taught by experience
the numerous necessities which wait on a revolution, what heave was not exerted
to anticipate (to the republic) the debt due to France, as a means of her
relief! Our rich granaries and stalls were poured into her ports, to feed her
famishing armies. The starving exiles of her islands, hunted from their homes,
were fattened on our national bounty. Fidelity to our engagements with France,
has in every act of administration appeared dear to the heart of the Executive.
This fidelity, in his instructions to ministers abroad, he has charged them
never to impair. Nor has it ever been held secondary to any national object,
however great or alluring. Have the people of these states been forgetful of
the duties which cordiality and confidence inspire! Witness the peals of
general joy, which rang on the arrival of the first ambassador from the
Republic. Witness the silent patience with which they have borne the delay, to
satisfy their immense and uncontested claims upon the government of France.
These are the considerations, in violation of which, she still requites us,
with outrage, calumny and contempt. Spurns from her threshhold, the successive
ministers of reconciliation, and tramples under feet the pacific messages of
explanation and esteem. Were she in our condition, what conduct might have been
expected from her? It is deemed needless to describe the energy of resentment,
with which she would have met such accumulated insults.

Faithful to the trust reposed in them by their fellow citizens, steady in view
of those obligations, which humanity and justice impose on every nation; behold
the wisdom and vigilance of our councils! With what solemn zeal, have they
pursued an adjustment of the existing difference with France! How long, and how
patiently have their ministers besieged the cabinet of Paris! How painful the
neglect, how degrading the contempt, which has persecuted their respectable
mission.

But my friends, there is a point at which forbearance should cease, and
importunity becomes criminal. Thither we are arrived. The Rubicon is now behind
us. It is not for me to prescribe to others opinions on facts. But when it is
perceived, that every act of sovereignty in our government gives offense to
France, the strongest circumstances urge on the mind a belief, that our
Independence is obnoxious to her. And that nothing short of its dereliction,
will satiate her rapacious ambition. The Executive chair, is not filled by the
candidate of her choice. The sentiments held in his official communications,
are not such as she would have prompted. Our Envoys Extraordinary bore
characters different from those of her election. But even with these she would
in her clemency have condescended to treat, provided (like ten tenants who bear
rent to their landlord) they had offered the tribute of millions as the price
of an audience. A sovereign free and independent people are told, "You have
^^red in a surreptitious and secr^^ manner, to negotiate a treaty with a
foreign nation, without the privity and consultation of the French cabinet." It
was done without leave! Without a sovereign right for the purpose, and it shall
not be operative. -- The SINE QUA NON of all her hopes and measures toward this
country, is, the pepper corn of acknowledgment. In whatever drapery she may
clothe her complaints, with whatever sophistry conceal her pretensions; every
other consideration with her is at present of minor importance, compared with
that of humbling our dignity, to yield her a power, paramount our own.

If we do not mistake her designs. If in this transient glance on the relations
of our country, we see plainly, that France has assigned to us a place, in her
chart of the reduction and division of empires. If she has matured her measures
to dismember Ameriica. If she has aided our advancement to independence and
glory, in order more effectually, to dash us to the dust. What then is our
duty? Where is the inheritance for which our ancestors contended, and which is
endeared to the sons, by the blood of their fathers! Poor is the consolation of
a choice of tyrants. It was not to become the Helotes and vassals of a new
master, claiming a right of imparting liberty to mankind, that Americans have
burst the chains of foreign bondage. Remember my friends, this inheritance is
sacred. Forget not the rich price of its purchase. Your honor, your fortunes,
your lives, and all that is dear to you, by a solemn appeal to heaven, on the
day we celebrate, were once for all, pledged for its guarantee. Unborn
posterity will demand it at your hands, unimpaired, by the ravages of
usurpation. In its defense, the sleeping heroes who poured the vital stream, to
secure it, will from the earth where they fell, inspire the soul to duty and to
glory. -- Remember -- The VENERABLE WARRIOR OF MOUNT VERNON, whose sword long
drawn in his country's service, is now hung in his hall. Frequent he reviews
its deeds, and the lambent flame of glory which still hangs on its point. He
still beholds the embattled plains where its victories laureled his temples.
And when the nerves of his arm shall be unstrung by age, the ancient patriot
will often cast his eye upon the faithful weapon, while the purple tide of ebb in
his bosom, glows with reverend rage at the wrongs of his insulted country.
Reflect on his services, his character, his counsel, and his solemn legacy to
mankind, when the curtain was closed on the last scene of his public labors.
Their recollection, will be an antidote, to cheer the heart, and rouse the
desponding spirit. Note. Since the above was written, General Washington has
been appointed to be Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief, of the armies
of the United States. Real patriotism will again assemble around his standard,
the Yeomanry of our country* where courage, confidence, patience and fidelity
will ensure them a meed of immortal fame, with the DEFENDER OF AMERICA.


Having long since counted the cost of submission, it is found, that no
computation can equal its evils. To yield tamely to unjust demands, or to
compound with a foreign power for one half of our rights, is at the same time
to merit and endure, the fate of slaves. This I trust is a fate, which will
never be assigned to America. Death in all its horrors, is clad in birthday
robes, compared with slavery. Let every friend to his country, rally around its
standard. Let its virtuous, firm, and independent administration, while it
diffuses happiness at home, be the strong buckler to guard us against our foes
abroad. Let our confidence in its integrity, inkindle daily as danger
approximates. Sanction the laws by an obedience, equally prompt and cordial.
Discountenance a spirit of disunion, that spirit which is an element of
perdition. Let us guard our own rights, by soundly informing ourselves, in what
they consist, and protecting the government in securing them to us. Discourage
those who calumniate and revile the legal authorities. Teach them, with the
energy of a soul devoted to its country, that the speculative errors of our own
government, (if such existed) have no relation to the outrages of France.
Fraught with danger from without, the present crisis is ill adapted to the
criticisms of extreme jealousy of our government. Such things, embolden and
multiply those enemies which lurk in the vitals of America. Bear on the mind,
that the successes of France in Europe, have been uniformly composed of force,
cooperating with her own treasonable arts and address among her foes.

Unhappily we have much reason to fear, this favorite system, is in progress
even in our own country. Where it reflects light on the purposes she
contemplates, while it paves the way to facilitate their completion. Oppose to
it, virtue, vigilance, decision and fidelity. These will exterminate from among
us, this sore and distressing enemy which rankles at the heart; and learn that
insidious nation, that it is not among this enlightened people, she will find
the means to dupe them into their own destruction. Thus, being united in
sentiment and interest, we shall acquire under God, the control of our own
fortunes, and none shall make us afraid. Then,

" Blow ye winds,"
" Ye waves! ye thunders roll your tempest on!"
" Shake, ye old pillows of the marble sky!"
" Till all its orbs, and all its worlds of fire,"
" Be loosened from their seats; yet still serene,"
We'd look "unconquered down upon the wreck,"
" And ever stronger as the storms advance,"
" Firm through the closing ruin hold our way,"
And bid the "fathers of our country, hail"
The glorious day, which saw Columbia FREE.
FINIS.

