AN ANSWER TO Paine's Letter TO GENERAL WASHINGTON: INCLUDING Some Pages of
Gratuitous Counsel TO Mr. Erskine.

Impius, ingratusque, audax, scelerumque magister. By P. KENNEDY, Esquire.

PHILADELPHIA: Re-published by William Cobbett, opposite Christ-Church. Jan.
1798.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS pamphlet was published in London about four months ago. The infamous
Letter of Pain seems to have produced, in Great Britain, that degree of
indignation and abhorrence, which the complicated crime of calumny,
ingratitude, and perfidy, is calculated to excite in every just and generous
mind. This sentiment of the British public, MR. KENNEDY has most forcibly
expressed. He has traced the malignant traitor through the labyrinth of his
nefarious career, from the first to the last of his publications: he has
brought forward many facts not generally known; has proved Pain to have been a
hireling of France, from the close of the American revolution; and has
exhibited, in glaring colors, his abominable ingratitude to GENERAL
WASHINGTON, whose character, if it stood in need of defense, has here sound a
zealous and able defender.

It must be a pleasure to every good man, and particularly to every good
American, to see that all men of talents, honor and honesty, even in foreign
countries, feel themselves interested in preserving untarnished, the same of
the MAN who is the pride of America; and, proportioned to this pleasure, must
be the pain, the shame, and the confusion of his unprincipled and viperous
enemies.

P. P.

AN ANSWER TO TOM PAINE's LETTER TO GENERAL WASHINGTON.
AMID the convulsions, which have for some years unhappily agitated the
European world -- Amid the horrors of a Revolution, founded on animosities,
hatreds, massacres, and blood, in which the human character has been exhibited
in all its deformity, no man has labored more unceasingly to unhinge the links
of social order -- and to overturn Religion, Morality and Government, than the
enthusiastic, the depraved, the ungrateful Tom Pain. --

Having developed the inveterate malice, the subtle cruelty of his character in
a series of wild discussions and dangerous theories, all tending to the
overthrow of general prosperity and individual happiness in every country, he
has now consummated his guilt, and given the most evident proofs of the
foulness of his heart, by sacrificing the last little remnant of imputed
patriotism, to a faithless and cowardly attack on his early benefactor and
friend.

We are not surprised, because we discover plainly the immediate cause of the
violent change that has dictated the declarations of discontent, and threats of
hostility, which continue to fill the columns of the French Journals, against
the firm and prudent conduct of the American Congress, aided by their
respectable President. -- It is the business of the designing, ill-intentioned,
ambitious leaders of faction in France, under the cloak of liberty, to practice
all the arts of calumny, to mislead the people, and hurry them into the wildest
measures. That Tom Pain should seize with avidity and with an activity,
unfortunately in him combined with a most malignant disposition, every channel
of invective, and abuse and injury against the British Government, we cannot
wonder at. -- But that he should add to the black catalogue of his crimes, that
of deep ingratitude, by aiming to stab the same, to murder the character of the
man that cherished his political infancy, and brought him forward into public
life, proves that the assumed garb of modern philosophy is but a safer covering
for the dagger of the assassin. An enemy of Britain by principles of rebellion,
by habits of abuse, by circumstances of political elevation and private
interest, we have seen him direct the whole force of his imposing talents, the
specious trick of smooth phraseology, the cant of popular prejudices, to
discolor, to traduce, the established forms of government and to overthrow the
constitution of those kingdoms. -- But in his last performance, he far out-does
his usual out-doings -- he out-strips depravity -- and high o'er-leaping
overleaps all bounds, -- faithful to his avowed principles of anarchy and
commotion, he boldly soars to the last and greatest of crimes, ingratitude, and
arraigns the illustrious Washington for his persevering and virtuous attachment
to the order, the prosperity of the American States.

In the phrenzy of Gallic zeal, he forgets that he fell a victim in his turn to
the fury of faction; and that in despite of his labors for a series of years
in the cause of revolutionary government, he was consigned to a dungeon; and
eventually rescued from the guillotine, which carried off his fellow-actors on
the great revolutionary theater, after strutting their hour on the bloody
stage, only by the generous interference of those peaceful and humane
Americans, whom he now loads with reproach and obloquy, because they will not
sacrifice individual virtue, and rational wisdom, to the insolent dictation of
French partisans, and domestic anarchists.

One would have thought that the situation of distress and suffering, into
which Pain was hurried, among the other revolutionary heroes of his day, and
his narrow escape from the gripe of the guillotine, should have checked the
cacoethos scribendi, and awed him from meddling further in political affairs.
But it seems that confinement tended only to sharpen the edge of calumny, and
to point more keenly the shafts of slander against all that men are taught to
respect in society -- Morality and Religion. The moment of his deliverance from
prison, was like the opening of Pandora's box, marked by the issuing forth of a
more pestilential vapor than what he had before sent into the world. Religion,
that great cement and bond of public order -- the gracious harbinger of peace
and happiness to mankind, became the object of his scurrillity and ridicule.
Maxims, arrayed in all the false colorings and tinsel glare of subtle
attraction, were propagated and diligently spread abroad, to catch the
prejudices of the unthinking and ignorant, as well as to gratify the conceits
and vanity of the dissolute and profane.

Happily, in this bloated publication, his views have failed; his itch of
scribbling, his mania of innovation, outran discretion; and the most zealous
advocates after reform, the most furious zealots for his Rights of Man, were
sorely chagrined, vexed, disgusted, and irritated, that he should so soon
discover the latitude of their intentions, and expose a system, menacing with
absolute destruction, the true basis of liberty and good government. They
confessed that Mr. Pain mistook the British character, when he ushered in,
with all the pomp of labored talent and detailed subtlety, those atheistical
tenets which make the Christian revolt from the book and from the man, with
honest indignation: The political reformers, who looked upon him before as
their surest champion, felt how much the public opinion would instantly turn
against the author of those atrocious systems which fill the humane and
Christian heart with terror and dismay.

Every man attached to the Christian dispensation saw clearly that there was
some latent design, some secret purpose, some soul intention of public
mischief, in an open attack upon religion; because every thinking man is fully
convinced that an attempt to overthrow religious principles, evinces a
disposition hostile to all restraints of law and social order, and inimical to
that salutary doctrine, which inculcates peace on earth, and good will among
men.

Mr. Pain, in the full career of vanity, and elated by the support his former
ostentatious productions had met with, from the agitators of sedition, proudly
imagined that public opinion would be always at his command; that a people
deluded for a while by the sophistry, the specious embellishments of fantastic
novelty, and prepared by the intrigue of itinerant declaimers and active
partisans, would embrace, with ardour, any system promulgated by him, however
inconsistent or diseased. -- He flattered himself that the momentary celebrity
of the Rights of Man, would establish his Age of Reason; and the name of Tom
Pain triumph over the mild doctrines of the Christian dispensation.

In his strenuous efforts to promote irreligion and immorality, and to
inculcate a contempt of the most sacred obligations, he takes care to call up
the prejudices of the vulgar, by levelling the artillery of his slander against
the Clergy: Judging with acute cunning, that to relax and undermine the
observances and ties of religion, the best method is to begin by lessening that
awe and respect, which we ought to ^^tertain for a body of men, who are
paticularly appointed to instruct us in the ways of true piety and virtue, and
who, in general, deserve from us the utmost regard.

It is to be lamented, that men often pervert talents to the worst of purposes
--

Ingeniis male usi --
et facundi malo publico.
LIVY. They labor to darken and corrupt the minds of others, with unremitting
earnestness; they seduce the multitude to their views by shattering their
passions -- by dressing up falsehood in the colors of truth, and vice in the
garb of virtue. The wise and good may look with contempt and indignation on the
endeavors of such men; but, unhappily, they are too apt to gain credit and
estimation with the greater number.

Happily for mankind, the Age of Reason became the antidote to the poison of
the Rights of Man. Paine's most zealous advocates were covered with shame and
mortification at the total disregard of religious character and public opinion,
in their favorite hero of liberty. -- The democratic scribes were obliged to
abandon his defense for the time, and even to confess the folly, the wickedness
of his attack upon religion. -- While, on the other hand, all men of sober
reflection saw in that publication the extreme licentionsness over attendant on
the extreme freedom of the press; where opinions are hazarded, and doctrines
introduced, subversive of all those relative duties, which unite Men in Society.

It is a maxim, founded on truth, that Religion is the firmest foundation of
honor and true happiness in every state; and the most permanent pillar and
strongest support in every form of government. A cursory view of the annals of
former ages will sufficiently convince us, that every State and Kingdom
flourished or decayed, were happy or convulsed, in proportion as they were more
or less religious. The reason is plain. Individuals will certainly be punished
or rewarded in another life according to their actions here -- but public
communities and states, as such, can only be rewarded or punished in this
world; and, therefore, national wickedness must ever expect public and national
punishment.

This should be a lesson to all who are placed in high stations, and fill the
feat of power, to exhibit the brightest examples of truth and justice, of
honor and religion. The examples of the great will induce more to tread the
paths of virtue than the instructions of the most eloquent preacher, or the
most finished essays of the finest writer.

In our own most gracious Sovereign, and in his Royal Confort, we behold bright
cramples of moral excellence and virtuous life. We glory in a monarch whose
sole aim and study is to establish law and religion, in their full and
offential force, against a tide of innovadon and danger to public happiness.
And surely, we may truly pronounce that for such gracious purposes, "the powers
that be, are ordained of God." -- When power and virtue are thus united for the
public good, what can be more just and beneficial?

The conduct, the speeches, the letters of General Washington, have ever
manifested a strong sense of religion and virtue. -- That great Man has ever
evinced his conviction of this truth -- viz.

We may pain the beauties of virtue and religion in the most alluring colors;
but it is example alone that must prevail over the multitude, and teach the
ignorant and thoughtless, wisdom. We must practically adore our Creator, love
our fellow creatures, and obey the dictates of conscience, that faithful
monitor, placed by Omnipotence in the human breast. We profess Christianity --
because in it we find every precept necessary to raise and elevate human nature
to perfection; and, at the same time, the pleasing assurance of an atonement
and propitiation for the transgressions and imperfections of the human race.
The more this religion is examined, the more we are convinced of its divine
original: Time, the unerring touchstone of truth, confirms its verity and
proclaims its power.

If there is any foundation in the above observations,

"And that there is, all Nature speaks aloud" -- How dreadful must be the
terrors of Tom Pain, if conscience is ever awakened in such breasts? How
fearful the representation of the wide and horrible waste, which his guilty
mind would spread among mankind -- as the immediate consequence of his infernal
Gallic creed -- Death is an eternal sleep.

While we reprobate and detest the impious systems promulgated in the Age of
Reason; while we consign to merited contempt its daring author, we must not
omit paying the just tribute of acknowledgement to the abilities of a prelate,
who has (...) well deserved of mankind by his clear argumentative and highly
impressive refutation of the impious doctrines of the maniac Pain. With great
perspicuity, precision, and an eminent display of learning, the right reverend
divine improves the understanding of the reader, corrects the aberrations of
disordered imagination, and in the most convincing manner unfolds the sacred
truths of the Christian Dispensation. With an even flow of strong reasoning and
good humor, he tempers severity of reprehension, by an animated earnestness to
recall the Atheist from the impiety of his ways; and leads the reader smiling
and pleased over the rocks and sands of irreligion, into the paths of
knowledge, virtue, law and government.

But to return to the immediate subject of his letter. Mr. Pain, with the
usual good intention toward the British government and British administration,
recurs in many pages to his old habits of abuse of our constitution -- he
vomits up his gall on that subject with drunken It is a matter of fact, that
for many months past, Tom Pain has totally given himself up to habits of
drunkenness and blasphemy -- like all lawless and profligate spirits, to blunt
the avenging stings of remorse, he has delivered himself over to strong
libations of pure cogniac, and is daily plunged in intoxication and stupor --
Such is ever the end of the dissolute and wicked scoffers of God and his holy
laws.
eructation, and gives us large doses of his former libellous animadversions on
our happy combination of king, lords, and commons -- while writing professedly
to General Washington, he allows himself to be transported into a long strain
of invective, and re-asserts, with his usual vehemence of aggravating style,
that every thing is slavery which restrains men in any part of their freedom:
but we see, by too near an instance, what is to be gained by this doctrine --
by an intemperate uncontrollable lust of dominion, the French have depopulated
their own once-fertile and happy provinces, spread devastation over the
neighboring countries; and their present attempts aim to impart to our
prosperous country the fraternizing law of desolation and massacre. Nor does
the melancholy experience they have had in attempting an invasion of Ireland,
deter them from holding out similar threats against the shores of Britain,
throughout our whole line of coast.

May I ask, what are the causes that thus give the temptation to our furious
Gallic neighbors to attempt to destroy us? -- It is in them then a vile
jealousy of our national prosperity, of our domestic comforts, of our
commercial enterprise, of our constitution, and of our laws. Without a
regulated system of government, men cannot enjoy what belongs to each in
particular; nor can a nation be secure, or preserve itself in general. While
subjects live in a competent share of freedom, it is surely unnatural to have
public harmony and symmetry of law interrupted by means that were originally
made use of to attain it. In despite of the maledictory comments of maddened
Pain, while our cities are populous, thriving and great, our commerce
extensive and flourishing, our constitution envied and admired, I am not
ashamed to own my low-spirited frailty in preferring such a model of government
as affords reasonable enjoyment to a free people, before that by which empire
is to be founded at home in blood, and extended abroad by a profusion of
millions of lives.

Besides, however, men may differ on various political questions, there is an
argument in this case which precludes any answer -- it is this -- we could not
subsist under the despotism of one, or the tyranny of many. As a great writer
observes, we are to consider that we are a very little spot in the map of the
world, and make a very great figure only by trade, which is the creature of
liberty. One destroyed, the other falls to the ground by a natural consequence
that will not admit a dispute.

If we would be measured solely by our acres, we are a poor inconsiderable
people: we are exalted above our natural bounds by our good government and
excellent laws.

We should be no more a people, nor could England longer keep its name,
commerce and wealth, from the moment that the revolutionary movements of
innovation and anarchy took place. The vital strength that supports us being
withdrawn, we should be no more than the carcass of a nation, with no better
security than that of pillage and murder: and subsisting upon no other terms
than the unbridled ferocity of successive factions, alternately rioting in
blood. In the judgment, therefore, of moderate men, there is such a short
decision to be made on this subject, that in relation to those kingdoms, and
the same will hold good of the American States, any reform of Gallic complexion
is as dangerous a thing to be wished, as I hope is will be impossible to be
attained -- England is the natural ally of America.

The animosities of the American revolution having long since subsided, and
melted into a current of philanthropy, mutual good will and commercial
intercourse; the bon^^ of old attachment, I will say, of old relationship
living happily renovated by the late commercial treaty, and cemented by
community of manners, of industry, of language, of good faith; it is no wonder
that the heart of envy is embittered, and the demon of discord conjured up by a
foul factor of sedition whom no country will acknowledge, protect, or cherish.

The rattlesnake, compared with Tom Pain, is an innocent animal. The
rattlesnake will bask in sunshine of its native fields -- spread its voluminous
body out at length to the genial heat -- and man, woman and child may pass
uninjured by. It is only when trodden upon or attacked by scythe, sickle or
stick, that it is roused to rage, to coil up its variety of folds, to hiss
horror, and sound its multitudinuous rattles, and to prepare for defense, in
consequence of offense -- the bite is poison, the poison is death. Follow up
the comparison.

Tom Pain is a pest in society. His first political efforts were directed
against the country that gave him birth. With more acrimony of invective, with
more eagerness of fiery zeal than the public men in America approved, he
attacked the monarchy, the constitution of England; and reviled the prudent
caution of those states, that wished to open a channel of accommodation and
reconciliation with Britain, before a formal and final separation was
proclaimed. After the declaration of independence, I forbear to comment on his
writings; he avowed himself a renegado from British government, and boasted his
citizenship in America. But why, after the peace; why, after a full
acknowledgment of the independence of America -- after a commencement was made
of mutual confidence, harmony, and commerce, why still cherish a latent poison,
an unforgiving enmity toward the country that gave him birth? Nay, more; why
relinquish the adopted soil of liberty, and return to Europe to disturb the
peace, the government of a country he had abjured? Why sit down, in sullen
silent disaffection, to spread his pestilential vapors throughout Britain; and
to sap the foundation of all law, human and divine? Why continue the
destructive tenor of his evil ways, to point the dagger of malevolence at the
breast of his former patron, benefactor, and friend, and aim to wound the
unsullied, unruffled bosom of a Washington? After these short observations,
look to the rattlesnake, look to Tom Pain -- which is the more dangerous, the
more destructive animal?

Here I beg leave to call the reader's attention to a circumstance that tends
strongly to elucidate and explain this settled, subtle, enthusiastic rancour in
this man-snake, against general Washington, and the other elevated characters
of America, against whom he largely deals out his frothy pages of abuse. It Is a
circumstance not known in Europe, perhaps forgotten in America along with the
individual, but not the less true, nor, at this time, less worthy of
elucidation. I appeal to the recollection of the American gentlemen now in
London; I appeal to the people of Philadelphia, and New York, who particularly
witnessed the transaction; I appeal to Tom Pain himself; because the
retrospect must harrow up his soul to a horrific sense of his restless,
unceasing animosity, to all that is British, to all that borders on moderation,
loyalty, humanity, and honor.

After the ratification of the treaty of independence and peace with America;
after the evacuation of the American States by the British troops, in the lapse
of a few months, the memory of the past disasters and calamities of war began
to soften down. Men of the first abilities, both in the American field and in
the American cabinet, soon descried the crooked policy, the haughty intent of
France, by a magisterial boast of their aid and consequence, to bow down the
American spirit to a servile dependence on French councils and French
friendship, by fettering the intercourse with Great Britain. For this purpose,
French adventurers poured in on all quarters: Tom Pain was employed by French
agents to brandish his goosequill, in order to cherish the memory of past
scenes of battle and devastation, and to plant an incurable hatred between the
two countries. With his usual alacrity in the cause of discord and disunion,
this dark conspirator against the peace of mankind, began his virulent attacks
in the public papers, under an old Roman name: obstinate and vain of his pen,
he began by loading with foul reproach of dangerous designs, those who had
remained at their homes, and who were supposed to be attached, during the war,
to the British cause. He secretly set forward the violent partisans of the
French faction in the great cities, to mortify, by sarcastic sheers on every
occasion, those supposed royalists and their advocates. At length, he openly
accused (...) bring America back (...) the yoke of Britain, and paving the way
for the introduction of the whole of the American royalists from Britain and
other countries, to invalidate and subvert the revolution, the labor of so
many years, and of so arduous a contest: nay, such was the depravity of his
character and writings, that he openly promulgated the doctrine, the necessity
of further persecution and proscription; and, insisted, that all who had been
aiding or assisting to the British troops with money or provisions, should be
banished, and their property confiscated Paine's vanity and self sufficiency as
a scribe, and his bad heart as a man, had been long known to many, and
suspected almost by all: but still the mild forgiving temper of the generous
Washington, was slow to believe the worst. Now, indeed, he has the (...)
manifest before him.
Such publications were read, we may suppose, by the violent and the vulgar,
with avidity: but the wise, and the good, looked to the terms of the treaty of
peace, to the laws of national good faith, and inviolate honor, more
especially essential in the infancy of an independent empire.

But where was the man to be found to enter the lists against this popular
writer? It required a prudent skill to wield the pen at such a crisis; to
rescue, from reproach and prejudices, an industrious body of men, who had
remained quietly at their homes to escape the storm of war, -- to undertake the
cause of injured innocence, it required the most delicate expression, the most
benevolent exertion of philanthropy. That man appeared; and, under a Roman
signature, with manly firmness, but, in temperate language and sound argument,
controverted the violent invectives of Mr. Pain, rebutted the foul accusations
of intrigue and danger from British loyalists, or British intercourse; and, by
pointing out the community of commercial interests, showing the utility of an
extensive trade with British merchants, whose solid capitals, good faith, and
extensive manufactures, were the surest earnest of future and permanent
prosperity to young America, he gradually smoothed and harmonized the public
mind, and levelled to the ground the baseless fabric of prejudice and hatred,
conjured up by the emissaries of France -- with Tom Pain at their head.

The obstinate and vain partizan cannot bear the opposition of good sense,
sound policy, and fair reasoning. -- The selfish arrogance of the plebeian
scribe, was wounded by the respectability, the credit, the plain undeviating
arguments of a writer, who sought not a contest with Tom Pain; -- but with the
alacrity and zeal of an honest man and a steady politician, undertook the cause
of an injured, traduced people: and pleaded the triumph of America, in her
display of moderation, humanity and good faith. -- The reader, no doubt,
anticipates the consequences -- The irritated Pain launched out into oblique
hints and illusive personalities against his antagonist -- Soured by the decay
of credit to his vehement, long-winded periods, his personal allusions and
asperity daily increased. -- Losing both in public estimation and in private
friendship by the violence of his publications, and depravity of soul, his
essays sunk into a gloomy strain of disappoitment, cruelty and vexation, which
precluded reply -- all his labors to sow the the seeds, to open the sources of
national antipathy at the very dawn of American Independence, were frustrated
by the generous energy and trulypatriotic spirit of a man, who has since proved
himself well skilled in the arcana of government, the elements of finance, and
the true channels of commercial prosperity.

It is needless to mention the name of this great man -- the picture I have
drawn points him out sufficiently -- he served in the field by the side of
Washington -- He has lent his assisting hand and counsel to the virtuous
President of the States from the establishment of the present enviable
Constitution: and his labors to lead a young people by the (...) of rational
freedom and regulated systems, into the ways of tranquillity and wealth, will be
recorded in America in aftertimes, when the pernicious doctrines of Tom Pain
shall fill the soul with terror, and be execrated as the worst of monsters, for
the purpose of general anarchy and butchery among mankind.

The reader will naturally ask, what became of this celebrated champion of
anarchy? I will answer by a question -- what brought the demon of discord back
into Europe? The contempt he fell into, the total disregard and abhorrence
which he experienced among the circles of the great and good in America,
manifested his state of public degradation; the malevolence of his mind,
suggested the application of his talents to the embroiling the European
continent; and the inauspicious winds wafted him, alas! too safely, to our
shores, to sharpen the dagger of rebellion, and to try to plunge a nation of
freemen into a multitude of assassins.

May I here be allowed a few words on our relative condition.

When we contemplate our real situation, the fertility of our soil, the
constitution of our government, and the many other blessings peculiar to
ourselves, we have reason to thank Heaven that we were born in so happy a
country. But, unhappily, the restless mind of man always wanders abroad,
seeking some fanciful of distant scene of felicity, while the happiness in
possession is faintly enjoyed or lost in insensibility, or disquietude.

In despite of the high colorings, and false imposing luster of our modern
reformers, whose declamatory pages are hurried through the chemical laboratory
of multitudinous editions, to catch the gape, and stare of the vulgar, when we
sit down dispassionately to compare our condition with that of most other
countries of Europe, the comparison ought to insire us with gratitude to our
rulers, with fortitude and resolute union to meet the necessary burdens, for
the more firm enjoyment of domestic security and family comforts. In most parts
of France, and throughout the countries they have invaded, we see numerous
provinces groaning under the weight of French tyranny and oppression; and, as
an increase of revolutionary wretchedness, we behold the capital exposed to all
the calamities of latent conspiracies: -- We see the inhabitants of the
different great cities plundered by alternate depredators, or slaughtered with
wanton cruelty. Surely, to be free from all the various scenes of misery, which
render great part of the Continent a spectacle of woe and horror; -- to be
secure from the deplorable, melancholy, and affecting state of subjection and
pillage, which, at this moment, overwhelm the rich provinces of Italy, -- must
make a deep impression on our minds, and rouse us to utmost exertion, to
cooperate by the free tender of our lives and fortunes, to avert similar
dangers from our shores. Why is it, then, that we still find among us
individuals, who, witnessing those dreadful convulsions, and all the rage of
civil discord and commotion abroad, seem, by their writings and declamatory
vehemence, in and out of certain doors, to wish, to invite, and encourage an
experiment of those terrors, desolation and wretchedness, the recital of which
is shocking to humanity? Why is it that a lust of power, a selfish ambition,
will labor to instigate, to inflame a giddy multitude? Why is it that men of
abilities, of fortune, of rank, forgetting their quality, forgetting the sad
tale of French massacre and bloodshed, ever inseparable from actual treason,
assume the vile form of seditious declaimers, and re-echo the doctrines of
inebriated Pain, and his sanguinary Republicanism.

Let me offer a word of advice to those splendid reformers, the mendacious
treachery of whose labored writings is but too successful a bait to an
unthinking and too credulous multitude. They know well that the passions of the
human heart hold close correspondence with each other; and the progress from
one violent affection to another is often rapid and involuntary. If we give way
to habits of approbation -- to expressions of admiration of those systems of
proscription and murder, which follow Revolutionary Government, our applause
will operate gradually, so forcibly on our minds, that we imbibe the same cruel
and unrelenting sentiments: while we are palliating the profligate vices, the
wicked intrigues, the bloody plots of successive factions in France, and urging
similar horrors among ourselves, under the soft (...) of Reform, we are
hardening our minds to the same savage and barbarous systems; and proving to
the world, that for the accomplishment of private ambition and power, we would
hazard the perils of insurrection, rebellion, and their accomitant horrors.

But, however obstinately a band of pretended patriots may attempt to palliate
the motives of horrid assassinations, and to persuade the world, that the
perpetrators of such foul crimes were moved by just principles of liberty, to
take those bloody methods of avenging their wrongs: -- However perversely our p
-- y declaimers may endeavor, under color of reform, to justify their
unnatural predilection and propensity for Gallic Revolution, I trust they never
will be able so far to impose upon the understanding and virtue of sensible and
reflecting Britons.

The last revolutionary writer, whose editions have been largely multiplied by
magic process, to dazzle the public eye, is the grand supporter of the chief of
his party, and contends, by a mockery of argument, as insulting to the good
sense of Englishmen, as it is injurious to truth and fact, that Mr. Fox alone
can administer the Government at this time with effect. That is, the doctrine
of faction supports itself now, as it has always done, on the supposed
incapacity of the present Ministers, and their utter incapability of conducting
the state affairs. -- This is the old cant, to introduce themselves by
vilifying and abusing others with systematic scurrility; -- By applauding the
energies of the enemy, while they fetter and clog the operations and powers of
our own Government -- thus widening the chasm of public difficulty, instead of
hastening to lend a friendly hand to fill it up and smooth it over. Surely, if
certain men have no method to support a consequence, but by raising a cloud of
doubt and embarrassing gloom over the public mind, their procedure and
associated affiliation must appear solely directed to serve the purposes of a
mystery or craft against the public welfare.

Whoever contemplates, with philanthropic and British feelings, those heats
that are every day increasing in the very bosom of Society, from the
enthusiastic rancour that fills the pages of the party-writers, must shudder at
the consequences; and must plainly see, that the most terrible events are to be
averted only by introducing and diffusing the salutary doctrines of truth and
law, in opposition to ingenious falsehood; and by opposing the practice of
national virtue and the communication of national happiness, to loose and
fanciful systems of innovation.

The gentlemen-reformers, of ourday, have shown themselves accesary to raising
a spirit of turbulence. They have labored to flatter the passions of the
people, and by doing so, have induced a strong suspicion, that they are not
averse to that extreme reform, which is attainable only through the horrors of
Revolution. I fear some are going farther and deeper, and regardless of any
extremity, have united to calumniate the conduct, and blast the fair fame, the
honest intentions of the present Ministers, in order to appear the defenders of
the people, and to cast themselves on the notice of the populace for their own
aggrandizement. If there are any of this description, who practice opposition
to British Constitution, in favor on French Republicanism, I pray that such
may obtain the reward of their duplicity and evil-doings from the Justice of
their Country.

The present crisis is allowed to be alarming -- The enemy, as ferocious and
implacable, as they are active and prodigal of blood, threaten our shores --
What then should be the conduct of those few firm associates in opposition? --
I will tell them in a few words of gratuitous counsel to the Author of "The
Cause and Consequences." -- Cease the cant of Reform. -- There is a necessity
at this time for the talents and exertions of all men. -- Let a suspension of
opposition spring out of that necessity. Make that necessity habitual among all
over whom you possess influence. -- Give this happy turn to your powers, rouse
the indolent virtues of all within your sphere of persuasion, by inspiring them
with that love of their country, which knows no party or diversity of sentiment
when the state is in danger. -- Make the high term -- UNANIMITY agitate the
minds, and interest the hearts of all men, to strive manfully together. -- When
Ministers come forward with a statement of their further wants for the public
service, at this momentous crisis, aid their proposition and plans by advice
best adapted to the occasion. -- Hasten to kindle an emulation of this kind in
every town throughout the Kingdom -- proclaim this honest truth, that parsimony
in war is often productive of the most serious mischiefs -- and that when an
enemy threatens our shores, our properties, our families, all that we hold
dear, -- the scale of expense should be ample and co-extensive with the
necessity of the time. -- Such a conduct will be truly political, popular and
liberal in its spirit, and will not fail to endear you to every man in the
nation.

Encourage by your zeal and example the military enthusiasm spread abroad by
the armed Yeomanry, and Volunteer associations. The military ardour which such
institutions inspire, has a double good effect, by connecting the public
interest with an honest personal ambition, and by showing the foe what
reception they may expect from an armed and united people.

You are too well versed in law and politics, not to be sensible of this truth,
that he who endeavors not to serve the State at an eventful period; who
applies not his powers and abilities to the immediate advantage and glory of
the nation, who acts not in every instance, as if animated with the wish to
preserve the Constitution of the country, can scarcely be supposed to be a
member of that community, whose interest appear, as it were, foreign to him.

The exertions of a great body of the people, which is the stamen of every
state, will be but slow and languid, while they can find in the clamours of
opposition a sort of reason and excuse for their torpitude and disaffection.

I have put before you a plain statement, not obscured by mystery, or entangled
by terms of art -- and I shall only add, that while you boast your knowledge of
the Rights of Man, you ought not to forget the duties of the individual.

I shall hope soon to witness that noble promptitude of spirit, that
affectionate alacrity, that high policy of unanimity which disdains
niggardliness of purse or of person, when the State calls for both -- I hope to
witness that liberality of conduct, that ^^nly unison of sentiment, which the
Salus Populi imperiously demands; and which will establish the public safety
upon a rock, against which the winds and waves of French threats and French
invasion shall beat in vain.

Should my eager hopes of such an happy consummation fail, I think all men must
be convinced more and more of the strong truths uttered by one of the greatest
men in our age -- that there is a malignant conspiracy in this country. I will
not point to the persons most deeply, most seriously implicated in it. But it
appears a conspiracy of talents generated from the lust of power, casting
themselves on the vicious propensities of the multitude; a conspiracy, equally
unprincipled and sanguinary, equally ferocious and cunning, as any plot of the
Roberspierian faction in France.

From this digression against modern reformers and Gallic scholiasts, and
having settled cursorily the account with Mr. Pain, for his attacks against
established Governments and Religion, I now proceed to examine the character of
that great and amiable man, whose former marks of friendship (while he appeared
worthy of friendship) could not suffice to melt the heart of this tiger, or
prevent him from drenching the dagger of calumny in the admired character of
his benefactor.

It is a lamentable reflection on human nature, that so much ingratitude and
baseness is to be found in man. -- When the American Fabius was cherishing to
his bosom, and conferring marks of favor on this miscreant, he little thought
he was warming the viper to turn against himself, and to emit his worst poison
upon his protector. -- He little thought that the abilities which he encouraged
in the writer of Common Sense, would be made subservient to revolutionary
ambition and French intrigue against America. -- He little imagined that the
pamphleteer Pain, a desperate adventurer, without friends or fortune, should
rise to be the greatest monster of wickedness that ever disgraced humanity: --
He dreamed not of giving his considence to a Journalist intriguer, an
hypocritical villain, ready, under the baneful influence of mad enthusiasm and
new philosophy, to load his patron with falsehood and defamation: -- But as he
had just before abjured God, and reviled the holy ordinances of religion, what
better return could be expected?

It has ever been the wish and the labor of wise and good men, to lay up a
stock of character and of reputable competence in life -- for the purpose of
the Poet -- Senes ut in otia tuta recedant. --

But Mr. Pain disdains the common rules of life, and has rushed precipitately
forward into the extremes of turpitude and baseness.

What an awful lesson to men in society to find that there are amongst them,
those who, rising by fortuitous circumstances from low situations, only become
more furious in their pursuits, intractable and insatiable in their ambition,
and dark assassins of the very bosoms that gave them consequence?

History records an individual, who, to attain the reputation of having
achieved the most splendidly atrocious act of consummate villainy, set fire to
the Temple of Diana, at Ephesus, and destroyed that chef-d'oeuvre of human
ingenuity: -- One of the sinest monuments of art, as well for its magnitude and
the lostiness of its architecture, as the quantity and excellence of the works
of sculpture, with which it was enriched by those eminent artists who gave life
to marble, if we may be allowed the expresson: So, Tom Pain, emulous of the
renowned infamy of the Ephesian incendiary, not only labors to spread the
conflagration of anarchy and atheism over the world, and to overwhelm the
astonishing fabric of British Constitution and American liberty, by the
poisonous effluvia of his pernicious doctrines; but, as if something was still
wanting to his public infamy, he opens his battery of slander upon the amiable
President of the United States. -- Quo non proestantior alter
pietate, virtute et meritis.


However enormous and destructive the publications, rushing from the pen of Tom
Pain, one would imagine, that he wanted to outdo himself in this atrocious
Letter -- It would in fact seem, that after many years labors happily
unsuccessful against Britain, he thought he should more easily obtain the palm,
the apex of infamy, by means equally shocking to honor and gratitude, as
inconsistent with truth and decency. What must be our opinion of the
presumption of an individual, known only by his crimes, who arrogantly arraigns
the man to whom Europe has long since conceded the merit of consummate wisdom,
the wreathe of military merit, obtained by the exertion of abilities, and by
the noblest instances of prudential caution and firmness. With petulant
affection of military skill and criticism, this little Ingrate dares to measure
the campaigns of the American war, and to controvert those brilliant and
distinguished traits of heroism, which British generals of long experience,
acknowledged with a kind of terrisic approbation, and which the great Frederic,
who knew how to appreciate military exploits, confessed his surprise and
admiration -- If the old hero of Prussia expressed such estimation for the
commander, and glowed with love to the man; -- If all Europe confessed the
superiority of American enterprise and exertion, amid a thousand difficulties:
If Washington established a character that can never die, or be obscured by the
vapor of slander; If, by the most compassionate endearments and tenderness for
his troops, in want of necessary clothing, stockings, and shoes, he was able
to reconcile them to their distresses, to animate them in a virtuous
perseverance in the cause of their country: if his comprehensive mind was able
to defeat the best conserted plans of his adversaries in the field: If his
wisdom, fertile in expedients, was capable of forming the vast project of
capturing a whole army: If, by a variety of skilful maneuvers, inviolable
secrecy, he concealed the magnitude of the undertaking, till the various
combinations of artillery, of vessels, and provisions, were prepared to carry
his plan into execution, by the most rapid and unexpected movements: -- If such
military operations place a general in the most distinguished point of view,
surely all men must admire the courage and conduct of the American commander in
chief.

Who, that reads the valedictory addresses of Genesis Washington to the people of
America, can doubt the probity and excellence of the heart that dictated such
humane and benevolent sentiments? Every Briton that in the war felt the courage
of the hand that wrote it; every man that heard of the achievements of a
Washington, must read, with a generous concern and regret, the farewell address
of an illustrious chief magistrate; who, after the labors of a difficult and
successful war; after the severities of long and dangerous campaigns, forsook
the bed of ease and domestic comfort, of whom the Americans may, with
exultation, pronounce, in the words of Seneca -- Unus cunctando, nobis
restituit rem, to secure to his country the happy possession and permanency of
an established government of commerce, internal harmony, and federal union. --
Thus great and glorious to the end of his political career, how much must the
grateful citizens of America, how much must posterity, admire his long
laborious services, and unsullied virtue; and, to crown all, the steady
attachment of his soul to his country's welfare, by his manly opposition to
those factious demagogues, who would risk national happiness for the
accomplishment of their destructive and flagitious designs in favor of Gallic
republicanism. The valedictory address of the immaculate Washington, has made a
serious and lasting impression on the public mind in this country, as in
America. In that honest plain production, we discover the abilities of the
consummate statesman, the wisdom of the just legislator, the affectionate
advice of the parent, anxious for the welfare of his children, and concerned
for the aberrations and indiscretions of a part of his family. -- We discover
the tender sympathy of a mind anxious and eager at an eventful crisis, to
perform the utmost possible service to his country. -- We admire that eminent
display of political knowledge, in which he offers, with energy and freedom,
his last advice toward preserving that vigorous union and form of government,
under which the country had prospered in wealth and commerce, the reins of
which he was about to resign into other hands. -- He takes an ample survey of
the relative situation of America and Europe, and delineates the beauties and
defects of the several component parts of the several governments. -- He points
out, with honest zeal and firmness, the shelves and rocks of disunion, on which
those who have been at the helm of a neighboring revolution have ran; and,
with glowing pencil, paints the advantages of a political and commercial
connection with England, as the palladium of peace, liberty, and prosperity to
America.

It is an agreeable entertainment and consolation for the great and
comprehensive mind of a Washington, to look to the work of his hands. -- He has
raised an infant empire; he has brought numerous and discordant colonial
interests into union and foederal harmony; -- he has stood at the helm, till
their defense has been completed against all the inclemencies and storms which
agitate the European continent; -- he has witnessed the rapid progress of
improvement and seen the empire great in agriculture, flourishing in commerce,
and directed by the well-regulated policy of peace with all the world. It is
surely a rich repast for the mind of the wise and good to contemplate such a
picture -- here we can furnish our minds with true ideas of beauty and
deformity, when we see one man thus greatly contributing to the happiness of
the whole, by a conduct formed on prineiples of wisdom and virtue, which never
fail to render individuals, as well as communities, happy and prosperous.

And why is it that Mr. Pain emits his bile in such quantity, and labors to
assail the character and conduct of one of the worthiest and best of men?

It is because the great and revered Washington wishes to avert the pernicious
and pestilential influence of Gallic incendiaries from the peaceful shores of
America. -- It is, because he has had discernment to discover that selfishness
and violence in the Councils of France, which would establish its power on the
ruins, and at the expense of others; that would sacrifice the interests of its
nearest allies to public plunder and devastation.

It is because he sees in the conduct of the French leaders, an encouragement
of anarchy in other states, and a desire of revolutionizing other Goverments,
as ambition and avarice point the way. -- It is because, instead of
constitutional harmony and union for the public good, mutual hatred and mutual
distrust still agitate their councils; faction is plotting against faction: and
party-marks and party names point the dagger of the assassin nightly in the
public streets.

It is because the enlightened Statesman have reprobated, in forcible terms,
the multitude of European ruffians and agitators, who have spread themselves
throughout the states, poisoning the public mind with foul calumnies, and
preaching the doctrines of commotion and discord. --

Away, then, vile Pain! hide thy infamous head in merited obscurity! nor
attempt again to sully the virgin paper with they corrupt gall. Thy writings
smell strongly of the eructations of drunkenness; and like stinkpots, are
solely remarkable for their pestiferous odours.

But it is reported the abusive letter to General Washington is the work of
dire necessity, to gain a pittance of favor from the Directory, even on the
ground of hunger, and pecuniary distress: how low and degraded must that man's
feelings be, who would stoop to such servile adulation, and Judas-like, sell
his benefactor for a few pieces of silver?

Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames!
The late strange behavior and threats of the French, point out more clearly
the true principles and policy of that nation. -- It is plainly conformable to
their general views, of intermeddling in every government, and engrossing an
influence in every country; and as this cannot be done on principles of trade
or equity, they regard not the method, provided they can succeed in their
darling schemes. The insolence of the French Envoy in America, -- his busy,
restless, nay, factious interference, is not disowned, but defended by the
Directory; instead of calling him back in disgrace to Europe, to suffer for his
atrocious offense against the laws of America, and of nations, they countenance
his intrigues, and vindicate his arrogance, against all principles of political
justice and plomatic faith.

Happily, indeed, these intriguing maneuvers have given to the Americans no
favorable idea of their pretended friends: the French have been long
developing their true character even in America, -- but never before dared to
speak in so outrageous a manner with regard to the Congress: and Tom Pain has
the daring to echo their vengeful animadversions on the public counsels of
America. -- The bold cant of Pain, the common topic of the Paris coffee-house
politicians is daily this -- "Did not France purchase with the blood of her
subjects the independence of America, and the security she enjoys? Did not
France snatch them from the trammels of Britain, by coming to their aid, when
they were at the alternative of unconditional submission? Did not France do all
this for America?" -- I deny the premises. France fought not for America, --
she fought in America, and with the aid and provisions of America, against
Great Britain, she little regarded America, -- the depression of England was
the object. -- She sought from America a monopoly of the most advantageous
branches of her commerce, in order to deprive the English of all intercourse
and share in the trade of that great Continent. -- She fettered America with
restrictive clauses respecting a Navy, and prescribed regulations in the
West India trade, totally inconsistent with friendship and protection. She now
proceeds to criminate the public act and terms of a treaty made by two
independent nations, with a reciprocal relation to their great commercial
interests, and encourages to insurrection the enthusiastic rancour of a little
Gallic faction in a few towns of the Continent.

Are these the transactions of friendship? Are these the suggestions of sound
policy? I will only remark on this subject, that the honor of Great Britain
and America, as powerful independent States, is concerned in procuring full and
ample justice for such hostile intrigues -- otherwise America may expect, the
first opportunity, to see the sequel, to the overthrow of the Netherlands, and
to the subjugation of Holland.

Let France then consider what she has to expect from such a friend as Pain?
Let Frenchmen judge whether such a man, in case he could accomplish the ruin of
his native country, and an insurrection in America would not extend his noxious
views further, and in order to consummate the character of infamy, seek to
continue and to multiply those calamities into which France has been plunged
for years past.

But Providence, which has lately so eminently defeated the projects of this
insidious pamphleteer, and which has recently humbled the pride of our open
enemy, by defeating their boasted invasion, will still manifest its goodness by
throwing shame on the evil doing of the arch-fiend Pain. We must hope, that by
its assistance, England and America, now combined in mutual relations of
commerce and prosperity, will defend themselves successfully against the league
formed for their injury and ruin, by the insinuations and intrigues of French
emissaries. All the efforts of a suborned Pain, cannot prevent the most
distant posterity from acknowledging General Washington to have been the
defender of the liberties of America against the secret agency of French
counsels and French gold. It is said, that Mr. Pain has, by some soul means or
other, got into his hands a ring belonging to the unfortunate Queen of France,
the motto is, En Dien mon esperance -- After his liberation from prison, some
friend asked him, if he had saved his ring? oh yes; here it is, he exclaimed --
"Mais au Diable l'esperance en Dieu -- The miscreant was then pregnant with
those pages of impiety and profanation, to which he afterward gave a hideous
birth.


But while we offer the merited tribute of praise to the illustrious
Washington, let us rejoice in making a just application at home -- Let us
seriously consider the duty we owe to our beloved Monarch, who is the
instrument in the hands of Providence to preserve us from the horrors of
licentiousness and revolutionary equality. While irreligion and pernicious
doctrines are abroad, conscience, gratitude, and even self-love should prompt
us to support the dignity of the Crown, and to cooperate, by every means in
our power, to maintain the cause of pure religion and virtue; of just
government and regulated liberty, in opposition to those fanciful schemes, and
innovating systems, which ravage and desolate a once-flourishing and civilized
country.

To conclude -- and happily the argument is applicable to the Government of
those kingdoms, as to America -- The merit of a wise and prosperous
Administration must certainly redound to the honor of the personage, who is
placed at the head of affairs. The divine prerogative of communicating
happiness and glory to a great and numerous people, of nourishing them "with a
true and faithful heart, and ruling them prudently with all his powers," must
surely fill the mind of the chief magistrate with conscious satisfaction,
because the general utility is to the people; and, however he may partake of
their felicity, the difficulty, the disquietude, the constant care lie upon the
person, who administers the Government.

Every considerate man must be sensible of the weight of the reins of
Government, and every honest man, far from opposing, will endeavor to support
the hand that bears it. To be acquainted with the connexions and dependencies
of power; to look to their force and consequences; to protect a nation from
foreign injury, and crush domestic disorder; to execute law, to exercise
authority, and secure obedience by an uniform and well-tempered system of mercy
and goodness, of justice and impartiality, of allegiance and protection, are
matters of no ordinary skill and management. Solid principles of wisdom,
enlarged views, a discerning spirit, strength and presence of mind, with
constant application and watchfulness, are required to keep the sources pure,
from which slow the benefits of civil Government and Order.

It is the purpose of Providence, that the Chief Magistrate should bear the
weight of Government, in order that the subjects may live easy under it. -- He
avails himself of his prerogative to resist the machinations of turbulent
spirits; and exerts his powers to act up to the glory and prosperity of the
people, that their security, tranquillity, and happiness, may be settled,
strengthened, and established, beyond the reach of disaffection and malice from
within, and of invasion from abroad.

In a word, when we look to the wisdom of our present councils, to the vigor
of our preparations -- with a force of well disciplined troops to guard our
coasts, and an additional body of brave and loyal men, training to arms, to be
ready, on an emergency, to go out in defense of their property and families:
When we behold Ministers employed in giving such substantial and permanent
security to the country, as will put it out of the power of the foe to injure
us to any extent, I humbly think that, instead of yielding to the gloom of
disquietude or despondency, we ought to look up to our danger with life and
spirit, and without any of those apprehensions, which pervade too many at this
time.

Our various operations, it must be owned, are attended with great, very great
expenses: -- But which is the man that will not acknowledge, it is better to
make our utmost efforts, by money and men, to avert a threatened danger, than
to sink into a state of apathy, or pusillanimity at an arduous moment, and
endanger the public safety by a cowardly parsimony and degenerate niggardliness.

Rouse, then, Britons -- reassume your wonted spirit -- do not think it so
easy a thing, to run upon our coasts, and make a descent of any magnitude on
armed shores. The abilities, the wisdom, the vigilance of Ministers are
directed to the proper points of national utility; -- and whatever may be the
demands for the exigencies of the war, be assured, you will eventually have a
good account of your millions, by the defeat of the enemy's mad projects, and
by a final happy issue to the war.

FINIS.

