THE CASTLE SPECTRE: A DRAMA. IN Five Acts.

BY M. G. LEWIS, ESQUIRE. M. P. AUTHOR OF "THE MONK," etc.

NOW PERFORMING WITH UNBOUNDED APPLAUSE AT THE Theater in Boston.

PRINTED AT BOSTON. Sold at the BOOKSTORE, No. 56, CORNHILL.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Osmond, Mr. HODOKINSON. Reginald, Mr. WHITLOCK. Percy, Mr. CHALMERS. Father
Philip, Mr. PRIOMORE. Motley, Mr. VILLIERS. Kenric, Mr. WILLIAMSON. Saib, Mr.
KENNY. Hassan, Mr. HARPER. Muley, Mr. POWELL. Alaric, Mr. KEDEY. Harold, Mr.
PRICE.
WOMEN.
Angela, Mrs. WHITLOCK. Alice, Mrs. BRETT. Evelina, Mrs. POWELL.
THE CASTLE SPECTRE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. -- A Grove.
Enter FATHER PHILIP and MOTLEY. F. Phil. NEVER tell me! -- I repeat it, you
are a fellow of a very scandalous course of life!


Motl. And I repeat it, I Am a perfect image of the purest virtue, compared to
whom, for sobriety and continence, Cato was a drunkard, and Lucretia little
better than she should be.


F. Phil. Oh! hardened in impudence! -- Can you deny being a pilferer, a liar,
a glutton --


Motl. Can I? -- Heaven be thanked, I Have courage enough to deny any thing!


F. Phil. Does Not all the world cry out upon you?


Motl. Certainly my transcendant merit has procured me some enemies; and, in
common with many other great men, my virtue at present labors under something
of a cloud. But understand me right, Father: Though I don't assent to the
sum-total of your accusations, possibly I may acknowledge some of the items;
the best actions frequently appear culpable, merely because their motives are
unexplained. Therefore produce your charges, let me justify my conduct, and I
doubt not I shall retrieve my reputation from your hands as immaculate and pure
as a new sheet of foolscap.


F. Phil. To begin then with your pilfering -- did you, or did you not, break
open the pantry-door, and steal out the great goose-pye?


Motl. Begging your pardon, Father, that was no fault of mine.


F. Phil. Whose then?


Motl. The cook's, undoubtedly; for if he had not locked the pantry-door, it is
an hundred to one I shouldn't have taken the trouble to break it open.


F. Phil. Nonsense! Nonsense! -- I tell you, you have been guilty of stealing,
which is a monstrous crime! And what did you steal? Had you taken any thing
else, I might have forgiven you: but to lay irreverent hands upon the
goose-pye! -- As I Am a Christian, the identical goose-pye which I intended for
my own supper! -- But this is not my only objection to your conduct.


Motl. No?


F. Phil. What principally offends me is, that you pervert the minds of the
maids, and keep kissing and smuggling all the pretty girls you meet. Oh, fie!
fie!


Motl. I kiss and smuggle them? St. Francis forbid! Lord love you, Father, it is
they who kiss and smuggle me. I protest I do what I can to preserve my modesty;
and I wish that Archbishop Dunstan had heard the lecture upon chastity which I
read last night to the dairy-maid in the dark! he would have been quite edified.
But yet what does talking signify? The eloquence of my lips is counteracted by
the luster of my eyes; and really the little devils are so tender, and so
troublesome, that I Am half angry with nature for having made me so very
bewitching.


F. Phil. Nonsense! Nonsense!


Motl. Why it was but yesterday that Cicely and Luce went to fifty-cuffs,
quarrelling which looked neatest, my red leg, or my yellow one. Then they are
so fond and so coaxing! They hang about one so lovingly! And one says, "Kind
Mr. Motley!" and the other, "Sweet Mr. Motley!" -- Ah! Father Philip! Father
Philip! How is a poor little bit of flesh and blood, like me, to resist such
temptation? -- Put yourself in my place: Suppose that a sweet smiling rogue,
just sixteen, with rosy cheeks, sparkling eyes, pouting lips, etc.


F. Phil. Oh, fie! fie! fie! -- To hear such licentious discourse, brings the
tears into my eyes!


Motl. I believe you, Father; for I see the water is running over at your
mouth. However, this shows you --


F. Phil. It shows me that you are a reprobate, and that my advice is thrown
away upon you: In future, I shall keep those counsels to myself, which I
offered you from motives of pure Christian charity.


Motl. Charity, my good Father, should always begin at home: Now, instead of
giving yourself so much trouble to mend me, what if you thought a little of
correcting yourself?


F. Phil. I? -- I have nothing to correct.


Motl. No, to be sure!


F. Phil. The odor of my sanctity perfumes the whole kingdom.


Motl. It has a powerful smell about it, I own, not unlike carrion; you may
wind it a mile off.


F. Phil. All malice!


Motl. Not exactly: I could mention some little points which might be altered
in you still better than in myself; such as intemperance, gluttony --


F. Phil. Gluttony? -- Oh! abominable falsehood!


Motl. Plain matter of fact! -- Why will any man pretend to say that you came
honestly by that enormous belly, that tremendous tomb of fish, flesh and fowl?
I protest I Am grateful to Heaven, that among the unclean beasts who accompanied
Noah, there went not into the ark a pair of fat monks: they must infallibly
have created a famine, and then the world would never have been re-peopled.
Next, for incontinence, you must allow yourself that you are unequalled.


F. Phil. I? I?


Motl. You, you. May I ask what was your business in the beech-grove the other
evening, when I caught you with buxom Margery the miller's pretty wife? Was it
quite necessary to lay your heads together so close?


F. Phil. Perfectly necessary: I was whispering in her ear wholesome advice.


Motl. Indeed? Faith, then she took your advice as kindly as it was given, and
exactly in the same way too: you gave it with your lips, and she took it with
here is! -- Well done, Father Philip!


F. Phil. Son, son, you give your tongue too great a license.


Motl. Nay, Father, be not angry: Fools, you know, are privil^^^d persons.


F. Phil. I know they are very useless ones: and in short, Master Motley, to be
plain with you, of all fools, I think you the worst; and for fools of all kinds
I Have an insuperable aversion.


Motl. Really? Then you have one good quality at least, and I cannot but admire
such a total want of self-love! [A horn sounds.] But hark! it is the dinner
horn. Away to table, Father -- Depend upon it, the servants will rather eat part
of their dinner unblessed, than stay till your stomach comes, like Jonas's
whale, and swallows up the whole.


F. Phil. Well, well, fool, I am going: but first let me explain to you, that
my bulk proceeds from no indulgence of voracious appetite: No, son, no. Little
sustenance do I take; but St. Cuthbert's blessing is upon me, and that little
prospers with me most marvellously. Verily, the saint has given me rather too
plentiful an increase, and my legs are scarce able to support the weight of his
bounties.


Exit. Motl. [Alone.] He looks like an overgrown turtle, waddling upon its hind
fins! Yet at bottom it is a good fellow enough, warm-hearted, benevolent,
friendly, and sincere; but no more intended by nature to be a monk, than I to
be a maid of honor to the Queen of Sheba.

Going.
Enter PERCY. Percy. I cannot be mistaken: in spite of his dress, his features
are too well known to me. Hist! Gilbert! Gilbert!


Motl. Gilbert? Oh Lord, that is I! -- Who calls?


Percy. Have you forgotten me?


Motl. Truly, Sir, that would be no easy matter: I never forgot in my life what
I never knew.


Percy. Have ten years altered me so much that you cannot --


Motl. Hey! -- Can it be -- Pardon, my dear master, pardon! In truth, you may
well forgive my having forgotten your name, for at first I didn't very well
remember my own. However, to prevent further mistakes, I must inform you, that
he who in your father's service was Gilbert the knave, is Motley the fool in
the service of Earl Osmond.


Percy. Of Earl Osmond? This is fortunate. Gilbert, you may be of use to me;
and if the attachment which as a boy you professed for me still exits. --


Motl. It does with ardes unabated; for I Am not so unjust as to attribute to
you my expulsion from Alnwic Castle. In fact, I deserved it; for I cannot deny
but that at twenty I was as good-for-nothing a knave as ever existed;
consequently old Earl Percy dismissed me from his service, but I know that it
was sorely against your inclination. You were then scarce fourteen, and I had
been your companion and play-fellow from your childhood. I remember well your
grief at parting with me, and that you slipped into my hand the purse which
contained the whole of your little treasure. That act of kindness struck to my
heart: I swore at the moment to love you through life, and if ever I forget my
oath, damn me!


Percy. My honest Gilbert! -- And what made you assume this habit?


Motl. Ah, my Lord! what could I do? In spite of my knavery and tricks, I was
constantly upon the point of starving; and having once contracted an idle habit
of eating, I never could bring myself to leave it off. After living five years
by my wits, want drove me almost out of them. I knew not what course to take,
when I heard that Earl Ofmond's jester had fled the country. I exerted my
knavery for the last time in stealing the fugitive's cast coat, was accepted in
his place by the Earl, and now gain an honest livelihood by persuading my
neighbors that I Am a greater fool than themselves.


Percy. And your change is for the better?


Motl. Infinitely; indeed your fool is unive^sally preferred to your knave --
and for this reason; your fool is cheated, your knave cheats. Now every body
had rather cheat than be cheated.


Percy. Some truth in that.


Motl. And now, Sir, may I ask, what brings you to Wales?


Percy. A woman, whom I adore.


Motl. Yes, I guessed that the business was about a petticoat. And this woman
is --


Percy. The orphan ward of a villager, without friends, without family, without
fortune!


Motl. Great points in her favor, I must confess. And which of these excellen^
^ualities won your heart?


Percy. I hope I had better reasons for bestowing it on her. No, Gilbert; I
loved her for a person beautiful without art, and graceful without affectation;
for an heart tender without weakness, and noble without pride. I saw her at
once beloved and reverenced by her village companions: they looked on her as a
being of a superior order; and I felt, that she who gave such dignity to the
cottage maid, must needs add new luster to the coronet of the Percies.


Motl. From which I am to understand that you mean to marry this rustic.


Percy. Could I mean otherwise, I should blush for myself.


Motl. Yet surely the baseness of her origin --


Percy. Can to me be no objection: In giving her my hand I raise her to my
station, not debase myself to here is, nor ever, while gazing on the beauty of a
rose, did I think it less fair because planted by a peasant.


Motl. Bravo! And what says your good grumbling father to this?


Percy. Alas! he has long slept in the grave!


Motl. Then he is quiet at last! Well, God grant him that peace in heaven, which
he suffered nobody to enjoy on earth! But, his death having left you master of
your actions, what obstacle now prevents your marriage?


Percy. You shall hear. Fearful lest my rank should influence this lovely
girl's affections, and induce her to bestow her hand on the noble, while she
refused her heart to the man, I assumed a peasant's habit, and presented myself
as Edwy the low-born and the poor. In this character I gained her heart, and
resolved to hail, as Countess of Northumberland, the betrothed of Edwy the
low-born and the poor!


Motl. I warrant the pretty soul was not displeased with the discovery!


Percy. That discovery is still unmade. Judge how great must have been my
disappointment, when, on entering her guardian's cottage with this design, he
informed me, that the unknown, who sixteen years before had confided her to his
care, had reclaimed her on that very morning, and conveyed her no one knew
whither.


Motl. That was unlucky.


Percy. Was it not? Ah! had I declared myself one day sooner, ere this she
would have been my wife.


Motl. True; and being your wife, if a stranger then had conveyed her no one
knew whith^^ you might have thought yourself mightily obliged to him.


Percy. However, in spite of his precautions, I have traced the stranger's
course, and find him to be Kenric, a dependant upon Earl Osmond.


Motl. Surely it is not Lady Angela, who --


Percy. The very same! Speak, my good fellow, do you know her?


Motl. Not by your description; for here she is understood to be the daughter of
Sir Malcolm Mowbray, my master's deceased friend. And what is your present
intention?


Percy. To demand her of the Earl in marriage.


Motl. Oh! that will never do; for in the first place you will not be able to get
a sight of him. I Have now lived with him five long years, and, till Angela's
arrival, never witnessed a guest in the Castle. Oh! it is the most melancholy
mansion! And as to its master, he is the very antidote to mirth. He always walks
with his arms folded, his brows bent, his eyes lowering on you with a gloomy
scowl. He never smiles; and to laugh in his presence would be high treason. He
looks at no one, speaks to no one. None dare approach him, except Kenric and
his four blacks; all others are ordered to avoid him; and whenever he quits his
room, dingdong goes a great bell, and away run the servants like so many scared
rabbits.


Percy. Strange! and what reasons can he have for --


Motl. Oh! reasons in plenty. You must know there is an ugly story respecting
the last owners of this Castle. Osmond's brother, his wife, and infant child,
were murdered by a banditti, as it was said. Unluckily, the only servant who
escaped the slaughter, deposed, that he recognized among the assassins a black
still in the service of Earl Osmond. The truth of this assertion was never
known, for the servant was found dead in his bed the next morning.


Percy. Good heavens!


Motl. Since that time, no sound of joy has been heard in Conway Castle. Osmond
instantly became gloomy and ferocious; he now never utters a sound except a
sigh, has broken every tie of society, and keeps his gates barred unceasingly
against the stranger.


Percy. Yet Angela is admitted: But, no doubt, affection for her father --


Motl. Why, no; I rather think that affection for her father's child --


Percy. How?


Motl. If I Have any knowledge in love, the Earl feels it for his fair ward: But
the lady will tell you more of this, if I can procure for you an interview.


Percy. The very request which --


Motl. It Is no easy matter, I promise you; but I Will do my best. In the
meanwhile, wait for me in yonder fishinghut; its owner's name is Edric: tell
him that I sent you, and he will give you a retreat.


Percy. Farewell, then; and remember that whatever reward --


Motl. Dear master, to mention a reward insults me. You have already shown me
kindness; and when it is in my power to be of use to you, to need the inducement
of a second favor would prove me a scoundrel undeserving of the first.


Exit. Percy. How warm is this good fellow's attachment! Yet our Barons
complain that the great can have no friends! If they have none, let their own
pride ^^ar the blame. Instead of looking with scorn on those whom a smile would
attract, and a favor bind forever, how many firm friends might our nobles
gain, if they would but reflect that their vassals are men as they are, and
have hearts whose feelings can be grateful as their own.


Exit. SCENE II. -- The Castle Hall.
SAIB and HASSAN meeting. Saib. Now, Hassan, what success?


Hass. My search has been fruitless. In vain have I paced the river's banks,
and pierced the grove's deepest recesses. Nor glen nor thicket have I passed
unexplored, yet found no stranger to whom Kenric's description could apply.


Saib. Saw you no one?


Hass. A troop of horsemen passed me as I left the wood.


Saib. Horsemen, say you? then Kenric may be right. Earl Percy has discovered
Angela's abode, and lurks near the Castle in hopes of carrying her off.


Hass. His hopes then will be vain. Osmond's vigilance will not easily be
eluded, sharpened by those powerful motives, love and fear.


Saib. His love I know; but should he lose Angela, what has he to fear?


Hass. If Percy gains her, every thing! Supported by such wealth and power,
dangerous would be her claim to these domains should her birth be discovered.
Of this our Lord is aware; nor did he sooner hear that Northumberland loved
her, than he hastened to remove her from Allan's care. At first I doubt his
purpose was a foul one: her resemblance to her mother induced him to change it.
He now is resolved to make her his bride, and restore to her those rights of
which himself deprived her.


Saib. Think you the lady perceives that our master loves her.


Hass. I know she does not. Absorbed in her own passion for Percy, on Osmond's
she bestows no thought; and, while roving through these pompous halls and
chambers, sighs for the Cheviot hills, and Allan's humble cottage.


Saib. But as she still believes Percy to be a low-born swain, when Osmond days
^his coronet at her feet, will she reject his rank and splendour?


Hass. If she loves well, she will. Saib, I too have loved! I have known how
painful it was to leave her on whom my heart hung! how incapable was all else
to supply her loss! I have exchanged want for plenty, fatigue for rest, a
wretched hut for a splendid palace. But am I happier? Oh! no! Still do I regret
my native land, and the partners of my poverty. Then toil was sweet to me, for
I labored for Samba; then repose ever blessed my bed of leaves, for there by my
side lay Samba sleeping.


Saib. This from you, Hassan? -- Did love ever find a place in your flinty
bosom?


Hass. Did it? Oh Saib; my heart once was gentle, once was good! But sorrows
have broken it -- insults have made it hard! I have been dragged from my native
land! from a wife who was every thing to me, to whom I was every thing! Twenty
years have elapsed since these Christians tore me away; they trampled upon my
heart, mocked my despair; and, when in frantic terms I raved of Samba, laughed,
and wondered how a negro's soul could feel! In that moment, when the last point
of Africa faded from my view, when as I stood on the vessel's deck, I felt that
all I loved was to me lost forever! In that bitter moment did I banish humanity
from my breast! I tore from my arm the bracelet of Samba's hair, I gave to the
sea the precious token, and, while the high waves swift bore it from me, vowed
aloud endless hatred to mankind. I have kept my oath, and I will keep it.


Saib. Ill-starred Hassan! your wrongs have indeed been great.


Hass. To remember them, un-mans me -- Farewell! I must to Kenric. Hold! --
Look, where he comes from Osmond's chamber!


Saib. And seemingly in wrath.


Hass. His conferences with the Earl of late have had no other end. The period
of his favor is arrived.


Saib. Not of his favor merely, Hassan.


Hass. How? Mean you that --


Saib. His anxiety for independence, his wish to withdraw himself from Wales --
yet more, certain mysterious words and threats for some time past have made our
Lord uneasy. By him was I this morning commissioned -- Silence! He Is here, you
shall know more anon.


Enter KENRIC. Kenr. His promise ever evaded! My request still heard with
impatience, and treated with neglect! Osmond, I will bear your ingratitude no
longer. -- Now, Hassan, found you the man described?


Hass. Nor any that resembled him.


Kenr. Yet, that I saw Percy, I am convinced. As I crossed him in the wood, his
eye met mine. He started as had he seen a basilisk, and fled with rapidity. Be
on your guard, my friends; doubtless he will attempt to gain admission to the
Castle.


Hass. Can we be otherwise than watchful, when we see how well the Earl rewards
his followers?


Saib. Of that, Kenric, you are an example. Have you obtained that recompense
so long promised? Do you enjoy that independence which --


Kenr. Saib, the Earl's ingtatitude cuts me to the heart! Attached to him from
his infancy, I have long been his friend, long fancied him mine: The illusion
is now over. He sees that I can serve him no further -- knows that I can harm
him much; therefore he fears, and, fearing, hates me. But I will submit no
longer to this painful depedence. Tomorrow, for the last time, will I summon
him to perform his promise; if he refuses, I will bid him farewell forever! and,
by my absence, free him from a restraint equally irksome to myself and him.


Saib. Will you so, Kenric? Be speedy then, or you will be too late.


Kenr. Too late! And wherefore?


Saib. You will soon receive the reward of your services.


Kenr. Ha! Know you what that reward will be?


Saib. I guess, but may not tell.


Kenr. Is it a secret?


Saib. Can you keep one?


Kenr. Faithfully.


Saib. As faithfully can I. Come, Hassan.


Exeunt. Kenr. [Alone.] What meant the slave? Those doubtful expressions.......
Ha! should the Earl intend me false...... Kenric! Kenric! how is thy nature
changed! There was a time when fear was a stranger to my bosom -- when,
guiltless myself, I dreaded not art in others. Now, wherever I turn me, danger
appears to lurk; and I suspect treachery in every breast, because my own heart
hides it.


Exit. Enter FATHER PHILIP and ALICE. F. Phil. Nonsense! You silly woman, what
you say is not possible.


Alice. I never said it was possible; I only said it was true; and that if ever
I heard music, I heard it last night.


F. Phil. Perhaps the fool was singing to the servants.


Alice. The fool indeed? Oh, fie! fie! How dare you call my Lady's ghost a fool?


F. Phil. Your Lady's ghost! you silly old woman.


Alice. Yes, Father, yes, I repeat it; I heard the guittar, lying upon the
Oratory table, play the very air which the Lady Evelina used to sing while
rocking her little daughter's cradle. She warbled it so sweetly -- and ever at
the close it went.

[singing] "Lullaby! Lullaby! hush thee, my dear!
"Thy father is coming, and soon will be here!"

F. Phil. Nonsense! nonsense! Why, pr'ythee, Alice, do you think that your
Lady's ghost would get up at night, only to sing Lullaby for your amusement?
Besides, how should a spirit, which is nothing but air, play upon an instrument
of material wood and cat-gut?


Alice. How can I tell? Why, I know very well that men are made; but if you
desired me to make a man, I vow and protest I shouldn't know how to set about
it. I can only say, that last night I heard the ghost of my murdered Lady --


F. Phil. Playing upon the spirit of a cracked guittar! Alice! Alice! these
fears are ridiculous! The idea of ghosts is a vulgar prejudice; and they who
are timid and absurd enough to encourage it, prove themselves the most
contemptible --


Alice. [Screaming.] Oh! Lord bless us!


F. Phil. What! -- Hey! -- Oh dear!


Alice. Look! look! A figure in white! It comes from the haunted room!


F. Phil. [Dropping on his knees.] Blessed St. Patrick! -- Who has got my
beads? Where Is my prayer book?


Alice. It comes! it comes! -- Now! now! -- Lack-a-day, it is only Lady Angela!


F. Phil. [Rising.] Lack-a-day! I Am glad of it with all my heart!


Alice. Truly, so am I. But what say you now, Father, to the fear of specter?


F. Phil. In good faith, Alice, that my theory was better than my practice.
However, the next time that you are afraid of a ghost, remember and make use of
the receipt which I shall now give you; and instead of calling for a priest to
lay the spirits of other people in the red sea, call for a bottle of red wine
to raise your own, Probatum est.


Exit. Alice. [Alone.] Wine indeed! -- I believe he thinks I like drinking as
well as himself. No, no! Let the old toping friar take his bottle of wine; I
shall confine myself to plain cherry-brandy.


Enter ANGELA. Ang. I am weary of wandering from room to room; in vain do I
change the scene; discontent is every where. There was a time when music could
delight my ear, and nature could charm my eye; -- when, as the dawn unveiled
the landscape, each object it disclosed to me looked pleasant and fair; and
while the last sunbeams yet lingered on the western sky, I could pour forth a
prayer of gratitude, and thank my good angels for a day unclouded by sorrow! --
Now all is gone, all lost, all faded!


Alice. Lady!


Ang. Perhaps at this moment he thinks upon me! Perhaps he wanders on those
mountains where we so often have strayed, reclines on that bank where we so often
have sat, or listens sadly to the starling which he taught to repeat my name.
Perhaps then he sighs; and murmurs to himself: The flowers, the rivulets, the
birds, every object reminds me of my well-beloved; but what shall remind her of
Edwy? -- Oh! that will my heart, Edwy; I need no other remembrancer!


Alice. Lady! Lady Angela! -- She minds me no more than a post!


Ang. Oh! are you there, good Alice? What would you with me?


Alice. Only ask how your Ladyship rested?


Ang. Ill! very ill!


Alice. Lack-a-day! and yet you sleep in the best bed!


Ang. True, good Alice; but my heart's anguish strewed thorns upon my couch of
down.


Alice. Marry, I Am not surprised that you rested ill in the Cedar-room. Those
noises so near you --


Ang. What noises? I heard none.


Alice. How? -- When the clock struck one, heard you no music?


Ang. Music! -- None.


Alice. And never have heard any while in the Cedar-room?


Ang. No that I -- Stay! now I remember that while I sat alone in my chamber
this morning --


Alice. Well, Lady, well!


Ang. Methought I heard some one singing; it seemed as if the words run thus --
[singing] "Lullaby! Lullaby! Hush thee, my dear!"


Alice. [Screaming.] The very words! -- It was the ghost. Lady! it was the
ghost!


Ang. The ghost, Alice! -- I protest I thought it had been you.


Alice. Me, Lady! -- Lord, when did you hear this singing?


Ang. Not five minutes ago, while you were talking with Father Philip.


Alice. The Lord be thanked! -- Then it was not the ghost: It was I, Lady! It
was I! -- And have you heard no other singing since you came to the Castle?


Ang. None. But why that question?


Alice. Because, Lady -- But perhaps you may be frightened?


Ang. No, no! -- Proceed, I entreat you.


Alice. Why, then, they do say, that the chamber in which you sleep is haunted.
You may have observed two folding-doors, which are ever kept locked: they lead
to the Oratory, in which the Lady Evelina passed most of her time, while my
Lord was engaged in the Scottish wars. She would sit there, good soul! hour
after hour, playing on the lute, and singing airs so sweet, so sad, that many a
time and often have I wept to hear her. Ah! when I kissed her hand at the
Castle-gate, little did I suspect that her fate would have been so wretched.


Ang. And what was her fate?


Alice. A sad one, Lady! Impatient to embrace her Lord, after a year's absence,
the Countess set out to meet him on his return from Scotland, accompanied by a
few domestics and her infant daughter, then scarce a twelvemonth old. But, as
she returned with her husband, robbers surprised the party scarce a mile from
the Castle; and since that time, no news has been received of the Earl, of the
Countess, the servants, or the child.


Ang. Dreadful! Where not their corpses found?


Alice. Never! The only domestic who escaped, pointed out the scene of action;
and as it proved to be on the river's banks, doubtless the assassins plunged
the bodies into the stream.


Ang. Strange! And did Earl Osmond then become owner of this Castle? -- Alice!
was he ever suspected of --


Alice. Speak lower, Lady! It was said so, I own; but for my own part I never
believed it. To my certain knowledge, Osmond loved the Lady Evelina too well to
hurt her; and when he heard of her death, he wept and sobbed as if his heart
were breaking. Nay, it is certain that he proposed to her before marriage, and
would have made her his wife, only that she liked his brother better. Well she
might, indeed; for Earl Reginald was a sweeter gentleman by half.


Ang. And in that Oratory, you say -- Good Alice, you have the key of it: Let
me see that Oratory tonight.


Alice. Tonight, Lady? Heaven preserve me! I wouldn't enter it after dark for
the world!


Ang. But before dark, Alice?


Alice. Before dark? Why that indeed -- Well, well, we'll see, Lady. But I hope
you're not alarmed by what I mentioned of the Cedar-room?


Ang. No, truly, Alice; from good spirits I have nothing to fear, and Heaven
and my innocence will protect me against bad.


Alice. My very sentiments, I protest! But Heaven forgive me, while I stand
gossipping here, I warrant all goes wrong in the kitchen! Your pardon, Lady: I
must away! I must away!

Exit.
Ang. [Musing.] Osmond was his brother's heir. His strange demeanor! -- Yes,
in that gloomy brow is written a volume of villainy! -- Heavenly powers! an
assassin then is master of my fate! -- An assassin too who -- I dare not bend
my thoughts that way! -- Oh! would I had never entered these Castle walls! --
had never exchanged for fearful pomp the security of my pleasures, the
tranquillity of my soul!

Return, return, sweet peace! and over my breast
Spread thy bright wings, distill thy balmy rest,
And teach my steps thy realms among to rove;
Wealth and the world resigned, naught mine but love!
Ah! cease thy suit, fond girl! thy prayer is vain,
For thus did Love his tyrant law ordain:
-- "Peace still must fly that heart where I still reign."

Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. -- The Armoury. -- Suits of Armor are arranged on both Sides upon
Pedestals, with the Names of their Possessors written under each.
Enter MOTLEY, peeping in. THE coast is clear! -- Hist, hist! -- You may enter.


Enter PERCY. Percy. Loiter not here! -- Quick, my good fellow, conduct me to
Angela.


Motl. Softly, softly, a little caution is needful; and I promise you just now
I Am not upon roses. You remember he servant, who hinted that Earl Osmond had an
hand in his brother's murder! -- Should I be suspected of admitting you to the
Castle, his fate might be mine; and whatever you may think of it, my Lord, I
shouldn't be at all pleased at waking tomorrow morning, to find myself dead in
my bed.


Percy. If such are your fears, why not lead me at once to Angela? Are we not
more exposed in this open hall.


Motl. Be contented, and leave all to me; I will contrive matters so that
Osmond shall have you before his eyes, and be no jot the wiser. Here, [taking
down a suit of armour] put on this coat of mail; you must make up your mind to
play a statue for an hour or two.


Percy. How?


Motl. Nay, it is absolutely necessary. Quick, quick! ere the servants quit the
hall, where they are now at dinner. Here Is the helmet, the gauntlet, the
shield! So now take this truncheon in your hand, and there we have you armed
cap a pee.


Percy. And now be good enough to explain what purpose this masquerade is to
answer.


Motl. Willingly. You are to know, that since the late Earl's death, the Castle
is thought to be haunted; the servants are fully persuaded that his ghost
wanders every night through the long galleries, and parades the old towers and
dreary halls which abound in this melancholy mansion. He is supposed to be
dressed in a complete armor; and that which you wear at present was formerly
his. Now hear my plan. The Earl prepares to hold a conference with Lady Angela;
even now I heard her summoned to attend him in the Armoury. Placed upon this
pedestal, you may listen to their discourse unobserved, and thus form a proper
judgment both of your mistress and her guardian. As soon as it grows dark, I
will conduct you to Angela's apartments: the obscurity will then shelter you
from discovery; and even should you be observed, you will pass for Earl
Reginald's spectre.


Percy. I do not dislike your plan; but tell me, Gilbert, do you believe this
tale of the apparition?


Motl. Oh, Heaven forbid! Not a word of it. Had I minded all the strange things
related of this Castle, I should have died of fright in the first half hour.
Why, they say that Earl Hubert rides every night round the Castle on a white
horse; that the ghost of Lady Bertha h^unts the west pinnacle of the
Chapel-Tower; and that Lord Hildebrand, who was condemned for treason some
sixty years ago, may be seen in the Great Hall, regularly at midnight, playing
at football with his own head! Above all, they say that the spirit of the late
Countess sits nightly in her Oratory, and sings her baby to sleep. However, if
it be so -- [A bell sounds thrice, loud and solemn] -- Hark! it is the Earl!
Quick to your post! [Percy ascends the pedestal] Farewell!I must get out of his
way; but as soon as he quits this chamber, I Will rejoin you.


Percy. Do so; and farewell.


Exit Motley. [The folding doors are thrown open: SAIB, HASSAN, MULEY, and
ALARIC enter, preceding Earl OSMOND, who walks with his arms folded, and his
eyes bent upon the ground. SAIB advances a sofa, into which, after making a few
turns through the room, OSMOND throws himself. He motions to his attendants,
and they withdraw. He appears lost in thought; then suddenly rises, and again
traverses the room with disordered steps.] Osm. I will not sacrifice my
happiness to here is! For sixteen long years have I thirsted; and now, when the
cup of joy again stands full before me, shall I dash it from my lip? No,
Angela, you ask of me too much. Since the moment when I pierced her heart,
deprived of whom life became odious; since my soul was stained with his blood
who loved me, with here is whom I loved, no form has been grateful to my eye, no
voice spoken pleasure to my soul, save Angela's, save only Angela's! Doting
upon one whom death has long clasped in his arms; tortured by desires which I
never hoped to satisfy, many a mournful year has my heart known no throb but of
anguish, no guest but remorse at committing a fruitless crime. Hope, that
stranger, once more visits my bosom: the fiend, who led me through passion's
mazes to the heights of guilt, owns that a crime so great well merits a reward.
He bids the monument's jaws unclose: Evelina revives in her daughter, and soon
shall the fires which consume me be quenched in Angela's arms. What though her
heart be Percy's? What though she prefer a basilisk's kiss to mine? Because my
short-lived joy may cause her eternal sorrow, shall I reject those pleasures
sought so long, desired so earnestly? That will I not, by Heaven! Mine she is,
and mine she shall be, though Reginald's bleeding ghost flit before me, and
thunder in my ear -- "Hold! hold!" -- Peace, stormy heart! She comes!


Enter ANGELA. Osm. [In a softened voice.] Come hither, Angela. Wherefore so
sad? That downcast eye, that listless air, neither suit your age or fortunes.
Raised from obscurity to rank and splendor, can this change call no smile upon
your cheek? Wherever you turn, respect and adoration wait you; a thousand
servants move obedient to your nod. The treasures of India are lavished to
adorn your person; yet still do I see you, forgetting what you are, look back
with regret to what you were!


Ang. Oh! my good Lord, esteem me not ungrateful! I acknowledge your bounties,
but they have not made me happy. I still linger in thought near those scenes
where I passed the blessed period of infancy; I still thirst for those simple
pleasures which habit has made to me most dear. The birds which my own hands
reared, and the flowers which my own hands planted; the banks on which I rested
when fatigued, the wild tangled wood which supplied me with strawberries, and
the village church where I prayed to be virtuous, while I yet knew of vice and
virtue but the name, all have acquired rights to my memory and my love!


Osm. What? these costly dresses, these scenes of pomp and greatness --


Ang. Dazzle my eyes, but leave my heart unsatisfied. What I would meet with is
affection, not respect; I had rather be obliged than obeyed; and all these
glittering gems are far less dear to me, than one flower of a wreath which
Edwy's hands have woven.


Osm. Confusion!


Ang. While I saw you, Cheviot Hills, I was happy, Oh! how happy! While I
listened to your artless accents, friends of my childhood, how swelled my fond
heart with gratitude and pleasure! At morn, when I left my bed, light were my
spirits, and gay as the zephyrs of summer; and when at night my head again
pressed my pillow, I whispered to myself, "Happy has been today, and tomorrow
will be as happy!" Then sweet was my sleep; and my dreams were of those whom I
loved dearest.


Osm. Romantic enthusiast! these thoughts did well for the village maid, but
disgrace the daughter of Sir Malcolm Mowbray: Let them be changed for others,
better suited to your birth, to the fortune which awaits you. Hear me^ Angela;
an English Baron loves you, a nobleman tha^ whom our island boasts few more
potent. It Is to him that your hand is destined; it is on him that your heart
must be bestowed.


Ang. I cannot dispose of that which has long been another's. My heart is
Edwy's.


Osm. Edwy's? A peasant's?


Ang. For the obscurity of his birth, chance must be blamed; the merit of his
virtues belongs wholly to himself.


Osm. By Heaven, you seem to think that poverty is a virtue.


Ang. Sir, I think it is a misfortune, not a crime: And witen in-spite of
nature's injustice, and the frowns of a prejudiced and illiberal world, I see
some low-born but illustrious spirit prove itself superior to the station which
it fills, I hail it with pleasure, with admiration, with respect! Such a spirit
I found in Edwy, and, finding, loved.


Osm. My blood boils with passion!


Ang. You say, that by these sentiments I disgrace my rank: I say, that to
break my given word, would disgrace it more. Edwy has my plighted faith: He
received it on the last evening which I passed in Northumberland, as we sat on
a^low bench before old Allan's cottage. It was an heavenly night, sweet and
tranquil as the loves of angels: A gentle breeze whispered 'among the
honeysuckles which bloomed above us, and the full moon tinged with her silver
light the distant towers of Alnwick. It was then that for the first time I gave
him my hand, and swore that I never would give it but to him: It was then that
for the first time he pressed his lips to mine, and I swore that my lips should
never be pressed by another!


Osm. Girl! girl! you drive me to distraction!


Ang. You alarm me, my Lord! Permit me to retire.

Going, Osmond detains her violently by the arm.
Osm. Stay! -- [In a softer tone.] Angela, I love you.


Ang. [Starting.] My Lord!


Osm. [Passionately.] Love you to madness! -- My bosom is a gulf of devouring
flames! I must quench them in your arms, or perish! -- Nay, strive not to
escape; remain and hear me! I offer you my hand; if you accept it, mistress of
these fair and rich domains, your days shall glide away in happiness and
honor; but if you refuse, and scorn my offer, force shall this instant --


Ang. Force? Oh, no! -- You dare not be so base!


Osm. Reflect on your situation, Angela: You are in my power -- remember it,
and be wise.


Ang. If you have a generous mind, that will be my surest safeguard. Be it my
plea, Osmond, when thus I sue to you for mercy, for protection! Look on me with
pity, Osmond: It Is the daughter of the man you loved; it is a creature,
friendless, wretched and forlorn, who kneels before you, who flies to you for
refuge! True, I am in your power: Then fave me, respect me, treat me not
cruelly; for -- I am in your power.


Osm. I will hear no more. Will you accept my of^er?


Ang. Osmond, I conjure you --


Osm. Answer my question!


Ang. Mercy! Mercy!


Osm. Will you be mine? -- Speak! Speak!


Ang. [After a moment's pause, rises, and pronounces with firmness.] Never --
so help me Heaven!


Osm. [Seizing her.] Your fate then is decided!

Angela shrieks.
Percy. [In a hollow voice.] Hold!


Osm. [Starts, but still grasps Angola's arm.] Ha! What was that?


Ang. [Struggling to escape.] Hark! hark! -- Heard you not a voice?


Osm. [Gazing upon Percy.] It came from hence! -- From Reginald! -- Was it not
a delusion? -- Did indeed his spirit -- [Relapsing into his former passion.]
Well, be it so! Though his ghost should rush between us, thus would I clasp her
-- Horror! What sight is this? -- [ At the moment that he again seines Angela,
Percy extends his truncheon with a menacing gesture, and descends from the
pedestal. Osmond releases Angela, who immediately rushes from the chamber,
while Percy advances a few steps, and remains gazing on the Earl stedfastly] --
I know that shield! -- that helmet! -- Speak to me, dreadful vision! -- Tax me
with my crimes! -- Tell me, that you come -- Stay! Speak! -- [ Following Percy,
who, when he reaches the door, through which Angela escaped, turns, and signs
to him with his hand. Osmond starts back in terror.] -- He forbids my
following! -- He leaves me! -- The door closes -- [In a sudden burst of
passion, and drawing his sword] -- Hell and fiends! I Will follow him, though
lightnings blast med --

[He rushes distractedly from the chamber.]
SCENE II. -- The Castle-Hall.
Enter ALICE. Alice. Here Is rudeness! Here Is ill-breeding! On my conscience,
this house grows worse and worse every day.


Enter MOTLEY. Motl. What can he have done with himself? Perhaps weary of
waiting for me in the Armoury, he has found his way alone to Angela. How now,
dame Alice, what has happened to you? You look angry.


Alice. By my troth, fool, I Have little reason to look pleased. To be frightened
out of my wits by night, and thumped and bumped about by day, is not likely to
put one in the best humor.


Motl. Poor soul! And who has been thumping and bumping you?


Alice. Who has? You should rather ask who has not. -- Why only hear: -- As I
was just now going along the narrow passage which leads to the Armoury --
singing to myself, and thinking of nothing, I met Lady Angela flying away as if
for dear life! -- So I dropped her a courtsey -- but might as well have spared
my pains. Without minding me any more than if I had been a dog or a cat, she
pushed me on one side; and before I could recover my balance, somebody else,
who came bouncing by me, gave me the other thump -- and there I lay sprawling
upon the floor. However, I tumbled with all possible decency; and took great
care that my petticoats should cover my legs.


Motl. Somebody else! What somebody else?


Alice. I know not; but he seemed to be in armor.


Motl. In armor? Pray, Alice, looked he like a ghost?


Alice. What he looked like, I cannot say; but I Am sure he didn't feel like
one. However, you have not heard the worst. While I was sprawling upon the
ground, my Lord comes tearing along the passage -- The first thing he did was
to stumble against me -- away went his heels -- over he came -- and in the
twinkling of an eye there lay his Lordship! As soon as he got up again --
Mercy? how he stormed! -- He snatched me up; cal^ed me an^ugly old witch; shook
the breath out of my body -- then clapped me on the ground again, and bounced
away after the other two!


Motl. My mind misgives me!. But what-can this mean, Alice?


Alice. The meaning I neither know, or care about; but this I know -- I Will stay
no longer in an house where I Am treated so disrespectfully. "My Lady!" -- says
I -- "Out of my way!" -- says she, and pushes me on one side. "My Lord," --
says I -- "You be damned!" -- says he, and pushes me on the other! I protest I
never was so ill used, even when I was a young woman.


Exit. Motl. This account alarms me! -- Should Percy be discovered -- The very
thought gives me a creak in my neck! At any rate, I had better inquire whether
--

[Going.]
Enter FATHER PHILIP, hastily. F. Phil. [Stopping him.] Get out of the house!
-- That Is your way.


Motl. Why, what is the meaning --


F. Phil. Don't stand prating here; but do as I bid you.


Motl. But first tell me --


F. Phil. I can only tell you to get out of the house. Kenric has discovered
Earl Percy -- You are known to have introduced him -- The Africans are in
search of you: If you are found, you will be hung out of hand. Fly then to
Edric's cottage; hide yourself there. Hark! -- Some one comes! Away, away, ere
it is too late!

[Pushing him out.]
Motl. [Confused.] But Earl Percy -- But Angela --


F. Phil. Leave them to me. You shall hear from me soon. Only take care of
yourself, and fly with all diligence! -- Away!


Exit Motley. F. Phil. [Alone.] So, so, he is off, and now I Have time to take
breath. I Have not moved so nimbly for the last twenty years; and, in truth, I Am
at present but ill calculated for velocity of motion. However, my exertions
have not been throv^ away: I Have saved this poor knave from Osmond's vengeance
-- and should my plan, for the Lady's release, succeed -- Poor little soul! --
To see how she took on, when Percy was torn from her! Well, well, she shall be
rescued from her tyrant. The moveable pannels -- the subterraneous passages --
the secret springs are well known to me -- Oh! I cannot fail of success: But in
order to secure it, I Will finally arrange my ideas in the Buttery. Whenever I Have
any great design in hand, I always ask advice of a flaggon of ale, and mature
my plan over a cold venison pasty. Oh! what an excellent genius must that man
have had, who first invented eating and drinking!


Exit. SCENE III. -- A spacious Chamber: On one Side is a Couch: On the other a
Table, which is placed under an arched and lofty Window.
Enter OSMOND, followed by SAIB, HASSAN, MULEY, and ALARIC, who conduct PERCY,
disarmed. Osm. This, Sir, is your prison; but, doubtless, your confinement will
not continue long. The moment which gives me Angela's hand, shall restore you
to liberty; and, till that moment arrives, farewell.


Percy. Stay, Sir, and hear me! -- By what authority presume you to call me
captive? -- Have you forgotten that you speak to Northumberland's Earl?


Osm. Well may I forget him, who could so far forget himself. Was it worthy of
Northumberland's Earl to steal disguised into my Castle, and plot with my
servant to rob me of my most precious treasure?


Percy. Mine was that treasure. You deprived me of it basely, and I was
justified in striving to regain my own.


Osm. Earl, nothing can justify unworthy means. If you were wronged, why sought
you not your right with your sword's point? I then should have esteemed you a
noble foe; and as such would have treated you: But you have stooped to paltry
artisice, and attacked me like some midnight ruffian, privately, and in
disguise. By this am I authorized to forget your station, and make your penance
as degrading as your offense was base.


Percy. If such are indeed your sentiments, prove them now. Restore my sword,
unsheathe your own, and be Angela the conqueror's reward!


Osm. No, Earl Percy! -- I am not so rash a gamester as to suffer that cast to
be recalled, by which the stake is mine already. Angela is in my power: The
only man who could wrest her from my arms has wilfully made himself my captive:
Such he is, and such he shall remain.


Percy. Insulting tyrant! Your cowardice in refusing my challenge proves
sufficiently --


Osm. Be calm, Earl Percy! -- You forget yourself. That I am no coward, my
sword has proved in the fields of Scotland. My sword shall again prove it, if,
when you are restored to liberty, you still question the courage of my heart!
Angela once mine, repeat your defiance, nor doubt my answering.


Percy. Angela thine? -- That she shall never be! There are angels above who
favor virtue, and the hour of retribution must one day arrive. --

[Throws himself upon the couch.]
Osm. But long ere the arrival of that hour shall Angela have been my bride;
and now farewell, Lord Percy! -- Muley and Saib!


Both. My Lord!


Osm. To your charge I commit the Earl. Quit not this apartment, nor suffer him
for one moment from your sight.


Saib and Muley. My Lord, we shall obey you.


Osm. [Aside.] If she refuse me still, the death of this, her favorite -- his
death! Oh! through what bloody paths do I wander in pursuit of happiness! Yes,
I am guilty! Heaven! how guilty! Yet lies the fault with me? Did my own
pleasure plant in my bosom these tempestuous passions? No! they were given me
at my birth; they were sucked in with my existence. Nature formed me the slave
of wild desires; and Fate, as she frowned upon my cradle, exclaimed; "I doom
this babe to be a villain and a wretch!"


[Exit, followed by Hassan and Alaric, who lock the door after them. Saib.
Look, Muley, how bitterly he frowns.


Muley. Now he starts from the sofa! Faith, he is in a monstrous fu^y.


Saib. That may well be: When you mean to take in other people, it certainly is
provoking to be taken in yourself.


Percy. [After walking a few turns with a disordered air, suddenly stops.] H^^^
gone to Angela! Gone, perhaps, to renew that outrage ^^ose completion my
presence alone prevented. H^loless and unprotected, with no friend but
innocence -- no ^^^cates save tears -- how will she now repel his violence?


Muley. Now he is in a deep study: Marry, if he studies himself out of this
tower, he is a cleverer fellow than I take him for.


Percy. Were I not Osmond's captive, all might yet be well. Summoning my
vassals, who by this time must be near at hand, forcing the Castle, and tearing
Angela from the arms of her tyrant! Alas! my captivity has rendered my plan
impracticable! Eternal curses upon Gilbert, who persuaded me to adopt this
artifice! Curses on my own rash folly, which has thrown me defenseless in the
power of my foe!


Muley. That Is right -- Another stamp or two, and the Tower comes rattling
about our ears.


Percy. And are there then no hopes of liberty?


Saib. He fixes his eyes on us.


Percy. Might not these fellows -- I can but try. Now stand my friend, thou
master-key to human hearts! Aid me, thou potent devil, gold! Hear me, my worthy
friends! Come nearer.


Saib. His worthy friends! Are we such, Muley?


Muley. Yes, truly are we; for friends in need are friends indeed: Marry, if he
were not in need, he would call us his mortal foes.


Percy. My good fellows, you are charged with a disagreeable office, and to
obey a tyrant's mandates cannot be pleasant to you; there is something in your
looks which has prejudiced me too much in your favor to believe it possible.


Saib. Nay, there certainly is something in our appearance highly prepossessing.


Muley. And I know that you must admire the delicacy of our complexions!


Percy. The tincture of your skin, my good fellow, is of little consequence:
Many a worthy heart heats within a dusky bosom, and I am convinced that such an
heart inhabits yours; for your looks tell me that you feel for, and are
anxious to relieve, my sufferings. See you this purse, my friends?


Muley. It Is too far off, and I Am short-sighted. If you will put it a little
nearer --


Percy. Restore me to liberty! and not this purse alone, but ten times its
value shall be yours.


Saib. To liberty?


Muley. That purse?


Saib. Muley.


Muley. Saib!


Percy. [Aside.] By all my hopes, they hesitate! You well know, that my wealth
and power are equal, not to say superior, to Earl Osmond's: Release me from my
dungeon, and share that power and wealth! On the events of today depend my
life's future happiness, nay, perhaps my life itself. Judge, then, if you
assist me, how great will be the service rendered me, and believe that your
reward shall equal my obligation.


Saib. I know not what to answer.


Muley. In truth, my Lord, your offers are so generous, and that purse is so
tempting -- Saib, what say you?

[Winking to him.]
Saib. The Earl speaks so well, and promises so largely, that I own I Am
strangely tempted.


Muley. Look you, Saib -- will you stand by me?


Saib. [After a moment's thought.] I will!


Muley. There Is my hand, then. My Lord, we are your servants!


Percy. This is beyond my hopes! A thousand thanks, my worthy fellows! Be
assured that the performance of my promises shall soon follow the execution of
yours.


Saib. Of that we make no doubt.


Percy. You agree, then, to release me?


Muley. It Is impossible to do otherwise; for I feel that pity, generosity, and
every moral feeling command me to trouble your Lordship for that purse.


Percy. There it is! And now unlock the door.


Muley. [Chinking the purse.] Here it is! And now I Am obliged to you. As for
your promises, my Lord, pray don't trouble yourself to remember them, as I
sha'n't trouble myself to remember mine.


Percy. [Starting.] Ha! What mean you?


Saib. [Firmly.] Earl, that we are faithful!


Muley. I wonder you didn't read that too in our amiable looks!


Percy. What! Will you not keep your word?


Muley. In good truth, no; we mean to keep nothing -- except the purse.


Percy. Perfidious villains*


Saib. You mistake us, Sir; we cannot be villains; for I, you know, am your
Lordship's "worthy friend!"


Muley. And I your Lordship's unworthy pensioner!


Percy. Confusion! -- To be made the jest of such rascals!


Saib. Earl Percy, we are none; but we should have been, could your gold have
bribed us to betray our master. We have but done our duty; you have but gained
your just reward; for they who seek to deceive others, should ever be deceived
themselves.


Percy. Silence, fellow! -- Leave me to my thoughts.

[Throwing himself passionately upon the couch.]
Muley. Oh! with all our hearts! We ask no better.


Saib. Muley, we share that purse?


Muley. Undoubtedly: Sit down, and examine its contents.

[They seat themselves on the floor in the front of the stage.]
Percy. How unfortunate, that the only merit of these villains should be
fidelity! No hope now is left! Angela is lost, and with her my happiness!


CHORUS OF VOICES. [Singing without.] "Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!" Muley.
Hark! What Is that?


Saib. I Will see. [Mounting upon the table.] This window is so high --


Muley. Here, here! Take this chair.

[Saib places the chair upon the table, and thus lifts himself to a level with
the window, which he opens.]
SONG AND CHORUS. Motl. [Singing without.] Sleep you, or wake you, Lady bright?


Chor. [Without.] -- Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Motl. -- -- -- Now is the fittest time for flight.


Chor. -- -- -- Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Motl. -- -- -- Know, from your tyrant's farther power,
Beneath the window of your tower,
A boat now waits to set you free;
Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!

Chor. -- -- -- -- Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Percy. [Who has half raised himself from the couch during the latter part of
the Song, and listened attentively.] Surely I know that voice!


Muley. Now, what is the matter?


Saib. A boat lies at the foot of the tower, and the fishermen sing while they
draw their nets.


Percy. I could not be mistaken -- It was Gilbert!


Saib. Hark! They begin again!


SECOND STANZA. Motl. Though deep the stream, though high the wall,


Chor. Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Motl. The danger, trust me, Love, is small:


Chor. Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Motl. To spring below then, never dread;
My arms to catch you shall be spread;
And far from hence you soon shall be,
Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!

Chor. Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Percy. I understand him. He bids me -- Yet the danger -- What course shall I
pursue?


Muley. Pr'ythee, come down, Saib; I long to divide the purse --


Saib. Stay a moment: one more stanza, and I Am with you. Now, silence!


THIRD STANZA. Motl. Fair Emma hushed her heart's alarms:


Chor. Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Motl. She sprang into her Lover's arms:


Chor. Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Motl. Unhurt she fell; then swift its way
The boat pursued without delay;
While Emma, placed on Edgar's knee,
Sang "Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!"

Chor. Sing Megen-oh! Oh! Megen-Ee!


Muley. Will you never quit that window?


Saib. [Shutting it, and descending.] Here I am, and now for the purse.

[They resume their seats upon the ground; Saib opens the purse, and begins to
reckon the gold.]
Percy. Yes, I must brave the danger. I will feign to sleep; and when my
gaolers are off their guard, then aid me, blessed Providence!

[Extending himself upon the couch.]
Saib. Hold, Muley! What if, instead of sharing the purse, we throw for its
contents? Here are dice.


Muley. With all my heart -- And look! to pass our time the better, here is a
bottle of the best sack in the Earl's cellar.


Saib. Good! good! And now, be this angel the stake -- But first, what is our
prisoner doing?


Muley. Oh! he sleeps: Mind him not. Come, come -- Throw!


Saib. Here goes -- Nine! -- Now to you.


Muley. Nine too! -- Double the stake.


Saib. Agreed! and the throw is mine. Hark! What noise!

[ Duri^^ this dialogue, Perey has approached the table in silence -- At the
moment he prepares to mount it, Saib looks round, and Percy hastily throws
himself back upon the couch.]
Muley. Oh! nothing, nothing!


Saib. Methought I heard the Earl --


Muley. Mere fancy: You see he is sleeping soundly Come, come -- Throw!


Saib. There, then -- Elven!


Muley. That Is bad -- Huzza! -- Sixes!


Saib. Plague on your fortune! -- Come, double or quits.


Muley. Be it so, and I throw. -- Zounds! Only five!


Saib. Then I think this hit must be mine. -- Aces, by heavens!


Muley. Ha, ha, ha! -- Your health, friend.


Percy. [Who has again reached the table, mounted the chair, and, opening the
window, now stands at it, and signs to the men below.] They see me, and extend
a cloth beneath the window! -- It Is a fearful height!


Saib. Do you mean to empty the bottle? Come, come -- Give it me.


Muley. Take it, blunder-head!

[Saib drinks.]
Percy. They encourage me to venture! -- Now then, or never! [Aloud.] Angels of
bliss, protect me!

[He throws himself from the window.]
Muley and Said [Starting at the noise.] Hell and furies!


Saib [ Dashes down the bottle, and climbs to the window hastily, while Muley
remains below in an attitude of surprise.] Escaped! Escaped!


Percy, Motley, etc. [Without.] Huzza! huzza! huzza!


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. -- The Castle Hall.
Enter KENRIC. Kenr. YONDER he stalks, and seems buried in himself. Now then to
attack him while my late service is still fresh upon his memory. Should he
reject my petition positively, he shall have good cause to repent his
ingratitude. Percy is in the neighborhood; and that secret, known only to
myself, will surely -- but, silence! Look where he comes!


Enter OSMOND. Osm. It shall not be! Away with these foreboding terrors which
weigh down my heart! Does not all smile upon my fortunes? my rival wears my
chains, he cannot wrest her from me; and, with tomorrow's dawn, Angela shall
be mine. Bound then high, my heart! Pleasure, sweet guest, so long a stranger,
Oh to my bosom welcome once more! I will forget the past, and enjoy the
present, and make those raptures again mine, which -- Ah! no, no, no! --
Conscience, that serpent, winds her folds around the cup of my bliss, and, ere
my lips can reach it, her venom is mingled with the draught.


Kenr. How profound the gloom which obscures his brow! -- How fixed, how
hopeless glares his dark eye-ball! -- Oh! dreadful is the villain's look when
he ponders on committed crimes!


Osm. Evening approaches fast. [Drawing near and opening the window.] Already
the air breathes cooler, and the beams of the setting fun sparkle on the waters
of Conway. How fair, how tranquil all without! How dark, how comfortless all
within! Hark! the sound of music! -- The peasants are returning from labor:
they move with gay and careless steps, carolling as they go some rustic ditty;
and will pass the night in rest, for they have passed the day in innocence!


CHORUS [without.] Pleased the toils of day to leave,
Home we haste with footsteps light:
Oh! how gay the cotter's eve!
Oh! how calm the cotter's night!

Osm. [Closing the window with violence.] Curses upon them -- I will look, I
will listen no more! I sicken at the sight of happiness, which I never more
must enjoy: I hate the possessors of hearts untainted -- hate, for I envy! --
Oh! fly from my eyes, bright day! Speed thy pace, darkness! thou art my love!
haste to unfold thy sable mantle, and robe the world in the color of my soul!


Kenr. Now then to accost him -- yet I tremble!


Osm. Anguish! endless, hopeless anguish! Day or night, no moment of rest. When
I sleep, dreams of strange horror still fright me from my couch! When I wake, I
find in every object some cause for distrust -- read the dread charge in every
eye, "thou art a murderer!" and tremble, lest the agents of my guilt should
work its punishment. And see where he walks, the chief object of my fears -- he
shall not be so long! His anxiety to leave me, his late mysterious threats --
No, no, I will not live in fear. -- Soft! -- he advances!


Kenr. So melancholy, my Lord?


Osm. Aye, Kenric, and must be so, till Angela is mine. Know, that even now,
she extorted from me a promise, that till tomorrow I would leave her
unmolested.


Kenr. But till tomorrow?


Osm. But till tomorrow? Oh! in that little space a lover's eye views myriads
of dangers! Yet think not good Kenric, that your late services are undervalued
by me, or that I have forgotten those for which I have long been your debtor.
When, bewildered by hatred of Reginald, and grief for Evelina's loss, my dagger
was placed on the throat of their infant, your hand arrested the blow -- judge
then how grateful I must feel, when I behold in Ange^a her mother's living
counterpart -- behold her such, as when shielding with her body her fallen
husband, Evelina received that dagger in her breast, which I aimed at the heart
of Reginald -- Worthy Kenric, how can I repay your services?


Kenr. These you may easily: but what, Earl Osmond, what can repay me for the
sacrifice of my innocence? I was virtuous till you bade me be guilty; my hands
were pure till you taught me to stain them with blood! You painted in strong
colors the shame of servitude -- you promised freedom, riches, independence --
you vanquished the resistance of my better angel, and never since have I known
one moment of rest!


Osm. Good Kenric --


Kenr. All here reminds me of my guilt -- every object recalls to mind Reginald
and his murdered Lady! -- Let me then claim that independence so long promised,
and seek for peace in some other climate, since memory forbids me to taste it
in this.


Osm. Kenric, ere named, your wish was granted. In a far distant country a
retreat is already prepared for you; there may you hush those clamours of
conscience, which must reach me, I fear, even in the arms of Angela. Yet do not
leave me till she is my bride; stay yet a week in Conway Castle; and then,
though it will cost me many a^pang, Kenric, you shall bid it a long adieu. --
Are you eontented?


Kenr. [Affected.] My Lord! -- Gratitude -- Amazement -- And I doubted -- I
suspected -- Oh! my good Lord, how have I wronged your kindness!


Osm. No more -- I must not hear you. [Aside.] Shame! shame! that ever my soul
should stoop to dissembling with my slave! -- Kenric, farewell: Till Angela is
mine, keep a strict eye on Percy; and then --


SAIB enters, and advances with apprehension. Osm. How now? why this confusion?
-- why do you tremble? -- Speak!


Saib. My Lord! -- the prisoner --


Osm. The Prisoner? -- Go on! go on!


Saib. [Kneeling.] Pardon, my Lord, pardon! our prisoner has escaped!


Osm. Villain! --

[Wild with rage he draws his dagger, and rushes upon Saib -- Kenric holds his
arm.]
Kenr. Hold! hold! -- What would you do?


Osm. [Struggling.] Unhand me, or by Heaven --


Kear. Away! away! -- Fly, fellow, fly and save yourself!


Exit Saib. Kenr. [Releasing Osmond.] Consider, my Lord -- happily 'twas not by
his keeper's fault that --


Osm. [Furiously.] What is it to me by whose? -- Is not my rival fled? -- Soon
will Northumberland's guards encircle my walls, and force from me -- Yet that
by Heaven they shall not! No! Rather than resign her, my own hand shall give
this Castle a prey to flames; then plunging with Angela into the blazing gulf,
I Will leave these ruins to tell posterity how desperate was my love, and how
dreadful my revenge! -- [Going he stops and turns to Kenric.] -- And you, who
dared to rush between me and my resentment -- you who c^^ld so well succeed in
saving others -- now look to yourself!


Exit. Kenr. Ha! that look -- that threat -- Yet he seemed so kind, so
grateful! -- He smiled too! -- Oh! there is ever danger when a villain smiles.


SAIB enters softly, looking round him with caution. Saib. [In a low voice.]
Hist! -- Kenric!


Kenr. How now? -- What brings --


Saib. Silence, and hear me! -- You have saved my life, nor will I be
ungrateful -- Look at this phial!


Kenr. Ha! did the Earl --


Saib. Even so: a few drops of this liquor should tonight have flavoured your
wine -- you would never have drank again! Mark me then -- When I offer you a
goblet at supper, drop it as by accident. For this night I give you life: use
it to quit the Castle; for no longer than till tomorrow dare I disobey our
Lord's commands. Farewell, and fly from Conway -- You bear with you my thanks!


Exit. Kenr. Can it be possible? Is not all this a dream? -- Villain! villain!
-- Yes, yes, I must away! -- But tremble, traitor! -- A bolt, of which you
little think, hangs over, and shall crush you! -- The keys are still in my
possession -- Angela shall be the partner of my flight. -- My prisoner too --
Yet hold! May not resentment -- may not Reginald's sixteen years captivity --
Oh! no! Angela shall be my advocate; and, grateful for her own, for her
parent's life preserved, she can, she will obtain my pardon. Yet, should she
fail, at least I shall drag down Osmond in my fall, and sweeten death's bitter
cup with vengeance!


Exit. SCENE II. -- The Cedar-Room with folding Doors in the middle, and a
large antique Bed; on one Side is the Portrait of a Lady, on the other that of
a Warrior armed. Both are at full length. -- After a pause, the Female Portrait
slides back, and Father Philip, after looking in, advances cautiously.
F. Phil. [Closing the panel.] Thus far I have proceeded without danger,
though not without difficulty. Yon narrow passage is by no means calculated for
persons of my habit of body. By my Holidame, I begin to suspect that the fool
is in the right! I certainly am growing corpulent. -- And now, how shall I
employ myself? -- Sinner that I am, why did I forget my bottle of sack? -- The
time will pass tediously till Angela comes. -- And, to complete the business,
yonder is the haunted Oratory. What if the ghost should pop out on me? Blessed
St. Bridget, there would be a tete-a-tete (...) this is a foolish fear: -- It Is
yet scarce eight o'clock, and your ghosts always keep late hours; yet I don't
like the idea of our being such near neighbors. If Alice says true, the
apparition just now lives next door to me; but the Lord forbid that we should
ever be visiting acquaintance! -- Would I had something to drive her out of my
head! A good book now, or a bottle of sack, St. Augustine, or a cold venison
pasty, would be worth its weight in gold: but in the ch^^bers of these young
girls one finds nothing good either to read, drink, or eat. Now my last
patroness, the Baroness O'Drench -- Ah! to hear the catalogue of her crimes was
quite a pleasure, for she always confessed them over a surloin of beef, and,
instead of telling a bead, swallowed a bumper! -- Oh! she was a worthy soul! --
But hark! -- Angela comes.


Osm. [Without.] What, Alice! -- Alice, I say!


F. Phil. By St. David, it is the Earl! I Will away as fast as I can! -- [Trying
to open the door] -- I cannot find the spring! -- Lord forgive me my sins! --
Where can I hide myself? -- Ha! the bed! -- It Is the very thing -- [Throws
himself into the bed, and conceals himself under the clothes.] -- Heaven grant
that it may not break down with me; for, Oh! what a fall would be there, my
countrymen! -- They come! --


[The door is unlocked.] Enter OSMOND, ANGELA, and ALICE. Osm. [Entering.] You
have heard my will, Lady. Till your hand is mine, you quit not this chamber.


Ang. If then it must be so, welcome my eternal prison! -- Yet eternal it shall
not be! -- My hero, my guardian-angel is at liberty! Soon shall his horn make
these hateful towers tremble, and your fetters be exchanged for the arms of
Percy!


Osm. Beware, beware, Angela! -- Dare not before me --


Ang. Before you! before the world! -- Is my attachment a disgrace? No! it is my
pride; for its object is deserving. Long ere I knew him, Percy's fame was dear
to me. While I still believed him the peasant Edwy, often, in his hearing, have
I dwelt upon Northumberland's praise, and chid him that he spoke of our Lord so
coldly! Ah! little did I think that the man then seated beside me was he whom I
envied for his power of doing good, whom I loved for exerting that power so
largely! -- Judge then, Earl Osmond, on my arrival here how strongly I must
have felt the contrast! -- What peasant names you his benefactor? What beggar
has been comforted by your bounty? What sick man preserved by your care? --
Your breast is unmoved by woe, your ear is deaf to complaint, your doors are
barred against the poor and wretched. Not so are the gates of Alnwic Castle;
they are open as their owner's heart.


Alice. My hair stands on end to hear her!


Osm. Insulting girl! -- This to my face?


Ang. Nay, never bend your brows! -- Shall I tremble, because you frown? Shall
my eye sink, because anger flashes from yours? -- No! that would ill become
the bride of Northumberland.


Osm. Amazement! -- Can this be the gentle, timid Angela?


Ang. Wonder you that the worm should turn, when you trample it so cruelly? --
Oh! wonder no more: Ere he was torn from me, I clasped Percy to my breast, and
my heart caught a spark of that fire which flames in his unceasingly!


Alice. Caught fire, Lady! -- Bless me, I hope you didn't burn yourself?


Osm. Silence, old crone! -- I have heard you calmly, Angela; now then hear me.
Twelve hours shall be allowed you to reflect upon your situation: till that
period is elapsed, this chamber shall be your prison, and Alice, on whose
fidelity I can depend, your sole attendant. This term expired, should you still
reject my hand, force shall obtain for me what love denies. Speak not: I will
hear nothing! -- I swear that tomorrow sees you mine, or undone! And, skies
rain curses on me, if I keep not my oath! -- Mark that, proud girl! mark it,
and tremble!


Exit. F. Phil. Heaven be praised, he is gone!


Ang. Tremble, did he say? -- Alas! how quickly is my boasted courage vanished!
Yet I will not despair: there is a Power in heaven; there is a Percy on earth:
on them will I rely to save me.


Alice. The first may, Lady; but as to the second, he will be of no use, depend
on it. Now, might I advise, you would accept my Lord's offer. What matters it,
whether the man's name be Osmond or Percy? An Earl's an Earl after all; and
though one may be something richer than the other --


Ang. Oh! silence, Alice! nor aid my tyrant's designs, Rather instruct me how
to counteract them. You have influence in the Castle; assist me to escape, and
be assured that Percy's gratitude and generosity --


Alice. I help you to escape! Not for the best gown in your Ladyship's
wardrobe. I tremble at the very idea of my Lord's rage; and, besides, had I the
will, I Have not the power. Kenric keeps the keys: we could not possibly quit the
Castle without his knowledge; and if the Earl threatens to use force with you
-- Oh Gemni! what would he use with me, Lady?


Ang. Threatens, Alice! I despise his threats! Ere it pillows Osmond's head,
will I plunge this poniard in my bosom.


Alice. Holy fathers! -- A dagger!


Ang. Even now, as I wandered through the Armoury, my eye was attracted by its
glittering handle. Look, Alice! it bears Osmond's name; and the point --


Alice. Is rusty with blood! -- Take it away, Lady! take it away! -- I never
see blood without fainting!


Ang. [Putting up the dagger.] This weapon may render me good service. But, ah!
what service has it rendered Osmond! Happily 'twas this very poniard which drank
his brother's blood, or which pierced the fair breast of Evelina! -- Said you
not, Alice, that this was her portrait?


Alice. I did, Lady; and the likeness was counted excellent.


Ang. How fair! how heavenly! What sweetness, yet what dignity, in her blue,
speaking eyes!


Alice. No wonder that you admire her, Lady: she was as like you as one pea to
another. But this morning you know I promised to show you her Oratory, and here
I Have brought the key. Shall I unlock the door?


Ang. Do so, good Alice! Happily for a moment it may abstract my thoughts from my
own sorrows.


F. Phil. [ While Alice un'ocks the door.] Will the old woman never be gone? I
dare not discover myself in her presence.


Alice. [ Having opened the folding doors, an Oratory is seen, richly
ornamented with carving and painted glass: Angela and Alice enter it.] This
room has not been opened since my Lady's death, and every thing remains as she
left it. Look, here is her veil -- her prayer book too, in which she was
reading on the very night before she quitted the Castle, never to return!


F. Phil. I Am out of all patience.


Alice. And that guittar! -- How often have I heard her play upon that guittar!
She would sit in yonder window for hours, and still she played airs so sad, so
sweet -- To be sure she had the finest voice that ever --

[ During this speech, Angela, who at first looks round with curiosity, throws
the veil carelessly ov^^ her face; and, taking a guittar from the table,
strikes a few wild and melancholy notes. Alice, whose back is toward her,
turns hastily round, screams, and rushes from the Oratory. Angela casts the
veil and guittar upon the table, and follows her.]
Ang. What alarms you?


Alice. Is it you, Lady? let me die if I didn't take you for the ghost! Your
air, your look, your attitude, all were so like the deceased Countess, that --
Well, well, I Will not enter that room again in a hurry; I protest my hand
trembles so, that I can hardly turn the key.


Ang. How contagious is terror; this silly woman's apprehensions have spread to
my bosom, and scarce can I look round without alarm. The stillness too of
evening -- the wavering and mysterious light which streams through these
pointed windows -- And, hark! 'twas the shriek of the screech-owl, which nests
in the tower above.


Alice. [Having locked the folding doors] Ah! 'twas a sad day for me, when I
heard of the dear Lady's loss! Look at that bed, Lady; that very bed was here is.


F. Phil. Was it so? Oh! ho!


Alice. How often have I seen her sleeping in that bed! and oh! how like an
angel she looked when sleeping! I remember that just after Earl Reginald -- O
Lord! didn't somebody shake the curtain?


Ang. Absurd! it was the wind.


Alice. I declare it made me tremble. Well, as I was saying, I remember just
after Earl Reginald had set out to the Scottish wars, going into her room one
morning, and hearing her sob most bitterly; so advancing to the bedside, as it
might be thus -- "My Lady," says I, with a low courtsey, "Is Not your Ladyship
well?" so, with that she raised her head slowly above the quilt, and, giving me
a mournful look --

[ Here, unseen by Angela, who is contemplating Reginald's portrait, Father
Philip lifts up his head, and gives a deep groan.]
Alice. Jesu Maria! the devil! the devil! the devil!


Exit. Ang. [Turning round.] How now? [Father Philip rising from the bed -- it
breaks under him, and he rolls at Angela's feet.] -- Good heavens! a man
concealed! [Attempting to pass him, he detains her by her robe.]


F. Phil. Stay, daughter, stay; if you run I can never overtake you.


Ang. Amazement! Father Philip!


F. Phil. The very same, and at present the best friend that you have in the
world. Daughter, I came to save you.


Ang. To save me? -- Speak! -- Proceed!


F. Phil. Observe this picture; it conceals a spring, whose secret is unknown
to all in the Castle except myself. Upon touching it, the panel slides back,
and a winding passage opens into the marble hall; thence we must proceed to the
vaulted vestibule; a door is there concealed similar to this; and, after
threading the mazes of a subterranean labyrinth, we shall find ourselves in
safety on the outside of the Castle walls.


Ang. Oh! worthy, worthy Father! quick let us hasten! Let us not lose one
moment!


F. Phil. Hold! hold! Not so fast. You forget, that between the hall and
vestibule we must traverse many chambers much frequented at this early hour.
Wait till the Castle's inhabitants are asleep. Expect me, without fail, at one;
keep up your spirits, and doubt not of success. Now then I must away, lest the
Earl should perceive my absence


Ang. Stay yet one moment. Tell me, does Percy --


F. Phil. I have apprised him, that this night will restore you to liberty, and
he expects you at the ^^sherman's cottage. Now, then, farewell, fair daughter.


Ang. Good friar, till one, farewell!


[ Exit F. Philip through the sliding panel, closing it after him.] Ang. This
is thy doing, God of Justice! receive my thanks. -- Yes, Percy, we shall meet
once more -- shall meet, never again to separate! Those dreams shall be
realized, those smiling golden dreams which floated before us in Allan's happy
cottage. Hand in hand shall we wander together through life -- partners in
pleasure, partners in woe. And when the night of our existence arrives, one
spot shall receive our bodies -- one stone shall cover our grave. Allan too,
and the worthy Maud! -- my parents -- my more than parents! to smooth the
pillow of their age -- to gild their last hours with sunshine! that thought is
heaven. So glorious are my prospects, that they dazzle me to look on, and
scarce can I believe them really to exist. Oh! gracious God! should my brain be
bewildered by fancy -- should I be now the sport of some deceitful dream, seal
up my eyes forever, never let me wake again! -- I must not expect the Friar
before one; till that hour arrives, will I kneel at the feet of yonder Saint,
there tell my beads, and pray for morning.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. -- The Castle Hall. The Lamps are lighted.
Enter FATHER PHILIP. F. Philip. IT IS near midnight, and the Earl is already
retired to rest. What if I ventured now to the Lady's chamber? Hark! I hear the
sound of footsteps.


Enter ALICE. F. Phil. How, Alice, is it you?


Alice. So! So! -- Have I found you at last, Father? -- I have been in search
of you these four hours! -- Oh! I Have been so frightened since I saw you, that I
wonder I keep my senses.


F. Phil. So do I; for I Am sure they are not worth the trouble. And, pray, what
has alarmed you thus? I warrant you have taken an old cloak, pinned against the
wall, for a Spectre, or discovered the devil in the shape of a tabby-cat.


Alice. [Looking round in terror.] For the love of Heaven, Father, don't name
the devil! or, if you must speak of him, pray mention the good gentleman with
proper politeness. I Am sure, for my own part, I had always a great respect for
him, and if he hears me, I dare say he will o^^ as much.


F. Phil. Respect for the devil, you wicked woman! -- for that perfidious
serpent -- that crafty seducer --


Alice. Hush! Hush! -- Father, you make my teeth chatter with fright. For aught
I know he is within hearing, for he certainly haunts this Castle in the form of
my late Lady.


F. Phil. Form of a fiddlestick! -- Don't tell me of your --


Alice. Father, on the word of a virgin, I saw him this very evening in Lady
Angela's bed.


F. Phil. In Lady Angela's? -- On my conscience, the devil has an excellent
taste! But, Alice! Alice! -- how dare you trot about the house at this time of
night, propagating such abominable falsehoods? -- One comfort is, that nobody
will believe you. Lady Angela's virtue is too well known, and I Am persuaded she
wouldn't suffer the devil to put a single claw into her bed for the universe.


Alice. How you run on! -- Lord bless ^^e, she was not in bed herself.


F. Phil. Oh! -- Was she not?


Alice. No, to be sure: But you shall hear how it happened. We were in the
Cedar-room together; and while we were talking of this and that, Lady Angela
suddenly gave a great scream. I looked round, and what should I se^ but a tall
figure all in white extended upon the bed! At the same time I heard a voice,
which I knew to be the Countess Evelina's, pronounce in an hollow tone --
"Alice! -- Alice! Alice!" -- three times. You may be certain that I was
frightened enough. I instantly took to my heels; and just as I got without side
of the door, I heard a loud clap of thunder, and the whole chamber shook as if
tumbling into a thousand pieces!


F. Phil. Well done, Alice! -- A very good story, upon my word: It has but one
fault -- It Is not true.


Alice. Ods my life, Father, how can you tell any thing about it? Sure I should
know best; for I was there, and you were not. I repeat it -- I heard the voice
as plain as I hear your'^: Do you think I Have no ears?


F. Phil. Oh! far from it: I think you have uncommonly good ones; for you not
only hear what has been said, but what has not. Hark! -- the clock strikes
twelve: -- It Is late, and I Am sleepy, so shall bid you farewell for the present.
As to this wonderful story of yours, Alice, I don't believe one word of it:
I Will be sworn that the voice was no more like your Lady's than like mine; and
that the devil was no more in the bed than I was. Therefore, take my advice,
set your heart at rest, and go quietly to your chamber, as I am now going to
mine. -- Good night.


Alice. Good night? -- Surely you will not have the heart to leave me in this
terrible situation! -- Suppose Satan should appear to me when I Am alone! --
Sinner that I am, I should certainly die of the fright! -- Good Father, you are
a priest, and an holy man; your habit frightens the evil spirits, and they dare
not come near you: -- Oh! if you will but suffer me to pass the night in your
company --


F. Phil. Oh! monstrous! -- Oh! impudence unparalleled! -- You naughty, naughty
woman, what could put such thoughts in your head?


Alice. What Is the matter now?


F. Phil. Does not my sacred habit inspire you with awe? -- Does not the
exemplary chastity of my past life warn you to conceal such licentious desires?
-- Pass the night with me, indeed? -- I Am shocked at the very thought!


Alice. The man's mad! -- Father, as I hope to be saved --


F. Phil. Nay! -- Come not near me! -- Offer not to embrace me!


Alice. I embrace you? -- Lord! Fellow, I wouldn't touch you for the universe!


F. Phil. Was it for this that you still flattered my person, and declared that
nothing became a man more than a big belly? -- Was it for this that you strove
to win my heart through the medium of my stomach; that you used to come
languishing every day with some liquorish dish; and, while you squeezed my left
hand tenderly, placed a sack-posset in the right? -- Heavens! how deep-laid
were your plans of seduction! -- But mark me, tempter: In vain has the soup
been salted, the ragout seasoned, and the pepper-box shaken with unsparing
hand! My virtue is proof against all your culinary spell; the fairness of my
innocence is still ^^blemished; and in spite of your luscious stews and savoury
hashes, I retire like a second St. Anthony, victorious from Temptation's lists!


Exit. Alice. There, he is gone! -- Dear heart! Dear heart! what shall I do now?
-- It Is past twelve o'clock, and stay by myself I dare not. -- I Will even wake
the laundry-maid, make her sit up in my room all night; and it is hard if two
women a'n't a match for the best devil in Christendom.


Exit. Enter SAIB and HASSAN. Saib. The Earl then has forgiven me! -- A moment
longer, and his pardon would have come too late. Had not Kenric held his hand,
by this time I should be at supper with St. Peter.


Hass. Your folly well deserved such a reward. Knowing the Earl's hasty nature,
you should have shunned him till the first storm of passion was past, and
circumstances had again made your ministry needful. Anger then would have armed
his hand in vain; for interest, the white man's God, would have blunted the
point of his dagger.


Saib. I trusted that his gratitude for my past services --


Hass. European gratitude? Seek constancy in the winds -- fire in ice --
darkness in the blaze of sunshine! -- But seek not gratitude in the breast of
an European!


Saib. Then, why so attached to Osmond? For what do you value him?


Hass. Not for his virtues, but for his vices, Saib: Can there for me be a
greater cause to love him? Am I not branded with scorn? Am I not marked out for
dishonor? Was I not free, and am I not a slave? Was I not once beloved, and am
I not now despised? What man, did I tender my service, would accept the negro's
friendship? What woman, did I talk of affection, would not turn from the negro
with disgust? Yet, in my own dear land, my friendship was courted, my love was
returned. I had parents, children, wife! -- Bitter thought, in one moment all
were lost to me! Can I remember this, and not hate these white men? Can I think
how cruelly they have wronged me, and not rejoice when I see them suffer? --
Attached to Osmond, say you? Saib, I hate him! Yet viewing him as an avenging
friend sent hither to torment his fellows, it glads me that he fills his office
so well. Oh! it is a thought which I would not barter for empires, to know that
in this world he makes others suffer, and will suffer himself for their
tortures in the next!


Saib. But say, you be one of those whom he causes to suffer, how then? Hassan,
I will sleep no more in the lion's den! My resolve is taken: I will away from
the Castle, and seek in some other service that security --


Osm. [Within.] What -- Hoa! Help! -- Lights there! Lights!


Hass. Hark! Surely 'twas the Earl!


OSMOND rushes in wildly. Osm. Save me! Save me! -- They are at hand! Oh! let
them not enter!

-- [ Sinks into the arms of Saib.]
Saib. What can this mean? -- See, how his eyes roll! How violently he trembles!


Hass. Speak, my Lord -- Do you not know us?


Osm. [Recovering himself.] Ha! Whose voice? -- Hassan's? -- And Saib too here?
-- Oh! Was it then but a dream? Did not I hear those dreadful, those damning
words? -- Still, still they ring in my ears. Hassan! Hassan! Death must be
bliss, in flames or on the rack, compared to what I have this night suffered!


Hass. Compose yourself, my Lord: Can a mere dream unman you thus?


Osm. A mere dream, say thou? Hassan, 'twas a dream of such horror! Did such
dreams haunt my bitterest foe, I should wish him no severer punishment. Mark
you not, how the ague of fear makes my limbs tremble? Rolls not my eye, as if
still gazing on the Spectre? Are not my lips convulsed, as were they yet pressed
by the kiss of corruption? Oh! 'twas a sight, that might have bleached joy's
rosy cheek for ever, and strewed the snows of age upon youth's auburn ringlets!
Yet, away with these terrors! -- Hassan, thou said, 'twas but a dream: I was
deceived by fancy. Hassan, thou said true; there is not, there cannot be, a
world to come.


Hass. My Lord! --


Osm. Answer me not! Let me not hear the damning truth! Tell me not, that
flames await me! that for moments of bliss I must endure long ages of torture!
Plunge the rather in the thickest gloom of Atheism! Say, that with my body,
must perish my soul! For, oh! should my fearful dream be prophetic! -- Hark,
fellows! Instruments of my guilt, listen to my punishment! -- Methought I
wandered through the low-browed caverns, where repose the relics of my
ancestors. My eye dwelt with awe on their tombs, with disgust on Mortality's
surrounding emblems! Suddenly a female form glided along the vault: It was
Angela! She smiled upon me, and beckoned me to advance. I flew toward her; my
arms were already unclosed to clasp her -- when suddenly her figure changed,
her face grew pale, a stream of blood gushed from her bosom! -- Hassan, 'twas
Evelina!


Saib and Hass. Evelina!


Osm. Such as when she sank at my feet expiring, while my hand grasped the
dagger, still crimsoned with her blood! -- "We meet again this night!" murmured
her hollow voice! "Now rush to my arms, but first see what you have made me!
Embrace me, my bridegroom! We must never part again!" -- While speaking, her
form withered away: the flesh fell from her bones; her eyes burst from their
sockets: a skeleton, loathsome and meagre, clasped me in her mouldering arms!
--


Saib. Most horrible!


Osm. Her infected breath was mingled with mine; her rotting fingers pressed my
hand, and my face was covered with her kisses! Oh! then, then how I trembled
with disgust! And now blue dismal flames gleamed along the walls; the tombs
were rent asunder; bands of fierce specter rushed round me in frantic cance;
furiously they gnashed their teeth while they gazed upon me, and shrieked in
loud yell -- "Welcome, thou fratricide! Welcome, thou lost forever!" -- Horror
burst the hands of sleep; distracted I flew hither: But my feelings -- words
are too weak, too powerless to express them.


Saib. My Lord, my Lord, this was no idle dream! 'Twas a celestial warning;
'twas your better Angel that whispered -- "Osmond, repent your former crimes!
Commit not new ones!" -- Remember, that this night should Kenric. --


Osm. Kenric? -- Oh! speak! Drank he the poison?


Saib. Obedience to your orders, I presented it at supper; but ere the cup
reached his lips, his favorite dog sprang upon his arm, and the ^^^uor fell to
the ground untasted.


Osm. Praised be Heaven! Then my soul is lighter by a crime! -- Kenric shall
(...) good Saib. What though he quit me, and ^etray my ^^rets? Proofs he cannot
bring against (...) bare assertions will not be believed. At worst, sho^^^
^^^ale be credited, long ere Percy can wrest her from me, shall Angela be mine.
Angela! -- Oh! at that name all again is calm in my bosom. Hushed by her image,
my tumultuous passions sink to rest, and my terrors subside into that single
fear -- her loss! I forget that I have waded to her arms through blood; forget
all, save my affection and her beauty!


Saib. You forget too that her heart is another's? Oh! my Lord, reflect on your
conduct while it is yet time; restore the poor Angela to liberty; resign her to
her favored lover --


Osm. Sooner will I resign my life! -- Fellow, you know not what you say: My
heart strings are twisted round the maid; ere I resign her, those strings must
break. If I exist to ^orrow night, I will pass it in her arms. -- If I exist?
-- Ha! Whence that doubt? "We meet again this night!" -- So said the Spectre!
-- Dreadful words, be ye blotted from my mind forever! -- Hassan, to your
vigilance I leave the care of my beloved. Fly to me that instant, should any
unbidden footstep approach yon chamber door. I Will to my couch again. Follow me,
Saib, and watch me while I sleep. Then, if you see my limbs convulsed, my teeth
clenched, my hair bristling, and cold dews trembling on my brow, seize me!
Rouse me! Snatch me from my bed! I must not dream again. -- Oh! faithless
sleep, why art thou too leagued with my foes? There was a time, when thy
presence brought oblivion to my sorrows; when thy poppy-crown was mingled with
roses! -- Now, Fear and Remorse thy sad companions, I shudder to see thee
approach my couch! Blood trickles from thy garments; snakes writhe around thy
brows: thy hand holds the well-known s^al dagger, and plunges it still reeking
in my breast! -- Then do I shriek in agony; then do I start distracted from thy
arms! -- Oh! how I hate thee, Sleep! -- Friend of Virtue, oh! how I dread thy
coming!


Exit with Saib. Hass. [Alone.] Yes, thou art sweet, Vengeance! Oh! how it joys
me when the white man suffers! Yet weak are his pangs, compared to those I felt
when torn from thy shores, O native Africa! from thy bosom, my faithful Samba!
-- Ah! do thou still exist, my wife? Has sorrow for my loss traced thy smooth
brow with wrinkles? -- My boy too, whom on that morning when the man-hunters
seized me, I left sleeping on thy bosom, say, Lives he yet? Does he ever speak
of me? Does he ask, "Mother, describe to me my father; show me how the warrior
looked?" Ha! has my bosom still room for thoughts so tender? Hence with them!
Vengeance must possess it all! Oh! when I forget my wrongs, may I forget
myself! When I forbear to hate these Christians, God of my fathers! may thou
hate me! -- Ha! Whence that light? A man moves this way with a lamp! How
cautiously he steals along! He must be watched. This friendly column will
shield me from his regards. Silence! He comes.


Retires. KENRIC enters softly with a Lamp. Kenr. All is hushed! The Castle
seems buried in sleep. Now then to Angela!


Exit. Hass. [Advancing.] It was Kenric! -- Still he moves onwards -- Now he
stops -- It Is at the door of Angela's chamber! -- He unlocks it! -- He enters!
-- Away then to the Earl: Christian, soon we meet again!


Exit. SCENE II. -- ANGELA'S Apartment.
ANGELA stands by the Window, which is open, and through which the Moon is
seen. Ang. Will it never arrive -- this tedious lingering hour? Sure an age
must have elapsed since the Friar left me, and still the bell strikes not One!
-- Percy, does thy impatience equal mine? Do thou too count the moments which
divide us? Do thou too chide the slowness of time's pinions, which moved so
swiftly when we strayed together on the Cheviot Hills? Methinks I see him now,
as he paces the Conway's margin: If a leaf falls, if a bird flutters, he flies
toward it; for he thinks it is the footstep of Angela: Then, with slow steps
and bending head, disappointed he regains the fisher's cottage. Perhaps, at
this moment, his eyes like mine are sixed on yonder planet; perhaps this sweet
wind which plays on my cheek, is freighted with the sighs of my lover. -- Oh!
sigh no more, my Percy! Soon shall I repose in safety on your bosom; soon again
see the moon shed her silver light on Cheviot, and hear its green hills repeat
the carol of your mellow horn!

SONG.
How slow the lingering moments wear!
Ye hours, in pity speed your flight,
Till Cheviot's Hills so fresh and fair
Again shall meet my longing sight!
Oh! then what rapture 'twill afford,
Once more those scenes beloved to see,
Where Per^^ ^eart first told its Lord
He loved (...) Lass of low degree!
No founding titles graced my name,
No bounteous kinsmen swelled my dower;
But Percy sought no highborn Dame,
But Percy sought not wealth or power.
He sought a fond, a faithful heart,
He found the heart he sought in me;
He saw her pure and free from art,
And loved the Lass of low degree.
The Castle seems to be still already: Would the Friar had named an earlier
hour! By this I might have been safe in the fisher's cottage. Hark! Surely I
heard -- Some one unlocks the door! -- Oh! should it be the Earl -- should he
not retir^ ere the Monk arrives -- The door opens! -- How! Kenric here! --
Speak -- What would you?


Enter KENRIC. Kenr. Softly, Lady! If overheard, I am lost, and your fate is
connected with mine. --

[Placing his lamp on the table.]
Ang. What means this mystery? This midnight visit --


Kenr. Is the visit of a friend, of a penitent! -- Lady, I must away from the
Castle: The keys are in my possession: I will make you the companion of my
flight, and deliver you safe into the hands of Percy. But, ere we depart,
[kneeling] Oh! tell me, Lady, will you plead for me with one, who to me alone
owes sixteen years of hard captivity?


Ang. Rise, Kenric: I understand you not. Of what captive do you speak?


Kenr. Of one, who by me has been most injured, who to you will be most dear.
Listen, Lady, to my strange narration. I was brought up with Osmond, was the
partner of his pleasures, the confident o^ (...) cares. The latter sprang
solely from his elder brother, whose birthright he coveted, whose superiority
he envied. Yet (...) ^^rsion burst not forth, till Evelina Neville, rejecting
his hand, bestowed here is with her heart on Reginald. Then did Osmond's passion
overleap all bounds. He resolved to assassinate his brother when returning from
the Scottish wars, carry off the Lady, and make himself master of her person by
force. This scheme he imparted to me: He flattered, threatened, promised -- and
I yielded to his seduction!


Ang. Wretched man!


Kenr. Condemn me not unheard. It Is true, that I followed Osmond to the scene
of slaughter, but no blood that day imbrued my hand. It was the Earl whose
sword struck Reginald to the ground; it was the Earl whose dagger was raised to
complete his crime, when Evelina threw herself upon her husband's body, and
received the weapon in her own.


Ang. Dreadful! Dreadful!


Kenr. His hopes disappointed by this accident, Osmond's wrath became madness.
He gave the word for slaughter, and Reginald's few attendants were butchered on
the spot. Scarce could my prayers and arguments save from his wrath his infant
niece, whose throat was already gored by his poniard. Angela, yours still
wears that mark.


Ang. Mine? -- Almighty Powers!


Kenr. Lady, it is true. I concealed in Allan's cottage the heiress of Conway:
There were you doomed to languish in obscurity, till, alarmed by the report of
the spies that Percy loved you, and dreading your meeting with so powerful a
supporter, Osmond decreed your death a second time. With this intention he
sought your retreat; but when in you he beheld Evelina's living image, he
changed his bloody purpose. He cause^ me to reclaim you from Allan, and
resolved, by making you his wife, to give himself a lawful claim to these
possessions.


Ang. The monster! Now then I know, when he pressed my hand, why still my blood
ran cold! 'Twas nature, that revolted at the fratricide's touch: 'Twas my
mother's spirit, that whispered, "Love not my murderer!" Oh! good, good Kenric!
And you knelt to me for pardon? You, to whom I owe my life! You, to whom --


Kenr. Hold! oh hold! -- Lady, how little do I deserve your thanks! -- Oh
listen, listen! -- I was the last to quit the bloody spot. Sadly was I
retiring, when a faint groan struck my ear. I sprang from my horse; I placed my
hand on Reginald's heart; it beat beneath the pressure!


[ Here Osmond appears at the door, motions to Saib, etc. to retire, and
advances himself, unobserved.] Ang. It beat! it beat! Cruel, and your dagger --


Kenr. Oh! that would have been mercy! No, Lady, I preserved his life to rob
him of liberty. It struck me, how strong would be my hold over Osmond, while
his brother was in my power; and this reflection determined me to preserve him.
Having plunged the other bodies in the Conway's stood, I placed the bleeding
Earl's on my horse before me, and conveyed him still insensible to a retreat,
to all, except myself, a secret. There I tended his wounds carefully, and
succeeded in preserving his life. Lady -- Reginald still exists.


[ Here Osmond, with furious look, draws his dagger, and motions to slab
Kenric. A moment's reflection makes him stay his hand, and he returns the
weapon into the sheath.] Ang. Still exists, say you? My father still exists?


Kenr. He does, if a life so wretched can be termed existence. While his swoon
lasted, I chained him to his dungeon wall; and no sooner were his wounds
healed, than I entered his prison no more. Through a wicket in his dungeon door
I supplied him with food; and when in plaintive terms he sued to me for mercy,
hastily I fled, nor gave an answer. Lady, near sixteen years have passed, since
an human voice struck the ear of Reginald!


Ang. Alas! alas!


Kenr. But the hour of his release draws near: I discovered this night that
Osmond seeks my life, and resolved to throw myself on your mercy. Then tell me,
Lady, will you plead for me with your father? Think you he. can forgive the
author of his sufferings?


Ang. Kenric, you have been guilty, cruel -- But restore to me my father; aid
us to escape; and all shall be forgiven, all forgot.


Kenr. Then follow me in silence: I will guide you to Reginald's dungeon: This
key unlocks the Castle gates; and ere the cock crows, safe in the arms of Percy
-- [ Here his eye falls upon Osmond, who has advanced between him and Angela:
She shrieks, and sinks into a chair.] Horror! -- the Earl! -- Undone forever!


Osm. Miscreant! -- Within there!


Enter SAIB, HASSAN, MULEY, and ALARIC. Osm. Hence with that traitor! confine
him in the western tower!


Ang. [Starting wildly from her seat.] Yet speak once more, Kenric! Where is my
Father? What place conceals him?


Osm. Let him not speak! Away with him! [Kenric is forced off by the Africans.
Osmond paces the stage with a furious air, while Angela eyes him with terror:
At length he stops, and addresses her.] Nay, stifle not your curses! Why should
your lips be silent when your eye speaks? Is there not written on every
feature, "Vengeance on the assassin! Justice on my mother's murderer?" But mark
me, Angela! Compared to that which soon must be thine, these titles are sweet
and lovely. Know thou the word parricide, Angela? Know thou their pangs
who shed the blood of a parent? Those pangs must be thine, tomorrow. This long
concealed captive -- this newfound father --


Ang. Your brother, Osmond? Your brother? -- Surely you cannot, will not --


Osm. Still doubt you that I both can and will? Remember Kenric's tale!
Remember, though the first blow failed, the second will strike deeper! -- But
from whom must Reginald receive that second? Not from his rival brother! not
from his inveterate foe! -- From his daughter, his unfeeling daughter! It Is
she, who, refusing me her hand, will place a dagger in mine; it is she, whose
voice declaring that she hates me, will bid me plunge that dagger in her
father's heart!


Ang. Man! man! drive me not mad!


Osm. [Pointing to Reginald's portrait.] Look upon this picture! Mark, what a
noble form! How sweet, how commanding the expression of his full dark eye! Then
fancy that he lies in some damp solitary dungeon, writhing in death's agonies,
his limbs distorted, his eye-strings breaking, his soul burdened with crimes
from which no priest has absolved him, his last words curses on his unnatural
child, who could have saved him, but who would not!


Ang. Horrible! horrible!


Osm. Yet if you still reject my offers, thus must it be. Tortures shall compel
Kenric to reveal what dungeon conceals your father; and ere tomorrow dawns
shall Angela lie a bride in my arms, or Reginald a corse at my feet. Nay, spare
entreaties! Why should I heed your sorrows? You have gazed unmoved upon mine!
Why should I be softened by your tears? Mine never were dried by your pity!
Cold and inflexible have you been to my despair; so will I be to yours. Speak,
then -- Is Percy's love or your father's life most dear to you? Does the false
mistress or the unnatural child sound most grating in your ears? Must Reginald
die, or will Angela be mine?


Ang. Thine! -- She will perish first!


Osm. You have pronounced his sentence, and his blood be on your head! --
Farewell!


Ang. [Detaining him, and throwing herself on her knees.] Hold! hold! -- Oh! go
not, go not yet! -- Wretch that I am, where shall I fly for succor? -- Mercy,
Osmond! Oh! mercy! -- Behold me at your feet, see me bathe them with my tears!
Look with pity on a creature whom your cruelty has bowed to the earth, whose
heart you have almost broken, whose brain you have almost turned! -- Mercy,
Osmond! Oh! mercy! mercy!


Osm. Lovely, lovely suppliant! And why not profit by the present moment? Why
owe to cold consent what force may this instant give me? -- It shall be so, and
thus --

[attempting to clasp her in his arms, she starts from the ground suddenly, and
draws her dagger with a distracted look.]
Ang. Away! Approach me not! Dare not to touch me, or this poniard --


Osm. Foolish girl! Let me but say the word, and thou art disarmed that moment.


Ang. But not by thee, Osmond! Oh! never by thee! Had thou the force of
fabled giants, vainly would thou strive to wrest this dagger from my hand.


Osm. Let this convince you how easily -- [attempting to seize it, his eye
rests upon the hilt, and he starts back with horror.] By hell, the very poniard
which --


Ang. [In an exulting tone.] Ha! have thou found me, villain? -- Villain, do
thou know this weapon? Know thou whose blood incrusts the point? Murderer,
it flowed from the bosom of my mother!


Osm. Within there! Help! -- [Hassan and Alaric enter.] Oh! God in heaven!

[He falls senseless into their arms, and they convey him from the chamber: the
door is loc^^^ after them.]
Ang. [Alone.] He faints! -- Long may the villain wear thy chains, Oblivion!
Long be it ere he wakes to commit new crimes! -- My father in Osmond's power?
-- Oh! it is a dreadful thought! -- But no, it must not, shall not be! -- I will
to Osmond, will promise to be his, will sacrifice my love, my happiness, my
peace of mind -- every thing but my father! -- Yet, to bid an assassin rest
upon my bosom, to press that hand in mine which pierced the heart of my parent
-- Oh! it were monstrous! -- [Kneeling before Evelina's portrait.] Mother!
Blessed Mother! If indeed thy spirit still lingers amidst these scenes of
sorrow, look on my despair with pity! fly to my aid! Oh! fly, and save my
father! -- [She remains for some moments prostrate on the ground in silent
sorrow. The Castle bell tolls the hour: she raises herself and counts the
quarters, after which it strikes "one!"] Hark! the bell tolls! -- It Is the time
which the Monk appointed. He will not tarry: But I must not follow him; I will
not fly and abandon my father! -- Yet may not my flight preserve him? Yes, yes,
I will away to Percy: By the same passage which favors my escape, his vassals
may easily surprise the Castle, may seize Osmond ere he effects his crime, and
tomorrow may see Reginald restored to freedom, to his domains, and to his
daughter! -- Oh! then sweet indeed will be my feelings! Then only can my heart
know joy, when it throbs against a father's! -- Ha! what was that? methought
the sound of music floated by me! It seemed as some one had struck the guittar:
I must have been deceived; it was but fancy.


[A plaintive voice sings within, accompanied by a guittar.] "Lullaby! --
Lullaby! -- Hush thee, my dear,
"Thy father is coming, and soon will be here!"
Ang. Heavens! The very words which Alice -- The door too! -- It moves! it
opens! Guard me, good Angelsd


[The folding-doors unclose, and the Oratory is seen illuminated. In its center
stands a tall female figure; her white and flowing garments spotted with blood;
her veil is thrown back, and discovers a pale and melancholy countenance; her
eyes are lifted upwards; her arms extended toward heaven; and a large wound
appears upon her bosom. Angela sinks upon her knees, with her eyes rivetted
upon the figure, which, for some moments remains motionless. At length the
Spectre advances slowly, to a soft and plaintive strain! She stops opposite
Reginald's picture, and gazes upon it in silence. She then turns, approaches
Angela, seems to invoke a blessing upon her, points to the picture, and retires
to the Oratory. The music ceases. Angela rises with a wild look, and follows
the vision, extending her arms toward it.] Ang. Stay, lovely Spirit! -- Oh!
stay yet one moment!


[The Spectre waves her hand, as bidding her farewell. Instantly the organ's
swell is heard; a full chorus of female voices chaunt "Jubilate!" A blaze of
light flashes through the Oratory, and the folding-doors close with a loud
noise.] Ang. Oh! Heaven protect me!

[She falls motionless on the floor.]
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. -- A View of Conway Castle by Moonlight.
Enter PERCY and MOTLEY. Motley. IN truth, my Lord, you venture too near the
Castle. Should you fall into Osmond's power a second time, your next jump would
be into a better world.


Percy. Oh! there is no danger, Motley. My followers are not far off, and will
join me at a moment's warning; then fear not for me.


Motl. With all my heart; but permit me to fear for myself. We are now within
bow-shot of the Castle. The archers may think proper to amuse us with a proof
of their skill; and were I to feel an arrow quivering in my gizzard, probably I
should be much more surprised than pleased. Good my Lord, let (...) back to the
fisherman's hut.


Percy. Your advice may be wise, Gilbert, but I cannot follow it. Angela's
escape may be discovered; she may be pursued, and in need of my assistance.
Then counsel not my retiring; my fears of losing Angela are too strong, the
flame which burns in my bosom too ardent.


Motl. I Am sure no flame burning in your bosom, can give you so much pain as an
arrow would give me sticking in mine; and as to your fears of losing the Lady,
I Would bet mine of losing my life against any fears in Christendom!


Percy. How, Gilbert? have you not promised to stand by me to the last? Did you
not say you could die in my service with pleasure?


Motl. Very true: But, Lord! if a man was always taken at his word, the world
would soon be turned upside down. When a polite gentleman begs you to consider
his house as your own, and assures you that all he has is at your disposal,
he would be in a terrible scrape if you began knocking down his walls, or requested
the loan of his wife or daughters! -- No, no, Sir, when I said that I should
die in your service with pleasure, I intended to live in it many long years;
since, to tell you the truth, from a child I had always a particular dislike to
dying, and I think that with every hour the prejudice grows stronger. -- Good
my Lord, let us be gone. Ere long I doubt not --


Percy. Hark! Did I not hear -- No! she comes not! -- Heavens, should the
Friar's plot have failed!


Motl. Failed! and a priest and a petticoat concerned in it? O no! a plot
composed of such good ingredients cannot but succeed. Ugh! would I were again
seated by the fisher's hearth! The wind blows cruel sharp and bitter.


Percy. For shame, Gilbert! am I not equally exposed to its severity?


Motl. Oh, the flame in your bosom keeps you warm; and in a cold night, love
wraps one up better than a blanket. But that not being my situation, the
present object of my desires (...) a blazing wood fire; and Venus would look to
me less lovely than a smoking sack-posset! Oh, when I was in love, I managed
matters much better: I always paid my addresses by the fireside, and contrived
to urge my soft suit just at dinner time! Then how I filled my fair-one's ears
with fine speeches, while she silled my trencher with roast beef! Then what
sigures and tropes came out of my mouth, and what dainties and tid-bits went
in! 'Twould have done your heart good to hear me talk and see me eat; and you would
have found it no easy matter to decide, whether I had most wit or appetite.


Percy. And who was the object of this voracious passion?


Motl. A person well calculated to charm both my heart and my stomach: It was a
lady of great merit, who did your father the honor to superintend his culinary
concerns. I was scarce fifteen, when she kindled a flame in my hear while
lighting the kitchen fire, and from that moment I thought on nothing but her.
My mornings were passed in composing poems on her beauty, my evenings in
reciting them in her ear; for nature had equally denied the fair creature and
myself the faculty of reading and writing.


Percy. You were successful, I hope?


Motl. Why, at length, my Lord, a Pindaric Ode upon her grace in frying
pancakes melted her heart. She consented to be mine; when, oh! cruel fortune,
taking one night a drop too much -- poor dear creature, she never got the
better of it! I wept her loss, and composed an elegy upon it, which has been
thought, by many persons of great judgment, not totally destitute of taste and
sublimity. It began thus: Baked be the pies to coals! -- Burn, roast-meat, burn!
Boil over, ye pots! -- Ye spits, forget to turn!
Cindrella's death --



Percy. Peace, peace! See you nothing near yonder tower?


Motl. Yes, certainly; two persons advance toward us: Yet they cannot be our
friends, for I see neither the Lady's petticoat nor the Monk's paunch!


Percy. Still they approach, though slowly: One leans on his companion, and
seems to move with pain. Let us retire and observe them.


Motl. Away, Sir; I Am at your heels.

They draw back.
Enter SAIB conducting KENRIC. Saib. Nay, yet hold up a while! Now we are near
the fisher's cottage.


Kenr. Good Saib, I needs must stop! Enfeebled by Ofmond's tortures, my limbs
refuse to bear me further! -- Here lay me down; then fly to Percy, guide him to
the dungeon, and, ere it is too late, bid him save the father of Angela!


Percy. [To Motley.] Hark! Did you hear?


Saib. Yet, to leave you thus alone! --


Kenr. Oh, heed not me! Think, that on these few moments depends our safety.
Angela's freedom, Reginald's life! -- You have the master-key! Fly, then -- oh,
fly to Percy!


Percy. [Starting forward.] Said he not Reginald? Speak again, stranger! What
of Reginald?


Saib. Ha! Look up, Kenric; it is Percy's self!


Percy and Motley. How! -- Kenric?


Kenr. [Sinking at Percy's feet.] Yes, the guilty, the penitent Kenric! Oh,
surely 'twas Heaven sent you hither! Know, Earl Percy, that Reginald lives,
that Angela is his daughter!


Percy. Amazement! And is this known to Osmond?


Kenr. Two hours have scarcely passed since he surprised the secret. Tortures
compelled me to avow where Reginald was hidden, and he now is in his brother's
power. Fly then to his aid! Alas! perhaps at this moment his destruction is
completed! Perhaps even now Osmond's dagger --


Percy. Within there! Allan! Harold! -- Quick, Gilbert, sound your horn! --

[Motley sounds it.]
Enter ALLAN, EDRIC, HAROLD, and Soldiers. Percy, Friends, may I depend on your
support?


Har. While we breathe, all will stand by you.


Soldiers. All! All!


Percy. Follow me, then! -- Away!


Kenr. Yet stay one moment! -- Percy, to this grateful friend have I consided a
master-key, which will instantly admit you to the Castle, and have described to
him the retreat of Reginald! -- Be he your guide, and hasten -- Oh! that pang!
--

[ He faints; Allan and Edric support him.]
Percy. Look to him! He sinks! Bear him to your hut, Edric, and there tend his
hurts. [ To Saib.] Now on, good fellow, and swiftly! -- Osmond, despair! -- I
come!


[ Exit, with Saib, Motley, Harold, and Soldiers, on one side, while Allan and
Edric convey away Kenric still fainting on the other.] SCENE II. -- A vaulted
Chamber.
Enter FATHER PHILIP, with a Basket on his Arm and a Torch, conducting ANGELA.
F. Phil. Thanks to St. Francis, we have as yet passed unobserved! -- Surely, of
all traveling companions, Fear is the least agreeable: I couldn't be more
fatigued, had I run twenty miles without stopping!


Ang. Why this delay? -- Good Father, let us proceed.


F. Phil. Ere I can go further, Lady, I must needs stop to take breath, and
refresh my spirits with a taste of this cordial.

[Taking a bottle from the basket.]
Ang. Oh! not now! Think that Osmond may discover me, and mar your kind
intentions. This room, you say, conceals the private door: -- Pr'ythee, unclose
it! Let us from hence! Wait till we are safe under Percy's protection, and then
drink as you list. But not now, Father; in pity, not now!


F. Phil. Well, well, be calm, Daughter! -- Oh! these women! these women! They
mind no one's comfort but their own! -- Now, where is the door?


Ang. How tedious seems every moment which I pass within these hated walls! --
Ha! Yonder comes a light!


F. Phil. So, so -- I Have found it at last.

[Touching a spring, a secret door flies open.]
Ang. It moves this way! -- By all my fears, it is Osmond! In, Father, in! Away,
for Heaven's sake! --

[Exeunt, closing the door after them.]
Enter OSMOND and HASSAN, with a Torch. Osm. [After a pause of gloomy
meditation.] Is all still within the Castle?


Hass. As the silence of the grave.


Osm. Where are your fellows?


Hass. Saib guards the traitor Kenric: Muley and Alaric are buried in sleep.


Osm. Their hands have been stained with blood, and yet can they sleep? -- Call
your companions hither. [Hassan offers to leave the torch.] Away with the
light! Its beams are hateful.


[Exit Hassan. Osm. [Alone.] Yes! this is the place. If Kenrie said true, for
sixteen years have the vaults beneath me rung with my brother's groans. I dread
to unclose the door! How shall I sustain the beams of his eye when they rest on
Evelina's murderer? How will his proud heart swell with rage at meeting his
usurping brother! Ah, the beams of his eye must long since have been quenched
in tears! The pride of his heart must by this be subdued by sufferings! --
Great have been those sufferings -- in truth so great, that even my hatred
bends before them. Yet for that hatred, had I not cause? At Tournaments, 'twas
on Reginald that each bright eye was bent; at Court, 'twas to Reginald that
each noble proffered friendship. Evelina too! -- Ha! at that name my expiring
hate revives! Reginald! Reginald! for thee was I sacrificed! Oh! when it
strikes a second blow, my poniard shall stab surer.


Enter HASSAN, MULEY, and ALARIC, with Torches. The Africans. [Together.] My
Lord! My Lord!


Osm. Now, why this haste?


Hass. I tremble to inform you, that Saib has fled the Castle. A master-key,
which he found upon Kenric, and of which he kept possession, has enabled him to
escape.


Osm. Saib too gone? -- All are false! All forsake me!


Hass. Yet more, my Lord; he has made his prisoner the companion of his flight.


Osm. [Starting.] How? Kenric escaped?


Alaric. It Is but too certain; doubtless he has fled to Percy.


Osm. To Percy? -- Ha! Then I must be speedy: My fate hangs on a thread!
Friends, I have ever found ye faithful; mark me now! -- [Opening the private
door.] Of these two passages, the left conducts to a long chain of dungeons: In
one of these my brother still languishes. Once already have you seen him
bleeding beneath my sword -- but he yet exists. My fortune, my love; nay my
life, are at stake! -- Need I say more? -- [Each half unsheothes his sword.] --
That gesture speaks me understood. On then before, I follow you. -- [ The
Africans pass through the private door: Osmond is advancing toward it, when he
suddenly staris back.] -- Ha! Why roll these seas of blood before me? Whose
mangled corse do they bear to my feet? -- Fratricide! -- Oh! it is a dreadful
name! -- Yet how preserve myself and Reginald? -- It cannot be! We must not
breathe the same atmosphere. Fate, thy hand urges me! -- Fate, thy voice
prompts me! Thou have spoken; I obey. --

[ He follows the Africans; the door is closed after him.]
SCENE III. -- A gloomy subterraneous Dungeon, wide and lofty: The upper part
of it has in several places fallen in, and left large chasms. On one side are
various passages leading to other Caverns: On the other is an Iron Door with
Steps leading to it, and a Wicket in the middle. REGINALD, pale and emaciated,
in coarse garments, his hair hanging wildly about his face, and a chain bound
round his body, lies sleeping upon a bed of straw. A lamp, a small bashet, and
a pitcher, are placed near him. After a few moments he awakes, and extends his
arms.
Reg. My child! My Evelina! -- Oh! fly me not, lovely forms! They are gone, and
once more I live to misery. Thou were kind to me, Sleep! Even now, methought I
sat in my Castle hall: A maid, lovely as the Queen of Fairies, hung on my knee,
and hailed me by that sweet name, "Father!" Yes, I was happy! -- Yet frown not
on me, therefore, Darkness! I am thine again, my gloomy bride! -- Be not
incensed, Despair, that I left thee for a moment; I have passed with thee
sixteen years! Ah! how many have I still to pass? -- Yet fly not my bosom
quite, sweet Hope I Still speak to me of liberty, of light! Whisper, that once
more I shall see the morn break, that again shall my fevered lips drink the
pure gale of evening! -- God, thou know that I have borne my sufferings
meekly: I have wept for myself, but never cursed my foes; I have sorrowed for
thy anger, but never murmured at thy will. Patient have I been; oh! then reward
me; let me once again press my daughter in my arms; let me, for one instant,
feel again that I clasp to my heart a being who loves me. Speed thou to heaven,
prayer of a captive! --

[He sinks upon a stone, with his hands clasped, and his eyes bent steadfastly
upon the flame of the lamp.]
ANGELA and FATHER PHILIP are seen through the chasms above, passing along
slowly. Ang. Be cautious, Father! -- Feel you not how the ground trembles
beneath us?


F. Phil. Perfectly well, and would give my best breviary to find myself once
more on terra-firma. But the outlet cannot be far off; let us proceed.


Ang. Look down upon us, blessed angels; aid us, protect us.


F. Phil. Amen, fair daughter! And now away.


Exeunt. Reg. [After a pause.] It Is that door which divides me from happiness.
How often against that door have I knelt and prayed, and ever knelt and prayed
in vain! Fearful, lest my complaints should move him from his purpose, my
jailer listens not, replies not: Hasty through you wicket he gives my food,
then flies as if this dungeon held a serpent. Oh! then, how my heart swells
with bitterness, when the sound of his retiring steps is heard no more, when
through you lofty chasm I catch no longer the gleam of his departing torch! How
wastes my lamp? The hour of Kenric's visit must long be past, and still he
comes not. How, if death's hand has struck him suddenly? My existence unknown
-- Away from my fancy, dreadful idea! [Rising, and taking the lamp.] The
breaking of my chain permits me to wander at large through the wide precincts
of my prison. Happily the late storm, whose pealing thunders were heard even in
this abyss, may have rent some friendly chasm: Happily some nook yet unexplored
-- Ah! no, no, no! My hopes are vain, my search will be fruitless. Despair in
these dungeons reigns despotic; she mocks my complaints, rejects my prayers,
and, when I sue for freedom, bids me seek it in my grave. Death! Oh, death! how
welcome will thou be to me!


Exit. [The noise is heard of an heavy bar falling; the door opens.] Enter
FATHER PHILIP and ANGELA. F. Phil. How Is this? A door?


Ang. It was barred on the outside.


F. Phil. That we'll forgive, as it was not bolted on the in. But I don't
recollect -- Surely I Have not --


Ang. What Is the matter?


F. Phil. By my faith, daughter, I suspect that I Have missed my way.


Ang. Heaven forbid!


F. Phil. Nay, if it is so, I sha'n't be the first man who of two ways has
preferred the wrong.


Ang. Provoking! And did I not tell you to choose the right hand passage?


F. Phil. Truly, did you; and that was the very thing which made me choose the
left. Whenever I Am in doubt myself, I generally ask a woman's advice. When
she is of one way of thinking, I Have always found that reason's on the other. In
this instance, perhaps, I have been mistaken; but wait here for one moment, and
the fact shall be ascertained. But, perhaps, you fear being alone in the dark?


Ang. I fear nothing except Osmond.


F. Phil. Nay, I Have no more inclination to fall into his clutches again, than
yourself. What would be the consequence? You would be married -- I should be
hung! Now daughter, you may think that I Have a bad taste; but, as I Am a
Christian, I Would rather be married fifty years, than hung for one little half
hour.


Exit. Ang. How thick and infecti^^ is the air of this cavern! Yet perhaps for
sixteen years has my poor father breathed none purer. Hark! Steps are quick
advancing! The Friar comes, but why in such confusion?


Re-enter FATHER PHILIP, running. F. Phil. Help! Help! It follows me!


Ang. [Detaining him.] What alarms you? Speak!


F. Phil. His ghost, his ghost! -- Let me go, let me go, let me go!

[Struggling to escape from Angela, he falls and extinguishes the torch; then
hastily rises, and rushes up the staircase, throwing the door after him.]
Ang. [Alone.] Father, father! Stay for Heaven's sake! -- He Is gone, I cannot
find the door! -- Hark! 'Twas the clank of chains! -- A light too! It comes yet
nearer! -- Save me, ye powers! -- What dreadful form! It Is here! I faint with
terror! --

[Sinks almost lifeless against the dungeon's side.]
Re-enter REGINALD with a Lamp. Reg. He is gone! -- Emaciated and stiff from
long disuse, scarce can I draw my limbs along; and I strive in vain to overtake
the fugitive.


Ang. [Recovering herself.] Still it is there, that fearful vision.


Reg. [Placing his lamp upon a pile of stones.] Why did Kenric enter my prison?
Happily, when he heard not my groans at the dungeon door, he thought that my woes
were relieved by death. Oh! when will that thought be verified?


Ang. How sunk his eye? -- How wildly hangs his matted hair on his pale and
furrowed brow! -- Oh! those are the furrows of anguish, not of age.


Reg. I have often wiped away tears, but never caused them to flow; often have I
lightened the prisoner's chains, but never increased their burden: Yet I am
doomed to chains and tears!


Ang. Each sound of his hollow plaintive voice strikes to my heart. Dared I
accost him -- Yet perhaps a maniac -- No matter; he suffers, and the accents of
pity will flow sweetly in his ears!


Reg. Thou art dead, and at rest, my wife! Safe in you skies, no thought of me
molests thy quiet. Yet sure I wrong thee! At the hour of death thy spirit shall
stand before me, shall close mine eyes gently, and murmur, "Die, Reginald, and
be at peace!"


Ang. Hark! Heard I not -- Pardon, good stranger --


Reg. [Starting wildly from his seat.] It Is she! She comes for me! Is the hour
at hand, fair vision? Spirit of Evelina, lead on, I follow thee!

[He extends his arms toward her, staggers a few paces forwards, then sinks
exhausted on the ground.]
Ang. He faints! perhaps expires! -- Still, still! See, he revives!


Reg. It Is gone! Once more the sport of my bewildered brain -- [starting up.]
Powers of bliss! Look, where it moves again! -- Oh! say, what art thou? If
Evelina, speak! oh, speak!


Ang. Ha! Named he not Evelina? That look! -- This dungeon too! -- The emotions
which his voice -- It is, it must be! -- Father! Oh, Father! Father! --

[falling on his bosom.]
Reg. Said you? Meant you? -- My daughter -- my infant, whom I left -- Oh! yes,
it must be true! My heart, which springs toward you, acknowledges my child! --

[Embracing her.]
Ang. And is it thus I find you? Burdened with chains -- no warmth, no air, no
comfort!


Reg. Think of it no more, my dearest! But say, how gained you entrance? Has
Osmond --


Ang. Oh! that name recalls my terrors! -- Alas! you see in me a fugitive from
his violence! Guided by a friendly Monk, whom your approach has frightened from
me, I was endeavoring escape: We missed our way, and chance guided us to this
dungeon. But this is not a time for explanation. Answer me! Know you the
subterraneous passages belonging to this Castle?


Reg. Whose entrance is without the walls? I do.


Ang. Then we may yet be saved! Father, we must fly this moment. Percy, the
pride of our English youth, waits for me at the Conway's side. Come then -- oh,
come! Stay not one moment longer. --

[As she approaches the door, lights appear above.]
Reg. Look! look, my child! The beams of distant torches flash through the
gloom!


Ang. Ha! -- Yet, perhaps, ashamed of his desertion, it is but the Monk, who
returns to seek me.


Reg. Grant, Heaven, that it may prove so!


Osm. [Above.] Hassan, guard you the door. -- Follow me, friends. --

[The lights disappear.]
Ang. Osmond's voice? Undone! Undone! Oh! my father! he comes to seek you,
perhaps to -- Oh! it is a word too dreadful for a daughter's lips!


Reg. If he seeks none but me, I am happy: But should your steps have been
traced, my child -- Hark! they come! The gloom of yonder cavern may awhile
conceal you: Fly to it: Hide yourself: Stir not, I charge you.


Ang. What, leave you? Oh! no, no!


Reg. Dearest, I entreat, I conjure you, fly! Fear not for me! -- Hark! they
are at the door! Speed to the cavern! Speak not, move not; if possible, breathe
not!


Ang. Father! Oh! Father!


Reg. Farewell! perhaps forever! -- [ He forces Angela into the cavery, then
returns hastily, and throws himself on the bed of straw.] -- Now then to hear
my doom!


Enter OSMOND, followed by MULEY and ALARIC, with Torches. Osm. The door
unbarred? -- Softly, my fears were false! -- Lo! where stretched on the ground,
straw his couch, a stone his pillow, he tastes that repose which flies from my
bed of down! -- Wake, Reginald, and arise!


Reg. You here, Osmond? What brings you to this scene of sorrow? Alas! hope
flies while I gaze upon your frowning eye! Have I read its language aright,
Osmond?


Osm. A right, if you have read my hatred. Reginald, I bring you death! -- What
other present could you expect from me? Have you not been ever a thorn in my
path, a speck in my sight? Was not "Submit to your elder brother," the galling
lesson for ever sounded in my ears? And when I praised some favorite spot of
these domains, some high-browed hill, or blooming valley, was not my father's
answer still, "That will be your elder brother's?" Yes, the first thought which
struck my brain was, "I am a younger son!" The first passion which tortured my
heart was, hate to him who made me one!


Reg. Have I deserved that hate? You often injured me, but as often I forgave.
You were ever my foe, but I never forgot you were my brother.


Osm. Hypocrite!


Reg. Was I one when my weapon struck the fierce Scot to the ground, whose
sword already glit^red above your head? Was I one, when, as embarassed by your
armor, you sank beneath the Severn's waves, I sprang into the flood, I seized,
I saved you? Twice have I preserved your life! Oh, let it not be for my own
destruction! See, my brother, the once proud Reginald lies at your feet, for
his pride has been humbled by suffering! Hear him adjure you by her ashes,
within whose bosom we both have lain, not to stain your hands with the blood of
your brother!


Osm. [Aside.] He melts me, in my own despite!


Reg. The fountains of my eyes have been long dried up: I have no tears that
can soften, no eloquence that can persuade; but Heaven has lightnings that can
blast! Then spare me, Osmond! Kenric has told me that my daughter lives!
Restore me to her arms; permit us in obscurity to pass our days together! Then
shall my last sigh implore upon your head Heaven's forgiveness and Evelina's.


Osm. It shall be so. -- Rise, Reginald, and hear me! You mentioned even now
your daughter: Know, she is in my power; know also, that I love her!


Reg. How?


Osm. She rejects my offers. Your authority can oblige her to accept them.
Swear to use it, and this instant will I lead you to her arms.


Reg. Osmond, she is your niece!


Osm. I have influence at Rome -- That obstacle will be none to me. -- What is
your answer? You hesitate! Say, will you give the demanded oath?


Reg. I cannot dissemble -- Osmond, I never will.


Osm. How? -- Reflect that your life --


Reg. Would be valueless, if purchased by my daughter's tears; would be
loathsome, if embittered by my daughter's misery. Osmond, I will not take the
oath.


Osm. [Almost choked with passion.] It Is enough! -- [ To the Africans.] You
know your duty! Drag him to yonder cavern! Let me not see him die!


Reg. [Holding by a fragment of the wall, from which the Africans strive to
force him.] Brother, for pity's sake! for your soul's happiness!


Osm. Obey me, slaves! -- Away!


ANGELA rushes in wildly. Ang. Hold off! Hurt him not! He is my father!


Osm. Angela here?


Reg. Daughter, what means --


Ang. [Embracing him.] You shall live, Father! I will sacrifice all to preserve
you! Here is my hand, Osmond! It Is yours; but spare my father!


Osm. [Transported.] Lovely Angela!


Reg. How, rash girl? What would you do?


Osm. Reginald, reflect --


Reg. Your uncle! Your mother's murderer! -- Remember --


Ang. Your life is in danger; I must forget all else. Osmond, release my
father, and solemnly I swear --


Reg. Hold, girl, and first hear me! [Kneeling.] God of Nature, to Thee I call!
If ever on Osmond's bosom a child of mine rests; if ever she calls him husband
who pierced her hapless mother's heart, that moment shall a wound, by my own
hand inflicted --


Ang. Hold! oh hold! -- end not your oath!


Osm. I burn with rage!


Reg. Swear never to be Osmond's!


Ang. I swear! --


Reg. Be repaid by this embrace!


Osm. Be it your last! -- Tear them asunder!


Ang. Away! away! I will not leave him!


Osm. Part them, I say! -- Ha! What noise?


Enter HASSAN hastily. Hass. My Lord, all is lost! -- Percy has surprised the
Castle, and speeds this way!


Osm. Consusion! Then I must be sudden. Aid me, Hassan!

[Hassan and Osmond force Angela from her Father, who suddenly disengages
himself from Muley and Alaric.]
Reg. Friends so near? Villains! at least you shall buy my life dearly!

[ Suddenly seizing Hassan's sword.]
Osm. [Employed with Hassan in retaining Angela, while Reginald defends himself
against Muley and Alaric.] Down with him! Wrest the sword from him! [Alaric is
wounded, and falls; Muley gives back: At the same time Osmond's party appears
above, pursued by Percy's.] Hark! They come! -- Dastardly villains! -- Nay,
then my own hand must -- [ Drawing his sword, he rushes upon Regin^ld, who is
disarmed, and beaten upon his knees; when at the moment that Osmond lifts his
arm to such him, Evelina's Chest throws herself between them: Osmond starts
back, and drops his sword.] Horror! -- What form is this?


Ang. Die!

[ Disengaging herself from Hassan, she springs suddenly forwards, and plunges
her dagger in Osmond's bosom, who falls with a loud groan, and faints. The
Ghost vanishes: Angela and Reginald rush into each other's arms.]
Ang. Father, thou art mine again!


Enter PERCY, MOTLEY, SAIB, HAROLD, etc. pursuing OsMOND'S Party. [All stop on
seeing him bleeding upon the ground.] Percy. Hold, my brave friends! -- See
where lies the object of our search!


Ang. Percy! -- Dear Percy!


Percy. -- [Flying to her.] -- Dearest Angela!


Ang. My friend, my guardian angel! Come, Percy, come, embrace my father! --
Father, embrace the protector of your child!


Percy. Do I then behold Earl Reginald?


Reg. [Embracing him.] -- The same, brave Percy! Welcome to my heart! Live ever
next it.


Ang. Oh moment, that o'erpays my suffering! -- And yet -- Percy, that wretched
man -- He perished by my hand!


Saib. Hark, he fighs! -- There is life still in him!


Ang. Life? -- Then save him, save him! Bear him to his chamber! Look to his
wound! Heal it, if possible! At least gain him time to repent his crimes and
errors! --

[Osmond is conveyed away: -- Servants enter with torches, and the Stage
becomes light.]
Percy. Though ill-deserved by his guilt, your generous pity still is amiable.
But say, fair Angela, what have I to hope? Is my love approved by your noble
father? Will he --


Reg. Percy, this is no time to talk of love. Let me hasten to my expriring
brother, and soften with forgiveness the pangs of death!


Percy. And can you forget your sufferings?


Reg. Ah! youth, has he had none? Oh! in his stately chambers, far greater must
have been his pangs than mine in this gloomy dungeon; for what gave me comfort
was his terror, what gave me hope was his despair. I knew that I was guiltless;
knew that, though I suffered in this world my lot would be happy in that to
come!

And, Oh, thou wretch! whom hopeless woes oppress,
Whose day no joys, whose night no slumbers bless,
When pale Despair alarms thy frenzied eye,
Screams in thine ear; and bids thee Heaven deny,
Court thou Religion! Strive thy faith to save;
Bend thy fixed glance on bliss beyond the grave;
Hush guilty murmurs; banish dark mistrust;
Think there is a Power above, nor doubt that Power is just!

FINIS.

