AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT BIDDEFORD, ON THE Fourth of July, 1798; THE
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

AT THE REQUEST OF THE GENTLEMEN OF THAT AND THE ADJOINING TOWN OF
PEPPERELLBORO'; BY WHOSE DESIRE THIS HASTY PRODUCTION IS SUBMITTED TO THE
PUBLIC.

CYRUS KING.

PRINTED BY R. A. JENKS, PORTLAND.

ORATION.
AMERICANS!
AMONG the days which have been distinguished for memorable events, that on
which the Independence of America was declared, ranks high in the calendar of
fame. The affecting scene of an infant people, bursting asunder the bonds and
shackles of despotic rule and foreign power, and rising into existence and
importance, is a sublime spectacle, which the God of Heaven must view with
complacency and favor. Twenty two years have now elapsed, since the rulers of
America, appealing to the supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of their
intentions, declared the then colonies of America, free and independent. Ours
be the pleasing task, my fellow citizens, briefly to recapitulate the events,
which preceded that declaration, and those of importance which have since
transpired: And by thus taking a general survey of the important occurrences
recorded in the annals of our country, and bringing fresh to your recollection,
the collected wisdom, undaunted firmness, and ardent patriotism, of our
renowned forefathers; and some of our cotemporaries, the sun of whose age is
fast declining, may you thereby be animated to a vigorous and manly conduct, at
this perilous period; and show yourselves the worthy descendants of the
illustrious founders of America.

BUT what events, from the thousands which have occured, shall I select for
your emulation! Shall I commence with the infancy of Massachusetts, and open to
your view, that unequalled example of perseverance, under every embarrassment,
exhibited by our ancestors? Driven by the intolerant spirit of persecuting
bigotry, from the ease and enjoyment of civilized society, we behold them
boldly encountering the perils of an unfrequented ocean, and confidently
seeking an asylum in the lonely deserts and wilderness of America; then the
eternal haunts of savage beasts and still more savage inhabitants. But the God
of Hosts guided, supported, protected them; and by a virtuous course of hardy
industry, under the kindest influence of Heaven's blessings, their posterity
became a numerous, wealthy, and happy people. But America never was designed to
be subject to any nation on earth. This envied state of prosperity and
happiness was soon interrupted: And by a system of measures on the part of
Great Britain, the most corrupt, iniquitous, and oppressive, that ever
disgraced the annals of her history, an attempt was made to reduce the most
free and enlightened people on earth, to the despicable state of slavery and
subjection.

YES, fellow citizens! they claimed a right, unheard, unrepresented, to bind
America in every case whatever! A position so monstrous and unjust, even if
advanced by majesty itself to the hirelings of the throne, would have raised
them in mutiny, against the cursed betrayer of their countries rights. What then
must have been its effects upon the free born sons of America? Like the deep
mouthed thunder, through the vault of heaven, it shook our creation. Union was
the desire of our hearts, and liberty or death, the resolve of our souls. That
desire was first realised, and this resolution evidenced on the ensanguined
fields of Lexington: And the virtues and patriotism of a WARREN, in the heights
of Charlestown, paid a monument, more durable, than the most conspicuous
Pyramid, that ever was erected by Egyptian magnificence. But why do I select
the crimsoned fields of Lexington, or celebrate the virtues and death of a
WARREN? Where is the situation in which America encountered her foe, and the
intrepidity and valor of her sons has not been signalized? Or show me the
soldier, who engaged from principle in the cause of humanity and America, who
has not proved himself a patriot and a hero? The name of WASHINGTON suggests
every thing that is great and heroic in arms, or humane and benevolent in
peace. And while the sun beams forth his glories in the firmament of heaven,
and Almighty God continues to humanity the perception of the sublime in action
and in virtue, the illustrious WASHINGTON, and his renowned companions in
virtue and in arms, shall enjoy a glorious immortality, in heaven of happiness,
and on earth of praise.

I HAVE thus, my fellow citizens, glanced at the events which preceded, and
rendered indispensible, that declaration of Independence, which we have this
day assembled to celebrate.

THAT kind and beneficent being, to whom the rulers of our country appealed
upon that important occasion, still continued to support the cause and arms of
America, through a most arduous conflict, to the glorious termination of our
troubles, in acknowledged liberty and independence. Yes! that haughty and
imperious nation, which arrogated to itself uncontrouled dominion and power in
America, was finally obliged to acknowledge the sovereignty and freedom of that
people, whom they had been pleased to style, ungrateful, and rebellious. Thus
beholding their exalted hopes of aggrandizement and power in this western
world, extinct forever.

BUT this happy termination of our arduous conflict, was far from restoring
domestic tranquillity to America. That stability and strength, which are the
glory of a nation, were still to be acquired. America, it is true, possessed
every part and member of a perfect body, into which freedom had breathed
animation, but in unity of parts, and grace of symmetry, she was unfortunately
deficient. War, among its thousand calamities, had introduced into society a
general depravity of manners: Disorder had crept into the several departments
of our government: Crimes too often escaped with impunity; while innocence in
vain sought protection from the law: and faction and rebellion began to rear
their formidable heads. At this critical, this alarming juncture, the genius of
America pointed to the road of happiness and prosperity. Yes! She influenced
the adoption of that Constitution, which forms the basis of the grandeur and
glory of America. Under the virtuous administration of the Federal Government,
before America was severely afflicted by the dreadful calamities which distract
the nations of Europe, our country rapidly advanced in greatness and renown.
All nature contributed to her celebrity and importance. Our hills and our
valleys, smiled with luxuriant plenty; and the Genius of Culture, delighted to
inhabit our plains. While from the depths of the ocean, our hardy citizens drew
mines of wealth; others, more enterprizing, pursued, uninterrupted, the
monsters of the deep, to the regions of the Pole. All climates, seas, and
oceans, witnessed the enterprise and industry of America. Commerce, with its
ten thousand wings expanded to the gales of heaven, wafted riches and greatness
to our favored land. These are among the blessings, which the God of heaven
showered down on America, and which the friend of his country delights to
acknowledge. But, alas! what have we now to contemplate, but the sad reverse of
this pleasing scene? In vain do we demand the hard earned reward of our
virtuous industry. In vain does the enterprising merchant hazard his property
on the ocean. In vain does America demand that justice from other nations,
which she is solicitous to grant. Under the Gallic law, imperious necessity,
the wealth and industry of America are sacrificed. Our Government, actuated by
the most impartial and righteous policy, has been grossly traduced and
insulted: And attempts have been made to alienate the people from their rulers,
and to corrupt the integrity of the officers of Government. The neutral flag of
America has been treated with shameful indignity; our commerce plundered, and
seamen tortured by pretended friends. Yes, fellow citizens, an American
freeman, one like yourselves possessing the conscious dignity of independence,
within view of this land of freedom and humanity, has been basely scourged and
tortured! Yes! shamefully scourged, and barbarously (...)! Calling in vain upon
the sacred names of liberty and America, to shield him from the soul disgrace.
Yes Americans, upon you he calls for protection, from you he requires that
vengeance which the prostrate honor of America demands. In vain have you sought
reparation and justice, by appealing to the magnanimity of France. Your offers
of negotiation are rejected with scorn; and your envoys treated with insolence
and contempt. When you ask for justice from the great republic, they demand
concessions: When you require indemnification for the immense depredations on
your commerce, they exact contributions: Nay they extend their arrogance still
further: They insist on concessions which would annihilate our liberty, and
imperiously demand acknowledgments, which would inslave America. They claim
what they are pleased to style "a well earned" influence in our country; and
are offended that we do not admit it. Having appropriated our property to their
necessities, they call upon us to acknowledge their justice and magnanimity.
Having deprived our merchants of more than twenty millions of dollars, they
have the extreme politeness to request our government to discharge that sum
themselves; and will doubtless give us unexceptionable security, in scourges,
thumb-screws, and guillotines: Thus answering the sychophancy of our infatuated
fellow-citizens, as an imperious master repays the caresses of a fawning
spaniel, with castigation and contempt. But their extortionary demands rest not
at the palty sum of twenty millions of dollars, on their own security; but they
modestly request a loan of thirty millions, and offer their lately subdued
friends the Dutch as security for the payment. And all those acts of friendship
and modest requests, no doubt proceeded from their excessive partiality for
their dear American ally. And should they receive those trifling loans, and
thus deprive us of the nerves and sinews of our defense, they certainly intend
our country a still higher honor, by kindly receiving into their holy keeping
and protection, the liberty and independence of America; politely giving the
fair and blooming daughters of Columbia, the fraternal embrace; and decreeing
to our worthy fellow-citizens the honor of a sitting under the national
guillotine.

HAD these injuries to our property, and insults to our citizens, been
committed in the first enthusiasm of their great and sanguinary revolution, the
intemperance of the times would have palliated the enormity of the crimes. But
deprived of this plea for their actions, what can they allege in justification
of their rapacious and insolent conduct? Will France justify under the
promptitude of our government, to discharge upon the first request, that debt
of (...) gratitude contracted during the American revolution? Yes,
fellow-citizens, that debt of gratitude was calculated to a mill, and
discharged with honor. Or will she plead in extenuation, the partiality of our
government in permitting the transports of France, during a general embargo, to
sail from our ports; and rescue from disease and death their famished
dominions? Or will France appeal to the ingratitude of America, in receiving
with open arms, and supporting with every convenience of life, the distressed,
the wretched fugitives from her West India territories; flying with famine and
death in their train, from the crimsoned sword of barbarous persecution. --
Yes, benevolent America kindly received those houseless wanderers, pressed them
to the (...) bosom of her unbounded humanity: Little, (...) little suspecting
that she cherished the benumbed serpent, or fastened on her veins the leeches
of destruction. Not sufficiently justified by these allegations, she will
doubtless resort to the coldness and apathy of our enthusiastic
fellow-citizens: And to these unfortunately she may, with the appearance of
justice, appeal. Not because our ardent patriots did not at the commencement of
the French revolution, participate in their glories, but because this
ridiculous and hostile partiality, has not been continued, or proved productive
to America of more fatal effects. France, in the meridian splendour of her
conquests, was the idol of our worship, the toast of our clubs, and envy of
America. But now alas, when she grasps at universal dominion and enjoys in
imagination the conquest of the world; no national hymns are sung, no patriotic
carmagnoles are bellowed in our streets; no societies are self-created to
cherish and preserve the darling influence of France, or superintend the
operations of our own government; no tri-coloured ribbons and cockades grace
the fair daughters of America -- Nay, so insensible are we grown, that we can
hear of conquest after conquest achieved; nation after nation falling on the
sanguinary sword of French Liberty and Equality; nay more, we can see them
victoriously domineering over our country, generously plundering our property
and humanely torturing our citizens, and no effigies of our worthy citizens are
burnt on our commons -- no neutral huzzas of "France forevever" are heard in
our streets -- No feasts of reason are celebrated in our halls, nor roasted
oxen followed in procession through our streets. -- Great God! Is it possible
that this ever could have been a true picture of America, of free, independent,
neutral America! No never -- never -- They who have thus conducted, must have
been foul fiends of darkness, who assumed the glorious appellation of
Americans, to screen from contempt their vileness and deformity. But praises to
the God of heaven, those days of folly and delusion are passed -- the eye of
reason is open to the danger of our country -- the ardent fire of patriotism is
enkindled in every breast -- and the spirit of Liberty and of America pervades
our land. Cherish the blessed flame -- let its blaze consume the bare remains
of party spirit and foreign influence; that the American name and character,
like gold seven times refined, may burst upon the world in their native purity
and splendour.

AMERICANS, we know not the extent of the dangers which threaten our country:
We know not the hidden vengeance which is prepared for our destruction. Look at
Venice; consider the fate of that ancient and respectable republic; which by
France itself is held up in terror, to frighten America into unconditional
submission. After surviving for more than fifteen centuries, the storms and
tempests of European climates, we behold the noble ship of their constitution
wrecked and destroyed on the sunken rocks of French duplicity: Their country
conquered, their constitution annihilated, and the freeborn citizens of
Venice, by their humane victors, basely bartered away and sold into eternal
bondage. Is there an American present, who does not prefer his country to all
the world; who is not in heart, soul, and conduct, a free, unbiassed American,
let the wretch receive the reward of his baseness, depart our country, and not
traitor Arnold like, prey upon the vitals of America! But you the friends of my
heart, whom the noble spirit of patriotism animates, who are resolved never to
be slaves -- Upon you America calls to save her from the destruction with which
Venice is overwhelmed. Behold Switzerland likewise! there contemplate the
desolation intended for America! Switzerland like every other free country, at
the commencement of the French revolution was the pretended idol of France. The
same professions of esteem, the same expressions of fraternity and friendship,
bestowed on America, were lavished upon the unsuspecting Swisses: A destructive
influence was thereby introduced into their country, divisions among their
citizens, and distraction in their councils -- and when the awful period of
their calamity arrived, and destruction had knocked at their doors -- when the
eternal night of their extinction seemed far advanced, and the alarming cry
"our enemy comes" was refounded in their streets -- alas, unhappy people! too
late they fatally experienced that the lamp of vigilance was extinguished and
the oil of wisdom exhausted. -- Hark! methinks I hear the voice of murdered
Switzerland, in friendly accents saying, America, "your enemy comes" -- rouse
from your fatal slumbers -- be vigilant, and revenge my fall!

AMERICANS, if a spark remains in your breasts of that etherial flame, which
has immortalized the defenders of our country's rights, it now must blaze forth
in deeds of valor and renown! If a drop of patriots blood still circulates in
your veins, it must boil with indignation, at the dastardly insults, which our
country has received. Vigorous measures have been adopted by our government,
but it rests with American freemen to give them stability and effect. Now is
the time for manly exertion: the door of accommodation is closed; and though we
deprecate a war, still ought we vigorously to prepare for that dreadful
calamity. It is in vain for us to hope to better our condition by any expected
change of affairs. We ought not to expect that justice from the mercy and
clemency of other nations, which we can be in a situation to demand. But it
will be objected, our preparations for war may excite the jealousy, may rouse
the indignation of France -- and it may not be their intention to make war upon
America? What, must we tamely wait till she pleases in form to declare herself
our enemy? Do not her actions speak louder than any declaration? Is not her
hostile temper declared by every capture on our heretofore defenseless ships,
by every measure of her arbitrary government? Did France in form declare
hostility against Genoa, Venice, Switzerland, or did she not fasten the leeches
of her baneful influence upon them and suck the vital blood from their
citizens? Yes this is the insidious policy of that crafty and ambitious nation:
and this is the system which they have attempted in America. But never will I
believe that the freeborn sons of America will submit to be slaves; or
sacrifice without a noble struggle, that liberty and independence, in the
attainment of which the richest blood of America freely flowed. Yes
fellow-citizens, I have the fullest assurance in the union and patriotism of
our countrymen, confident that they will rally magnanimously, round the
standard of Liberty and America, and bravely repel the ambitious foe who dares
invade our rights. Yes, though our deadly enemy, by the infernal thirst of
blood and rapine hurried on, should throw their rapacious legions on our coast;
drive and expel us from our towns and cities, and the flower of our strength
should fall in the conflict, still with liberty in our train, like our exalted
ancestors, we would seek, beyond the cloud capped hills and in the deserts of
our country, an independent and glorious retreat! But though earth and hell
should fiercely combine their powers and rise in arms against us, still
encouraged by liberty and supported by independence, we should rise superior to
their base assaults and bid defiance to their sternest vengeance! What though
these mortal bodies should crumble into dust, still the immortal soul would
spring aloft to regions of eternal freedom; and at the throne of Almighty God,
amidst the departed spirits of our virtuous ancestors, with servant
supplications would plead the cause of suffering America. -- O God of heaven!
look down in mercy on our injured country! and shield, O shield America from
impending ruin!


