AN ORATION DELIVERED IN ST. PAUL'S CHURCH, AUGUSTA, ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, ONE
THOUSAND SEVEN HUNDRED AND NINETY-EIGHT, BEING THE TWENTY-SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF
AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY WILLIAM J. HOBBY, ESQUIRE.

AUGUSTA: PRINTED BY JOHN ERDMAN SMITH. MDCCXCVIII.

THE following address was prepared and delivered by WILLIAM J. HOBBY, Esquire. in
St. Paul's Church on the 4th of July last, at the particular request of the
Volunteer Artillery and Light Infantry Companies of Augusta, and was received
with general applause, not only by those companies, but by a very large and
respectable audience. From the peculiar fitness of the address to the present
situation of our country, many persons expressed a wish that it might be
published, and a Committee of the Companies requested of Mr. Hobby a manuscript
copy thereof, which he politely furnished.

EDITOR.
Augusta, August, 1798.
AN ORATION, etc.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
WE are assembled at this time to celebrate our national birth day -- to
commemorate the event which gave the United States an important rank among the
nations of the earth, and secured to millions of people the blessings of
freedom and independence. The design of celebrating this anniversary, is not to
preserve national animosities, or to revive national enmities; but to unite us
in sincere acknowledgments to the benevolent Parent of Nature, for the signal
benefits conferred on our country -- to bring to grateful remembrance, that our
liberties are under Heaven the effects of our own exertions -- bought with the
blood of our fellow citizens: And by this annual assemblage, we, in a manner,
mutually agree to guard our sacred rights, and tacitly pledge ourselves to each
other, that although we can recur in recollection to the time when our
independence commenced, we resolve never to see the time when it shall cease to
exist.

IT would be trespassing on your patience to attempt a review of the various
circumstances which led to the emancipation of our country, or to conjectures
on the consequences which will probably result therefrom: But a few cursory
remarks on past events, concluding with some observations on present
appearances, will, I trust, be excused by the candid audience I have now the
honor to address, and particularly so, by those respectable volunteer
companies, whose request imposed on me a task to which I feel myself inadequate.

THE American Revolution did not originate in that restless uneasiness so
natural to the human mind; but resulted from virtuous exertions excited by
rational reflections: When we discovered the government to which we had been
accustomed, pursuing a system of policy hostile to our interests, and
manifesting a determination to reduce us to a state of vassalage inconsistent
with the dignity of man: That a vast extensive continent, possessing all the
varieties of soil and climate, should be subject to the control of an island,
at three thousand miles distance, appeared a political absurdity to every
rational mind; and philosophic characters were expecting, with confidence, the
approach of the period, when American should assume the station destined for
her by the God of Nature: The unjust aggressions of Great Britain hastened her
rise to glory; and a decree of parliament of their right by law "to bind the
Americans in all cases whatsoever," gave occasion for the practical exercise of
those principles which had before been the subject only of theoretical
reasoning: The flame of freedom was kindled in our land, and its rays darted
with the rapidity of the electrical fluid, from one end of the continent to the
other -- the sound of liberty vibrated on every ear -- thrilled through every
heart, and the people rose, in a mighty mass, determining to sacrifice their
lives, or liberate their country from foreign dominion. For well they knew --

"That wanting VIRTUE life is pain and woe,
"That wanting LIBERTY, even virtue mourns
"And looks around for happiness in vain."
THOSE venerable sages and fathers of the land who composed the American
Congress in 1776, on the 4th day of July declared the United States free and
independent; which declaration was received with universal rejoicings by the
American people, and resounded with loud shouts and feu de jois from the
American army: And a seven years following war, successfully sustained against
the strenous exertions of the most powerful nation in Europe, confirmed the
sincerity of the declaration, evinced the impossibility of subduing men who
preferred death to slavery -- and in letters of blood recorded this important
truth, that the Americans have the will and the capacity to defend their rights
against any foreign foe whatever.

PEACE being established, the American people on reviewing their confederated
system which had been adopted as it were on the spur of the occasion, found it
incomplete, calculated only for a time of general danger, and wholly
insufficient to preserve the dignity of the nation, and to secure the
diversified interests of an extensive community. This gave occasion to an event
new in the political world -- a peaceful revolution in government, scarcely
less surprising than the violent one which preceeded it. A delegation from the
several states convened at Philadelphia, and after wise deliberation, in order
to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity,
provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the
blessings of liberty to ourselves and posterity ordained and established the
Federal Constitution. To see a whole people laying aside their government from
a conviction of its insufficiency to secure the blessings contemplated to
result from the social compact -- returning as it were to a state of nature --
and suddenly adopting a new system, was a singular display of national wisdom;
and while mankind waited the issue in silent suspense, the new government was
organized, and the great and good man, who had led our troops in war, was
called on to take the helm in peace, and guide our political barque to the
haven of safety and happiness.

THUS was the revolution completed, and thus the seal of permanency affixed to
our independence.

THESE combined events have given to the United States a conspicuous station
among the independent nations of the earth -- and have opened new sources of
comfort to the benevolent heart; they have also imposed on us a lasting
obligation, to be ever ready, in imitation of the departed heroes of the
revolution, to sacrifice our lives in defending the rights, and in vindicating
the honor of our country; they have advanced to perfection the science of
legislation, and instructed mankind in the principles of rational freedom.

TYRANNY shall here never feast on the blood of the innocent, and ambition
shall never succeed in any endeavors to trample on the rights of the people.

THE Sun of Reason has arisen on our land and dispelled the clouds which have
heretofore obscured the mind of man -- Rational toleration has liberated
religion from the shackles of superstition, and preserved in its purity the
worship of God. Literature, patronized by virtue, has extended, and is
extending its delightful influence: The arts and sciences, planted in the soil
of freedom, flourish and grow with singular luxuriancy: And the architects, the
historians, the poets, the orators, and the legislators of our country are
preparing to transcend the splendid exhibitions of genius in the Eastern World.
Philosophy has established here her throne of wisdom, and with complacent
countenance, she bids the genius of liberty join with truth and reason, in
extending universal knowledge, and in advancing to perfection the moral
virtues: While the American Eagle, with its new constellation, soaring on the
wings of commerce, establishes a peaceful intercourse with remote nations, and
diffuses through our country the productions of all the earth.

GLADLY would we devote the present time to eulogiums on the characters
concerned in the American revolution, and in anticipating the future glory and
happiness of these states; but scenes, less pleasing, though not less
important, demand our attention, and without aspiring at elegance, permit me to
attend to facts, as we turn our attention to the present situation of our
country in its relation to foreign powers.

THROUGH the wisdom of her administration, America has preserved a neutral
situation during the commotions which have for years agitated the European
World, and still wishes to preserve it by an inflexible adherence to existing
treaties, and a due observance of the law of nations: And though efforts have
been made by the two principal contending powers to draw her into the
tumultuous vortex, she has undeviatingly attended to the principles of justice,
and shown no preference, and given no assistance to either, incompatible with
strict neutrality; and when injuries committed by those powers created between
them and her a difference, she wisely sought an accommodation by pacific
negotiation. In this, with Great Britain, she was happily successful; but her
pacific overtures to France have been treated with contempt, and the evident
designs of that nation, bid us prepare for a state of hostilities with them.

THE time once was when the French nation possessed our sincere friendship, our
best wishes: When their object appeared to be to establish for themselves a
government on the principles of reason and natural justice, we wished them
success; but when we see them forcibly prescribing governments for other
nations, and wishing to give law to the world, we cannot but pray for a check
to their mad career.

NATIONS, with respect to their internal police, are to each other what
individuals are in a state of nature, totally independent, and at liberty to
establish such rules for their own regulation, as their own wisdom shall
suggest, so long as they do not disturb the quiet, nor intrude upon the rights
of others. And as no individual has a right to interfere in the personal or
domestic concerns of another, so no nation has a right to interfere in, or
prescribe, the constitutional regulations of another; every nation having an
inherent right to regulate its own concerns, and to establish its own
government. If one nation establishes a monarchical, and another a republican
form of government, they both exercise their natural privilege, and neither is
authorized to censure or control the other; each being in this respect sole
and absolute judge of the government best suited to its own condition, and at
liberty to adopt it. And from the right of establishing a government,
necessarily results the right of altering it: Human nature is subject to
various vicissitudes, and the condition of man is so perpetually changing, that
the most perfect system today, may, from the mutability of temporal concerns,
become imperfect tomorrow, and, in a short time, totally defective; and a
power of change must therefore be reserved, or the government vainly attempted
to be founded on principles of such pliability as to accommodate itself to
every variation. But government, when formed, is intended for durability, and
when established, and during its continuance, ought to be inflexibly adhered
to, and energetically administered: Still there must be a power reserved of
even laying it aside and adopting another; otherways man at one time possesses
a right which at another time he cannot enjoy. But the power of change
reserved, by no means argues the propriety of frequently exercising it* and
rational men, and sound politicians, will be extremely cautious, how they
attempt the dangerous experiment of altering an established system of
government, the good effects of which they experience; lest by an
over-readiness to remedy imaginary inconveniences, they introduce serious
evils, and place it in the power of the discontented to introduce political
fluctuation, where the utmost stability ought to obtain.

THE principles here suggested are, with others equally important, preserved in
full perfection in the Federal Constitution, which is unquestionably the most
perfect social compact the wisdom of man has hitherto devised. Most of the
governments of the Old World are founded on conquest, and to this day exhibit
some proofs of their violent origin; our government founded in reason, and the
free choice of the people, possesses the perfections, without the defects, of
former establishments, and provides a constitutional mode of amendment when a
change in our condition shall require an alteration.

THIS obvious right of nations, to form their own regulations, was acknowledged
by the French republic in the early period of their revolution, when they
decreed, with a semblance of sincerity; that they would not interfere in the
government of other nations, nor suffer other nations to interfere in theirs:
But this principle they soon abandoned, and we now see them manifesting designs
hostile to the natural rights of all mankind; their troops invading surrounding
nations -- plundering defenseless cities -- ransacking sacred temples --
levying unjust contributions -- overturning social compacts and robbing
unoffending people under the vile pretext of giving, or enforcing upon them, a
free government; that is, a government free from all ingredients of their own
choice, and such only as these tyrannic liberators please to prescribe. France
has exhibited the strange political solicism of republican tyranny -- a tyranny
which sets parallel at defiance, and makes despotism blush for its former
moderation. Turn your eyes to the European World and see the horrid desolation,
the scenes of general distress, the anarchy, confusion, and unequalled
sufferings of those countries, where French troops have enforced the acceptance
of French politics, as well as those, where the desire of innovation has
countenanced and admitted French principles. Wherever the troops of the
directory have marched as foes, destruction and death have followed their
course; and wherever they have been received as friends, with the fraternal
embrace they have introduced misery and ruin, resembling the traitor Judas who
betrayed the Holy Savior with a kiss. And not content with the diabolical
progress they have made throughout Europe, they now turn their attention to our
country, and make war upon our rights: We now see them, regardless of their
plighted faith, transgressing the sacred rules of justice -- violating the laws
of nations -- capturing our ships -- interrupting our commercial intercourse,
and rejecting our ministers of peace: Their repeated injuries and insults have
been borne with a moderation bordering upon impropriety, and pacific measures
have been pursued from a wish to avoid those evils, which war in a greater or
less degree, is sure to bring upon contending nations. But our pacific
overtures have not only been rejected and our ministers insulted, but the sum
of thirty millions of dollars is in fact required to be advanced -- not as the
price of peace -- of security -- of uninterrupted liberty or of French
friendship, but as the price of being admitted to an audience with the dread
directory; to be told by them what further insults we must submit to; what
further sums they will graciously please to demand. -- Their ears are shut to
the voice of justice, and every spark of virtue appears to be extinguished in
that deluded country: Intoxicated with success, they deem their troops
irresistible, and look forward to the day, when the independent nations of the
earth shall become tributary to, or appendages of, the Terrible Republic.

THE directory charmed with human misery, elated with recent successes, and
deeming themselves the arbiters of fate, are fast accelerating the ruin of
their own country -- their banquet will hereafter be the confusion and distress
of their own citizens -- their music the tremendous groans of an expiring
republic: Already having passed their splendid meridian, and abandoned the
virtue necessary to their existence, they will suddenly be involved in
darkness, and the hour unexpectedly approach, when France, like imperial Rome,
shall be left to stalk with melancholy aspect, among the ghosts of perished
nations.

THE United States uniformly adhering to the principles of justice, have in no
instance given to France the least cause for those violent abuses and piratical
depredations, which she has authorized and committed; but readily afforded her
all the assistance consistent with neutrality, and manifested for her a
friendship from the commencement of her revolution, till her infamous policy
and inconsistent conduct declared her, in unequivocal terms, to be the enemy of
the human race. From the commencement of their troubles have the French
government in one way and another endeavored to involve these states in
European commotions. Do we not all recollect that a French minister, before he
was received by our government, commissioned privateers in our ports, and
afterward attempted to raise troops in our country, assuming a dictatorship
over our president, and upbraiding him with insolent language, because he had
construed a treaty different from the construction given to it by his own
heated imagination? The long and interesting correspondence which then took
place between the secretary of state and Mr. Genet, though it did not silence
that hotheaded character, saved the United States from the intended evil, and
convinced the world of their determination to discharge their relative duties
to mankind, and their absolute duties to themselves.

WHILE at that important period we view our then great and beloved President,
the head and representative of a free people, we see new traits of wisdom
embellish his character, and reiterated love for his country, adorn and
regulate his conduct -- we see him steadily pursuing the good of the Union,
observing faithfully existing treaties, submitting his conduct to the
examination of his constituents, still preserving his own respectability and
the dignity of the nation. With singular pleasure do we dwell on his character.
Through a long and an arduous war, he led our armies to battle and to conquest,
and when peace extended her olive wings, he was again called by his country, to
public life; and though he might safely have retired with a character
unsullied, and a reputation unequalled, yet at the solicitations of his fellow
citizens, he left his peaceful retirement and again embarked on the troublesome
ocean of political life; where he exhibited the same brilliant talents, the
same disinterested patriotism, which distinguished his former conduct: And
after seeing his country by his wise administration rise with unprecedented
rapidity to wealth and greatness -- possessing the confidence of his fellow
citizens and the admiration of the world, he voluntarily retired, to enjoy in
the evening of his days, that domestic peace, tranquillity and happiness, which
are the never failing attendants on a life of virtue. While the Sun shall
continue with his beams to make glad the earth -- While freedom shall be dear
to man, even till the "Angel shall stand, one foot upon the water and one on
the land, and declare that time shall be no more," shall the name of WASHINGTON
be held in dear remembrance and his character contemplated with gratitude and
joy.

GENET'S scheme, though defeated, was not abandoned by the government he
represented, and the insidious policy which he pursued, has been uniformly
continued to the present day, and unwearied efforts have been made to establish
a difference between the American people and their government; till finding
their dark machinations counteracted by the watchful vigilance of the federal
executive, the unprincipled directory now unveil their designs, and not only
acknowledge their determination to subdue this country, but tell us, with
insolent confidence, they have here a large party, who will aid their nefarious
purposes. But in this, I trust, they are deceived; the citizens of these states
will not readily abandon the government of their choice -- a government which
secures to them the full enjoyment of all their rights, and affords to all, the
equal benefit, and equal protection of law.

IN a country so extensive as ours, possessing such a diversity of character
and interest, it is not astonishing that there should be found friends and
enemies of many of the ordinary measures of administration, and superficial
foreigners may imagine the freedom of their political discussions evidence a
desire of change -- But though there may be found here as in all governments,
persons who do not in every instance approve the measures of administration,
yet whenever the question comes to be between the United States and a foreign
power, there will, I trust, be found few enemies to our country.

THE rage for experiments -- the jealousy of rulers, the desire of adopting
things new, because they have not been tried, was never before perhaps carried
to such an extravagant pitch as at the present day: But it is presumable we
have not attained such a height of political folly as to desire to lay aside
our government, merely because it is established, and to adopt in its stead the
visionary whims of fanatic revolutionists. Our government is the result of the
concentrated wisdom of our country, and approaches so near perfection, that
there can be little doubt but a change by consent, would be for the worse -- a
change by force, would destroy our freedom.

IF however there are any still wedded to revolutionary principles, still
dissatisfied with their government, and disposed to favor the aspiring views
of the French directory, to them permit a few concluding observations.

WE, my friends, are all brothers -- members of the same political family, the
head whereof is the government, which, with parental care and affectionate
solicitude, watches over our interests, guards our rights, and secures to us
the free and uninterrupted enjoyment of all our privileges; and could our
situation be bettered were a foreign foe to succeed in destroying our family
compact and in depriving us of our family inheritance? Think you that hostile
troops will, at the risque of their lives, cross an extensive ocean and invade
a neutral power, for the purpose of rewarding their friends, or of diffusing
general happiness? Can you live in society without government, and if you are
displeased with a government of your own choice, founded on virtue, will you be
better satisfied with a government forced upon you by military power, and
founded on the destruction of every moral principle? Be not deceived by the
friendly professions and pretensions of the agents of France, nor imagine the
French nation have your interests at heart. Disinterested friendship of nations
is an imaginary phantom which never yet had existence in fact; their own
aggrandizement is the object of the directory of France, to effect which they
would trample, as they do trample, on all laws human and divine: And could the
man who would assist in their wicked designs against this country, justify his
conduct to his fellow men -- his conscience -- or his God? On the one hand we
have every thing to loose -- on the other hand nothing to gain. For were
success to attend the schemes of the directory against this country, could they
bring to us one additional blessing? Could they liberate us from any thing but
order, happiness and liberty, could they reward us with any thing but
confusion, distress and slavery?

ARE not our rulers, from the highest to the lowest, of our own choice,
periodically elected, and subject to all the regulations which they prescribe?
Are they not our fathers -- brothers -- friends and fellow citizens; united
with us in the same cause -- bound by the same interests and influenced by the
same principles? Is not our beloved Federal Head the tried friend of his
country? Was he not an early advocate for, and an active assistant in
establishing American liberty? And together with the great talents with which
the Benevolent Author of Nature has endued him, has he not the acknowledged
character of an honest man? Is it within the limits of possibility that the
American administration should have interests separate from the American
people? Are not our government and our people the same, and would not the ruin
of one prove the inevitable destruction of the other? To be dissatisfied then
with our government, is to be dissatisfied with ourselves, and to be jealous of
our rulers, is to question our own integrity.

WHEN we see the gloomy scenes exhibited in the Old World, and observe the
spreading of principles which have shaken to the foundation the governments of
Europe -- When we view the destructive progress of the French abroad, and
observe their detestable policy at home -- when we see their troops spreading
desolation far and wide -- city after city falling a prey to their ambition,
and town after town pillaged for their avarice -- when we see unoffending
nations subdued and neutral powers destroyed -- the temples of God overthrown
-- religion and moral virtue trodden under foot: When we see the once
flourishing states of Holland undone -- Venice blotted from the map of the
world, partitioned out and no longer a nation -- Switzerland invaded and its
inhabitants cruelly massacred -- Portugal offered for sale, offered to be
bartered with Spain for territories in the vicinity of the United States, and
America threatened with chastisement for injuries -- not that she has done, but
for injuries received; can we desire an increase of the general calamity, and
wish to introduce destruction into the bosom of our country? O Americans! Guard
against foreign influence, and set your faces against principles which tend to
destroy every social comfort; show a united attachment to your government,
discover the firmness and energy manifested by the executive of the United
States, and resolve to support the constituted authorities of your country;
then will the clouds which appear to be gathering in your political horizon be
dispersed, or should the impending tempest burst on your shore, it will spend
its rage in vain, and leave you as unhurt as the solid rock which has for ages
resisted the dashing of the waves.

BUT if a love of peace, of order, of individual security and happiness, will
not attach you to your government, let the love of your wives and your children
-- the solicitude you must feel for the welfair of the fair daughters of
Columbia, warm and animate you to active exertions for their security. What
would be your sensations, O husbands! to see your wives -- what your
reflections, O fathers! to see your daughters -- what your feelings, O brave
American youth! to see your amiable and beloved female companions, without
whose delightful society life is not worth enduring, to see them subjected to a
foreign foe, placed within the power of those lawless hordes, who have reduced
iniquity to system, sanctioned immorality, and openly denied the influence of
religion? May your readiness to protect them show you deserving of their
friendship, and may no enchanting smile delight, and no fair hand make happy
the man who in the hour of danger will desert his country's cause.

IN these southern states, my friends, we have not only common incitements to
guard against those disorganizing principles which overturn social compacts,
and introduce that impiety, immorality and infidelity, which will eventually
destroy a people; but our local situation and circumstances may render us
subject to a repetition of the horrid massacres of Fort Dauphin and the
barbarities of Cape Francois; and should these ever make their appearance here,
let not the man who has favored or countenanced the evil expect to escape the
general calamity. For, be assured, should the noble fabric which has been
raised by united exertions, founded on virtue, and cemented by the blood of our
country, be overthrown by the fraud or the force of a foreign foe, the man who
has meanly aided the destruction, with him who has nobly opposed, will alike be
buried in its ruins. But the ardour and military spirit discoverable in all
parts of the Union -- the pleasing military appearance now before our eyes,
inspire a firm and confident belief, that the wisdom and bravery of the
American people will forever guard the rights -- vindicate the honor, and
defend the government of their country; and should the directory of France, in
pursuit of universal dominion, attempt by force the liberties of these states,
they will find here a virtuous phalanx successfully resist every encroachment,
whether impelled by an individual despot or a five headed tyrant: And I doubt
not but almost every American bosom this day, secretly resolves, never to
abandon that independence, the anniversary of which he rejoices to celebrate.

MAY the Almighty Ruler of Heaven and Earth, who holds the scales of universal
empire, and overrules the fate of nations, unite the hearts of our citizens in
an unshaken attachment to the cause and the interest of their country: And may
the United States forever remain unequalled in the virtue of their rulers, the
prosperity and happiness of their citizens -- the security and peace -- the
freedom and independence of their government.


