(...) ANTHON^

A SERMON, PREACHED AT DANBURY, NOVEM^^^ ^ A. D. 1798, BEING THE DAY OF THE
EXECUTION OF ANTHONY, A FREE NEGRO, PURSUANT TO SENTENCE OF DEATH PASSED (...)
BY THE HON. SUPERIOR COURT, FOR THE CRIME OF A RAPE.

BY TIMOTHY LANGDON, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN DANBURY.

Be not wicked over much; why should thou die before thy time? Eccl. THE
following discourse, composed in a state of ill health, is published by the
request of some who heard it delivered. Hoping that the publication will answer
some valuable purpose, wherever it may circulate, the author has committed it
to the press. When delivered, some parts of the sermon were necessarily
omitted. In the publication these are added, as being in the opinion of the
writer, useful in the illustration of the main subject of the discourse.

A SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY ^^XII.35, and part of 36. To me belongs vengeance, and
recompense; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity
is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste. For the Lord
shall judge his People, and repent himself for his Servants.


THE most high God, being as merciful as just, has been careful in his word, to
encourage, support, and comfort his people with gracious promises, no less than
to alarm, check, and ^^ter his enemies by the most awful threats. The passage
of holy writ now read is an evidence of this. The chapter from which i^ is
taken contains a valedictory song, which Moses by the appointment of God,
delivered to the Children of Israel, a li^^^ before his death. The time was now
come, for him to take his leave of that people, whom he had so long governed,
comforted, and instructed. In this song he not only admonishes and reproves
them for their ap^stacy from God, but predicts the punishments which their sins
would bring upon them. At the same time he promises, in the text, and context,
that destruction shall eventually come upon their (...) and oppress^rs. As the
sovereign and righte^^^ ruler of the un^^erse, God claims his right to inflict
punitive justice upon his enemies, and with the authority of a judge, declares,
that in due time their foot shall slide. For their vine is of the (...), and of
the fields of Gomorrah. verse 32. The commentators which I have had opportunity
to consult, say, this had (...) the enemies of the Jewish Church, and therefore
the (...) of judgment in the text is to be considered as made upon them.

But equally mindful of the righteous, God declares in the text that he will
judge his (...), and repent himself for his servants. By which we may
understand that h^ will not destroy the righteous (...) them that are his, and
will (...) anger. I appears to be the meaning (...) the text, that God in
compassion for his people, and for his own glory, will judge for them against
their enemies, condescend to plead their cause and break the yoke of oppression
under which they may groan: that, instead of visiting them in judgment as they
deserve for their sinful backslidings, he will forgive, protect and save them.
Repenting himself for his servants, is an expression which shows, not that God
changes his purposes and is fickle like men, but that he will forgive the sins
of his people and not deal with them according to their deserts. And when the
Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and delivered
them out of (...) hand of their enemies, all the (...) of the judge; for it
repented the (...) because of their groanings, ^y reason of them that oppressed
them and (...) them. Judges ii.18.
And God saw their works, that they turned from their (...); and God repented
of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not.
Jonah iii 10.


Notwithstanding this denunciation of judgment, and proclamation of mercy had a
special reference to the children of Israel (...) their enemies, or to the
wicked and the pious of that day, still (...) contained in the text, is
applicable to those two charact^^^ of men in all ages of the world* It was no
doubt given for (...) to vicious men, that in due time their foot should (...)
and (...) a promise of comfort to the righteous, that God would (...) himself
for his people.

(...). We are naturally led^y the denunciation of judgment in the text, to
consider the awfully alarming state of wicked, impe^^tent men. They are
constantly exposed to destruction, as one who walks on slippery ground, is
every step which he takes, in danger of falling. The very manner in which
destruction is to come upon them shows their continual danger. For, says the
Psalmist, surely thou did set them in slippery places, and thou castedst them
down into destruction.

Their state is the more awful, as they are exposed to sudden and unexpected
ruin. If a man ^enture on slippery ground, he is not only liable every moment
to fall, but when his foot does slide, it is instantaneous, and he falls
without warning. The reason why they have not already fallen is because God in
mercy has held them up. But in due time their foot shall slide. When they
shall have proceeded in the commission of crime after crime against God and
human society, till the measure of their iniquities be full, then the most high
God, will in his providence, no longer hold them up in their walks upon
slippery ground, where they never had any leave to venture, but let them sink
under the weight of their sins into merited contempt and misery.

In order more fully to illustrate this truth, that impenitently wicked, and
immoral men will be detected and punished, let me propose the following things
for consideration.

1st. There is no want of power in God to begin the infliction of that
punishment upon such persons, which they deserve, at any time, when he pleases.
Feeble mortals can make no resistance against an omnipotent arm. Though earthly
princes have frequently found it difficult to subdue a rebel when he has
fortified and made himself strong; yet no fortress nor numbers can avail any
thing against almighty God. If hand join in hand, and ever so many in
malevolence combine against him, they are easily broken and destroyed. They are
like a rope of sand, -- feeble as the chaff before a driving storm; -- the
driest stubble in the field, is not more easily consumed by the raging of an
uncontroled fire. Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are
counted as the small dust of the balance. However easy it may be for us, to
crush the worm, which crawls under our feet, upon the ground, or to cut the
thread by which any thing is suspended in the air, still with infinitely more
ease, the Almighty can destroy his enemies. What is man, that he should presume
to think of resisting God, at whose rebuke the earth trembles, and before whom
the mountains are levelled.

2ndly. Another consideration which shows that impenitent, disobedient men,
will be overtaken in their career of vice, and punished, is, that this they
deserve. Such are their crimes against God and man, that they deserve, and have
reason to expect this, as a reward for their evil deeds. That justice to which
a holy God must always have a sacred regard, will not stand in the way; nor be
any objection to his executing vengeance upon them. But deserving punishment,
justice will rather demand that they should suffer. To every tree in the
garden, which brings forth the fruit of Sodom and Gomorrah, the language of
justice, is, cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground? Being under the sentence
of condemnation, the sword of justice already hangs over their heads. The law
of God, which he has established as a rule of righteousness, condemns them; for
he that believes not is condemned already.

3rdly. It is a consideration of importance that impenitent, disobedient men,
are now under the very same kind of divine displeasure, as God exercises
toward those whom he punishes in the reg^^ns of despair. The reason why, by
human laws they are not d^tected, and condemned, is not because God is
unoffended at their crimes: The reason why they do not immediately sink down
into misery, is no proof of their innocence. Perhaps the divine being is now
more displeased with them, than with some, who for thousands of years have been
suffering in the place of torment. For some now living, not only may be
impenitent, but much more guil^y: and though God's displeasure will be made
much more manifest in the future than in the present world, yet, his
displeasure is always in proportion to the creature's criminality.

Notwithstanding there are some hardened persons who think themselves safe in
continuing a vi^ious course, because less-guilty in their opinion than their
companions, yet they ought to confide^, that they may now be much more criminal
than some who have long since perished, and therefore are under the greater
displeasure of God. But if guilty in a greater or less degree, as God hates
iniquity, their misery s^umbereth not: as he loves the justice of his law,
though for the present they be permitted to escape the vigilant attempts of
human society to detect them, still God has opened a pit of destruction under
their foot, into which in due time they must fall.

4thly. Still further to illustrate the truth, that impenitent, vicious men
must fall in due time, let me suggest, that they have nothing on which to
depend for safety, protection, and salvation. If the thief, the murderer, the
man of lewdness, or any other sinner, should see nothing which is likely in his
opinion, to be the means or his detection and punishment: this however is no
evidence but there are means now operating which will speedily bring his works
of darkness to light, unto his utter confusion and ruin. It is reasonable to
suppose, that as God has appointed the end, he has also appointed the means. If
a man walk on slippery ground, he must be blind, not to see his danger and the
means which are likely to effectuate his fall. To bring this to pass, there is
no need of a miracle, or that any thing extraordinary should take place. It is
in vain that they cry peace, and safety; for the highest authority has long
since assured ^s, that to the wicked there is no peace.

Their own care, cunning and secret artifice, or the most diligent precaution
and vigilance of others can be no certain security to them. Self-conceited, and
worldly-wise men are often taken in their own craftiness. Remaining imp^nitent,
men of this character, go from sin to sin, and by hal it in an evil course,
become hardened and alike insensible to their guilt and their danger. But were
they to be ev^r so vigilant to avoid de^^ction, will not an overruling
providence in time drag them forth from their lurking places, and (...) the
murderer, the robber of the purse, and the destroyer of (...), to the (...) of
h^man justice, or, by some other mea^^, send (...) forward to the more
enlightened, the more perfect, and the more (...) of heaven? I will be in (...)
for their (...) pray and petition (...) in due time (...)

If through the cunning devices and contrivances of friends, they should be
protected, defended and saved for a time, this however must be temporary; for
it is a course which tends to ruin, and sooner or later must end in ruin. Could
they use any art, vigilance, secrecy, or contrivance, which would be an
impregnable bulwark against their detection and punishment, -- fools might be
accounted wise, and wise men, fools, -- fools would live, and wise men die. But
it is a happy circumstance, that nature has furnished wicked men with no
irresistible weapons of defense. Either the laws of men, or the providence of
God, will in due time bring them to condign punishment. The simple pass on and
are punished.

These sons of vice, these enemies to God and men, can find no promise of their
maker, to preserve them for a moment from detection and an ignominious death.
Pursuing a wicked course, and continuing impenitent, they can find no more
safety in God, than in the^^ ^wn contrivances of defense. God has ^laid himself
under no obligation, by promise, to pretect and preserve them for a moment,
from a punishment which their conduct seems to defy. To those who have searched
the scriptures, it is well known, that God has made no promises of forgiveness
and eternal life, or none of deliverance and preservation from eternal death,
which are not contained in the covenant of grace; and in the promises of this
covenant, it must also be known, that no wicked men can take refuge, for they
are made on the conditions of repentance and faith, of which persons of this
character are entirely destitute.

If the hypocrite travel the round of internal duty -- if the knave and the
thief pretend to honesty and uprightness -- if the murderer and man of lewdness
appear harmless as the lamb, or if the whole group of vicious characters should
attend upon the appointed means of instruction and grace, -- yet all this will
not enable them to take refuge in the promises of the Gospel, because they are
still impenitent and unbelieving. Like the practical atheist and the villain
among men, they cannot, upon seeing that their own care, vigilance, and
contrivances are weak and likely to fail, fly to any divine promise for safety
and protection. Before this can be done by any description of men there must be
a sincere and cordial compliance with the conditions of the covenant of grace.
For whosoever believes and is babtized shall be saved; but whosoever believes
not shall be damned.

Again. There are reigning in the souls of impenitent, disobedient men, th^se
viole^^, inflammatory and evil principles, which would pr^s^ntly destroy them,
were they not restrained by the grace of God. ^ere it not for this restraint,
it is impossible to conceive, what violence, what malignity what e^mity, what
strife, what remorse, what intense misery, sinful principles rooted in the
depraved heart of man, might produce. From effects however which we have seen,
where the restrain^s of God have been only partially taken off, we have the
m^st solemn and alarming reason to dread, abhor, and to the utmost extremity,
resist, the operation of sinful principles, in the heart of man. Such persons
not only have nothing on which they can rely for safety and salvation, ou^ are
charged with principles, which are hosti^e to themselves and s^^iety, and are
too often actually productive of confusion and every evil work. If Amnon
vi^iated the chastity of Tamar his sister -- if Cain s^ew his brother -- if
Judas betrayed his savior -- and others innumerable have committed the most
attr^^ious crimes, when only some of the divine restraints were taken off, to
what lengths would sinful principles carry then, and into what depths of misery
plunge them, were they entirely given up to pursue their own corrupt
inclinations! Those, who wish to know, will do well to consult Robison's
"proofs of conspiracy against religion and government," and carefully peruse
those writers who have given a correct history of the revolution in France. By
these means they will see human nature in ^^s worst light; and to what
dangerous and destr^ctive lengths sinful principles will impe^ depraved man,
when he fears not God, nor regards human law.

Sin is the cause of ruin to the soul. It is in its very nature malignant and
destructive. Like the element of fire, wit^ restraint, it may become immoderate
and boundless in its fury. I^ in this life it be pent up, and ^^nfi^ed in the
hearts ^f wicked men, by the restraining and gracious arm of God, what would i^
do were it to be let loose? It would set on fire the course of natu^^* Its
peculiar tendency, is, to bring on disorder, confusion, pai^ are every degree
and kind of misery to individuals and society. It ^s the grand principle of
disorganization. As it operates in Eu^^pe* at the present day, it thre^tens the
rui^ (...) religion, govern^ and morals. With a soaring hand, it ^ves (...)
life. If unchecked (...) continue to rage^ soon it will be (...) be born to
live in the s^ciety of men. When sin (...) were first imbibed by the angels in
heaven, (...) those blesse^ abodes, and to the government of God, (...) were
banished from the regions (...) peace, and (...) further disturbance from them
were reserve^ (...) under darkness unto the judgment of the great day.

In the vi^^^us ch^ of the day, we (...) them (...) ^iples (...) remarks, (...)
^rone of society, who a^ds nothing to (...) on the in^^^rs and spo^^^ of
others, might yet be borne, were not his s^^^h the (...) gate of wickedness.
Idle to do good, he is a pattern of ^y to do evil With a restless mind, and
hands diligent i^ mi^^^ief, he consumes his time, and employs his ta^ in (...),
cheating, lying, stealing, corrupting youth. (...) ^rder, and pursuing an
universal round of no^^ous (...) diversions. ^


The (...), exhibits the ruinous ^^ndency of sinful principles, (...) the
depravation of every mental and bodily faculty, in the mortification of
friends, in the destruction of the p^ace, co^for^ and hopes of his family, and
in giving a contagious, p^st^^ential example highly injurious to the community.

The fatal effects of sinful principles, are still more strikingly and awfully
manifest in the man of lewdness. "He unceasingly ^atters, firebrarnds, arrows,
and death, on all around him. He profe^^es indeed to be in sport, and merely to
pursue his own amusement; but the sufferings of those who are unhappily within
his reach, make that amusement a very serious concern to them. He lives but to
injure, and acts but to destroy. The burglar plunders the purse; the murderer
^uts off the life, and hurries his unhappy victim to an untimely grave. The man
of lewdness robs the parent of his child, the husband of his wife, and the
family of their mother* murders household pe^ce, character, and happiness*
plunges the dagger of death into the soul, and hurries the victim of his lust,
into the abyss of the damned. The plunder of the ^urglar may be recovered, or
the loss may be borne; the victim of the murderer may live beyond the grave,
and the unhappy mourners may with this ^pe ^^othe their excr^ciating sorrows;
but no means can restore, no mind can sustain the plunder of peace; no ^^ls^m
was ever ^ound for the u^er of infamy; no skill can rebuild a r^ined (...): no
artist can repair p^ 18. (...)
the dishonor done to a (...), or make any adequate compensation. Such are the
eff^^ts o^ wicked principles in the lecher. His crimes are (...), whether he be
an adulterer, a fornicator, of one who ^^mmi^ a rape. The latter of which is a
"crime level^ed not only against (...) happiness of domestic and social life
and well being of s^^iety* (...) against ^ts very existance." ^
This effect of wicked (...) in the heart of ^ewd men, has ever been dreaded by
all the frien^ of social order are happiness. "All nations have (...) crime,
that they have punish^ (...) with death. ^
When it is con^ (...) so dangerous to (...) destructive to the peace (...)
vict^m of it, and indicative of such depravity of mind, the humane and
benevolent heart, the strongest advocate for lenity of punishment, cannot find
much fault with a law that subjects the criminal to the pains of death." This
law is designed, and well calculated, to preserve the important rights of
women, and the inestimable virtue of chastity. But so violent and inflammatory
are sinful principles in the heart of man, so strong and "perpetual is the
temptation to the commission of crimes, against chastity," and so deep is the
veil of secrecy which the mode^^y of the most profigate, throws ^ound these
transactions, that it is impossible always to restrain them, "either by the
penal laws of God or man." But in due time their foot shall slide. The day of
calamity is (...), and the things that shall come upon them make (...).

Again. While a principle of sin and corruption is so terrible in its effects
upon others, both in their individual and social capacity. it is no less
distr^^sing to th^se who i^ibe and i^dulge it. By this, our first parents lost
the possession of the garden of Eden; -- by this, the world was dr^wned: -- by
this, the Jews were subjected to the Babylonian captivity; -- by this,
thousands have been cut off by the axe and the ^a^ter: -- and it is this, which
brings on remorse of conscience, despair of mercy, and bitter heart-risings
against the ^^ly and (...) God. The effects of corrupt principles ar^ vis^^e in
the bo^y and mind of those who indulge them. There the human mind refer ^^es
the wrecks of a disorganized family: there the will chooses what the
understanding sees to be wrong, and is indulged: conscience opposes and in vain
protests: -- A conflict ensues between the noble faculties of the soul, which
after the image o^ God were made for peace. The (...) of the wicked are like
the troubled sea, which c^steth (...) and dirt. That house which is divided
against itself, veri^y cannot stand. These violent, corrupt, sinful principles,
if retai^d and indulged, will soon engender and nourish up to an enormous
m^^urity, (...) which dies not, and light up into a devouring flame, the fire
^at (...) not (...).

The observations which have been made, it is presumed, are s^^ficient to
illustrate the awful and dangerous (...) of impe^itent, dis^b^ient men. What
has been offered to you in the dis^^urse ^ither^^, is intended clearly to show
the (...), and miser^^^^ tendency of (...)* -- th^^ (...) men are (...) danger,
-- that (...) in sin. will ^^^ntually ^^te (...) and (...) like the (...), if
they (...) (...) in this (...) (...), there is a power (...) G^d who (...)
(...) them (...) of his (...) them ^^^ording to their ^ll deeds. The day of
their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste.

SECONDLY. God shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants.
That he will judge his people is matter of great consolation. For it implies
that in mercy to them, as well as for the support of his own government, he
will detect and punish the wicked. And Joshua said; why have thou troubled us?
The L^r^ shall trouble thee this day. The troublers of God's people shall be
troubled: in due time their foot shall slide. Experience confirms the truth of
this. Under the Jewish dispensation, it is well known, that God appeared in a
very remarkable manner for his people, during a great length of time. In many
particular instances, he interposed, and cut off these of their enemies, who
threatened and troubled them. To all who have examined the history of the
Christian church, it must be equally evident, that God has continued to judge
his people, even to the present day. The gates of hell have not and shall not
prevail against his church.

But he not only judges for his people, in protecting them as an Almighty
Guardian, against external and internal ^oes to their peace and well being, but
in forgiving their back^lidings and saying them from the fatal consequences of
sin. He repents himself for his servants. Upon those who repent of their sins
and embrace the way of salvation which he has opened, by the death of his Son,
he will show mercy, forgive and save them. None that trust in him shall be
des^^ate.

It is true there is a sense in which even those may fall. The sins of God's
people may involve them in great troubles in the present life, but as God
repents himself for his servants, who exercise that love and obedience in
kind which are required in the divine law, so happiness without end, and
complete, will be their portion in the world to come. Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
^ath prepared for them that love him.

It is a most pleasing reflection, that even the murderer, the thief, the man
of lewdness, may become the people of God, (...) he will judge, and for whem he
repents himse^^. For the Son of God was set forth to be a pr^pitiation for
our sins, and not for (...) only, but for the sins of the (...) world. He died
as (...) ch^if, as for the least of ^inners. But, there is no intimati^^, nor
promise in scripture that any shall be saved (...) toward God, and f^it^^
(...) the Lord Jesus Christ. (...) indispensable conditions on which the (...)
is made to the sinner. (...) perish. He that believes on PIM, is not
condemned. These qualifications are essential. If they be obtained merely by
the exertion and striving of the creature, or if by the efficacy of appointed
means of instruction and grace -- or if they be given to the sinner without any
solicitude, or a single thought or act of his, they nevertheless on each of
these schemes are equally necessary. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins.

To those in whom these qualifications are found, God will be a Judge, a
Father, and a Savior, without any regard to what their character had been,
previous to their conversion. If their sins have been many, aggravated, public,
or private, he will upon their repentance and faith; preserve, acquit, forgive,
and save them from the misery of hell, to which their sins have tended. For by
these qualifications, men become the people and servants of God. Whatever a
profession of religion, and a constant observance of divine institutions may
do, in making men the people of God, in the eyes of their fellow creatures, or
in preparing them for piety and holiness, yet they are not favored with the
promise of God to forgive and save them from eternal death, without repentance
for sin, and faith in the Redeemer. There is no other name given under heaven
by which m^n must be saved; nor in this name of Christ, can the righteous or
the most pro^igate sinner be justified and accepted, without a contrite heart,
and faith in the Son of God. And all who exercise these christian graces and
qualifications for heaven will manifest themselves to be the people of God, in
a full and entire reliance on the work of Christ as the matter of their
justification, and in a careful observance of divine institutions and precepts.
For faith works by love, and therefore is not dead, but productive of good
fruit.

How glorious is the work of redemption! How wonderful in its invention,
execution, and effects! It is most happily calculated to humble the sinner and
redound to the glory of God: to open the divine character to the view of men,
to bring them into the practice of virtue, and unitedly to secure both the
honorable support of the government of God, and the happiness of the penitent
sinner. -- The plan and work of redemption is also infinitely be ^evolent in
its effects. Adam after he had sinned, and before he had a revolution of this
mercy, retired to an obscure pa^^ of (...) garden, there to hide himself from
the presence of his Maker Self-c^^^^mned and feelingly guilty, he feared to
meet his Judge. Conscious blame plunged him into the horrors of despair.

Such must have been the condition of all mankind, had not the wor^ of
redemption by Christ been accomplished and revealed unto thee. They could not
have been the people of God. Repentance and faith, would not have brought them
the pleasing hope of forgiveness and salvation. But, in boundless love, unto
those who sat in darkness and the shadow of death, Christ was given to
enlighten, comfort and save. In him God is reconciling the world unto himself.
God will judge his people and repent himself for his servants.

A careful review of what has been said in this discourse* will on the one hand
show the tendency of sin, and the awful ca^ger of those who continue in their
vicious courses; and on the other, the advantages and everlasting blessings to
be derived from penitence, reformation and virtue. The ^ages of sin is death:
but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. We unto the
wicked! it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his han^s shall be given
him. But, say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with him* for thee shall
eat of the fruit of their doings.

The strongest motives are placed before impenitent, disobedient men, to
forsake every wicked and false way, and to return unto the Lord, who will have
mercy upon them, and to God in Christ who will abundantly forgive. But if they
hearken not to Moses and the Prophets, neither would they be persuaded, were
one to rise from the dead, and preach the very same truths, hold out the very
same threats, and offer the very same promises of pardon and felicity, which
have already been presented to them by the prophets, and apostles, Jesus Christ
being the chief-corne^ stone. Herein, the murderer, the thief, the lecher, and
many others, show that they are neither friends to their God, nor their fellow
men, nor themselves. Against such enemies, the providence of God, and the laws
of men will conspire to detect and punish: Their only hope of escape must be in
repentance and reformation. May this hope, lead them to seek these peaceable,
holy and saving qualifications.

We cannot but congratulate men of piety and religion that they stand on such a
solid and immovable foundation. The Lord will judge his people, and repent
himself for his servants. If the rain descend, if the floods come, and the
winds blow, and beat against such a foundation, it will not give way, because
laid upon a rock, even the rock of ages.

There are the most powerful arguments to be drawn from love, from past
experience, and the hope of future safety, to excite them to deny every fl^shly
lust, and to live soberly and righteously, studying the things which make ^^r
peace and whereby one may edify another. May their fruit be unto holiness and
the end ^^erla^ting life.

The ^ccasion requires, that in the next place I should make a particular
address to the Prisoner.

ANTHONY: it is by your request that I speak on this occasion and this is the
last address which I shall ever make to you. From the sentence pronounced upon
you by the court, and from the preparations with which you are surrounded, you
must see that you have but a very, very short time to live. Your situation is
truly deplorable. Whatever your crimes may have been against God and human
society, yet seeing your present condition, I pity you as a man, I pray for you
as a christian, and am now to address you as a minister, of the Gospel. I must
therefore be faithful, and use great plainness of speech.

The awful situation, ANTHONY, to which you are reduced, is a striking
illustration of the evil nature and tendency of sin, which in this discourse I
have endeavored to explain, and set in ajust, and affecting point of light.
You are one of those that have lived contrary to the dictates of your
conscience, contrary to the plain and explicit commands of your God, and to the
advice and laws of your fellow-men. Your life has been impenitently disobedient
and ^ingrantly pernicious. But to say nothing of your other vices, which you
have confessed and lamented, you have committed a crime, for which the
punishment is death. Of this you have been convicted. Your guilt is aggravated.
It must have been known to you, as you were educated and have lived in a
christian land, that the crime of which you are convicted, was a violation of
the law of God and man. Having lived where the means of information were within
your own ^each, you cannot now come forward and plead ignorance as an excuse.
It seems, that you neither feared men, who can kill the body, nor God, who can
destroy both soul and body in hell. Do you not now see, that lust when it has
conceived, bri^geth forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
death? To you, indeed, the day of (...) is now come.

How important is it that you should see and (...), your awful, (...). For you
must know, if yet impenitent, and (...) are under condemnation -- that the
wrath of God (...) upon you. It is a solemn and awful ^ation that (...) but
execution; but it is (...) and awful (...) in a st^te of (...) stupidly and
unbelief, you plunge yourself into (...) and hopeless misery. I (...) yo^* how
(...), and the wrath of God hang over your guilty ^d*

(...) of hope for you, and only one; which is the LORD JESUS CHR^ (...) came
to seek and to save those that were lost. For it is (...) ^^ful saying and
worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came (...) the world to save
sinners, even the chief. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. It is a
well known fact that some who were aggravatedly guilty have obtained pardoning
mercy through the divine Redeemer. One of the thieves crucified with our
Savior, obtained mercy upon the cross, in some of his very last, yea, in his
dying moments. To whom the all-merciful and benevolent Savior said, to day,
shall thou be with me, in Paradise. It does not admit of a doubt, but the
atonement or work of Christ, is a foundation every way sufficient for the
salvation of men, as the cause or matter of justification. And there is no more
reason to doubt, but repentance and faith are necessary in order to the
sinner's acceptance on the ground of his atonement; not as a work of the law,
-- not as a meritorious act, nor in order to make any further atoning
sacrifice; but as the absolute, indispensable conditions, on which p^rdon and
eternal life, are in the gospel, offered to the sinner. For without repentance
there is no remission of sin, and he that believes not shall be damned.

If you have seen sin in its evil nature, as a crime committed against a God of
infinite purity and holiness, you will feel^humble, undeserving, penitent, and
self-condemned: pray, therefore, with the Publican* God be merciful to me a
sinner. If you have had a proper view of Christ, he must appear to you to be
altogether excellent and lovely in himself* as the express image of his
father's glory; as willing and able to save even the chief of sinners, and
therefore you will embrace* and trust in him as the way, the truth, and the
life. Let me* then* urge and press it upon you, "with the tenderest compassion,
and yet with the utmost earnestness, as you love your own never dying soul,"
closely and seriously to attend to these things. What time you can spare from
the duty of prayer to God, meditate upon those things which are essential to
salvation. They are but few. You have a tolerable unde^^^anding of them. May
you in this extremity reap advantage from the pious instuction which you have
received. Confess your sins. As you hope to be forgiven of God* against whom
you have sinned, ^^rgive those if there be any who, you apprehend, have
trespassed against you. Endeavor to die in a pious temper of min^; fearing,
yet loving, adoring, and trusting in your Maker: and in a forgiving, benevolent
disp^sition toward your fellow-men Tho^ y^^ are now to die as a criminal, by
the hand of civil just^ce, yet may God through the m^^its of his Son prepare and
receive you to glory, making you ^ ^iking monument of his free, rich, and (...)
Grace. ANTHONY: I bid you farewell: and the Lord h^v^ in (...) upon Soul.

A brief (...) the numerous assembly convened on the present, mournfu^ ^on,
will close this discourse.

BRETHREN and FRIENDS:

The business on which we are this day convened, is of the most solemn and
awful nature: -- to see, one of our fellow-men, and fellow sinners, receive the
just recompense of his crimes. Behold, in the prisoner before you, the
miserable tendency and end of a vicious course. His foot has slid in due time.
In this sorrowful spectacle, see, as in a glass, the vi^e, the debasing, the
shameful nature of sin; how low it may reduce men, and then leave them exposed
to public shame and justice, helpless and forlorn.

If only such crimes be committed by any of you as by our laws are not
punishable with death, yet you must be sensible that the smallest indulgence in
sin subjects men to the condemnation of God's law. Cursed is every one, that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do
them. Think not finally to escape, without repentance and reformation, neither
because undetected you have aleady gone great lengths in sin, no^ because your
crimes, if known, do not subject you to a shameful death. The natural tendency
of all sin is to ruin. It is owing to the restraining grace of God, that we
have not been destroyed by iniquity. What but the restraining grace of God, has
made us to differ, in our present situation, from the unhappy prisoner* What is
it owing to but this, that we have not committed the most enormous crimes,
become "spectacles to the world, loaded with chains, and brought forth the
prisoners of justice,' to suffer as malefactors. Were it not for the restraint,
"the embargo, which God puts upon men's lusts," their wickedness would
constitute a hell upon earth.

If you would have God for your judge, who repents himself for his servants,
to defend, forgive and bless you, with penitent hearts forsake every wicked and
false way. If one sin be retained and indulged, it will lead to the commission
of others. There are few solitary sins. To the man of an unsanctified heart,
the transition is exceeding easy from lying to profane swearing, thence to
sabbath-breaking, thence to gambling, pil^ering, stealing, and finally to the
commission of murder. The transition in the crime of lewdness, from little to
great, is alike easy, and almost unavoidable. It is a career, which if a man
begin, he is likely to pursue, if not to detection and punishment among men,
yet to the infinite detriment of others, and the ruin of his own soul. Avoid
every thing which leads to a comm^ment of this unhallowed and destructive
^areer: its (...) is (...) as (...)* sharp as a (...)-edged sword: it leads
down to death, and takes hold on h^ Place yourselves as far as possible from
the danger of fall^ (...) ^o this sin. Mortify every lust. Learn from the
Apostle's advice to possess your vessels in sanctification and honor. It ought
to be matter of humiliation and regret before God, unto all who have made any
approaches toward this forbidden, dangerous, and fat^l ground. Retreat in time;
fly from it as from the shoals of death. There is little reason perhaps to hope
that those who have en^ered upon this forbidden ground, being hedged in by the
briars and thorns which it produces, will ever retire and forsake it; still
they are to be informed, as a motive to their repentance and reformation, that
to God belongs vengeance and recompense, and in due time their foot shall
slide.

Before I conclude, let me entreat you, my hearers, to pity, and pray for this
poor criminal, that God would be pleased to grant him repentance and the
remission of his sins. That, notwithstanding justice will suffer him no longer
to live, yet that he may find mercy with God through the merits of Christ, and
be made meet for the inheritance of saints in light. Believing it consistent
with the plan of divine mercy in the redemption of men, for God to save him, if
truly penitent, you can pray for him as his distressing condition requires. Go
not to the place of execution merely to see an awful, unusual exhibition, and
to gratify vain curiosity; but whatever injury the criminal may have done you,
or others, now pity and forgive him: leave him indeed to fall a vi^tim to the
just laws of our country* but lend him the aid of your fervent prayers in the
tribulation and agony of his last moments.

My hearers: this occasion naturally leads our views forward to the great day
of judgment; when, at the sound of the last trump, the dead shall rise, and
there shall be an assembled world before the bar of God. A day, which will be
glorious and joyful to the saints, for the Lord shall judge his people, and
repent himself for his servants, saying, come ye blessed of my father, inherit
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. But a day, which
will be terrible to the wicked and finally impenitent, for t^ the Lord
belongs veng^ance and recompen^, who will say unto thee on the left hand,
depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, p^pared for the devil and his
angels. By the grace of God, may w^ be prepared in that day to give up our
accounts with joy, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. AMEN.

AN ADDRESS MADE BY THE REV. MR. S. BLATCHFORD, AT THE GALLOWS, IMMEDIATELY
PRECEDING THE EXECUTION OF ANTHONY, A FREE NEGRO, (...) THE CRIME OF A RAPE.
MY BRETHREN,
THERE is something peculiarly awful in every thing that relates to death and
eternity. It is affecting to attend the dying bed of one of our fellow mortals
when the connection which subsists between the body and the soul is dissolved by
the prevalence of any of those diseases to which human nature is subject. --
But you have now before you in the person of this poor criminal, something
still more awful and affecting. In strong health and the prime of life, when by
the regular discharge of those duties incumbent upon us as men living in a
social compact, he might make himself useful to society and contribute to his
own and the happiness of others, he is about to fall a victim to the just laws
of his country and to exhibit a solemn warning of the issue of the degenerate
passions* of the human heart, uncontroled by reason or religion. We (...) of us
mourn the man, whilst we acquiesce in the justice of his sentence, and the
propriety of is execution.

It is an acknowledged truth (...) there is a God who is the creator and
governor of the world, who superintends all the concerns of nations and
individuals -- In all his plenitude of almighty power he does according to his
pleasure amongst the armies of heaven, and according to his will amongst the
inhabitants of the earth: and (...) power is in divine consistency with his
other perfections of un^rring wisdom, inflexible justice, and boundless love.
In the government of God a strict attention has been paid to rewards and
punihments; by which nations and individuals are led to virtue by alurement,
and from vi^^ by fear.

It is necessary therefore both to the constitution and preservation of
ommunities, that they are under the guidance of an alwise and almghty ruler,
and that government is the best constituted which m^ nearly resembles the
divine.

The constitution and government under which we live, I would ^old out to* you
as one of the best that can be framed by serious and re^^ecting minds, anxious
for the well being of society. It is imitative of the plan of divine Providence
in securing public happi^ess by an exhibition of praise to them who do well,
and of ^^ror to them who do evil. The laws of our country are a bul^ark against
^epredation, and a strong tower of defense against all attempts upon our
comforts and our lives.

What God formerly said of the patriarchs, the law of America says of every
one of you, yea more, of every limb of every one of you, -- Touch not mine
anointed and do my prophets no harm. Your property little or much, your
domestic enjoyments more or less, are all g^^^ded by the law.

In most (...) countries the life of a subject is at the will of his lord; but
(...) nothing is attempted against the life of a citizen, without an ^pen and
fair trial: Evidences are required to make out the charge, and the utmost
deliberatio^ is used by those impartial judges of the fact, called jurors,
before they deliver their verdict. If that verdict go to a declaration of the
guilt of the criminal and he be adjudged worthy of death, the execution of the
just judgment of the law is deferred for a considerable time, that opportunity
may be had for the important purposes of prayer and instruction, of faith and
repentance.

The spiritual concerns of unhappy culprits in other coun^ are not ^^^ended to
with that diligence with which they are here; neither is there ^ime for the
purpos^ pun^^hmen^ being more summary. But here the ministers (...) one (...)
most important parts of their duty (...) house of confir^ment, to visit the
prisoner in his chains, (...) deliverance to him who is bound and the
acceptable ye^^ of the Lord. In this ^w of (...) we cannot but exclaim, (...)
and the justice of ^^e (...)

In the hands of magistrates is the lord of justice -- a remis^^ess in the use
of (...) would be the betrayment of an important trust, and an affront to the
sovereignty of God who has ^mposed upon them. -- The (...) of public security
(...) tumb^^ into (...) both the magistracy and the laws (...) contempt. To
(...) wise and good laws well suited to the condition of the people, an^
sanctioned with penalties to secure their observance, is the true foundation
upon which government must stand; but when the thing sleeps here, the laws are
made but an idle speculation, and the penalties are exposed by their own
severity, when they are grown useless for want of execution. Rulers may thunder
and threaten as they please, yet if they proceed no farther, delinquents will
despise it as an empty noise in which they are (...) ^oncerne^, and from which
they fear no harm. For myself (...) the non execution of national justice upon
offender (...) ruinous and dangerous of national sins; and that because it
proves the greatest discouragement to virtue and the strongest encouragement to
vice. For it is a plain case that the on^^ principle wicked men have of
forbearing at a^^ time to d^ evil things is the dread of impending punishment.
And if this b^ once taken away by a public impunity, there can be nothing left
to restrain them from acting up to the naughtiness of their own inclination,
abandoning themselves to all manner of immoralities, defiling their own persons
by their lewd and dissol^te lives, and by violence and wrong disturbing the
peace and security of others.

You who are come hither today to see this (...) ^^ectacle, will go away
perhaps satisfied with the justice of your ^try; but I hope you will carry with
you other reflections (...) them. Here in a lively emblem, you may see the
justice of God as it will be displayed another day upon all the impenitent and
ungodly* The rewards and punishments annexed to his laws are certain. Before
the tribunal of his judgment we must all appear. Tremendous scene! -- And the
angel shall descend and, placing one foot upon the land and another upon the
sea, shall swear by him that lives forever and ever, that time shall be no
more -- then the trumpet shall sound and the graves be opened, and the dead
shall be raised -- all human nature shall hasten to the judgment, and the
millions of the human race await their sentence. The glory of the justice of
God and the triumphs of his grace will then be displayed before an asse^^led
universe; and he shall say unto (...) on his right hand, ^^me ye ble^^ed of
(...) inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation (...) the world;
but to those on his left* depart from me ye ^ursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his ^^gels. May we have grace given us to flee the
wrath that is to com^ that we may enter into (...) he^ven of heavens, and spend
an eternity in the most refined joy and infinite delight. We have every motive
to engage us to an immediate attention to those important things which respect
the safety of our so^^ hereafter -- ^et (...) minds (...) full of instruction
and anxiety to secure the one thing needful, and to ch^^^^ that good part in
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ which (...) never be taken away from us.

A^ to you ANTHONY, my whole heart feels for your (...) this day, and the awful
situation in which you now stand. After what you have heard it will be
unnecessary for me to say mu^^ to you, the law which condemned you to die has
shown you merry in pres^rving your life so ^^ng after your judgment, and in
(...) to you hereby an opportunity of being taught the principles (...) of
receiving (...) most pressing exhortations (...) bewailing your sins. Your
(...) friends have (...) pleasure in having it in their power to offer (...)
(...) fervent (...) to God in your behalf, and to point you to the^ (...) of
God as your only remedy. I hope you may ha^^ (...) ^ome benefit from their
labors of piety and benevolenc^ (...) you will experience the advantage of
them in this mom^ (...) extremity. You are a sinner before God; but Jesus
Christ (...) to s^ve sinners -- and he calls you to look to him and be save^
(...) -- ^member who has said he that believes shall be (...) whole soul be
captivated by the divine loveliness of his (...) -- he can be your only friend
-- exercise faith in his blood (...) ^entance toward God -- and may the great
father of your spir^^ (...) mercy upon your soul! AMEN.


