AN ADDRESS ON The Natural and Social Order of the World, AS INTENDED TO
PRODUCE UNIVERSAL GOOD; DELIVERED BEFORE The TAMMANY SOCIETY, AT THEIR
ANNIVERSARY, ON The 12th of May, 1798.

FAIR LE BIEN C'EST LE RECEVOIR. BY GEORGE LOGAN.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by BENJAMIN FRANKLIN BACHE.

An ADDRESS, etc.
FELLOW CITIZENS,
WHILST we are prompted by a spirit of philanthropy to desire the general
happiness of Mankind; sound policy and justice dictate the necessity of
promoting, in a more especial manner, the prosperity, the happiness and the
independence of our fellow citizens. The law of Nature, as supported by reason,
prescribes to us this course, as the only just foundation of our own individual
happiness or safety.

The ancients, almost universally, agreed that Man was formed by Nature for
society, and therefore obliged to observe and practice whatever tends to the
good of the community, of which he is a member. This comprehensive rule was in
all ages respected, until Hobbes, and other devoted slaves to Tyrants, broached
the detestable opinion, that the state of Nature, in respect to Man, is a state
of war; that consequently all Men are enemies to each other, and that they are
only to be governed by fear. This doctrine has been opposed by several eminent
writers, and our obligation to render each other every friendly assistance has
been established on a more rational foundation. Dr. Sharrack, of Oxford, in the
year 1660, published a valuable work, on the duties of Man, according to the
law of Nature; he appears to be one of the first who attempted to supply the
great defect complained of by Lord Verulam, "that due care had not been taken
to establish some certain principle for a foundation of morality." He
considered that the end of every worthy and virtuous action is to remove
uneasiness, and enjoy a serene tranquillity. The learned and good Bishop of
Cumberland, some years afterward, published a valuable treatise on the same
subject; in which he maintains that the greatest benevolence of every rational
agent toward all, forms the happiest state of every and of all, and is
necessarily requisite to the best state to which Man can attain, and therefore,
the common good is the supreme law.

The Earl of Shaftsbury considered the whole Universe as one system, composed
of infinite other lesser systems, and these again of others. As our solar
system has its several orbs, each of which is another system of itself: And
whatever there may be in the rest, in this of ours we know there are many
systems, each made up of individuals, and every of these of different parts,
each of which may be perfect in itself, considered as a part, as a perfect eye,
hand, etc. but its use has reference to the whole, of which it is immediately a
part; that to its greater, that again to another, and so on to the whole.

All those luminous Bodies observable in the Heavens, however infinite in
number, or distant, materially communicate with this Globe, and it is highly
probable, that all and every of them contribute to the support and carrying on
the work of each other: And consequently that they all make one universal whole
system; they must all, therefore, be exactly proportioned and fitted each to
the others' operations; for otherwise they must prove destructive one to the
other, and produce the utmost confusion.

We know that the Planets within our own system have their projectile forces so
suited to their gravities or attraction, as to perform their motions nearly in
circles, which they do with such constancy, that all the eclipses of the
luminaries that were ever known to have happened, or that may hereafter happen,
can be calculated to an hour with the same certainty, as those of the present
year.

In the animal and vegetable creation, every species is furnished with vessels,
glands, and liquids the best adapted to its kind and to the perfection of its
existence; accompanied, at the same time, with that uninterrupted constancy and
unerring certainty, that there is scarcely any one species of animal or
vegetable, as has ever been known with certainty to have existed on this Globe,
but the same may be found at this day.

Such is the wonderful regularity of all Nature; that even the smallest
particles of matter are so uniform in their operations, that the effects which
they will produce under particular circumstances are known a priori, although
these particles are so small that they escape all our senses. A particle of
light, which by a variety of experiments is ascertained to he matter, is so
inconceivably small, that Dr. Barrow gave it as his opinion, that a particle of
light is as much less than a grain of sand as that grain is less than the whole
world.

Thus, from the most stupendous immensity, to the minutest particles that can
be conceived, -- order, proportion, fitness and congruity in the relation and
government of all things universally prevail, and this order is eternal. Every
thing in the creation is found relative to a certain end, and though infinitely
varied among themselves, are so managed and combined as to conspire all to the
general design of universal good.

When we consider this beautiful order, established in the physical world, it
is impossible to believe for a moment, that Man, designed the brightest
ornament of the creation, should forever remain destitute of moral and
political knowledge, the wretched object of injury and oppression. On the
contrary, God himself declared the perfectibility of the nature of Man, when he
appeared to Abram, and said "I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou
perfect." Our blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, confirms this doctrine in a sermon
breathing a spirit of general philanthropy and replete with the warmest
sentiments of virtue, truth and justice. He says to his Disciples, "be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father who is in Heaven is perfect." This
opinion of the state of absolute perfection and happiness, designed for Man in
this world, is not only supported by the powerful authority of the Holy
Writings, but by Reason; which manifests to us, that the end which God had in
view with regard to his Creatures, and particularly with respect to Man, was a
state of perfection and happiness in this world. On whatever side we turn our
eyes, we see nothing in nature which is not governed by laws proper to its
existence, and which is not organized in a manner to obey such laws; to acquire
every succor which is agreeable to the nature of its being, or necessary to
the mode of its existence. Man is not neglected by his Creator: The gifts which
to him are particular, and which give him the empire of the world, manifest
that happiness and prosperity are designed for him, and an order proper to
ensure him the enjoyment of them.

However Mankind may differ in opinion, respecting the perfectibility of Human
Nature, all agree in deploring its miseries. This degraded state of Man has
been affected by the Executive Magistrates of all Countries; who have uniformly
encroached on the liberties of the People, until such times as they filched
from them their Sovereignty, and reduced them to a state of wretchedness. Wars
created by ambitious Executives have been undertaken more to their own
aggrandizement and power, than for the protection of their Country. The People,
involved in a state of abject misery by accumulated wrongs, and drove almost to
a state of desperation, -- are comforted with a promise of eternal happiness,
by interested Priests, who participate with the Government in the plunder of
its Citizens.

To escape from this combination of outrage and deception, our ancestors fled
to the Wilderness of America; where they might enjoy their religious and
political opinions without insult or injury. The native Indians gave them a
kind reception, and at once permitted them to partake of all the advantages
they enjoyed themselves. Although William Penn, according to the unjustifiable
custom of Europe, received a grant from the King of England, of the territory
of Pennsylvania, of which he was declared sole proprietor; yet, on his taking
possession, a spirit of justice and philanthropy, which in all his transactions
marked his conduct through life, engaged him to purchase the soil from the
Natives; by which means the colony was preserved in peace, and flourished. The
only difficulties it had to encounter were occasioned by the arbitrary
regulations of the British Court, which interdicted our municipal regulations,
obstructed our progress in manufactures, and restricted our commerce; by which
means she enjoyed a monopoly of the produce of our industry, highly injurious
to this Country. Roused at length by repeated injuries, Pennsylvania, united
with her sister Colonies, and assisted by the blood and treasure of that brave
and generous People, the French, we became a free, independent Republic. Having
in this manner rejected the Government of Great Britain, and now united with
our sister States for mutual aid and protection, -- it becomes the undoubted
duty of every Citizen of the United States, to give encouragement to the
Mechanics, and Manufacturers of our Country; not by promoting prohibitory laws
against the importation of Foreign Fabrics, but by calling our own manufactures
into use; by which means we shall afford them the most substantial
encouragement.

The local and physical advantages enjoyed by the United States, afford to her
Citizens the means of being supplied within themselves with most articles
necessary or useful in life. This being an undeniable fact, it becomes criminal
in her Citizens not to derive all the advantages in their power from
circumstances thus placed within their reach. Civil society is so constituted,
that its state of prosperity and power arises from the independence and
prosperity of its members, and as every Citizen affords his aid to support its
municipal regulations, by which the property of all is protected, it becomes
not only the duty, but the interest, of every individual to promote the
prosperity and independence of his Fellow Citizens. It is computed, that the
Mechanics, and Manufacturers within the United States comprehend one twentieth
part of our Citizens; that the Merchants, Agents, etc. compose one twentieth,
and that eighteen twentieths are engaged in Agriculture. Those Men whose
inclinations lead them to Mechanic or Manufacturing occupations for a support,
and who have no desire to engage in the cares and fatigues of a Country life,
will consider it for their advantage, that their Fellow-Citizens should give a
preference to the produce of their industry, over Foreign Manufactures. The
Merchants, merely as Agents, no doubt consider, that every kind of Mechanic and
Manufacturing employ should be discouraged within the United States, as agents
equally interested in supporting the prosperity of the Foreign Manufacturer, as
the American Farmer; they should rather be considered as Citizens of the World,
than Citizens of any particular Commonwealth. To send Clay to England to be
returned made into Bricks, Limestone into Lime, and Wheat into Flour, would not
be more absurd than the practice we have been in, for many years, of exporting
our Flax-Seed, Iron and Furs to Europe, to be returned in a variety of
Manufactured Articles, equally capable of being fabricated amongst ourselves.
Exporting all your Raw Materials to Europe, to be manufactured, would create a
great degree of bustle at our seaports; would create a great quantity of
shipping and would increase the business and wealth of the Merchants, but it
would certainly add nothing to the actual wealth or independence of our Country.

The Farmers, comprehending eighteen-twentieths of the People of the United
States, are so advantageously situated, that they can manufacture, immediately
from their own Farms, all the Woollen and Linen Cloth necessary in their
families, and at a cheaper rate than any imported; taking into consideration
the superior quality of the Domestic Manufacture, for real use, and the time
and labor bestowed and saved by the family. Independent of this important
fact, it is the peculiar interest of the Farmers, that they should give every
encouragement to the Mechanics, and Manufacturers of the United States; by
which they may procure a certain and steady market at their own doors, for the
surplus produce of their industry; which could not be interrupted by Foreign
competition, or destroyed by the impolitic measures of our own Executive
Government, or by the arbitrary laws of foreign Countries. The labor of the
Citizens of the United States, actually engaged in Manufactures, canto be
procured at the low rate of that of the Subjects of England, either in Europe,
or in India; nor should it be looked for by any man who values the real
independence of his country. An exchange, for the mutual advantage of the
parties, ought to be supported by justice. Every manufacturer should have such
an equivalent for his labor as to enable him to live with comfort; to educate
his children and to preserve something for the support of his family in case of
unavoidable accident. This is so far from being the case in the British
dominions, from whence we derive most of our manufactures, that but a small
number of the workmen receive an adequate compensation for their labor.

In rewarding their exertions or ingenuity no rule of equity is attended to; on
the contrary, a combination takes place to reduce the wages of the manufacturer
to a scanty subsistence. From the tenderest infancy they are doomed to
perpetual labor, and have no time, even in childhood, for the necessary
exercise of the body, or the cultivation of the mind. Thus the poor man, upon
whose industry depends the so much boasted extent of British manufactures is,
by the force of arbitrary regulations, obliged to such excessive toil, that he
is reduced to a mere animal existence, having no interest in the prosperity of
his country, or as little capable of serving it in time of danger.

In British India, Mr. Bolts and Colonel Dow concur in opinion respecting the
severe treatment the manufacturers experience. Bolts' India Affairs, page 193
-- 194.
"The assent of the poor weaver is, in general, not deemed necessary to the
bargain, for the gomastahs or agents, when employed in the company's
investments, frequently make them sign what they please and, upon the weavers
refusing to take the money offered, it has been known that they have had it
tied in their girdles, and they have been sent away with a flogging. A number
of those weavers are also generally registered in the books of the company's
gomastahs, and not permitted to work for any others, being transferred from one
to another, like so many slaves, and subject to the roguery of every succeeding
gomastah. The winders of raw silk have been treated also with such injustice,
that instances have been known of their cutting off their thumbs to prevent
their being forced to wind silk." By such horrid outrages, against the rights
of millions of our fellow creatures, do we become furnished, at so cheap a
price, with the manufactures of the British dominions.

The present gloomy appearance of our public affairs has no doubt been
occasioned by the Citizens of the United States having too much neglected the
representative principles of the federal government, and looking up to one man
for the salvation of our country. Similar causes will produce similar effects
to the end of time. Whenever men; by the abuse of that free will, given to them
by the author of the universe for their own well-being, make use of it to
destroy the natural order of things, in the moral and physical world, confusion
and distress must be the consequence. When that highly favored people, the
Jews, sought a king to rule over them, God considered it not as an offense
against Samuel and their Elders, but against himself; as manifesting a desire
to follow the corruptions of other nations, and to pervert the natural order
which he had established for the good of the universe. He therefore gave them a
king in his wrath, who was a curse to them, as kings have been a curse to
mankind from that day to the present time. The kingly power, after having be a
scourge to Europe for ages, is now, by the light of the American and French
revolutions, coming to an end. It is devoutly to be wished, that the citizens
of the United States may be upon their guard not to suffer even the appearance
of kingly authority to return amongst us to blast the fair prospects of our
revolution. The liberty of our country must be supported on the foundation of
that equality, ascertained by the laws of the creation, supported by the
gospel, which acknowledges no distinction of bond or free. Self-interest may
oppose, and sophistry may cavil, but equality, in its rational acceptance, as
relating to civil privileges and impartial laws, gives dignity to the human
character and prompts it to acts worthy of its origin.

Finally, republicans, let it be our studious care to vindicate the rights of
oppressed humanity and to remove the false impressions of all unjust
distinctions. Let us cultivate the principles of philanthropy, justice and
equality, which are altogether incompatible with those systems of oppression
and injustice, which for a length of time have darkened the face of the
European world.

Let us not precipitately endeavor to accomplish that to day, which the
dissemination of truth will make unavoidable tomorrow: Let us not anxiously
watch for occasions and events; the ascendency of truth is independent of
events. Let us anxiously refrain from violence; force is not conviction, and is
extremely unworthy of the cause of justice: Let us admit into our bosoms
neither contempt, animosity, resentment nor revenge. The cause of justice is
the cause of humanity; its advocates should overflow with universal good will.
We should love this cause; for it conduces to the general happiness of mankind.
We should love it; for there is not a man that lives, who, in the natural and
tranquil progress of things, will not be made happier by its approach.

END.

