AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WESTMORELAND, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE; JULY 4 th, 1798.

BY ALPHEUS MOORE.

WALPOLE, NEWHAMPSHIRE: PRINTED by DAVID CARLISLE, FOR THOMAS and THOMAS.

1798.

Westmoreland, July 5 th 1798. SIR,
FROM us, a Committee, be pleased to accept the thanks of the town of
Westmoreland, for your ingenious and patriotic oration delivered yesterday.
Please to gratify us and the public, so much as to furnish us with a copy for
the press.

We are, with sentiments of esteem, your humble servants, JOSEPH BURT, GEORGE
ALDRICH, DANIEL COBB.


Col. ALPHEUS MOORE.
July 5 th, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
YOUR politeness is equal to your patriotism; your request, too flattering not
to be complied with. But, my friends, recollect, that a day too late, in
defending the rights of our country, can never be placed in our calendar. With
respect, and the firmest attachment of friendship to the interest of the town
and my country,

I am yours, ALPHEUS MOORE.

Col. JOSEPH BURT, Genesis GEORGE ALDRICH, Col. DANIEL COBB.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WESTMORELAND, JULY 4th, 1798.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,
THE honor you have done me, by appointing me your Orator on this day, very
sensibly affects me: this is not the first instance of your friendship. -- I
only feel unhappy that I cannot do more justice to your intentions. -- Excuse
me, if I ask you to take into consideration the short period of time I have had
to prepare for an occasion so important. The errors of the performance I know
you will pardon of course.

WERE I to draw positions of argument or reasoning from a text of sacred
history, they would be from that positive saying -- a kingdom divided against
itself cannot stand; but, my friends, a larger text in this particular year of
the christian era opens to our view; it is a text "big with the fate" of you
and your posterity. The political situation of this country, affords a text,
from which, if arguments were drawn by modern political reasoning, it would
undeniedly appear, that its fate and happiness are now at hazard. In this
assembly we are both young and old; but few of us so young or so old, who do
not feel the loss of a friend, a relation, or an acquaintance during the
American revolution.

I MUST ask you for a moment to revert to periods which are past. In the
despotic and monarchical nations of Europe and the world, government became
art; that art, science; and power, the supreme law. Passive obedience was a
decree enforced by the executive authority of each country; and nonresistance
became the religious order of the day: when sentiments drawn from such data
were full in their bloom, the principle of colonization was first adopted.
Europe, Asia and Africa of ancient date, tinged by their religious creeds,
governed their respective kingdoms, states and empires by rules founded on the
superstition and fears of mankind. Authority to govern, was then, and perhaps
ever will be, a center from which the radii of legislation were drawn. Looking
into their history, in periods that are past and long since revolved, we find
this philosophical position, that, according to the quantity of power, which
each individual nation possessed, extension of territory became an object which
bore an exact proportion. I shall pass over every applicable lesson I could
draw from the Persian, Grecian, Roman and Carthagenian princes, and concentrate
the attention of the present moment to the situation of our own country; but
stop, I wish to rescue the character of Cyrus from the least imputation of
fault.

THAT kingdom, which styled herself our mother, at an early period attempted
the right of control over the rights of the citizens of this country; this for
a century or more she successfully practiced. We must now recollect, that it
was in that period in which her established religious creed presumed to dictate
the consciences of men that the first English settlers of America were allowed
to abscond the kingdom. -- Their object was liberty of sentiment: denied that
liberty in Europe, they sought it on the shores of America; shores unknown and
hostile, but shores not tinged with that spirit of persecution, which raged on
those they left. Our forefathers braved the dangers of the seas, the hazards of
the climate and the fierceness of a savage foe; but liberty of sentiment I say
was their object, and the clams of Plymouth were "sweet to their taste." The
same spirit and principle induced others to emigrate. The increasing population
in America, the spirit of enterprise in the transatlantic states, and the idea
that this was a land of liberty, soon rendered the British colonies in America,
an object of consideration in the eyes of Europe. As we increased in population
so much the more we became objects of attention. Our first claim to the rights
of men, and to the internal right of legislation, became offensive to the old
monarchy, and subjected us to their censure.

THE government of many of the colonies was formed upon principles of
viceroyalty; but that kind of government, and the assumed right of taxation,
immediately brought forward the original spirit, and the determined principles
of those who first settled this country. -- The descendants of our ancestors
frowned with contempt on the foreign, usurped claim of control: that claim they
considered as infringing on their rights as men; and the mode to render that
claim of any effect, as an insidious imposition. That claim they resisted,
whether successful or unsuccessful, in every form in which an imposing
government pleased to place it.

So firm was the opposition to the land bank scheme, and the stamp act, that
the views of the British government were defeated; so inimical were the views
of that foreign power to our rights as freemen; so imposing and insulting was
their claim to the right of taxation over the colonies, that the love of
country, and the dignified personal spirit of its inhabitants, produced the
important era which we now commemorate. -- The fourth of July, one thousand
seven hundred and seventy six, was a day that astonished the world: what else?
It was a day that made us Freemen. The Genius of America placed a wreath on the
brows of the Aurora of that morning, which will always be in bloom -- her
smiles were friendship, and her dimples good will toward men. The label of her
chaplet was peace, though the spirit of her eyes spoke the language of defense:
if their nuptials were consummated on the evening of that day, I should say, on
such a night, the moon lost its consciousness; -- we view the offspring; -- it
is the LIBERTY of our COUNTRY.

THE day, which we now commemorate, is the national one of America; it is that
day, which both young and old ought to celebrate; it is that day, which
constituted our existence as a nation; on this day children will recollect,
that their fathers once entered into a bond, hazardous and dangerous; a bond
sealed with the blood of thousands: young men, recollect this day, for old men
will not forget.

A SHORT, cursory view of past American defense may not be improper. If there
be any officer or soldier now present, who entered the armies of his country,
was dictated by his love to it, and fought for its defense, under the late
glorious commander in chief, let me tell him, that WASHINGTON is an honorable
man. Although the battles of America were fought under many disadvantages, yet
we can never find greener laurels around the heads of ancient heroes, than
those, which now hang on the brows of the war worn soldier of America. Should I
bring into view the conduct of the armies of our country; although I shall
glance over Bunker hill, where lie the remains of a father and an officer, I
say -- that if any of you were present on the nineteenth of September, and the
seventh of October, and fought with good will to your country -- you are all
honorable men. The officer or soldier, at any period of the war -- if he
fought for the freedom of himself and his posterity, and from principles of
patriotism, whether on the plains of Monmouth, on a scout, or at the siege of
Yorktown -- is also an honorable man. Were the ghosts of your departed
companions, who bled and died by your side, now to arise at this moment of
danger, they would speak to you through a trumpet as sonorous as that of the
archangel -- No Iscariot in your councils; no Arnold in the field.

WHAT was the principle that led to the opposition of a foreign power? It was,
that neither foreign power or foreign influence should ever interfere with the
internal concerns of our country. Liberty of opinion is desirable, but liberty
of action, within the rules which God and nature have pointed out, much more
so. Is not then the liberty of our country, which secures both, an object of
such magnitude as to require the united exertion of our citizens to prepare for
its defense? We have read of the hewers of wood, and the drawers of water of
old times; we know that the slavery of the Afric exists among us; we know that
our own citizens have been captives at Algiers: are either of these kinds of
slavery accordant to the feelings of freemen? No; the attempt to impose foreign
task masters, or to make us the white slaves of France, or of any other foreign
power within our own country, would cause the sword of every independent
American to leap from its scabbard.

IN our political concerns with the powers of Europe, diplomacy effected a
negotiation for our late disputes with England: yet "another foreign nation,
with whom we were more particularly connected," now appears to interest herself
very officiously in the internal, as well as external management of our
affairs. French political embrace, according to the custom of the present
ruling powers of France, would not be congenial to that spirit of freedom which
pervades our own country: if the modern hug of fraternity is to interfere with
the domestic arrangement of the United States; from an embrace of the French
nation, may our union and the God of armies deliver us; it is an embrace which
approaches rather too nigh the delicacy of American independence.

FELLOW CITIZENS, who are now under arms, attention is most deservedly due you;
the defense of our country is immediately devolving on you; the love of country
will make you soldiers; but to make you soldiers of that force and effect,
which should characterize a free and independent nation, you must be united.

AND what shall I say of union? Should I draw an idea of disunion from sacred
documents, I should say, that all the evil and distress, incident to kingdoms
and nations, originated from that same principle which made the rebels of
paradise: the sword which Michael wielded -- tempered and burnished in the
laboratory of God -- was a sword of union; it drove the traitors from the
pavement of heaven. But that same spirit of discord, founded on its original
principle, power by assumption, now constitutes the whole disunion and war of
the world; though it has been said by a very high authority that a prophet has
no honor in his own country, yet I will hazard the opinion, that there now
exists a spirit in foreign nations, which will shake every monarchy on earth to
its center.

I HAVE here drawn a picture of disunion, from which we can judge of its
opposite. -- Union brings with it the mildness of peace and the dignity of
defense, attaches itself to internal regulation and rejects foreign
interference.

FRANCE, rejecting every honorable mode of accommodation for wrongs, of which
she was the aggressor, tells you not only in words, but in action, that she is
a dangerous and an insidious enemy, and that her power is a formidable object;
it is true, it is barely possible we may be crushed by the armies of France; but
I shall never believe that men, born under our own vines and our own figtrees,
will ever be disunited, and be tamely dictated by the power of France; but,
should the navy of England be destroyed, recollect this, that some of us must
part to regions where French influence has no superiority. Therefore -- Friends
and Soldiers, let union be our morning and evening prayer; let union be the
magnet, by which we form our political compass; the stripes of America are the
only colors that ought ever to wave on our standard.

THE energy of the administration of the Governor of the state of New Hampshire
is the best comment on his patriotism. -- The unanimity, which supports him,
will freshen by age -- his conduct has placed a laurel on his brow that never
can wither.

ON the character of the President of the United States I shall only speak this
eulogy; his diplomatic conduct at the Hague; his firmness in concluding the
definitive treaty of peace; the uprightness of his private character, and his
present patriotic exertions, constitute the four corners of that temple, which
no confusion of language can ever tumble into ruins.

FRIENDS, CITIZENS and SOLDIERS, I shall now close with one short observation
from the address of the Legislature of New Hampshire to the President of the
United States, "By Union, our independence can be maintained, by Division, it
is lost forever."

" -- Never shall the sons of Columbia be slaves,
While the earth bears a plant or the sea rolls its waves."

