THE SPEECH OF Edward Livingston, Esquire. ON THE THIRD READING OF THE ALIEN BILL.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed: by JAMES CAREY, No. 19. Carter's Alley.

Speech of Edward Livingston.
MR. LIVINGSTON said he esteemed it one of the most fortunate occurrences of
his life, that after an inevitable absence from his seat in that house, he had
arrived in time to express his dissent to the passage of the bill. It would
have been a source of eternal regret, and the keenest remorse, if any private
affairs, however urgent, any domestic concerns, however interesting, had
deprived him of the opportunity he was then about to use, of stating his
objections, and recording his vote against an act which he believed was in
direct violation of the constitution; and marked with every characteristic of
the most odious despotism.

On my arrival, sir, mr. L. said, I enquired what subject occupied the
attention of the house; and being told it was the alien bill, I directed the
printed copy to be brought to me, but to my great surprise seven or eight
copies of different acts on the same subject were put in my hands -- among them
it was difficult (so strongly were they marked by the same family features), to
discover the individual bill then under discussion. This circumstance give me a
suspicion that the principles of the measures were erroneous -- Truth marches
directly to its end by a single undeviating path -- Error is either
undetermined on its object, or pursues it through a thousand winding ways --
the multiplicity of propositions therefore to attain the same general but
doubtful end, led me to suspect that neither the object nor the means proposed
to attain it were proper or necessary. These surmises were confirmed by a more
minute examination of the act -- In the construction of statutes, it was a
received rule to examine what were the state of things when it was passed, and
what were the evils it was intended to remedy -- as these circumstances would
be applied in the construction of the law, it might be well to examine them
minutely in framing it -- the state of things, if we are to judge from the
complexion of the bill, must be that a number of aliens, enjoying the
protection of our government, were plotting its destruction -- that they are
engaged in treasonable machinations against a people who have given them an
asylum and support, and that no provision is found to provide for their
expulsion and punishment. If these things are so and no remedy exists for the
evil, one ought speedily to be provided, but even then it must be a remedy that
is consistent with the constitution under which we act -- for as by that
instrument, all powers not expressly given by it to the union, are reserved by
the states -- it follows that unless an express authority can be found, vesting
us with the power, be the evil never so great it can only be remedied by the
several states who have never delegated the authority to congress -- but this
point will be presently examined, and it will not be a difficult task to show
that the provisions of this bill are not only unauthorised by the constitution,
but are in direct violation of its fundamental principles, and contradictory to
some of its most express prohibitions; at present it is only necessary to ask
whether the state of things contemplated by the bill have any existence -- We
must legislate upon facts, not on surmises -- we must have evidence, not vague
suspicions, if we mean to legislate with prudence -- What facts have been
produced? What evidence had been submitted to the house? I have heard, sir, of
none -- but if evidence of facts could not be procured, at least it might have
been expected that reasonable cause of suspicion should be shown -- here again
gentlemen were at fault -- they could not show even a suspicion why these
aliens ought to be suspected. We have, indeed, been told that the fate of
Venice, Switzerland, and Batavia, was produced by the interference of
foreigners. But, the instances were unfortunate -- because all those powers had
been overcome by foreign force, or divided by domestic faction, not by aliens
who resided among them; and if any instruction was to be gained from those
republics, it would be that we ought to banish not the aliens but all those
(...) who did not approve the executive (...) this I (...) were not ready to
own -- but if this measure prevailed, I shall not think the other remote; but
if it had been proved that these governments were destroyed by the conspiracies
of aliens, it yet remains to show that we are in the same situation; or that
any such plots have been detected or are even reasonably suspected here.
Nothing of this kind has been yet done. A modern Theseus, indeed, has told us
he has procured a clue Mr. Harper, declared in the house, that he had hold of
certain (...) which (...) a conspiracy.
that (...) enable him to penetrate the labyrinth and destroy this monster of
sedition. Who the fair Ariadne is who kindly gave him the ball he has not
revealed: nor though several days have elapsed since he undertook the
adventure, has he yet told where the monster lurks. No evidence then being
produced, we have a right to say that none exists, and yet we are about to
sanction a most important act, and on what grounds? our individual suspicions,
our private fears, our overheated imaginations. Seeing nothing to excite those
suspicions, and not feeling those fears, I could not give my assent to the
bill, even if I did not feel a superior obligation to reject it on other
grounds. As far as my own observation goes, I have seen nothing like the state
of things contemplated by the bill. Most of the aliens I have seen were either
triumphant Englishmen, or Frenchmen, with dejection in their countenances and
grief at their hearts, preparing to quit the country and seek another asylum.
But if these plots exist, if this treason is apparent, if there are aliens
guilty of the crimes that are ascribed to them, an effectual remedy presents
itself for the evil; we have already wise laws, we have upright judges and
vigilant magistrates, and there is no necessity of arming the executive with
the destructive power proposed by the bill now on your table -- the laws now in
force are competent to punish every treasonable or seditions attempt.

But grant, sir, what however has not been at all supported by fact, grant that
these fears are not visionary, that the dangers are imminent and that no
existing law is sufficient to avert them; let us examine whether the provisions
of the bill are conformable to the principles of the constitution: if it should
be found to contravene them, I trust it will lose many of its present
supporters; but if not only contrary to the general spirit and principles of
the constitution, it should also be found diametrically opposite to its most
express prohibitions, I cannot doubt that it would be rejected with that
indignant decision which our duty to our country, and our sacred oath demands.

The first section provides that it shall be lawful for the President, "to
order all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous to the peace and safety of
the United States, or shall have reasonable ground to suspect are concerned in
any treasonable or secret machinations against the government thereof, to depart
out of the United States, in such time as shall be expressed in such order."

Our government, sir, is founded on the establishment of those principles which
constitute the difference between a free constitution, and a despotic power; a
distribution of the legislative, executive and judiciary powers, into special
hands, a distribution, strongly marked in three first and great divisions of
the constitution -- by first -- all legislative power is given to Congress, the
second vests all executive functions in the president, and the third declares
that the judiciary power shall be exercised by the supreme and inferior courts;
here then is a division, of the govermental powers strongly marked, decisively
pronounced, and every act of one or all of the branches that tends to confound
these powers, or alter this arrangement must be destructive of the
constitution: examine then, sir, the bill on your table, and declare whether
the few lines I have repeated from the first section do not confound these
fundamental powers of the government, vest them all in the most unqualified
terms in one hand, and thus subvert the basis on which our liberties rest.

Legislative power prescribes the rule of action; the judiciary applies that
general rule to particular cases, and it is the province of the executive to
see that the laws are carried into full effect. In all free goverments these
powers are exercised by different men, and their union in the same hand is the
peculiar characteristic of despotism: if the same power that makes the law can
construe it to suit his interest and apply it to gratify his vengance, if he
can go further, and execute according to his own passions, the judgment which
he, himself, has pronounced upon his own construction, of laws, which he alone
has made, what other features are wanted to complete the picture of tyrany; yet
all this and more is proposed to be done by this act; by it the president
alone, is empowered to make the law, to fix in his own mind, what acts, what
words what thoughts or looks, shall constitute the crime contemplated by the
bill; that is the crime of being "suspected to be dangerous to the peace and
safety of the United States." He is not only authorized to make this law, for
his, own conduct, but to vary it at pleasure, as every gust of passion, every
cloud of suspicion, shall agitate or darken his mind; the same power that
formed the law then applies it to the guilty or innocent victim whom his own
suspicions or the secret whisper of a spy have designated as its object; the
president then having made the law, the president having considered and applied
it, the same president is by the bill, authorized to execute his sentence, in
case of disobedience, by imprisonment, during his pleasure. This, then comes
completely within the definition of despotism, and union of legislative,
executive, and judicial powers. But this bill, sir, does not stop here, its
provisions are a refinement upon despotism and present an image of the most
fearful tyranny -- Even in despotisms, though the monarch legislates, judges
and executes, yet he legislates openly, his laws though oppressive, are known,
they precede the offense, and every man who chooses may avoid the penalties of
disobedience. Yet he judges and executes by proxy, and his present interest or
passions do not inflame the mind of his deputy.

But here the law is closely concealed in the same mind that gives it birth --
the crime is "exciting the suspicions of the president," but no man can tell
what conduct will avoid that suspicion -- a careless word, perhaps
misrepresented or never spoken, may be sufficient evidence, a look may destroy,
an idle gesture may insure punishment, no innocence can protect -- no
circumspection can avoid the jealousy of suspicion -- surrounded by spies,
informers and all that infamous herd which fatten under laws like this. The
unfortunate stranger will never know either of the law, of the accusation or of
the judgment until the moment it is put into execution -- he will detest your
tyranny, and (...) from a land of delators, inquisitions and spies.

This, (...) the detestable contrivance of the (...) the table of their laws
(...) high that few could read them; a tall man, however, might reach, a short
one might climb and learn their contents, but here is the law is equally
inaccessible to high and low; safely concealed in the breast of its author, no
industry or caution can penetrate this recess and attain a knowledge of its
provisions, nor even if they could, as the rule is not permanent would it at
all avail.

Having shown that this act is at war with the fundamental principles of our
government, I might stop here in the certain hope, of its rejection -- But I
can do more; unless we are resolved to pervert the meaning of terms, I can show
that the constitution has endeavored to "make its surety doubly sure, and take
a bond of fate!" by several express prohibitions of measures like that you now
contemplate. One of these is contained in the 9th section of the first article,
it is at the head of the articles which restrict the powers of Congress, and
declares "that the migration or importation of such persons, as any of the
states, shall think proper to omit, shall not be prohibited prior to the year
1808" Now, sir, where is the difference between a power to prevent the arrival
of aliens and a power to send them away as soon as they shall arrive? to me
they appear precisely the same. The constitution expressly says, that congress
shall not do this, and yet congress are about to delegate this prohibited
power, and say, that the president may exercise it as often as his pleasure
may direct. I am informed that an answer has been attempted to this argument,
by saying, that the article, though it speaks of "persons." only relates to
slaves? But a conclusive reply to this answer may be drawn from the words of
the section, it speaks of migration and importation; if it related only to
slaves, "importation," would have been sufficient; but how can the other word
apply to slaves; migration is a voluntary change of a country; but who ever
heard of a migration of slaves! the truth is, both words have their appropriate
meaning, and even extended to secure the interests of different quarters of the
union? The middle states wished to secure themselves against any laws that
might impede the emigration of settlers; the southern states did not like to be
prohibited in the importation of slaves, and so jealous were they of this
provision, that the fifth article was introduced to declare that the
constitution shall not be amended so as to do it away.

But even admit the absurdity, that the word, "migration" has no meaning, or
one foreign to its usual acceptance, and that the article relates only to
slaves; Even this sacrifice of common sense will not help gentlemen out of
their dilemma -- slaves probably always, but certainly on their first
importation, are aliens, many people think they are always "dangerous to the
peace and safety of the United States!" if the president should be of this
opinion, he not only can, but by the terms of this law, is obliged to order
them off; for the act creates an obligation on him to send away all such aliens
as he shall judge dangerous to the peace or safety of the United States. Thus,
according to the most favorable construction, every proprietor of this species
of property, holds it at the will and pleasure of the president -- and this,
too, in defiance of the only article of the constitution, that is declared to
be unalterable. -- But let us, sir, for a moment, if it be possible, let us
imagine that a constitution, founded on a division of powers, into three hands,
may be preserved, although all these powers should be surrendered into one; let
us imagine, if we can, that the states intended to restrict the general
government, from preventing the arrival of persons whom they were yet willing
to suffer that same general government to ship off as soon as they should
arrive: grant all this; and they will be as far from establishing the
constitutionality of the bill, as they were at the first moment it was proposed
-- for in the 3d article it is provided, that all "judicial power shall be
vested in the supreme and inferior courts," that the trial of "all crimes shall
be by jury," except in case of impeachment; and in the 7th and 8th amendments,
provision is repeated and enforced by others this which declare, that "no man
shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a
presentment of a grand jury" that "in all criminal prosecutions the accused
shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the
state and district where the crime shall have been committed, which district
shall have been previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature
and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him,
to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have
the assistance of council for his defense" -- Now, sir, what minute article in
these several provisions of the constitution is there that is not violated by
this bill? all the bulwarks which it opposed to encroachments on personal
liberty, fall before this engine of oppression.

Judiciary power is taken from courts, and given to the executive, the previous
safeguard of a presentment by a grand inquest is removed, the trial by jury is
abolished: the " public trial required by the constitution is changed into a
secret and worse than inquisitorial tribunal: instead of giving "information of
the nature and cause of the accusation," the criminal, alike ignorant of his
offense and the danger to which he is exposed, never hears of either until the
judgment is passed, and the sentence is executed: instead of being "confronted
with his accusers," he is kept alike ignorant of their names and their
existence, and even the forms of a trial being dispensed with, it would be a
mockery to talk of "process for witnesses," or the "assistance of council for
defense," thus are all the barriers which the wisdom and humanity of our
country had placed between accused innocence and oppressive power at once
forced and broke down. Not a vestige even of their form remains. No indictment,
no jury, no trial -- no public procedure, no statement of the accusation; no
examination of the witnesses in its support. No council for defense -- all is
darkness, silence, mystery, and suspicion. But as if this were not enough; the
unfortunate victims of this law are told in the next section that if they can
convince the president that his suspicions are unfounded, he may, if he
pleases, give them a license to stay -- but how remove his suspicions when they
know not on what act they were founded? how take proof to convince him, when he
is not bound to furnish that on which he proceeds; miserable mockery of
justice! appoint an arbitrary judge armed with legislative and executive powers
added to his own! let him condemn the unheard, the unaccused object of his
suspicion, and then to cover the injustice of the scene, gravely tell him, you
ought not to complain, you need only disprove facts that you have never heard,
remove suspicions that have never been communicated to you, it will be easy to
convince your judge, whom you shall not approach, that he is tyrannical and
unjust, and when you have done this, we give him the power he had before, to
pardon you if he pleases.

So obviously do the constitutional objections present themselves, that their
existence cannot be denied, and two wretched subterfuges are resorted to, to
remove them out of sight. First, it is said, the bill does not contemplate the
punishment of any crime, and therefore, the provisions in the constitution,
relative to criminal proceedings and judiciary powers do not apply. But have
the gentlemen who reason thus, read the bill, or is every thing forgotton in
our zealous hurry to pass it? What are the offenses upon which it is to
operate? Not only the offense of being "suspected to be dangerous to the peace
and safety of the United States," but also that of being "concerned in any
treasonable or secret machinations against the government thereof." And this we
are told is no crime! a treasonable machination against the government, is not
the subject of criminal jurisprudence! good heaven, to what absurdities does an
over zealous attachment to particular measures lead us! in order to punish a
particular act, we are forced to say, that treason is no crime, and plotting
against our government is no offense. And to support this fine hypothesis, we
are obliged to plunge deeper in absurdity and say, that as the acts spoken of
in the bill, are no crimes; so the penalty contained in it is no punishment, it
is only a prevention; that is to say, we invite strangers to come among us, we
declare solemnly that government shall not have the power to prevent them -- we
entice them over by delusive prospects of advantage, in many parts of the union
we permit them to hold lands, and give them other advantages, while they are
waiting for the period at which we have promised a full participation of all
our rights -- an unfortunate stranger, disgusted with tyranny at home, thinks
he shall find freedom here, he accepts your conditions, he puts faith in your
promises, he rests his whole property in your hands, he has dissolved his
former connections and made your country his own. But while he is patiently
waiting the expiration of the period that is to crown the work, and entitles
him to all the rights of a citizen, the tale of a domestic spy, or the calumny
of a secret enemy draws on him the suspicions of the president -- and, unheard,
he is ordered to quit the spot which he solicited for his retreat, the country
he had chosen for his own, perhaps the family which was his only consolation in
life, he is ordered to retire to a country whose government irritated by his
renunciation of its authority, will receive only to punish him -- and all this
we are seriously told is no punishment.

Again we are told, that the constitutional compact was made between citizens
only; and that therefore, its provisions were not intended to extend to aliens,
and that this act operating only on there, is therefore not forbidden by the
constitution. But unfortunately, neither common law, common justice, nor the
practice of any civilized nation will permit this distinction: It is an
acknowledged principle of the common law, the authority of which is established
here, that alien friends (and permit me to observe that they are such only,
whom we contemplate by this bill, for we have another before us, to send off
alien enemies), residing among us, are entitled to the protection of our laws.
And that during their residence they owe a temporary allegiance to our
government. If they are accused of violating this allegiance, the same laws
that interpose in the case of a citizen, must determine the truth of the
accusation, and if found guilty they are liable to the same punishment; this
rule is consonant to the principles of common justice; for who would ever
resort to another country, if he alone was marked out as the object of
arbitrary power? It is equally unfortunate too for this argument, that the
constitution expressly excludes any idea of this distinction, it speaks of all
"judicial power" -- "all trials for crimes, all "criminal prosecutions" -- all
"persons accused." No distinction between citizen and alien, between high or
low; friends or opposers of the executive power, republican and royalist. All,
all are entitled to the same equal distribution of justice, to the same humane
provisions to protect their innocence -- all are liable to the same punishment
that awaits their guilt. How comes it too if then the constitutional provisions
were intended for the safety of the citizen only, that our courts uniformly
extend them to all, and that we never heard it enquired whether the accused is
a citizen before we give him a public trial by jury.

So manifest do these violations of the constitution appear to me, so futile
the arguments in their defense, that they press seriously upon my mind and sink
it even to despondency -- they have been so glaring to my understanding, that I
felt it my duty to speak of them in a manner that may perhaps give offense to
men whom I esteem and who seem to think differently on that subject -- none,
however, I can assure them is intended.

I have seen measures carried in this house which I thought militated against
the spirit of the constitution, but never before have I been witness to so
open, so wanton, and undisguised an attack. I have now done, sir, with the act
and come to consider the consequences of its operation.

One of the most serious has been anticipated when I described the blow it
would give to the constitution of our country -- we should cautiously beware of
the first act of violation; habituated to over leap its bounds, we become
familiarized to the guilt and disregard the danger of a second offense -- until
proceeding from one unauthorized act to another, (...) at length throw of all
the restraints which our constitution has imposed; and very soon not even the
semblance of its forms will remain.

But if regardless of our duty as citizens, and our solemn obligation as
representatives, regardless of the rights of our constituents -- of their
opinion and that of posterity -- regardless of every sanction, human and divine
-- if we are ready to violate the constitution we have sworn to defend -- will
the PEOPLE SUBMIT to our unauthorized acts? will the states sanction our
usurped power? Sir, they ought not to submit -- they would deserve the chains
which these measures are forging for them, if they did not resist. For let no
man vainly imagine that the evil is to stop here, that a few unprotected aliens
only are to be affected by this inquisitorial power; the same arguments which
enforce those provisions against aliens, apply with equal strength to enacting
them in the case of citizens: the citizen has no other protection for his
personal security that I know, against laws like this, than the humane
provisions I have cited from the constitution: but all these apply in common to
the citizen and the stranger: "All crimes" are to be tried by jury -- "No
person" shall be held to answer unless on presentment: in all criminal
prosecutions the "accused" is to have a public trial: the "accused" is to be
informed of the nature of the charge: to be confronted with the witnesses
against him. May have process to enforce the appearance of those in his favor,
and is to be allowed council for his defense -- Unless, therefore, we can
believe that treasonable machinations and the other offenses described in the
bill are not crimes -- that an alien is not a person -- and that one charged
with treasonable practices is not "accused" -- unless we can believe all this,
in contradiction to our own understandings, to received opinions and the
uniform practice of our courts, we must allow that all these provisions extend
equally to aliens and natives, and that the citizen has no other security for
his personal safety than is extended to the stranger, who is within his gates;
if, therefore, this security is violated in one instance, what pledge have we
that it will not in the other? The same plea of necessity will justify both:
either the offenses described in the act are crimes, or they are not; if they
are, then all the humane provisions of the constitution forbid the mode of
punishing or preventing them equally as relates to aliens and citizens. If they
are not crimes, then the citizen has no more safety by the constitution than
the alien has; for all those provisions apply only to crimes. So that in either
event, the citizen has the same reason to expect a similar law to the one now
before you; which subjects his person to the uncontrolled despotism of a single
man. You have already been told of plots, conspiracies -- and all the frightful
images that were necessary to keep up the present system of terror and alarm
were presented to you: but who were implicated by these dark hints -- these
mysterious allusions? -- they were our own citizens, sir, not aliens: if there
is then any necessity for the system now proposed, it is more necessary to be
enforced against our own citizens, than against strangers; and I have no doubt
that either in this, or some other shape they will be attempted. I now ask,
sir, whether the people of America are prepared for this? Whether they are
willing to part with all the means which the wisdom of their ancestors
discovered; and their own caution so lately adopted to secure the liberty of
their persons? Whether they are ready to submit to imprisonment, or exile,
whenever suspicion, calumny or vengeance, shall mark them for ruin? Are they
base enough to be prepared for this? No, sir, they will, I repeat it, they will
resist this tyrannic system; the people will oppose, the states will not submit
to its operation: they ought not to acquiesce, and I pray to God they never
may. My opinions, sir, on this subject are explicit, and I wish they may be
known; they are, that whenever our laws manifestly infringe the constitution
under which they were made, the people ought not to hesitate which they should
obey: if we exceed our powers, we become tyrants, and our acts have no effect.
Thus, sir, one of the first effects of measures such as this, if they should
not be acquiesced in, will be disaffection among the states, and opposition
among the people to your government; tumults, violence, and a recurrence to
first revolutionary principles. If they are submitted to, the consequences will
be worse -- After such manifest violation of the principles of our
constitution, the form will not long be sacred; presently every vestige of it
will be lost and swallowed up in the gulf of despotism -- but should the evil
proceed no further than the execution of the present law, what a fearful
picture will our country present -- the system of espionage (...) established;
the country will swarm with informers, spies, delators, and all that odious
reptile tribe that breed in the sunshine of despotic power, that suck the blood
of the unfortunate, and creep into the bosom of sleeping innocence only to wake
it with a burning wound -- the hours of the most unsuspecting confidence; the
intimacies of friendship, or the recesses of domestic retirement, afford no
security: the companion whom you most trust, the friend in whom you confide,
the domestic who waits in your chamber, are all tempted to betray your
imprudence or guardless follies; to misrepresent your words; to convey them,
distorted by calumny, to the secret tribunal where jealousy presides; where
fear officiates as accuser, and suspicion is the only evidence that is heard.

These, bad as they are, are not the only ill consequences of these measures:
among them we may reckon the loss of wealth, of population, and of commerce.
Gentlemen who support the bill, seemed to be aware of this, when yesterday they
introduced a clause to secure the property of those who might be ordered to go
off; they should have foreseen the consequences of the steps they have been
taking; it is now too late to discover that large sums are drawing from the
banks, that a great capital is taken from commerce. It is ridiculous even to
observe the solicitude they show to retain the wealth of these dangerous men,
whose persons they are so eager to get rid of; if they wish to retain it, it
must be by giving them security to their persons, and assuring them that while
they respect the laws, the laws will protect them from arbitrary power; it must
be, in short, by rejecting the bill on your table. I might mention many other
inferior considerations: but I ought, sir, rather to entreat the pardon of the
house, for having touched on this; compared to the breach of our constitution,
and the establishment of arbitrary power, every other topic is trifling;
arguments of convenience sink into nothing; the preservation of wealth, the
interests of commerce, however weighty on other occasions, here lose their
importance: When the fundamental principles of freedom are in danger, we are
tempted to borrow the impressive language of a foreign speaker, and exclaim --
"Perish our commerce, let our constitution live:" -- Perish our riches, let our
freedom live -- this, sir, would be the sentiment of every American, were the
alternative between submission and wealth; but here, sir, it is proposed to
destroy our wealth, in order to (...) our commerce. Not in (...) but to break
it -- not to secure (...).

I have now done sir, but before I sit down let me entreat gentlemen seriously
reflect before they pronounce the decisive vote, that gives the first open stab
to the principles of our government. Our mistaken zeal, like that of the
patriarch of old, has bound the victim; it lies at the foot of the altar; a
sacrifice of the first born offspring of freedom is proposed by those who gave
it birth. The hand is already raised to strike, and nothing I fear but the
voice of Heaven can arrest the impious blow.

Let not gentlemen flatter themselves that the fervor of the moment can make
the people insensible to these aggressions. It is an honest noble warmth,
produced by an indignant sense of injury. It will never, I trust, be extinct,
while there is a proper cause to excite it: but the people of America, sir,
though watchful against foreign aggression are not careless of domestic
encroachment; they are as jealous, sir, of their liberties at home, as of the
power and prosperity of their country abroad: they will awake to a sense of
their danger; do not let us flatter ourselves then that these measures will be
unobserved or disregarded. Do not let us be told, sir, that we excite a fervor
against foreign aggression, only to establish tyranny at home; that, like the
arch traitor, we cry "Hail, Columbia," at the moment we are betraying her to
destruction: that we sing out "happy land," when we are plunging it in ruin or
disgrace: and that we are absurd enough to call ourselves "free and
enlightened," while we advocate principles that would have disgraced the age of
Gothic barbarity, and establish a code compared to which the ordeal is wise,
and the trial by battle is merciful and just.


