THE GLEANER.

A MISCELLANEOUS PRODUCTION. IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY CONSTANTIA.

Slow to condemn* and seeking to commend,
Good sense will with deliberation scan;
To trivial faults unwilling to descend,
If Virtue gave, and formed the general plan.
VOL. I.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, FAUST's STATUE, No. 45,
Newbury-Street.

FEB. 1798.

Dedication.
TO JOHN ADAMS, L.L.D. PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
SIR,
ALTHOUGH I am aware, that by electing for my humble productions a patronage so
distinguished, I hazard the accusation of presumption, I rest confident that
your candor will ascribe my temerity to the best possible motive.

THAT benignity and dignified affability, which is perhaps inseparable from a
truly noble mind, may be compared to the lucid veil, that, thrown around the
orient beam, accommodates to our imbecile gaze those splendors, which might
otherwise dazzle and confound; we trace with enkindling ardor the mildly
attempered radiance, we learn to appreciate its worth, and spontaneously we
bless its genial path.

To dwell with accumulating energy upon the pleasing past, is one of the
appropriate felicities of reason; and, amid the review of other times,
retrospection frequently presents to my mental eye, a period which memory
piously consecrates, when, privileged by an opportunity of contemplating the
President, during the white moments of social pleasure, the domestic virtues
collected and embodied, were exemplified with uncommon luster; and while the
recollection of his philanthropic manners, and uniform elevation, gives me to
mark with additional complacency, the ascendency he has so meritoriously
obtained in the public mind, I regard the authority to inscribe these volumes
to him among the most elating circumstances of my life.

WERE I to indulge the genuine language of my heart, it would be a task of no
ordinary description, to circumscribe within due bounds those expansive
effusions resulting from admiration of his character, and from affectionate
gratitude for the very essential services he has rendered to a country, that
may consider his birth as an era in her annals, and that justly places this
event among her highest honors.

THE homage we yield to eminent abilities, and luminous rectitude, can never
involve the charge of singularity; for genius, elevated by virtue and
unimpeached integrity, adorned by literature, elegance and taste, have in all
ages commanded the esteem and veneration of mankind: but although I might plead
the sanction of numerous and respectable examples, I cannot, however, discern
the utility of essaying to prove, that the majesty of day illumines our world,
or that his salutary influence, like some gladdening deity, diffuses over the
face of nature, consistency, harmony, and unrivalled beauty.

THAT America has looked up to you, Sir, as her second hope, is a truth which
carries in its bosom a panegyric upon your virtues more impressive, than if an
angel had pronounced your eulogy; and while our fervid benedictions must ever
follow the retiring Chief, whose guardian care conducted our benighted
footsteps over paths untried and perilous, to a brilliant morning, the
refulgent dawn of which is regarded as the harbinger of a glorious meridian, we
hail with ardent expectancy his patriotic successor, who, like another Elisha,
clothed in the sacred vestments of authority, inherits a full proportion of
that spirit, which rested upon him, who, emancipating his country from
unwarrantable usurpations, will ever be recognized as her DELIVERER: Thus, in
the same moment that to the name of Washington, respectful gratitude, bending
over the unperishing record of his illustrious acts, establishes in the
Columbian bosom her eternal monuments; we exult in an ADAMS, whose transcendent
talents, and whose vigilance, are fully adequate to the emergencies and the
dangers of a FREE GOVERNMENT; whose wisdom and magnanimity will firmly guide
the helm of State; who, although contending storms may assail, and the big
waves of opposition may lash the bark, will pursue with unwavering intrepidity,
his destined way; while rectitude his chart, and experience his compass, he
must assuredly make the broad and ample harbor of Security.

YES, Sir, I indulge a hope that your name may not only shield me from the
oblivion I dread, but possibly confer a degree of celebrity, to which my own
merit may not furnish a title; yet whatever is the fate of pretensions
originating perhaps in arrogance, may you, Sir, pursue your course with ever
new effulgence. The guardian of a nation's weal, you will watch over us for
good. May you long continue to direct, enliven, and invigorate; and may your
parting moments set serenely bright.

I HAVE, Sir, the honor to be, with every sentiment of esteem and veneration,

Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, CONSTANTIA.
BOSTON, March 15, 1797.
PREFACE to the READER.
MY Readers will not call my veracity in question, when I assure them that I am
ardently anxious for their approbation. A lover of humanity, I do not remember
the period when I was not solicitous to render myself acceptable to all those
who were naturally or adventitiously my associates. Had I possessed ability, I
should have advanced every individual of my species to the highest state of
felicity, of which the present scene is susceptible; but circumscribed within
very narrow bounds, I have, I had almost said momently, been reduced to the
necessity of lamenting the inefficacy of my wishes. Yet this my ruling passion,
a fondness to stand well in the opinion of the world, having given a prevalent
hue to every important action of my life, has operated powerfully upon my
ambition, stimulated my efforts, and implanted in my bosom an invincible desire
to present myself before a public which I reverence, irresistibly impelling me
to become a candidate for that complacency we naturally feel toward those
persons, or that performance, which has contributed to our emolument, or even
amusement.

MY desires are, I am free to own, aspiring -- perhaps presumptuously so. I
would be distinguished and respected by my contemporaries; I would be continued
in grateful remembrance when I make my exit; and I would descend with celebrity
to posterity.

HAD I been mistress of talents for an achievement so meritorious, my first
object in writing would have been the information and improvement of my
readers; nor will I deny that a pleasing hope plays about my heart, suggesting
a possibility of my becoming in some small degree beneficial to those young
people, who, just entering the career of life, may turn, with all the endearing
ardour of youthful enthusiasm, to a New Book, to an American Author; and while
with partial avidity they pursue the well intended pages, they may select a
hint, or treasure up a remark, which may become useful in the destined journey
of life.

BUT vanity, in the most extravagant moments of her triumph, having never
flattered me with the capability of conveying instruction to those, whose
understandings have passed the age of adolescence, my view has only been to
amuse; and if I can do this without offending, I shall be honored with a place
in some gentle bosom where I should else have been unknown; I shall obtain a
portion of esteem, and my ruling passion will be thus far gratified.

To have presented a finished or perfect production, (such is my fondness for
literary ^ame) I would gladly have relinquished my present mode of (...) ^ay,
more -- I would have labored for the completion of such a composition through
a long succession of lengthening years, although my life had been a scene of
penury and hardship.

WITH such sentiments I shall not be suspected of writing hastily or
carelessly. The truth is, I have penned every essay as cautiously as if I had
been assured my reputation rested solely upon that single effort: yet defects
of almost every description may too probably occur; the Grammarian, the
Rhetorician, the Poet, these may all trace such palpable deviations from the
given standard, as may render me, in their opinion, an unpardonable offender
against the rules of language, and the elegance and graces of style. Possibly
too, thus laid open to all the severity of criticism, I may be arraigned, tried
and condemned; and in this case it is certainly true, that I am preparing for
myself the severest pangs. But, be this as it may, I rest assured, that the
feelings of the Moralist being in no instance wounded, he will accept with
complacency my efforts in the common cause, and humanely shield me from those
shafts which might otherwise transfix my peace.

HAVING, in the concluding Essay, given my reasons for assuming the masculine
character, I have only further to observe, that those who admit the utility of
conveying instruction and amusement by allegory or metaphor, and who allow the
propriety of giving a tongue to the inanimate world, and speech to the inferior
orders of the creation, will not object to the liberty I have taken. It is
superfluous to add, that allegory and fable are not only authorized by the best
moral writers, but are also sanctioned by holy writ.

I CANNOT urge in defense of my temerity, that the importunity of friends has
drawn me forth -- certainly not. But, worthy reader, I repeat that I have been
animated, in this my arduous pursuit, by a desire to be introduced to thee, by
a wish to make one in the number of thy friends. I am solicitous to obtain an
establishment in the bosom of virtue -- I would advance my claim to the sweetly
soothing strains of just applause; and I would secure for myself, and for my
infant daughter, (should our future exigencies require it) thy amity and thy
patronage.

IF thou proceedest through the volumes before thee, we shall pass on together
through many a page; the sentiments of my heart will be unreservedly
pourtrayed; and I fondly persuade myself that thou will, without reluctance,
embrace in the arms of thy complacency, thy most obedient, and sincerely
devoted friend, and very humble servant,

CONSTANTIA.
BOSTON, March 16, 1797.
CONTENTS of the FIRST VOLUME.
DEDICATION to John Adams, L.L.D. President of the United States of America 3
Preface to the Reader 7 No. I. The Gleaner is introduced to the Editors of the
Massachusetts Magazine -- Some account of the Author's pretensions 13 No. II.
Story of Margaretta 17 No. III. Economy and method recommended and illustrated
by a sketch of the characters of Ernestus and Cr^^stinatus 25 No. IV. (...) ^n
the present times 32 No. V. An (...) remarkable cure performed on a person in
the last stages of a consumption -- Letter to the Gleaner, recommending an
additional article in the Constitution of the United States, in favor of real
genius 44 No. VI. Dinner at a public house -- The Author incog. listens to a
variety of remarks on the Gleaner -- Several letters to the Gleaner. 54 No.
VII. Story of Margaretta resumed 66 No. VIII. Story continued 76 No. IX.
Farther continuation 87 No. X. Margaretta discovers the real character of
Courtland, and does justice to Hamilton 96 No. XI. History of Miss Wellwood 110
No. XII. Some account of the various comments made on the Gleaner, and of the
conjectures relative to the real author -- Return of Edward Hamilton 124 No.
XIII. Marriage of Edward Hamilton, and Margaretta Melworth 130 No. XIV.
Reflections on the ingratitude of mankind 136 No. XV. Subject continued --
Account of Agetius and Placidius 143 No. XVI. Eulogium on philanthropy --
Letter to the Gleaner from Robert Amiticus 149 No. XVII. Industry, with the
independence which it confers, celebrated and illustrated by facts 161 No.
XVIII. Subject continued -- Account of the Airy family, with particulars
relative to Miss Helen and Miss Penelope Airy 169 No. XIX. Letter from
Zephaniah Doubtful -- A sketch of the Gleaner's religious sentiments 180 No.
XX. Interesting situation of Margaretta -- Letter addressed to her, with her
answer 188 No. XXI. Eclaircissement 200 No. XXII. Written in December, 1793 213
No. XXIII. Reflections on justice -- Rectitude of a debtor 217 No. XXIV.
Panegyric on the Drama -- Its happy effect on Miss Clarinda Meanwell -- Account
of the opening the Boston Theater -- Eulogy on the prefatory address, and on
Gustavus Vasa 224 No. XXV. Reflections on the Heathen mythology, on the
doctrine of Guardian Spirits -- Its effect on the morals of mankind -- Some
account of a valuable Matron 241 No. XXVI. Sketch of the present situation of
America, 1794 -- Horror excited by the ingratitude of faction -- Wisdom of our
national government 252 No. XXVII. Subject continued -- Necessity of
subordination illustrated by an example -- Panegyric on the American
Constitution 261 No. XXVIII. Further account of Margaretta 272 No. XXIX. An
unexpected event, which places Margaretta and her family in affluence 286 No.
XXX. Beauty and propriety of family attachment -- Instance of fraternal
affection 301 No. XXXI. Necessity of religion, especially in adversity 311 No.
XXXII. Propriety and utility of supporting the ills of life with equanimity --
Account of Flavilla 320 No. XXXIII. Pernicious consequences of ambiguity, or
concealment -- Story of Eliza 330 No. XXXIV. Explanatory letters -- Defense of
the Gleaner 339
THE GLEANER.
No. I.
Yes, I confess I love the paths of fame,
And ardent wish to glean a brightening name.

OBSERVING in the general preface, published in the December Magazine, The
reader is requested to remember, that the Essays which compose this First
Volume were written purposely for the Monthly Museum, in which they originally
appeared; and that they now stand precisely in the order, and nearly in the
manner, in which they were first presented.
a hint which I have construed into a desire to increase the number of your
miscellaneous correspondents; and, stimulated by the delicate reproof upon
literary indolence, which that elegant exordium contains, I feel myself, while
sitting quite at my leisure, on this evening of January 27th, 1792, strongly
incited by my good or bad genius -- the event must determine the character of
the spright which is goading me on, to take into my serious consideration, the
solicitation which in said preface is so modestly urged, and which squares so
wonderfully well with my ideas of the reason and fitness of things.

Not that I shall aim at palming myself upon the public, for a son of
literature, a votary of the nine, or a dabbler in wit. I have no pretension to
any of these characters. I am rather a plain man, who, after spending the day
in making provision for my little family, sit myself comfortably down by a
clean hearth, and a good fire, enjoying, through these long evenings, with an
exquisite zest, the pleasures of the hour, whether they happen to be furnished
by an amusing tale, a well written book, or a social friend. Possibly I might
have jogged on to the end of my journey, in this sober, tranquil manner: but
alas, for some time past, I think, as near as I can remember, ever since the
commencement of your Magazine, I have been seized with a violent desire to
become a writer. To combat this unaccountable itch for scribbling, it is in
vain that I have endeavored; it follows me through all the busy scenes which
the day presents; it is my constant accompaniment in every nocturnal haunt; and
it often keeps me waking, when, I verily believe, but for this restless desire,
I might enjoy, in the fullest latitude, every blessing which has ever yet been
ascribed to sleep.

The many comprehensive titles, and alluring signatures, which have from time
to time embellished your Magazine, have well near captivated my reason; and
among many et ceteras, which might be enumerated, the following appellations
have had for me peculiar charms: An ample field seemed opening in the title
page of the General Observer; the name Philo appeared replete with studious
lore; the Politician was indefatigable for the good of the nation; the
Philanthropist bled sympathy; and with the Rivulet I was ^^raptured. At the bar
of fancy, many a title for my intended essays has been tried, and has been
successively condemned. A variety of signatures have been deliberately adopted,
and as deliberately displaced, until my pericranium has been nearly turned
with thinking. Unfortunately, with my wish to commence author, originated also,
a most inordinate ambition, and an insatiable thirst for applause. In whatever
line I made my appearance, I was solicitous to stand unequalled. -- I would be
Caesar, or I would be nothing. The smoothness of Addison's page, the purity,
strength and correctness of Swift, the magic numbers of Pope -- these must all
veil to me. The Homers and Virgils of antiquity, I would rival; and, audacious
as I am, from the Philenia's of the present age, I would arrogantly snatch the
bays. Strange as is this account, it is nevertheless true. And, moreover, all
these wild extravagancies have been engendered in a brain, which it may be,
does not possess abilities adequate to the furnishing a paragraph in a common
newspaper! My case, I assure you, Gentlemen, has been truly pitiable, while,
for three years past, I have been struggling with an inflatus, which has been
almost irresistible. Reason, however, aided, as I said, by a conviction of
inferiority, has hitherto restrained me; but your last preface has done the
business -- it has interested my feelings, and induced even reason to enlist
under the banners of temerity -- the fire thus long pent up, cannot now be
smothered, but acquiring, from its confinement, additional fervor, it at
length produces me a candidate for that applause, by a prospect of which, you
are solicitous to engage your readers in the arduous pursuit of fame.

Thus resolved, the die is cast, and this ungovernable mania admits of one only
remedy. But having once made up my mind to write, an appellation is the next
thing to be considered; for as to subjects, my sanguine hopes assure me they
will follow of course. A writer of facetious memory, has represented his dear
Jenny, when she could not obtain the tissued robe, as meekly assuming the
humblest garb which frugality could furnish. I am fond of respectable examples,
and I have humility enough to be influenced by them.

My title having much exercised my mind, and being convinced that any
considerable achievements are beyond my grasp, upon mature deliberation I have
thought best to adopt, and I do hereby adopt, the name, character, and
avocation of a GLEANER; and this appellation, I do freely confess, gives a full
and complete idea of my present amazingly curtailed views.

Here pride suggests a question, What is any modern scribbler better than a
Gleaner? But I very sagaciously reply, Let my brethren and sisters of the quill
characterize themselves; I shall not thus, upon the very threshold of the
vocation of my election, enter the lists.

The truth is, I am very fond of my title: I conceive that I shall find it in
many respects abundantly convenient; more especially, should an accusation of
plagiarism be lodged against me, my very title will plead my apology; for it
would be indeed pitiful if the opulent reaper, whose granaries are confessedly
large, and variously supplied, should grudge the poor Gleaner what little he
industriously collects, and what, from the richness and plenty of his ample
harvest, he can never want.

With diligence then, I shall ransack the fields, the meadows, and the groves;
each secret haunt, however sequestered, with avidity I shall explore; deeming
myself privileged to crop with impunity a hint from one, an idea from another,
and to aim at improvement upon a sentence from a third. I shall give to my
materials whatever texture my fancy directs; and, as I said, feeling myself
entitled to toleration as a Gleaner, in this expressive name I shall take
shelter, standing entirely regardless of every charge relative to property,
originality, and every thing of this nature, which may be preferred against me.

Mean time, should any of the Parnassian girls, or his godship Apollo, or any
other genius, sylph, or gnome, of legendary or fairy ancestry, fond of
encouraging a young beginner, throw into my basket an unbroken sheaf, you may
depend upon it that I will assay to form the valuable original, with all the
care, accuracy and skill which close thinking, deep study, and an ardent desire
to excel, can bestow; and you may farther assure yourselves, that when thus
highly wrought, I shall haste to present the precious gift, a fit offering at
the shrine of the Massachusetts Magazine. Thus having, as far as it lays with
me, adjusted preliminaries, I propose myself, Gentlemen, as a candidate for a
place in your Magazine. If my pretensions are judged inadmissible, presiding in
your respectable divan, you have but to wave your oblivious wand, and I am
forever silenced. I confess, however, that I have no violent inclination to see
the Gleaner among your list of acknowledgments to correspondents, set up as a
mark for the shafts of wit, however burnished they may be.

You, Gentlemen, possess the specific at which I have already hinted, and by
which I may be radically cured; and if this attempt is really as absurd as I am
even now, at times, inclined to think it, your non-insertion of, and silence
thereto, will operate as effectually as the severest reprehension, and will be
regarded by the Gleaner as a judgment from which there is no appeal.

No. II.
Whether over meadows, or through groves I stray,
Industry points her broad directing ray;
With care I glean, even in the well trod field,
The scattered fragments it perchance may yield.

TO the Editors of the Massachusetts Magazine I make my best congee, and
without any further prefatory address, I shall, in future, produce my
piecemeal commodities, fresh as I may happen to collect them.

Bless me! cried Margaretta, while, in the hope of meeting something from the
pen of (...), she threw her fine eyes in a cursory manner ever the index to the
February Magazine. But pray, it may be asked, who is Margaretta? Curiosity is,
without doubt, a useful if not a laudable propensity; and, if it is the parent
of many evils, it is but fair to acknowledge, that it has also among its
numerous sons and daughters some extremely well favored children. Curiosity
has given birth to the most arduous pursuits; its achievements have been of
the greatest utility; and without this stimulus we should have great reason to
fear an universal stagnation in every branch of knowledge. Moreover, this same
curiosity consorts, at this present, very exactly with my feelings; for the
question -- Pray, who is Margaretta? involves a subject upon which I expatiate
with infinite satisfaction, and upon which I have never yet lost an opportunity
of being loquaciously communicative.

At the close of the late war, when I was an idle young fellow, fond of
indulging myself in every luxury which the small patrimony that descended to me
from a very worthy father, would permit, I conceived an invincible desire of
becoming a spectator of the felicity which I imagined the inhabitants of
South Carolina, particularly the suffering metropolis of that State, would
experience on their emancipation from a succession of evils, which, for a
period of seven years, had continued to occupy their minds, giving them to
taste deeply of every calamity consequent upon a war, conducted in that part of
our country with almost unparalleled barbarity. I had early connected myself in
the bands of wedlock with a young woman of a mild and conceding disposition,
who sincerely loved me, and who, accommodating herself even to my caprices,
has made it the study of her life, when she could not convince my judgment,
however rational her arguments in her own estimation, to bend to my purposes
her most approved wishes.

When I announced my intention of visiting South Carolina, she could not
forbear suggesting some economical ideas; but upon a declaration that I was
determined to execute my plan, she submitted with that kind of acquiescence,
which our sex is so fond of considering as the proper characteristic of
womanhood. For a progress then of many hundred miles, in a one horse chaise, we
commenced our journey; we intended to pass on by easy stages; and, moreover, we
were accompanied by one of the patriotic exiled citizens of Charleston, with
whom, during a struggle which associated the remotest subjects of the union, we
had contracted an intimate acquaintance. The kindness of this gentleman, who
was well mounted, serving us as a relay, we proceeded expeditiously enough, and
I do not remember that I ever in my life passed my time more agreeably. Many
scenes novel and interesting, prospects extensive, and views truly picturesque,
arrested our attention; and were I not hasting to give a solution to the
reader's question, I might perhaps amuse him very tolerably, in the descriptive
line, through two or three pages close printing; but in a course of
publications, I may possibly again recur to exhibitions which pleased me so
highly at the time, when I may be more at leisure to glean whatever flower
recollection may furnish.

On our arrival in Charleston we found our most sanguine expectations answered;
the joy of the liberated citizens was unbounded -- it was beyond description;
nor can I give a better idea of their satisfaction than by pronouncing it in
exact proportion to, and fully commensurate with, their preceding sufferings.
Our companion, however, was, by the same unwarrantable measures which had
wrecked many a princely fortune, stripped of his whole inheritance; so that
being entire strangers in Charleston, we were necessitated to provide ourselves
with hired lodgings.

Our landlady was a widow of reputation, whose house was frequented only by
people of the utmost circumspection. The second day after our arrival, as the
good woman was pouring the tea, which we had chosen for breakfast, a gentle tap
at the door drew our attention. My wife, who is in fact the pink of civility,
was mechanically rising to open it, when she was prevented by our hostess, who
cried, Sit down, Madam, it is nobody but the child. My dear Mary, who is
extravagantly fond of children, catching at the sound, eagerly replied, "Then,
Madam, you have a young family." "No, Madam," returned the hostess, "it is long
since my young folks have been grown up about me; but this little creature
belongs to an unfortunate lodger of mine, who is continually weeping over her,
and who I am afraid will not long be an inhabitant of this bad world; indeed I
suppose her present errand is occasioned by some new distress of her mother's,
for the pretty thing is wonderfully sensible for such a mere baby." My poor
wife, in whose composition humanity is the paramount ingredient, instantly
found her benevolence engaged; all her tender feelings took the alarm; and,
precipitately quitting her chair, in a tremulous voice she exclaimed, "Pray,
Madam, neglect not the unfortunate sick person for us; I can fill the tea, and
I beseech you to admit the little petitioner." The good woman, pronouncing a
panegyric upon the tenderness of my wife's disposition, forthwith threw open
the door, when a little female, apparently about ten years of age, presented
herself; she was beautiful as innocence, and her figure was of that kind, which
seems formed to interest every benign principle of the soul; which is
calculated to invigorate, even in the bosom of the most phlegmatic, the latent
sparks of pity, although nearly smothered there.

"Oh Mrs. Thrifty!" exclaimed the heart affecting pleader, will you not come to
my mamma? will you not give her some more of them blessed drops which yesterday
made her so much better? she is -- indeed she is -- Here, casting her eyes
toward us, whom her concern had before prevented her from seeing, and who were
regarding her with a mixture of pity and admiration, a modest blush tinged her
cheek, which, even at that early age, had been too often washed by the tear of
sorrow; and, bursting into an agony of grief, she remained silent. "Go on,
Margaretta, said Mrs. Thrifty; let us know what new complaint you have to make;
this gentleman and lady are very good, and will excuse you." Mary took the hand
of the weeping cherub, and drawing her to her, imprinted upon her humid cheek
one of those balmy kisses which she is always ready to bestow upon the young
proficient, thus early enlisted under the banners of misfortune. "Mrs. Thrifty
says right, my dear, every body will love and pity you; tell us, how is your
mamma?" The child, hanging upon the arm of my wife, expressed by her
intelligent eyes a thousand mingling sensations; surprise, love, gratitude, and
a corrected kind of joy, seemed to grow at once in her soul; and, bowing upon
the hand of Mary in a perturbed manner, she spontaneously expressed the
involuntary emotions of her bosom: Oh my dear lady, will you not see my mamma?
certainly you can make her well, and she is indeed very sick; I thought this
morning she would speak to me no more -- she looked so pale -- and was so long
before she bid me repeat my morning hymn: Oh if my poor mamma should die -- I
cannot -- indeed I cannot stay here.

Mary, it will not be doubted, bent her utmost efforts to soothe the sweet
mourner. But not to dwell longer upon a subject, on which it will perhaps be
thought I have already too much enlarged, it shall suffice to say, that,
through the good offices of her little friend, Mary soon procured an
introduction into the chamber of the sick -- that, feelings, which at first
originated in compassion for the charming child, meliorated into a sympathetic
kind of amity -- and that, for the course of one week, she passed a very large
proportion of her time in endeavoring to mitigate the calamities of the
suffering matron, Her assiduities, however, were not crowned with the salutary
effects she wished; the patient, it was but too apparent, was hastening on to
the hour of her dissolution; her disorder was a regular decline; the shafts of
a deep-rooted and incurable grief, must, of necessity, be unerring; and it was
evident, that in the bosom of the fair afflicted, corroding sorrow had infixed
its envenomed ^ooth. My wife often recommended a resignation to, and reliance
on, the dispositions of a paternal God; but the dying woman shook her head, and
continued her pity moving sighs: And about ten days after our abode at Mrs.
Thrifty's, the poor lady recovering from a fainting fit, during which it was
supposed she had breathed her last, summoned us into her apartment, and,
consigning Margaretta to the care of Mrs. Thrifty, she thus addressed us: --

You see before you, my friends -- for friends, short as is the interval in
which I have known you, a number of concurring circumstances evinces you, in
the most exalted sense of the term, to be; but you are uniformly, I doubt not,
the friends of the unfortunate, and the Searcher of all hearts knows that my
claim to your regards in this character is indubitable. You see before you, I
say, a very distressed woman; for the sake of the child who is just gone from
me, I will briefly recount to you the outlines, if I may so express myself, of
my life. She is not, as she supposes, my daughter -- I never was a mother -- I
was the eldest of two sisters, who saw ourselves reduced from affluence to
penury; we were orphans, and we were, by the rapacious hand of unexampled
fraud, despoiled of our patrimony; our mutual affection, however, survived;
and, upon the altar which our misfortunes had erected, we exchanged vows of
eternal amity. To a small town in the environs of London we retired,
endeavoring to shelter our defenseless heads, and to seek from honest
industry, that support, of which, by faithless trustees, we had been robbed.

My sister was addressed by a young man, whom I conceived altogether unworthy
of her; for the pride of my heart was yet unsubdued; she, however,
notwithstanding all my remonstrances, persisted in encouraging the pursuit of
young Melworth; while, so rooted was my aversion, so impassioned my
declarations, and so unyielding the anger which deformed my soul, that I rashly
protested, the hour which made them one, should fix between us an everlasting
bar, and that I would on no account, after such an event, hold with her the
smallest intercourse. Their marriage nevertheless took place, and to my
sister's entreaties for a restoration of our former amities, my obdurate heart
continued insensible.

About this time, Captain Arbuthnot made his appearance in our village; a
tender friendship grew between us; it meliorated into love, and he, in some
sort, supplied to me the place of my lost sister: Hymen sanctified our union,
and I esteemed myself the happiest of women.

Of my sister, I knew but little; common same indeed informed me, that she was
satisfied with her connection, that her circumstances were easy, that she had
given birth to one daughter, and with this intelligence I was well enough
contented. It is true, I was, by private whispers, assured that she pined after
a reconciliation, and that she had often been heard to say, that a renewal of
our once warm and glowing attachment, was the only remaining requisite which
was yet wanting to complete her felicity. Still, however, I was unmoved; and I
verily believed that every tender sentiment, in regard to my sister, was
eradicated from my bosom. It was at this juncture that I accompanied Captain
Arbuthnot in a journey of some months; and on my return, being upon a visit,
among other occurrences which were retailed to me, I learned that Mr. Melworth,
having engaged on board a ship which had foundered at sea, every life had been
lost; and that Mrs. Melworth, whose health was before in a declining state, was
fast sinking under this calamitous event. The feelings of nature, were now, as
by a shock of electricity, instantly roused. Unspeakable was the agony of my
soul! with the utmost speed I hasted to her abode; but alas! I was only in time
to receive her last sighs! the dart which my unkindness had aimed at her peace,
urged by a stroke so fatal, deeply transfixed her spirit, and she was
absolutely expiring a martyr to the severity of her fate. Yet, ere she breathed
her last, she bequeathed her little Margaretta to my care. The sweet infant,
then only two years old, intuitively, as it should seem, threw her arms about
my neck, while in the presence of Heaven, and in the hearing of her departing
mother, I solemnly swore never to forsake her; and, since that hour, to
shelter, to soothe, to restrain, and to direct my lovely charge, has been the
prime object of my life; but, yet a little while, and I shall be here no more.
Oh thou sainted shade of my much wronged Margaretta! may my death, so similar
to thy own, expiate my injustice to thee, thou first, most indulgent, and
mildest of women.

In one of the regiments stationed in Ireland, and in the year eighty-one
ordered to America, Captain Arbuthnot had a command; he was now my only friend,
and with my little orphan, who imagined us her real parents, I resolved to
follow his fortunes. We had been induced to suppose that case and affluence
awaited us here; that the country was subdued, and that nothing remained for us
but to take possession of the forfeited lands; but we have been miserably
deceived. Landing in this city, upon the third of June, as early as the seventh
of the same month, the troops marched under the command of Lord Rawdon,
encountering inconceivable difficulties, in a rapid progress beneath the
intense rays of a burning sun, through the whole extent of the State. My
unfortunate husband fell a victim to the climate, and to the wounds which he
received in the engagement, which took place near Shubrick's plantation. Need
the rest be told? -- Upon the evacuation of Charleston, I was unable to embark
with the troops. For my little Margaretta, my last sigh will be breathed; it is
for her, as I said, my humane friends, that I have thus long detained you. By
the injuries of which they complain, the benevolent feelings of the inhabitants
of this city are blunted -- what can I do? strangers as you are, I solicit your
advice -- was she but provided for, my passage out of time would be easy; for,
with regard to myself, I know no prospect so pleasing, as a speedy reunion with
my Henry and my much injured sister* Mary cast upon me her intelligent eyes; I
understood the reference, and I hastily replied, If, Madam, your confidence in
us is sufficient to calm your mind, you may make yourself entirely easy about
your girl; for, from this moment, we jointly invest ourselves with the
guardianship of the little orphan, and we promise to consider her as the child
of our affection. This was enough; the matron yielded up her spirit without a
remaining regret; and, after assisting at her obsequies, we returned home, well
pleased with our new acquisition.

No. III.
To catch the moments as they rapid fly;
To send them marked and gilded to the sky;
Fraught with the incense diligence extracts,
Which still improves, and not one hour protracts;
This is the hyblean art, whose honied sweets
From circling angels glad acceptance meets.

"BLESS me!" cried Margaretta, "as I live, here is, in this Magazine, a
publication entitled the Gleaner!" As she spoke, she bent her lovely face
toward me, in order the more attentively to observe what effect this
information produced in the lines of my countenance, I endeavored to preserve
my accustomed gravity. Margaretta interrogated -- "Dear Sir, did I not lately
hear you say, that if you ever appeared in the world as an author, you would
certainly be known by this appellation?" I was still silent -- Margaretta
continued, -- "I protest, Sir, I am sorry you are forestalled, for I had
promised myself a fund of improvement, whenever you should employ your talents
as a writer: I expected also, much entertainment from the various conjectures
which I imagined would have been hazarded, relative to the real character of
the Gleaner, and I was positive, that from the commendations which would
undoubtedly have been bestowed upon my best friend, I should have experienced
some of the finest sensations of which my gratefully duteous heart is
susceptible." I saw that having entered upon a subject that her ingenuity never
fails of rendering sufficiently copious, she would so manage it, as to prattle
on, till her tender volubility had made of me the fool, into which it is always
in her power, (my boasted equanimity notwithstanding) to convert me. I judged
it proper, therefore, to stop her in her career, and drawing my pipe from my
mouth, I hastily exclaimed -- I tell you, child -- I tell you, Miss Melworth,
that the universe contains not so vile an assassin of our best purposes, so
dete^^able a murderer of time, as that hangdog scoundrel -- Procrastination.
The poet was too cool when he pronounced him only a thief; for he who steals a
commodity, may turn it to his own use, reaping thereby, at least a temporary
advantage: whereas this same Procrastination, is in no sort benefited by what
he seizes, since he absolutely ingulfs, (...), the precious moments upon which
he lays his torpid paw; or, in other words, I aver, that even in the most
virtuous bosom, every principle of firmness evaporates at his corrosive touch,
and that his fangs are more deadly than the most mortal pestilence, for from
the death which he inflicts, there is no resurrection. Had I, immediately on my
election, engaged in a composition of some kind or other, (for the versatility
of the title allows the utmost latitude) had I forthwith sent it forward to the
Editors, I should thus have secured, by appropriation, the designation of my
choice; but what regrets can redeem the past? read it, however, my dear, and
let us profit by every means.

The reader will remember that at the time of this confab, the second number of
the Gleaner was not written.

Margaretta read, and when she had finished the piece, I proceeded, without
commenting thereon, to harangue the good girl, and Mary my wife (though I must
confess, that few females stand less in need of lecturing) upon the value of
time, upon the necessity of seizing it by the forelock, etc. etc. etc. And
indeed is there a more estimable gem, a pearl of more intrinsic worth, than
that quota of days, which is committed to every hand? and, since by grasping
the moments we cannot detain them, since when once they have winged their
flight, it is only by reflection that they are known, what industrious
lapidaries ought we to be, that so their radiant influence may emit the most
superb and lengthening beams of light. I have long been a warm admirer of that
Roman Emperor, who is represented as lamenting in so impassioned a manner, the
loss of a single day; and in truth, he could not possibly have been furnished
with a more rational cause of regret; for, had he been robbed of his
possessions, as an individual, the wheel of fortune is still revolving, and his
ancient patrimony might have once more been established; were his vast
dominions in any part dismembered, armed for conquest, he might have gone
forth, and his victorious arm might possibly have reunited the severed
district; was he deprived of the choicest of his friends, with the gods they
still remained, and futurity would doubtless restore them: but alas! the lapse
of time he could never overtake, its course must be ever progressive, no hand
can roll back its career. Neither Joshua nor Hezekiah, though they may justly
be deemed Heaven's first favorites, though the condescending Deity
propitiously bending his ear to the prayer of their supplications, added whole
years to the life of the one, investing the other with full power to arrest and
suspend the operations of nature, giving the sun at his command to stand still
upon Mount Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Ajalon, yet they could not so
far prevail with their God, as to induce him to recall a single moment which had
passed by.

If then, time is a good, which when gone is beyond redemption, utterly and
altogether irretrievable, the wonder is, that we are so little attentive to its
waste that in its regulations and distribution we economize so little! I have
thought, that if parsimony is ever tolerated, it ought to be in the disposition
of time, and that the penurious hand, when employed in apportioning the
moments, may with propriety be accounted under the direction of virtue. It is
strange to hear from the mouth of one who murders above half the hours, by
consigning them to oblivious sleep, a complaint of the shortness of time, and
yet nothing is more frequent. Six hours in four and twenty, devoted to sleep,
when the constitution is naturally good, is said, by the most eminent
physicians, to be fully adequate to every purpose of health. If we have
accustomed ourselves, when the sun is upwards of fifteen hours above our
horizon, to prostrate before the drowsy god, until the hour of eight in the
morning, let us by perseverance acquire the habit of quitting our pillows at
five, at a moment when the blushing face of nature is clothed in tranquillity;
when every breeze seems commissioned to invigorate the mind; when the weary
frame which the evening before sunk down languid, debilitated, and almost
exhausted, is as it were renovated; when, aided by fancy, we might be induced
to conceive ourselves again in the morning of our days; when every circumstance
disposes to the peaceful enjoyments of contemplation, and the most
philanthropic sentiments are originated in the bosom: Let us, I say, resolutely
and cheerfully embark in this speculation, and we shall find that three of the
most delightful hours are every day gained; that twenty-one hours are cleared
in the course of one week; and how many months may be thus added to a common
life, let the expert arithmetician calculate. It is certain that sleep is a
figure of death, that while wrapped in its embraces, we are in effect as
helpless, and in fact as unconscious of every thing which in reality passes
upon this globe, as the body which has been for many years entombed; and as it
is quite as possible to commit a debauch in sleeping as in eating or drinking,
it must be acknowledged as an undoubted truth, that every moment thus devoted,
which is more than sufficient to restore the tired faculties, is worse than
lost. But it is not enough that we become careful to enrich ourselves by an
accumulation of hours, an exact attention to their appropriation being to the
full as requisite. It is in vain that we have amassed much property, if we
lavish it in a profuse or thoughtless manner. Order should be employed as the
handmaid of time; she should mark, arrange and decorate every movement; thus
protecting from the inroads of confusion, which would ingulf even the longevity
of an antediluvian.

It would be pleasant to observe the contrast between a family, the females of
which were properly methodical, and economical in their distributions and
expenditures of time, and one accustomed to leave every thing to the moment of
necessity, to conform to no regulations, but to crowd the affairs which ought
to take rank, in the different divisions of the week, into some contingency for
which they are totally unprepared: The one is the habitation of tranquillity;
it is a well ordered community; it is a complicated machine, the component
parts of which are so harmoniously organized, as to produce none but the most
concordant sounds, to effectuate none but the most salutary and uniform
purposes; in short, it is a terrestrial paradise, where dwells love and unity,
attended by all the blessings of contentment. While the other, -- but who can
delineate the other? It is a restoration of the reign of chaos, and genuine
pleasure is a stranger to its abode; and yet, perhaps, the lady paramounts of
each family, are equally well meaning, good kind of women; although the want of
a little perseverance, which would a^m at producing a laudable habit, presents
this melancholy reverse.

I wish not, said Ernestus to Crastinatus, to entrust my only son to the
fluctuating waves of the treacherous ocean; but, in my opinion, neither
Charybdis nor Scylla, though armed with all the terrors once attributed to
them, is ^^lf so fatal to a young fellow, as a mind unoccupied by laudable
pursuits, and that pernicious habit of idly dissipating time, which has dashed
so many high raised hopes. Why do you not take him into your compting-house,
replied Crastinatus, he will certainly find full employ there, for I declare
for my own part, that though I constantly retain two clerks, I am yet
notwithstanding, inexpressibly fatigued by the multiplicity of attentions which
my business involves. Well, I do not know how it is returned Ernestus; but I
assure you, neighbor, upon my honor, though I have not the smallest
assistance, that were (...) not for the amusement of reading, riding, visiting,
etc. etc. etc. I could not possibly contrive to fill up time.

But the business of Crastinatus is more various, more extensive, and his
avocations are more multiplied. Ernestus, it may be, moves in a more confined
sphere. No such thing -- the calls upon them are exactly similar, and the same
line of conduct would b^ proper to them both; to integrity they are equally
devoted, and equity in their dealings is alike the goal of their wishes.

But the close of every week states exactly the accounts of Ernestus; the
posting of his books was, from the first, the work of every day; as often as
possible he passes receipts; and when this desideratum cannot be obtained, so
precisely is debt and credit announced, that the foot of every page presents
the most unerring information; the whole amount of his possessions he knows;
every farthing for which he is indebted is in legible characters expressed, and
in a very short space of time, he can estimate to a penny, what he is really
worth: no person demands of Ernestus a second time his dues, for he never
hazards larger sums, than his capital can at any time command; this enableth
him to wear the wreath of punctuality, and he supports, unimpeached, even by
the tongue of slander, the character of an honest man. The happy effects of
such a mode of procedure, are too obvious to be pointed out, and Ernestus feels
them all.

The heart of Crastinatus is equally good, but irresolution has affixed its
stamp upon his mind, and he has not perseverance enough to break the force of
habit; a demand upon Crastinatus for a settlement, throws him into the utmost
confusion; his accounts have ran so long, that they involve a thousand
intricacies; all hands are at work to investigate; to come at truth is
difficult, if not impossible; and it is a wonder if a rupture is not the
consequence. When Crastinatus has paid the great debt of nature, his affairs
will lay open to the inroads of fraud, his widow and his orphan children will
be the sufferers, and the probability is, that an insolvency will take place.
Whereas, had he -- But it is time that I recollect myself; it may be thought
that I encroach too far upon a department, which may be considered as already
filled. Well then, having gleaned thus much, I will only add, that a late
ingenious writer would have observed -- Crastinatus "does not work it right."

No. IV.
But let us give the present times their due.

THERE is scarce an observer in all the purlieus of contemplation, but must
recollect, in some part or other of his life, to have met with spirited
declamations upon the degeneracy of the times. O Tempora! O Mores! is an
exclamation frequently in the mouths of those who inherit much, and who are, by
the good and wholesome laws of their country, guaranteed the peaceable
enjoyment of their ample possessions. There is a set of people who can never
see a tax-bill, or attend to the requisitions of government, without
mutinously, if not treacherously, running the parallel between what they term
the present exorbitant demands, and the moderate charges of the British
administration; and while they are blind to the emoluments of independence,
they seem to forget that house keeping is of necessity more expensive than a
residence in the dwelling of a parent or a master If the spirit of discontent
was peculiar to these inconsiderate cavillers, it would be well; but we are
concerned to find, that it pervades all orders of men, from the philosopher
down to the veriest grumbler -- from the priest to the cobbler -- from the
aggrandized lawyer to his fleeced client -- from the most enlightened physician
to his suffering patient -- from the statesman to the beggar -- and from the
liberally endowed and independent gentleman to the common day's labourer. In
short, every description of people are found crying out on the depravity of the
times; and were we to give full credit to the testimony of those, who, from age
to age, have taken an unaccountable pleasure in depreciating the time being, we
should be ready to conclude, that we must at length have arrived at the ne plus
ultra of turpitude, and have become adepts in every species of atrocious
criminality. Yet the accusation proceeds from the lips of very respectable
complainants, whose judgment, in many respects, is hardly problematical, and to
whose decisions we submit perhaps with too much docility.

In order to exalt the ancients, and to render them supreme in the scale of
excellence, it is customary to level the moderns; and the fame of the one is
appreciated, in an exact ratio, as that of the other is undervalued.

We are told much of the golden age; but the most careful investigator is at a
loss at what period of the world to date its epoch; since, immediately upon the
expulsion of Adam from the paradise which he had forfeited, the battery of
hatred and malevolence was opened; grants were abroad in the earth, and nations
no sooner existed, than they learned war.

The golden age, then, with all its splendid characteristics, we are feign to
consign to the region of fancy, denying it a being, but in the breath of poetic
fiction, or the annals of imagination.

The superiority which we are so ready to award to the ancients, may be equally
without any foundation in reality; and it is in my humble opinion probable,
that their principal advantages were derived from their being first upon the
stage of action. Methinks I see the blush of indignation tinge the face of the
reader, and he is ready to execrate the Gleaner, for attempting to pluck from
the venerable brow of antiquity the smallest twig of fame. Yet, while I
reverence a prejudice, which very possibly originates in the most laudable
affections, I nevertheless reply -- But let us give revolving time its due.
Pray, my good Sir, or Madam, if a certain opulent possessor is endowed with
vast dominions, in consequence of his eldership -- am I, an honest Gleaner, to
whom only a few barren tra^^ remain, or whose lot, perhaps, it is to examine
with unwearied diligence every spot of the wide domain, if perchance I may
glean the pittance which affluence has overlooked -- am I, for this, in a
judgment of unimpassioned reason, to be the less regarded? or, what principle
of equity, passing sentence without a trial, will pronounce, that had I been
placed precisely in the situation of the original occupier, I might not have
laid out my grounds to equal advantage, supporting a character to the full as
dignified, as consistent, and as becoming.

Man is ushered into being; he finds himself exposed to all the vicissitudes
with which the various seasons are replete; the wintery storms are abroad;
hail, rain and snow possess a power essentially to afflict him; he burns
beneath a torrid zone, or he freezes beneath a frigid; in short, every thing
points out to him the necessity of a shelter, and accordingly, he sinks the
hollowed cavity, or he raises the thatched hut; with proper repairs, this
homely dwelling would answer full as well for his successor; but his son
improves thereon, and every generation adds something, till at length the
finished edifice becomes complete. Now, I would ask, is not every generation
entitled to its quota of praise? and since the original inventor was urged
merely by necessity, and performed no more than what the beaver and other
animals have frequently done, may not the improver, who had not this
incitement, come in for his full share?

Surely the annals of antiquity record instances of barbarism in persons, when
the manners were deemed highly polished, which would shock the present feelings
of the most illiterate. Let us take a view of the Athenians, at an era when a
state of great refinement was attributed to them, when they were, it is said,
an intelligent and a learned people; let us take a seat in their theater; let
us listen while they, almost unanimously, applaud the coarse ribaldry of an
Aristophanes, while they complacently attend the degradation of virtue,
encouraging a rude and indelicate buffoon to hold up a Socrates as a fit
subject for the ridicule of the people!

But the ancients made many discoveries -- very true -- and is not the reason
obvious? There was much to discover; moreover, necessity, as has been before
hinted, is an excellent stimulus to promptitude; yet, in some respects, it
would seem that they were vastly deficient in ingenuity: For example; through
revolving centuries they remained ignorant of the art of printing, by which
they might so eligibly have transmitted to us their elaborate productions,
although they could not set a foot upon the yielding earth, without producing
an impression sufficient to suggest to them so valuable an idea.

The education of a modern student is by no means finished, without an
extensive acquaintance with the history, learning, manners and customs of the
ancients; the best part of his life is therefore devoted to acquire this
knowledge, and when thus accomplished, he finds that the age of fancy is well
near fled, and that to him the door of originality seems effectually barred.
The student of antiquity was not thus encumbered; from his predecessors he had
little to reap, and the volume of nature was opened before him; yet his
acquirements were often superficial, while the deepest researches, with their
consequent improvements, were reserved for later ages.

How dreadful are the preparations for war, which the page of antiquity
recounts! their terrific habiliments; their deathful chariots; their elephants,
with all the shocking apparatus! scarcely are they exceeded by the arrangements
of an American savage, and hardly are the tortures which he meditates, more
fearfully tremendous. What scenes of blood and devastation does the annals of
ancient history exhibit! how frequently are the feelings of humanity pierced to
the very soul! what fratricide! what parricide! while instances are not wanting
of mothers, who wade to empire through the blood of those children, in whose
vital stream they had, with remorseless cruelty, imbrued their hands; sons
incestuously pollute a father's bed; and fathers, most unnaturally, snatch to
their libidinous embraces the trembling female to whom they gave existence!

The government of the ancients, whether democratical, aristocratical,
monarchical, simple or mixed; all these, if examined by the eye of
impartiality, the boasted wisdom of their legislators, yielding in many
respects to modern improvements, will, if I mistake not, by exactly striking
the balance, prove the arrangements of Deity to be equal, and manifest him
distributing with a paternal hand, to every age their exact proportion of
talents, endowing every division of time, with men possessing understandings
alike capable of profiting by the circumstances in which they were involved.
With regard to the religion of the ancients, I suppose it will be granted, that
it was a heap of absurdities; that it consisted of contradictions, impurities,
and mysteries; the character of their very deities are lewd and otherwise
immoral; with the rivalship and content on of their gods we are disgusted; and
even the history of their Jupiter is replete with crimes, that abundantly
justify the ill humor of his Juno, that would have warranted the most coercive
proceeding^ against him, for which he merited condign punishment, and which
would have induced us wholly to acquit his brothers, Pluto and Neptune, (their
own enormities notwithstanding) if they had, uniting their powers, precipitated
him from his Olympian height, and confined him in adamantine chains to the
Stygian flood, or the Tartarean gulf.

But to resume the language of reason; this fond predilection for, and
preference of the ancients, is, in reality, altogether unaccountable; it is a
singular trait in the history of mankind, since, in every other instance, the
persons, places and things, with which we have associated, and to which we are
accustomed, possess a charm, the blandishments of which we find it impossible
to escape: With what ardour do we remember the scenes of our youth! upon the
tablets of our breasts how indelibly is the love of the place of our nativity
engraved! what noble enthusiasm fires the patriotic mind, when the interests of
his country are at stake, and how gladly would the man of filial integrity,
sacrifice his fairest hours, to advance the importance of his parent soil! More
than one instance has occurred of the most dignified characters, who have,
from circumstances, been compelled to a state of ^^^^shment, breathing out
their last wishes, that their remains might be conveyed to the much loved spot,
there to mingle with the dust, upon the surface of which they first drew their
vital breath. Indeed this attachment to country is astonishing, and not seldom
does it betray the mind into prejudices and conclusions, extravagant and
unjust. But one of the most pleasing effects of this local affection is, that
genuine transport which so agreeably surprises the soul, upon unexpectedly
meeting, in a distant land, an acquaintance, a townsman, or even a subject of
the same government; perhaps in the streets of our own district, we should have
passed him with the utmost indifference; but absence still more endears to us
every natural connection; reflection meliorates our ideas; circumstances in
themselves of little or no consequence, acquire a tender kind of importance;
recollection presents the scenes of home-felt enjoyment: and though, probably,
they were undistinguished by any prominent feature, by any particular
refinement, or impressive softness, yet, registered in the storehouse of
memory, they rise up dignified and respectable claimants, they are cherished
with augmenting regard, they point us to anticipated good; and the traveller,
who would once have been viewed as a stranger, standing as a memento, is
embraced with the ardour of friendship.

But quitting a field, in which the Gleaner had not intended at this time to
have wandered, I proceed to say, that though, as it is an article of my creed,
that all things are in a state of progression, I cannot regard the present, as
the best of all possible times; yet I do conceive, that at no period since the
lapse of Adam, was the world in so high a state of improvement, as it is at
this very instant; it is less malevolent, and more philanthropic; it is less
barbarous, and more civilized; it is less vicious, and more moral; it is less
rude; it evinceth an increasing share of urbanity; in short, the augmentation
of its virtues is rapid, and the probability is, as progressive movements
preclude a retrograde idea, that having rounded the circle, it will finally
regain the point from whence it commenced its career.

Let us take a view of the present order and decency observed in society; how
superior is it even to the patriarchal age: Let us attend the rise, the
progress, and the termination of the hostilities of adverse nations; how
multiplied are their precautions; how accumulated their manifestoes; what
strict justice, or at least the semblance thereof, are the contending parties
obliged to exercise; with what regularity is the whole process conducted; how
great is the faith and confidence of treaties; what odium attends the
infringement thereof; with what cordiality, when the sword is sheathed, do the
battling heroes embrace! resentments immediately subside, and the captured and
the wounded become the objects of generous and instantaneous attention;
hospitals, refreshments, and a variety of solaces are prepared, and it is the
pride of the foe, that the defeated warrior should receive every alleviation,
of which the circumstances of his situation are susceptible. By these means so
abundantly are the calamities of war softened, that military engagements,
comparatively speaking, assume the form of an amicable intercourse.

The present age is justly styled the period of revolutions; let us just glance
at the most prominent events. The struggles of the French nation have been, and
still continue, truly interesting; the rights of man are placed in a
conspicuous view; many glorious exertions have been made; they are rapidly
posting on to the desired goal: and their King, if he possesses that genius,
that philanthropy, and that patriotic glow, which the sentiments he has
avowed, and many corroborating testimonies incline us to attribute to him,
while his brow is encircled with the brightening gem of real worth, will
doubtless find himself embosomed in that tranquillity which conscious rectitude
creates, and which all the pageantry of false greatness could never have
bestowed. The Gleaner regrets, that the deplorable catastrophe, which, since
the production of the above essay, closed the virtuous life of a Prince,
acknowledged amiable, has furnished so striking a proof of the ferocity of the
present times.
But, passing on, we behold another crowned head, voluntarily, without a single
hint from his subjects, divesting himself of every vestige of despotism,
augustly making the good of his people the prime movement of his actions, and
with an ardent and a generous enthusiasm, which will transmit his name with
eternal honor to the latest posterity, hailing upon equal ground his
fellow-men; restoring to the body of the people their privileges and
immunities, and once more investing them with their native and inherent rights.
If we turn our eyes toward our own country, we shall acknowledge that a few
years have produced the most astonishing effects: Unnatural and inadmissible
claims have been made; they have been investigated; they have been weighed in
the balance, and they have been found wanting. The genius of liberty,
invigorated in this younger world, has arrayed itself for the battle; it has
gone forth; it has originated opposition; its banner have been displayed: it
has enlisted its worthies; the struggle has been arduous, but the event has
crowned us with success; over veteran foes we have been victorious;
independence claps her wings; peace is restored; governments are formed: public
faith established; and we bid fair to become a great and a happy people. Yes,
governments are formed; and what has hitherto been deemed a solecism in
politics, now becomes, to the eye of experience, a palpable reality. We are
free, sovereign, and independent States, and yet we are amenable to the Federal
Head. Governments within governments exist; their component parts are adequate
to the purposes of jurisdiction; they are members of the national government;
they are united, ^s it were, by a sympathetic thread, symmetry, and its
concomitant harmony, presides, and federalism is the talisman of their
importance. Perhaps the principles of concentration are not susceptible of
close investigation like the immortal spark by which we are animated, it takes
the alarm, and flies off, when we would apply to its vital parts the instrument
of dissection. Yet to the captious reasoner, the answer is as ready, as to the
sophist, who asserted the nonexistence of motion, merely because he could not
move in the place where he was, and it was impossible he could move where he
was not; but we cannot admit his ergo, for experience proclaims that we
absolutely do move, and it is a fact, that these governments, simple and
complex, have, in reality, an energetic and respectable being. Thus, in this
instance, we have refined upon the plans of our ancestors, and we are happily
reaping the genial fruits of a wife and well concerted system. Our admirable
Constitution unites the advantages which are attributed to a monarchical
government, to an oligarchy, and a democracy; since sufficient power is lodged
in the hands of the Chief Magistrate, to benefit the people; since an order of
nobility is instituted, an order, to which all our worthies may pretend -- the
order of Virtue -- which, in truth, is alone ennobling; and since the career
being open to all, we may with democratical equality pursue the splendid prize.

It is with glad complacency we mark the honors which encircle the head of our
immortal Chief; we congratulate our countrymen, that they have, to the utmost
of their power, with becoming unanimity agreed to reward his patriotic worth;
that, investing him with due authority, they have reposed in his revered bosom
the highest confidence; that, superior to the narrow politics of the Athenians
(the splendor of his character notwithstanding) they prepare no ostracism for
his virtues; but that, on the contrary, with a glow of superior pleasure, they
listen while the tongue of sapient age expatiates upon his justice, his
disinterestedness, and his paternal attachment to his country; that they
delight to hear the voice of lisping innocence pronounce his venerable name;
that they rejoice in his echoing fame; and that his praises vibrate sweetly
upon their finest and most rational feelings.

Nor, though that fell despoiler, slander, has dared to infix its envenomed
tooth in the fair and consistent character of our illustrious Vice President,
will the public mind submit to the deception which audacious accusation would
presume to fabricate; it will not suffer a man, who would have conferred honor
on any country in which he had happened to be born; who adorns every department
which he is called to fill, from the tender domestic scene, to the highest
offices of state, with elegance and propriety, with the most undeviating
firmness, and unblemished integrity; whose interesting and highly finished
literary productions will transmit his name to ages yet unborn; when the
invidious caviller, and the writer of this essay, will, it is probable, be
whelmed in the gulf of oblivion; -- the public mind, I say, will not suffer
such a man to sink; they will not suffer the opaque cloud, which for a moment
may have shaded the disk of so bright a luminary, long to intercept its
radiance; no, it will judiciously decide, and rising superior to prejudice, it
will still confer on him its unsuspecting confidence.

Mentioning the Vice President, I am reminded of a tour I lately made through a
neighboring State, when falling into company with a leading man in the
government, he expressed himself with a considerable degree of acrimony of that
gentleman; and upon my gravely demanding in what he was culpable, the
disaffected person, in so many words, replied, that he did not like him; that
he believed him to be haughty and unyielding; that in his progress through that
State, he, the objector, had been one of a number who had been solicitous to do
him all the honor in their power: that they assembled in large companies,
collected the militia, rung the bells, etc. etc. but that Mr. Adams contrived,
by some means or other, to elude their wishes, for he had absolutely, in
defiance of all this homage which was prepared for him, passed unmindful on,
incog. as it were, refusing in fact every acknowledgment of their allegiance.
Such, and so enormous, are the pretended misdemeanors of the Vice President;
yet, nevertheless, I persuade myself that the assemblage of virtues which
brighten his character, will at length flash conviction upon every eye, and
that the many will know to distinguish, and to value that noble independence of
spirit, that inborn worth, and intrinsic greatness, which, avoiding an
ostentatious display of grandeur, contents itself with innate consciousness of
real elevation.

But, to the most interesting and important particular, in which the present
times may justly boast their superiority over former ages, we have yet to
attend. Religion looks abroad with all her native honors thick about her; the
days of massacre; the bloody, the execrable administration of a Mary; the
affrighted hours which witnessed the horrid transaction upon the eve of St.
Bartholomew; the Irish persecutions, and succeeding murders; the government, or
rather mortal tyranny of James, with the more recent, though not less fatal
American bigotry; all those days are now gone past, and I supplicate the
Savior of (...) that they may no more return: Religion, as I said, now
descends among us, and she is clothed in all her native loveliness. On her
head she wears a wreath, entwined by the fingers of clemency; virtuous
indulgence is expressed in every feature of her face; her eye beams tenderness,
and her bosom is the seat of compassion: the unsullied whiteness of her flowing
garments denotes the purity and uprightness of her laws; beauteous and
prepossessing is her countenance; benign is her sway; reason and humanity are
her daughters; and while rectitude is the moral of her life, she throws over
her faulty children the mantle of forbearance. Under her correcting auspices,
what wonders are at this present exhibiting in the earth! her well aimed shafts
have pierced the very vitals of bigotry, liberality of sentiment is
established, a Calvinistical church is permitted almost in the heart of the
Papal dominions, it is consecrated with much solemnity; magistrates of all
descriptions, with the clergy of the Roman Lutheran, and Calvinistical
persuasion, join in the te deum, and, the most God honoring effects are
produced. But it is not at Stratsburg alone that the triumphs of true religion
are manifested; her divine and elucidating powers seem penetrating into every
corner of the globe, while in our own country, her progress is remarkably and
gloriously rapid. The thackles of superstition are thrown off, ignorance and
bigotry give way; the benign agency of toleration is established, and a spirit
of equality, and of free inquiry, is abroad. Parents, enlightened parents, at
this day are not solicitous to implant in the tender minds of their offspring
the seeds of prejudice, or enthusiastic zeal; they judge it sufficient if they
can instruct their children in the nature of their moral duties, what they owe
to society, and to themselves; if they can give them an early and deep
impression of their dependence on, and their obligations to, a creating and a
paternal God; if they can sketch for them the outlines of the fall, and the
restoration, pointing to Jesus as the Redeemer of men; if they can teach them
to view their fellow mortals as descending from the same original; if they can,
by degrees, accustom them to regard this world as the path through which they
are to shape their course to their native skies; these leading points, if they
can accomplish, they are therewith content, wisely leaving the election of a
particular sect of Christians, with which to coalesce their sentiments, with
all the thorny road of disputation, to the matured growth of fully informed
reason.

Glorious, happy, and august period! The Gleaner is grateful to the Power which
has given him his existence in so favorable an epoch; he gladly renders to
the present times their due; he feels therein the utmost complacency, and the
tranquillity which this speculation diffuseth through every faculty of his
soul, he is ardently solicitous to communicate to his reader.

No. V.
The virtue, Fortitude, to mould the mind,
Bends smiling forward, on herself reclined;
To meet the ills of life the soul she forms,
Accommodation in her cause she arms;
While fashioned thus, we mark the various scene,
And firmly stand amid the storm serene.

"GOD tempers the wind to the shorn lamb." -- Stern certainly possessed the
happy art of clothing his ideas in figures which pointed them to the heart of
his reader. Not seldom does the humid eye of sensibility confess that the
writings of that exquisite sentimentalist abound with flowers of the fairest
growth, and though the delicate mind is too often lacerated by the thorns,
which in some instances deform his high-wrought scenes, yet so sweet is the
fragrance of the rose, that the softest hand is reached forth to pluck it --
yea, even at the risk of being deeply pierced by the formidable points which
surround it. But, however rich his eccentric pages may be, (and I have not the
smallest objection to allowing them their full value) they produce not, I take
upon me to pronounce, a more strikingly comprehensive passage, than that which
I have selected above -- "But, God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb." -- It
is, methinks, a sentence containing a system in itself; and it is replete with
the quintessence of morality, religion and divinity -- It is replete with
morality, for example is (...) all hands allowed to be more influential than
precept; and it exhibits a view of the Lord of Universal Nature, bestowing such
minute regards, upon the feelings of the family which his omnific word had
commanded into being, as to be attentive even to the ^^^nts of the bleating
innocent, who, shorn of its (...) covering, stands in need of the vernal zephyr
which is then commissioned to move gently over the warm surface of his disrobed
body. -- Here, I say, is a rich lesson of morality; for if God thus tempers the
wind to the shorn lamb, are we not hence taught to respect much more the
feelings of our fellow men -- to regard as sacred the relative duties of life,
and to become reverentially observant of those calls which, upon the utmost
efforts of humanity, a social intercourse with mankind is so frequently making.
It is, in an especial manner, replete with religion; for an assurance that God
tempereth the wind to the shorn lamb, naturally originates in the bosom the
most unwavering faith; we cannot but confide in the Sovereign Power which is
thus benignly exercised: our hearts become the seat of acquiescent
tranquillity; the altars of unwavering affiance are erected there, cheerfully
we sacrifice thereon; before the surrounding Deity we devoutly prostrate,
worshipping with all adoration the Father of eternity, the God of the spirits
of all flesh. -- It is replete with divinity; for its excellence can hardly be
surpassed; it whispereth to the care-worn mind the genial voice of consolation;
it comfort, it erecteth the superstructure of its peace upon the only solid
and rational foundation; upon a reliance on the paternal goodness of the Sire
of angels and of men, and thus pointing directly to heaven; thus by its
animating powers soothing the (...), it is undoubtedly the language of the
Spirit of truth; it indisputably partaketh of the divine nature. "But, God
tempereth the wind to the shorn lamb." -- Poor Maria, no wonder that thy
desolated bosom disdained every mitigating consideration, not immediately
derived from that omnipotent Being, who, having "twice bruised thee," could
alone assuage thy lacerating sorrows. Doubtless it was the angel of compassion,
who, breathing over the chaos of thy deranged ideas, illumined them by that
irradiating light, which shall one day make glad the whole creation of God. But
not to Maria only, is the all healing hand of divine benignity even now
extended. To the sons and daughters of humanity, the winds of heaven are still
attempered, and the Source of all intelligence regards with an equal eye the
creatures whom he has made: The destitute orphan, who trembles on the
threshold of an arraigning, a censuring, and an unpitying world; the childless
parent, who once beheld a lovely group of sons and daughters; the widowed fair
one, whose blasted hopes, and whose short withering joys seem to condemn her to
unceasing tears; the once happy husband, bending over the untimely grave of a
beloved wife; the brother, the sister, the friend, torn from the embraces of
the object whom they h^ld most dear; these have all been enabled experimentally
to say, "But, God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb." The angel, Fortitude,
armed with unyielding firmness, issues from the right hand of the Most High; to
this lower world she shapeth her course; in the garments of inflexibility she
is clothed, and always true of her path, while she wears upon her brow the
wreath of rectitude, she turns neither to the right nor to the left;
perseveringly she passes on; she takes possession of the mind, and she
fashioneth it to her purpose; with the genuine spirit of heroism she endoweth
it, and pointing it to an elysium of future bliss, she investeth it with
superiority over the ills of time: Resignation and acquiescence are in her
train; for, fixing her eye upon one grand object, she bends accommodating, and
with becoming reverence to the will of Him from whom originates every good.
Thus, in sickness and in death, she fortifies, supports, and strengthens the
mind, enabling the man piously to exclaim, "But, God tempers the wind to the
shorn lamb." I said, in sickness; and a reflection upon this particular
calamity, bringing me back from my present ramble, suggests to the Gleaner a
question -- Whether it may not be well to account for his being induced thus to
wander, in a field where, the soil having been so often trod, he could expect
to glean so little? And with the association of ideas perhaps every observer,
though not absolutely a Lock, is more or less acquainted.

Patrolling one superbly mild evening, in the course of the last visibility of
the moon, the streets of the metropolis of the State of Massachusetts, I felt a
very strong inclination to step for a little space into the coffee-house;
yielding to the impulse of the moment, I entered with as little observation as
possible, and, seating myself in one of the open apartments, I listened to a
very warm dispute which was carried on by a trio, consisting of a merchant of
great note, a military officer of some eminence, and a sea commander. The skill
and abilities of the Boston physicians was their subject, and they seemed to
discuss and compare their several qualifications with much vehemence. Lloyd.
Danforth, Warren, etc. etc. all passed in review before them. People in general
are as much attached to the Esculapius of their choice, as to the religion of
their election; and our combatants showed themselves in earnest by disputing
every inch of ground, yielding no point, and mingling at length in their
retorts and rejoinders no small proportion of acrimony. It is true, that upon
the merits of the gentlemen in question, they might be inadequate to decide;
but they proved themselves, however, capable of arguing, and they seemed in no
sort conscious of insufficiency. After summing up the evidences which had been
produced upon the tapis, the merchant gravely and peremptorily insisted that
the balance was entirely in favor of Lloyd; the military gentleman swore, and
he confirmed his award by many oaths, that Danforth ought to be created
general^^^^ of the college of physicians; while the sea captain, who appeared
to be a mild man, closed the debate by protesting, that he had boarded them all
three, without being all to obtain a market for any part of that cargo of
complaints, with which his shattered bark had been so long laden. The subject
thus continuing a moot point, I was disposing myself to retire, when the sea
captain, putting himself in the attitude of a narrator, again arrested my
attention. "You know, gentlemen," said the (...) Neptune, that I am moored,
when at home, in a harbor considerably distant from this town; and I declare
to you, upon the honor of a sailor, that we have now laid up in our port, a
little snug honest fellow, who makes the prettiest way imaginable; and who, if
he continued to carry sail upon the ocean on which he has embarked, with as
much undaunted boldness, and to steer as safely as he has hitherto done, will
stand as fair a chance to enter the desired haven, and to hoist his flag upon
the highest eminence of fame, as the most skilful navigator of them all; and
that he i^ acquainted with every rope in the ship, I will, if you please,
produce a reckoning, that shall fully evidence. The captain proceeded; but not
being sufficiently versed in his vocabulary, to produce his account verbatim, I
shall take leave to render his deposition in my own manner. It seems, in a
small village in the neighborhood of the residence of the captain, a poor man
has lately been called to pass through all the stages immediately preceding
death, of what is termed a regular decline, or consumption; he was not more
than twenty-seven years of age, when he was seized with the pain in the side,
the breast, hectic sever, suppuration of the lungs, cough, purulent
expectoration, etc. etc. all which train of dreadful symptoms, in their gradual
and distressing order, successively took place. At length the hour of his
dissolution was supposed at hand; his father was no more; and he was the son of
a widowed mother. Repeatedly the matron, not possessing strength of mind enough
to witness the dying agonies of him, on whom she had placed her maternal hopes,
had quitted his apartment, yielding him to the care of those who were engaged
to perform for him the last offices. But while there is life, a latent hope
will play about the heart: The villagers insisted that the captain's little
snug honest fellow should be called in. The young doctor, who has hardly
completed his twenty-third year, approached; he examined, and he drew his
conclusions; one only experiment remained, it was painfully hazardous, and its
effects extremely precarious; but cert^^^ and speedy death was the only
alternative. In the breast of the young man, though having been repeatedly
captured in the course of the late war, suffering much in guard-ships and
prisons -- though having been so often afflicted by the infirmities of a
debilitated constitution -- he had deeply tasted of the bitter cup of calamity;
yet in his breast a love of existence still predominated, and when he consented
to an operation, which it is conceived has been seldom performed in our
country, and was certainly a novel event in the village of B --, he was
believed to be the drowning man grasping at a straw. The patient, however,
witnessed, unappalled, the dreadful preparations. The bedstead was planked, the
mattress was nailed thereto, and he, with his face covered, was placed thereon.
In the country, upon any extraordinary occasion, the whole village seem^ but
one family; no wonder then, that at such a period the apartment of the
emaciated sick man was much thronged; a number stood over him; if he struggled,
they were to confine him, and their hands were lifted up for that purpose; for
a moment he threw the handkerchief from his face -- he beheld the formidable
apparatus -- the surrounding visages, which resembled his, who drew Priam's
curtains at the dead of night, and would have told him half his Troy was burnt
-- he breathed short; he gasped -- stop, Sir -- one sigh -- it is over -- I am
myself again -- and you may proceed. The muscles between the fourth and fifth
ribs, an inch nearer to the center of the breast, then the back bone, were cut
through; the pleura was pierced; and, to enlarge the aperture into the cavity
of the breast, the proper instruments were introduced; two fingers of the
operator were then insinuated, and, passing through the wound, were pressed on
the external surface of the diseased lobe, when instantly the seat of the
vomica, was by its tremulation discovered; it was at this period, that some
person, to whom years had given an advantage over our physician, vehemently
exclaimed, Doctor, we beg that you would proceed no farther! Is it not a wonder
that terror at the sound of this imprudent interposition, cut not the slender
thread of the patient's life? The operator, however, made sure of success,
warmly replied, "By heaven, I will not now be stopped;" when, penetrating the
investing membrane of the right lobe, into the abscess, and dilating it three
quarters of an inch, its contents, blood and purulent matter, to the quantity
of a pint, were immediately discharged; the consequences of this operation have
been most happy, the patient, from not being able to repose for a single moment
upon either side, now stretches himself at his ease, and slumbers sweetly upon
his bed; his cough, night sweats, sore mouth, and swelled feet are no more;
from extreme debility, he is sufficiently strong to walk abroad, and he eats,
drinks, and digests, perfectly well. What a transition! -- he is regarded as
one raised from the dead; while every person admires the cool, courageous, and
determined resolution, with which he submitted to so fearful an experiment. He
is of the lowest grade of industrious poor; the powers of his mind were never
remarkable; his life had contained no striking exertions; he had seemed only in
the common way to yield to the necessity which his misfortunes had created --
had any one, in the morning of his existence, officiously presented him a
picture of the ills which he was to endure, doubtless he would have started
with horror from the view. Is it not surprising that he did not thus argue: My
physician is a young man; older practitioners have never once suggested so
hazardous an expedient; it is an unheard of operation; shall I yield this
emaciated body to an enterprizing genius, who possibly is only seeking his own
emolument in the experiment which he is solicitous to make? To the reflections
of imbecility, I say, such arguments might naturally have presented themselves;
but the mind of this poor, emaciated, illiterate sufferer, was intuitively, it
should seem, endowed with fortitude; suddenly he is converted into a
philosopher; he reasons justly, and with sedate composure he meets his fate.
What shall we say? we can only repeat, that, in deed and in truth, "God tempers
the wind to the shorn lamb."

The Gleaner comments no further; but, retiring, he gives place to a timid
suggestor, who has chosen to bring forward a proposal, through the medium of
this publication.

To the GLEANER.
State of Massachusetts, June 1st, 1792. SIR,
NOT possessing merit sufficient to claim, in my own character, even the
smallest niche, in that very useful and respectable repository in which you, by
repeatedly appearing, have, I presume, obtained a considerable interest, I take
leave, through your means, to introduce to the gentlemen Editors, a proposal,
which, if they think proper to lay before the public, may possibly be attended
with the most agreeable consequences. The idea, which to embody and effectuate,
I would not only relinquish whole years of my existence, but I would absolutely
be contented to live and die in obscurity, originated in an hour, which having
appropriated to some choice spirits, I passed convivially over a bottle; we
were not, however, bacchanalians, and our wine but served to meliorate and give
an edge to our reflections.

Our subjects were multifarious, and with the utmost freedom we arraigned,
tried, and condemned. Among other matters of speculation which we had taken it
upon us liberally to analyze and critically to scan, the cause of the little
encouragement which is generally throughout the world, and especially in our
own country, given to genius, we carefully endeavored to investigate; but for
this absurdity, it was in vain that we assayed rationally to account; and we
were reduced to the necessity of lamenting a fact, the sources of which, our
utmost researches could not penetrate. The disappointments of a Butler, the
melancholy fate of an Otway, with a long train of et-ceteras, we could not
review, without pathetically deploring; and so far were we from conceiving that
the taste of the present times was in any degree refined, that one of our party
gave it as his decided opinion, that if Pope, Addison and Swift flourished in
America, their merit would be almost entirely disregarded, and that there would
scarce be found a single wight, who would acknowledge their superior claims.
From regretting, we naturally proceeded to devising the ways and means, and our
pericraniums were fruitful in expedients to remedy an evil which we regarded as
a real blot upon the rising fame of this new world. After many pro's and con's,
it was unanimously agreed among us, (and I do assure you there was in our junto
many respectable persons) that it would be a most happy arrangement, if the
constitution of the United States of America would admit an additional article,
providing for the establishment of real genius, whether it be found in the male
or female world. It is not seldom the case, that, to answer the pressing wants
of life, the efforts of the mind are so wholly engrossed, that the operations
of genius are suspended, if not wholly blasted, and the door to intellectual
fame is thus of necessity barred. Against this inconvenience, in its utmost
latitude, our plan went to the providing. Congress should appoint persons, duly
qualified to examine every literary pretender, and by this means, while the
road would be open to all, only real worth would receive the palm. To obviate
the necessity of every pecuniary attention, out of the Treasury of the United
States, pensions, competent to the decencies of life, according to the wants
and degrees of merit which the candidates possessed, should be decreed, and
regularly paid; and to preclude every reasonable objection, the sinecure should
be continued (except in cases of natural and absolute decay) no longer than
while the beneficed remained, to the utmost of his or her power, in the full
exercise of those talents which procured from the liberality of government so
honorary a distinction.

If this scheme, or rudiments of a scheme, might serve as a hint, to be wrought
into form by the legislators of the Union, the probability is, that the Muse,
in such regulations of State, would not be called to mourn the chilling blasts
of penury; the genial current of the soul would no longer be frozen; the
fostering ray of prosperity, would lend to the real gem its beautifying
splendor; upon the desert air the flower would not then waste its sweetness,
but borne on the wing of the more propitious zephyr, taste would acknowledge,
and fame disseminate its fragrance: " Knowledge would un^old her ample page,"
and the child of nature would wake to ecstacy the living lyre -- the village
Hampdens, with dauntless spirits, would arise, and a mute inglorious Milton
would no more be found.

Not well versed in the history of mankind, I am ignorant if any plan similar
to the one proposed, has ever yet, by any government, been adopted; but I
think its utility can hardly be deemed problematical, and if the sons of
genius, in this Columbian world, were th^^ secured from the fear of want, the
goal of eminence being thrown open before them, to the highest grades of
excellence they might aspire, and the probability is, that, commencing with
youthful ardour the great career, they would, in their various pursuits, rival
the brightest names.

Once more, good Mr. Gleaner, I request you to usher these hints to the public
eye; and you will, in so doing, much oblige your very humble servant,

MODESTUS MILDMAY


No. VI.
Their (...) censures now they forward bring,
And urge by various words the self same thing.

BEING necessitated, in the course of my business, to make frequent visits to
our metropolis; and bearing about me, neither in my person, or habiliments, any
distinguishing mark, I have the advantage of mixing unnoticed, in places of
general resort, with people of various descriptions, and not seldom of
important characters. It was in one of my late excursions, that I found myself
at a table where the guests took their seats with that freedom which is so
eligible, and which is always tolerated in a public house. After playing their
parts, like men who perfectly well understood themselves, swallowing a
sufficient quantity of ham and chicken, and liberally moistening the clay with
the juice of the apple, they imagined themselves duly qualified to sit as
judges of literary merit; for my own part, I am obliged to confess, that in
regard to the gifts requisite in conversation, nature has been unto me a
perfect niggard, and that (...) possess not, in orally delivering my ideas, the
smallest degree of facility. Intrenching myself, therefore, in my natural
taciturnity, as I had never before had the honor of meeting an individual of
whom our party consisted; with the utmost sang (...) I wrapped myself about,
determining to indulge myself, by following the prevalent bent of my
disposition, which is invariably assigning me the part of a hearer.

I was amazed to find with how little accuracy, and with what arrogant freedom,
their dogmatizing decisions were, for the most part, made; and I felt a kind of
horror at the mangling of names, which I had accustomed myself to consider in
the most respectable point of view. From questioning the correctness and the
delicacy of Addison, the wit of Swift, and the poetical merit of Pope, they
summoned before their imperious tribunal, the candidates for fame, which, in
this younger world, distinguish the present day: Trumbull, Barlow, Humphreys,
Warren, Morton, Belknap, etc. etc. -- these all passed in review before them;
and as they seemed determined to set no bounds to their invidious censures,
their observations were of course equally destitute of justice and of candor.
From these luminous bodies in the hemisphere of literature, descending in their
career, they fell pell-mell upon the poor Gleaner. He was regarded as free
plunder, serving as a mark at which to point their keenest shafts of satire; he
was any body, every body, or nobody. One while he was certainly a Parson, for,
in his last number, throwing off the mask, he had positively sermonized
throughout; it was true he had taken his text from a brother chip; but what of
that? his speech betrayed him. A second gravely declared, that he was credibly
informed, the Gleaner was, at this present, a student in Harvard College; and
indeed, (he added) it is evident, that he needs instruction. Here a loud laugh
interrupted, for a moment, the progress of their critical and judicious
remarks; when a young barrister, taking up the matter, for the sake of the
argument, just to exercise his talents, professionally pronounced, that most
assuredly the gentleman who spoke last had been grossly imposed upon, in the
plea of vesting the property under consideration; for that the Gleaner
certainly bore strong marks of genius* that, to his knowledge, it was the
production of a Connecticut p^n, and it was well known that Connecticut was the
land of essayists. A magisterial voice now interfered -- Pshaw, pshaw, brother
litigant, I say you are wrong, absolutely wrong; for if we except the first
number of the Gleaner, there is not to be found, in that writer, a single
sentence of sheer wit. From the first number, indeed, I encouraged a hope of
originality, of a species of entertainment, not every day to be met with; but
that, it should seem, was a forced matter, a mere hot-bed production, a spark
struck from a flint, rather than the offspring of that pure, celestial and
immortal fire, which, like its ethereal source, can never be extinguished, and
which, ever genuine, glowing, and animated, is with propriety hailed by that
dignifying appellation -- true genius. But the Gleaner, O shocking! in his
Margaretta, indeed, I took an interest, but he just p^pt her upon us, and very
soon running himself out there, whip, in a moment, she was gone. Take my word
for it, Gentlem^n, (and he shook his head with great sagacity) the Gleaner is
not worth our attention; he is poor, despicably poor -- low, pitifully low; and
I hesitate not to pronounce him a mere trite, commonplace observer. A
middle-aged gentleman, who sat at the bottom of the table, and who had been,
till then, silent, actuated, as I conceive, by a kind of sympathy, being
himself probably a supplicant at the shrine of fame, now joined in the
conversation, by heartily suggesting, that it did not appear the Gleaner had
laid any claim to extraordinary talents; that he had very early renounced the
vain hopes by which he had been inflated; that if every writer could not reach
the eminence of a Boil, a Lock, or a Newton, yet those who were contented
with the subordination of their several departments, were entitled to their
quota of praise; that if the observations of the Gleaner were trite, he was but
a Gleaner, and the modesty of his pretensions entitled him to the full exercise
of candor. But your Honor, (continued the good-natured gentleman) was
interested in his Margaretta; now I think it very possible that Miss Melworth
may again make her appearance, and it is my opinion, that the Gleaner withholds
her now, not altogether from poverty of genius, but from the fear of giving to
his productions the air of a novel -- (I could hardly forbear taking my
advocate in my arms) -- and you know, Gentlemen, in what a frivolous point of
view, the novelist, at this present, stands. It is painful to sink, and who
would wish to debase the essayest (for so it would be esteemed) into a mere
annalist of brilliant fictions; yet, for my own part, I am free to own, that I
class this species of writing in the very highest grade of excellence; ^t is
true that the best things may be made subservient to the worst of purposes, and
the pen, seized by the singers of imagination, has not seldom proved
licentiously luxurious. Thus, even a Richardson, though his writings abound
with the purest morals, and though his Clarissa, with a single exception, may
be regarded as a model, cannot, perhaps, be considered as altogether faultless;
yet I have thought, that under proper regulations, the province assigned to the
novel writer, might be productive of the highest utility; love, I would not
hail as almighty; I would not create a despot, before whose throne every other
consideration must, of necessity, prostrate; I would not represent him as
reducing to vassalage every faculty of the soul, and riding victorious over
decency, propriety, and every other virtue; but I would describe him as a
benign monarch, to whom reason should administer; his powers should be limited,
and chastized by prudence; and, by a series of interesting, circumstantial and
well digested narrations, I would produce events deeply marked, and strikingly
natural, which should indisputably evince the triumphs of discretion over the
impassioned dictates of the perturbed spirit; volumes, wrote upon such a plan,
would, I venture to assert, be more serviceable to the interests of virtue than
even the ethic page; for, however plausibly we may harangue, the voice of the
narrator will still be heard, when, perhaps, the most elaborate essays, not
thus embellished, which ever issued from the closet of the studious, will pass
the torpid ^ar without leaving the slightest impression. Indeed, I think the
glorious. Author and Pattern of the Christian faith, seems, in the whole course
of his teaching, to put this matter beyond a doubt: One specimen readily
presents -- when the Savior undertakes to cultivate the interests of
benevolence, when he would disseminate the seeds of that universal benignity,
or brotherhood, which, springing up, shall one day produce a rich harvest of
immortal amity, he personifies his wishes, and says, "A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho," etc. etc. Thus I conceive, that the well-concerted
relation, designed to promote morality, or a rectitude of thinking and acting,
is authorized and sanctioned, even by a divine example.

Before such a pleader, thus powerfully provided, even Doctor Subpoena was
silent, and the company soon after separating, I returned to my lodgings,
felicitating myself on the possession of that command of countenance, which had
so regulated every feature, as to render it impossible that my secret should be
even surmised; and my business in the capital being accomplished, I jogged
onward to my native village, pondering all these things in my mind, and almost
coming to a determination to furnish some sketches from my domestic
arrangements, when the following letters, which awaited my return, and which I
render verbatim, helped to confirm my wavering resolution.

To the GLEANER.
State of Massachusetts, County of Hampshire. August 13th, 1792 GOOD MAN
GLEANER.
I AM, do you see, an old sea commander, and many a tough bout have I had on it
in my day; with the wind in my teeth, I have been blown hither and thither,
coast wise, and every wise; but what of that? with a pretty breeze, mayhap, I
can carry as much sail, and steer as strait forward as another man. Now I have
been plaguily puzzled to know at what you were driving: I never, in the whole
course of my life, was fond of an uncertain navigation, because, do you see,
there is no knowing what rocks and quicksands may take one up. For my part, I
never wasted many glasses in poring over your books, and your histories, and
all that -- not I -- it was my business to mind how the ship worked, to see if
she made good way, and failed as many knots in an hour as the charming Sall, or
Bet. When I was a lad, my father sent me to school, and would have made a
parson of me; but it would not do -- the wind pointed another way, and so I up
jib, and bore away, making all the sail I could to more convenient moorings:
Howsomever, I learned enough of the art to enable me to make an observation, by
the help of which I can carry my ship round the globe, passing with safety
through the narrowest straits, always keeping her clear of a lee shore, and
never running foul of any rock or shoal, though I have made ever so many
voyages; but I always kept a good look out, was careful to heave the log,
attending, with my own eyes, to the veerings, and my reckonings were as sure
and as certain as the rock of Gibraltar. But what is all this to the purpose?
avast a moment, and you shall hear. Being pretty much weather beaten, I thought
best, sometime since, to make the safe and convenient harbor of matrimony, and
my daughter Molly, for that was the sober name we gave her at the fount,
though, by the bye, my wife very soon tacking about, chose to call her Maria,
till returning from a trip she has made to a neighboring town, the wind again
shifting, there is nothing so proper, so sedate, and which, she says, squares
so well with her ideas, as Mary; thus reducing us to the necessity of beginning
our traverse anew; well, but my said daughter Molly, Maria, or Mary, being born
just a year after our marriage, and very soon becoming a fine rosy cheeked
girl, I have ever since been examining every point of direction, so belaying
the lifts and the braces, the clewlines and the buntlines, that she may be as
good a sail, make as good way, and procure as good a birth, as any little tight
sea boat of them all. Her mother was for putting her adrift at a boarding
school, but by virtue of my authority, I have hitherto kept her in her old
moorings, being hugely afraid of the breakers, which she may encounter upon the
ocean of inexperience; but my education being such as I have said, I am
something suspicious that I may not perfectly understand every point of the
compass; and being embarked in so difficult a navigation, I am, for the first
time since I undertook the command of a ship, rather doubtful of my course. Now
you must know, that though I am no reader, I have, in order to find out by the
entries and clearances, which way the wind sets with my old comrades, made it
my practice to take on board the newspapers; that since my matrimonial
adventure, I have also shipped their first cousins, the magazines, and that one
cold evening, upon the first of April last, my wife and I being safely hauled
up along side of a good fire, were mightily taken with your Margaretta, and
that immediately striking our colors, we lovingly agreed to dispose of our
Molly, precisely as you should inform us you had done of the little yawl
belayed along side your anchorage by dame Arbuthnot; but now, Mr. Gleaner, I am
coming to the point; though we have ever since kept watch and watch, placing
upon the mast-head of scrutiny the careful eye of intelligence, yet we cannot
espy the smallest appearance of the little skiff for which we are looking out;
on the contrary, you seem to have hoisted every sail, bearing directly from the
port to which we supposed you were bound! And pray now what have you got by all
this? I doubt your voyage will prove rather unprofitable; for, say what you
will, people will turn in when they please, and though your mornings should
break ten times handsomer, they will not quit their cabins a single glass the
sooner. It is true, you have taken us a round about course to Athens, and the
Lord knows where, paraphrasing upon the times, and the times, though you do not
make them a rope's end the better: and I know, in the very teeth of all you
say, that I never had more taxes, or more duties to pay, since I first stepped
on board a ship; and now, you have come out full freighted with a long sermon,
though I could as well find out longitude, as tell from what quarter of the
Bible you have taken your text; and even our parson, who I have consulted, and
who is as good a man as ever took the command of a church, and who declares,
that he thinks you mean very well; yet he, I say, knows no such passage, unless
indeed you may have mistaken a sparrow for a lamb, and suppose that he who made
him, will order him a fair wind. And what is all this rigmaroll business about?
why, forsooth, to introduce a story of a cock and a bull -- of a man cured of a
consumption at the village of B --. The village of B --! split my topsails --
why, it may be bear's head, or bull's foot, for aught we know. This is not well
worked, Mr. Gleaner; if you had meant us fair, you would have so pointed our
compass, that we might have made sail directly for the harbor of the wonderful
physician, which your chart delineates as affording such safe and commodious
landing; but you have so contrived matters, as to run every invalid of us fast
aground upon the lee shore of conjecture, and I now declare to you, Sir, that
if you do not resume your plain sailing, you shall no more be read by

GEORGE and DEBORAH SEAFORT.


To the GLEANER.
DEAR GOOD MR. GLEANER,
YOU can have no notion how vastly we are all disappointed; I does not date my
letter, because, as how, I would not for the whole world that you should find
me out: but I am one of a great many ladies, which is absolutely dying to see
something more about Margaretta. My papa has given his ^^^itation against my
reading your novels, and your theatricks, and all that; but he is a subscriber
to the magazines, and says how I may read in them from morning till night; and
we are all mightily delighted when we find such pretty historiettes as we
sometimes does; but we would not give a fig for any thing else, and indeed we
could not get through your two last Gleaners, though we read alteratively, as
the folks say, that is, first Miss Primrose, and then I, till we went down two
columns, on purpose to see if we could find as much as the name of dear
Margaretta. Do pray, Sir, oblige us, and let us know something of her dress,
and if she wears a head as high as Miss Sycamore, which my papa says is quite
metreposterous; I don't know if I spells these ere hard words right, for my
brother Valentine has stole my dictionary; but I assure you, Sir, you cannot do
better, for so Miss Sabina says. I sometimes visits Miss Sabina with my papa,
for my mamma is dead, and she is a vast cute lady, and she writes poeticks like
any thing, and her mamma says that she writes um very near as glibly and as
handsomely as Madam Philenia. And Miss Sabina says, that supposing Miss
Margaretta is a visual being, and not a real, and a deed^n lady, that you might
make her the vetrick of a serus of epics, and so teach demeanours and
proprieties, and all that, to the varsal world; and so I knows that you will
mind her, for every body says how that Miss Sabina is a very learned lady: and
besides all that, I will love you dearly, and will remain until death, your
ever dutiful -- I must subscribe a fiction name -- and to tell you the truth my
brother Valentine, is not my brother Valentine, that is, Valentine is not my
brother's true and deed^n name; but I am -- that is, if you tell us some more
of Margaretta, your ever loving.

MONIMIA CASTALIO.
P. S. I got my name from a play book, which Miss Primrose lent me. My papa
does not know it; but the Gleaner must not tell secrets.




To the GLEANER.
From the Saloon of Solitude, August 15th, 1792. SIR,
I WAS early left an orphan, and my education was much neglected; but
nevertheless, a variety of concurring circumstances, disposing the heart of a
very worthy gentleman in my favor, I happily became his wife. For a few years,
the history of my life may be regarded as the annals of felicity; but alas! I
have laid my husband in the grave, and the story of my enjoyments is finished;
yet, in a little daughter, I once again revive; my girl still attaches me to
humanity. I am in possession of what I deem a competency; and, being entrusted
by her deceased father with the entire disposal of my child, I would adopt, in
the forming of her mind, that system, which may be the best calculated to make
her good and happy.

Thus circumstanced, I have looked with very much anxiety, into every late
publication, which I have thought calculated for the meridian of my
understanding; and in this pursuit, your lovely orphan very naturally attracted
my attention; if I was amused with an agreeable fiction, I was, nevertheless,
interested and pleased; if the charming stranger was endowed with more than a
fanciful existence, I shed tears of joy that she had found upon this American
shore so able a patron; and I have for many weeks expected from your gentle
Mary, and her beauteous Margaretta, some hint, whereby to shape my future
conduct. I will confess to you, Sir, that reading your numbers under this cloud
of disappointment, I have not so well relished subjects, which, however, for
aught I know, may have been extremely well chosen, and altogether as well
handled. Will you, my dear Sir, indulge a petitioner, while she requests, in
your own way, some documents in the line of education, which may serve as
guides in the arduous undertaking in which she is so deeply engaged, and for
which she is so little qualified? If you will, you may assure yourself of
wishes for your felicity, which shall ever be breathed, warm from the heart of.

REBECCA AIMWELL.


To the GLEANER.
Dissipation Hall, July 18th, 179^. OLD SQUARE TOES,
TO tell you the truth, I think you have conducted your matters devilish oddly,
and the whole town are of my opinion. What, to raise our curiosity, leading us
to expect the history of a fine girl, and then to fob us off with your musty
morals, which are to the full as old as your grandfather Adam -- fore gad it is
not to be borne; but nevertheless, I will play a fair game with you; and I know
you are too conscientious a prig to keep from your ward any thing which will
redound so immensely to her advantage. Know then, that I inherited from my
father a clear estate, the income of which, would have supported me in
tolerable style: but not choosing to encumber myself with business, and living
rather beyond the line, I have got, as the saying is, a little out at the
elbows; however, a few of your acres (and I am confident that you are either a
Connecticut landholder, or a Pennsylvania Quaker) serving as decent patches,
will set all right again; and you may depend upon it, that I will reform, live
within bounds and if I like your girl, make her a very good sort of a husband.
One thing let me tell you, old fellow, she will be the envy of all the ladies
in --, married and single -- dear tender creatures, there is not one of them,
who has not made the kindest advances; but I like to do things out of the
common course; and so, if you will, let me hear from you, and tell me how you
go on; if you will order matters properly; and if your Margaretta answers my
expectations -- why then -- what then -- hang it -- I must come to it at last
-- why then -- offer her my devoirs, and inform her, that she may assure
herself of the hand of the gay, and hitherto inconstant

BELLAMOUR.


To the GLEANER.
From my Estate in the Country, July 21st, 1792. WORTHY SIR,
AS I suppose it will be your care to dispose of Miss Melworth to the best
advantage; as I think that she must now be marriageable, and as I have been for
some time looking out for a wife, I have thought best to address you upon the
subject. Indeed, I should have wrote you before; but expecting, every number,
to hear something further of the girl, I postponed my intention, until by your
long-winded remarks, (you will pardon me, Sir) my patience is quite exhausted.
In truth, as I am turned of fifty, I have no time to spare; and having a
handsome and disencumbered estate, it is fit that I procure lineal descendants,
who, in case of my decease, may become legal possessors. From applying to the
girls of our day, whom I have seen, notwithstanding your opinion of " the
present times," I am deterred by the little chance which a man has of
obtaining a woman possessed of that discretion which is so requisite in a wife;
for, what with morning visits, family and public (...), (...) small strolling,
evening tea parties, midnight (...), and the time which is necessarily devoted
to sleep and dressing, the four and twenty hours are completely filled up! Now,
as I look upon you, Mr. Gleaner, to be a very wise man, I take it, th^^ your
Margaretta must be a girl of a very different sort; and, as I suppose she has
been educated in the country, I take it for certain, that she is a complete
house-wife; that she can superintend a dairy; take care of her children, when
she has any; see that I have my meals in due season; and that my clothes are
brushed and laid in order. Moreover, as from a hint in one of your papers, I
imagine that you have a proper idea of the subordination which is so essential
to the character of a woman: I presume you have not failed to document your
pupil, with sufficient gravity, upon the article of subjection; and, I assure
you, that I shall expect obedience from my wife; that ^he must not only be very
well taught, industrious, and (...) economical, but also extremely docile.
These things premised, if you will introduce me to Miss Melworth, and we should
happen to fancy each other, I will, if you please, order the banns to be
published, and very speedily invest her with all the privileges and immunities
of a wife. I am, worthy Sir, your very humble servant to command,

TIMOTHY PLODDER.


In answer to my several correspondents, I have only to observe, in general,
that their expectations abundantly forerun both my plans and my ability; but
that I may, "in all my best, obey them," I will, from time to time, furnish,
from my private family, such sketches as I shall think proper, reserving to
myself the privilege of discontinuing and resuming them, as shall suit my
convenience. But to my friends Bellamour and Plodder, it is but justice to say,
that four months since, I had the felicity to bestow the hand of Miss Melworth
upon a very worthy man, who, I doubt not, will be fully sensible of the value
of the acquisition which he has made. ^ut by what steps she has obtained the
honorary crown of matronhood, may in future numbers be narrated.

No. VII.
Then smoothly spreads the retrospective scene,
When (...) gigantic errors intervene.

NO, I think not -- relative to Margaretta, we have no capital errors to
deplore; from the hour which consigned to the narrow house the remains of Mrs.
Aburthnot, she has continued to progress in our affections, endearing herself
to us by every act of duty, and having laid her in our bosom, she has become
unto us indeed a daughter. Heaven has denied us children; but we regret not
that circumstance, while this amiable female lives to prop, to soothe, and to
slope our passage through the journey of life. Having packed up her little
movables, the most valuable of which was a miniature of her mother, put into
her hands by her aunt (whose degree of affinity she has since understood) just
before she expired, we quitted the capital of South Carolina. I took a place
for myself in the stage; and Mary, accommodating herself to the movements of
that vehicle, came on with the child. Mary has the peculiar talent of stealing
from the unfortunate their sharpest sorrows; moments of the keenest anguish she
can sometimes beguile; and by her address she has not seldom extracted from
the wounded bosom the lacerating shaft. To soothe and to support the little
Margaretta, who was at first overwhelmed with grief, she bent her utmost
efforts; and as the minds of children, at that early and interesting age, are
commonly very susceptible, and easily impressed, she succeeded wonderfully
well; while the little creature, assured and comforted, before we had reached
the northern extremity of the middle States, with her heart as light as the
gossamer, prattled away most delightfully.

When we returned home, we fitted up a little chamber, of which we constituted
Margaretta the sole proprietor; my wife informing her that she should establish
a post betwixt her apartment and her own, that if they chose, upon any
occasion, to separate, they might with the greater convenience open a
correspondence by letter. The rudiments of Margaretta's education had been
attended to; in her plain work she had made considerable proficiency; she could
read the seventh, tenth, eleventh and twelfth chapters of Nehemiah, without
much difficulty; and when her aunt was taken ill, she was on the point of being
put into joining-hand; but Mary very soon sketched out for our charge rather an
extensive plan of education; and as I was not entirely convinced of the
inutility of her views, the natural indolence of my temper induced me to let
the matter pass, without entering my caveat by way of stopping proceedings; and
indeed, I think the propriety of circumscribing the education of a female,
within such narrow bounds as are frequently assigned, is at least
problematical. A celebrated writer, I really forget who, has penned upon this
subject a number of self-evident truths; and it is an incontrovertible fact,
that to the matron is entrusted not only the care of her daughter, but also the
forming the first and oftentimes the most important movements of that mind,
which is to inform the future man; the early dawnings of reason she is
appointed to watch, and from her are received the most indelible impressions of
his life. Now, was she properly qualified, how enviable and how dignified would
be her employment. The probability is, that the family of children, whom she
directed, supposing them to possess common capacities, being once initiated
into the flowery paths of science, would seldom stop short of the desired goal.
Fine writing, arithmetic, geography, astronomy, music, drawing; an attachment
to all these might be formed in infancy; the first principles of the fine arts
might be so accommodated, as to constitute the pastime of the child; the seeds
of knowledge might be implanted in the tender mind, and even budding there,
before the avocations of the father permitted him to combine his efforts.
Affection for the sweet preceptress, would originate a strong predilection for
instructions, that would with interesting tenderness be given, and that would
be made to assume the face of entertainment, and thus the young proficient
would be, almost imperceptibly, engaged in those walks, in which an
advantageous perseverance might rationally be expected. A mother, who
possesses a competent knowledge of the English and French tongues, and who is
properly assiduous about her children, I conceive, will find it little more
difficult to teach them to lisp in two languages, than in one: and as the
powers of the student advances, certain portions of the day may be regularly
appropriated to the conversing in that language which is not designed for the
common intercourses of life. Letters, in either tongue, to the parent, or
fictitious characters, may be alternately written, and thus an elegant
knowledge of both may be gradually obtained. Learning, certainly, can never
with propriety be esteemed a burden; and when the mind is judiciously
balanced, it renders the possessor not only more valuable, but also more
amiable, and more generally useful. Literary acquisitions cannot, unless the
faculties of the mind are deranged, be lo^t; and while the goods of fortune may
be whelmed beneath the contingencies of revolving time, intellectual property
still remains, and the mental funds can never be exhausted. The accomplished,
the liberally accomplished female, if she is destined to move in the line of
competency, will be regarded as a pleasing and instructive companion; whatever
she does will connect an air of persuasive elevation; wherever she may be
adventitiously called, genuine dignity will be the accompaniment of her steps;
she will always be attended to with pleasure, and she cannot fail of being
distinguished; should she, in her career of life, be arrested by adverse
fortune, many resources of relief, of pleasure, and of emolument, open
themselves before her; and she is not necessarily condemned to laborious
efforts, or to the drudgery of that unremitted sameness, which the rotine of
the needle presents.

But whatever may be the merits of the course which I am thus apparently
advocating, without stopping to examine the other side of the question, I
proceed to say, that the plan of education adopted for Margaretta was, as I
have already hinted, sufficiently extensive, and that Mrs. Vigillius (to
address my good wife, in her dignified character of governante, with all
possible respect) having instructed her pupil in the grand fundamental points
of the philanthropic religion of Jesus, was never easy while any branch of
improvement, which could by the most remote construction be deemed feminine,
remained unessayed; and I must in justice declare, that the consequence, by
producing Margaretta at the age of sixteen, a beautiful and accomplished girl,
more than answered her most sanguine expectations.

Of needle work, in its varieties, my wife pronounced her a perfect mistress;
her knowledge of the English, and French tongues, was fully adequate to her
years, and her manner of reading had, for me, peculiar charms; her hand writing
was neat and easy; she was a good accomptant, a tolerable geographer and
chronologist; she had skimmed the surface of astronomy and natural philosophy;
had made good proficiency in her study of history and the poets; could sketch a
landscape; could furnish, from her own fancy, patterns for the muslins which
she wrought; could bear her part in a minuet and a cotillion, and was allowed
to have an excellent hand upon the piano forte. We once entertained a design of
debarring her the indulgence of novels; but those books, being in the hands of
every one, we conceived the accomplishment of our wishes in this respect,
except we had bred her an absolute recluse, almost impracticable; and Mrs.
Vigillius, therefore, thought it best to permit the use of every decent work,
causing them to be read in her presence, hoping that she might, by her
suggestions and observations, present an antidote to the poison, with which the
pen of the novelist is too often fraught. The study of history was pursued, if
I may so express myself, systematically: To the page of the historian one hour
every day was regularly devoted; a second hour, Mary conversed with her adopted
daughter upon the subject which a uniform course of reading had furnished; and
a third hour Margaretta was directed to employ, in committing to paper such
particular facts, remarks and consequences deduced therefrom, as had, during
the hours appropriated to reading, and conversing, most strikingly impressed
her mind; and by these means the leading features of history were indelibly
imprinted thereon. Mrs. Vigillius also composed little geographical,
historical, and chronological catechisms, or dialogues, the nature of which
will be easily conceived; and she pronounced them of infinite advantage in the
prosecution of her plan; she submitted likewise, at least once every week, to
little voluntary absences, when my boy Plato, being constituted courier betwixt
the apartments of my wife and daughter, an epistolary correspondence was
carried on between them, from which more than one important benefit was
derived; the penmanship of our charge was improved; the beautiful and elegant
art of letter writing was by degrees acquired; and Margaretta was early
accustomed to lay open her heart to her maternal friend.

Persons when holding the pen, generally express themselves more freely than
when engaged in conversation; and if they have a perfect confidence in those
whom they address, the probability is, that, unbosoming themselves, they will
not fail to unveil the inmost recesses of their souls -- thus was Margaretta
properly and happily habituated to disclose, without a blush, each rising
thought to her, on whom the care of preparing her for the great career of life
had devolved.

No, Mr. Pedant, she was not unfitted for her proper sphere; and your stomach,
however critical it may be, never digested finer puddings than those which I,
with an uncommon zest, have partook, as knowing they were the composition of
her fair hand -- yes, in the receipts of cookery she is thoroughly versed; she
is in every respect the complete housewife; and our linen never received so
fine a gloss as when it was ironed and laid in order by Margaretta. Mrs.
Vigillius was early taught the science of economy, and she took care to teach
it to her daughter; and being more especially economical of time, she so
arrangeth matters as never to appear embarrassed, or in a hurry, having always
her hours of leisure, which she appropriates to the contingencies of the day.
It is true, she does not often engage in visits of mere ceremony, seldom making
one of any party, without some view either to her own emolument, or that of
those about her; and with regard to dress, she spends but little time in
assorting an article which is, it must be confessed, too generally a
monopolizer of a blessing, that can hardly be too highly estimated. She does
not think it necessary to have her dishabille for the morning, her
robe-de-chambre for noon, and her full trimed polanee or trollopee, for the
evening. The morning generally, except in cases of any particular emergency,
presents her dressed for the day; and as she is always elegant, of course she
can never be preposterous, extravagant or gaudy. It will be hardly necessary to
add, that Miss Melworth was, and is, her exact copiest; and indeed she is so
warmly attached to my dear Mary, that I verily believe it would have been in
her power to have initiated her into the devious paths of error; and this is
saying a great deal of a mind which possesses such innate goodness, as does
that which inhabits the gentle bosom of my Margaretta. Upon the subject of
dress, I am naturally reminded of the request of my fanciful correspondent
Monimia Castalio, relative to the dress of Margaretta, and particularly the
height of her head; and I am happy that I can gratify Miss Monimia Castalio, by
recollecting a circumstance, which being in point, may serve as a specimen of
the general style of Margaretta's dress. I think she was about fifteen, when
Mrs. Vigillius conforming as much as her ideas of propriety would admit, to the
then fashion of the times, made for her a hat of white satin. I remember there
was a prettily fancied ribbon to it; and it had, I thought, rather a jauntee
appearance. Margaretta put it on, and sallied forth to pay a visit to an
acquaintance, a Miss Preedy; and the next morning, when seated at the breakfast
table, with much hesitation she requested her mamma to purchase for her, as an
additional ornament to her hat, some beautiful feathers, which she said were to
be disposed of at the very next shop. Mrs. Vigillius, with great calmness,
replied, "Yes, my dear, without doubt I can obtain for you the feathers; but I
have for some time been endeavoring to accumulate a sum, which I had intended
to appropriate for the completion of your little library; and a crown laid out
in feathers, will take therefrom at least one handsome and instructive volume;
it is true, I have some money now by me, designed for another use -- Poor Mrs.
Lovemore, over whose misfortunes you have shed so many tears, still swells the
sigh of sorrow -- he, whose presence would turn her little cottage into a
palace, yet remains imprisoned! I have long had it in contemplation to dry the
tear of anguish from the cheek of that solitary mourner; and I have anticipated
the pleasure I should experience while witnessing the mantling joy, and the
dimpling smiles, which would, upon an occasion so happy, pervade the faces of
the little beings who owe to her their existence -- Genius of sensibility! how
extatic would be my emotions, could I be made instrumental in restering to
their embraces the husband and the father! The sum for which Mr. Lovemore is
held in durance, is small, and his misfortunes could not by human prudence be
either foreseen or prevented. From the late expenditures in our family, I have
so far economized, as to have at length made up the requisite sum; and I had
thought to have taken a walk this fine morning, in order to liberate the poor
man -- but you want the feathers, and Lovemore must continue in captivity until
I can lay by another crown."

Never shall I forget the expression, the animated expression, which lighted up
the countenance of Margaretta; tears of mingling pleasure and delicate
apprehension, were upon her cheek; with a kind of duteous eagerness, she seized
the hand of Mary, and in a most graceful manner bowing thereon, with a
tremulous voice she thus questioned -- thus entreated -- "And will the sorrows
of the poor Mrs. Lovemore know an end? O friend, patroness, protectress,
preserver, mother -- what shall I say? -- Already my obligations to you are
infinite -- but tell me, dear lady, will you still add thereto -- shall I
accompany you to the abode of Mrs. Lovemore? I know that you will consent --
let us go this instant -- I will fly for your cloak, and we will not delay a
moment."

It is hardly necessary to add that Margaretta obtained her suit, and I subjoin
a declaration, that these kind of feathers are the most beautiful, and the
highest plumed, of any she has ever yet worn in her hat or cap.

But while we have been assiduously employed in cultivating the mind of
Margaretta, we have been endeavoring to eradicate the seeds of that
overweening self conceit, which, while it would induce an ostentatious
exhibition of those talents natural, or adventitious, which she may possess --
like a rampant weed would impede and overshadow the growth of every virtue.
Against pride and affectation we have been careful to guard her, by constantly
inculcating one grand truth; a truth, to the conviction of which every
ingenuous mind must be ever open. Her person, the symmetry of her features, the
rose and lily of her complexion, the tout ensemble of her exterior, the harmony
of her voice, etc. etc. -- these are the endowments of nature -- while the
artificial accomplishments with which she is invested, resulting wholly from
accident, and being altogether independent of her own arrangements, confer upon
her no real or intrinsic merit.

We are daily assuring her, that every thing in future depends upon her own
exertions, and that her character must be designated by that consistent
decency, that elegant propriety, and that dignified condescension, which are
indeed truly estimable. We have apprized her, that in every stage of her
journey through life, she will find friends -- or a social intercourse with the
circles in which she may be called to move -- constituting one of her principal
enjoyments, and that if she is not eager for admiration, if she avoids making a
display of superior abilities, she will escape those shafts of envy which will
otherwise be too surely aimed at her peace; and secure to herself the
complacent feelings of those with whom she may be conversant.

Margaretta has a becoming spirit, and dissimulation is a stranger to her
heart; she is rather cheerful than gay; she never diverts herself with
simplicity and ignorance; double entendres she detests; she is not an adept in
the present fashionable mode of playing upon words, and she never descends to
what is called jesting; she can deliver herself upon any subject, on which she
ventures to speak, with great ease; but in large or mixed companies she engages
in conversation with manifest reluctance; and I have heard her declare, that
she has frequently, when encircled by strangers, felt alarmed at the sound of
her own voice; she never comments upon those blunders which are the result of a
neglected education, nor will she lend her smiles to those who are thus
employed; and she observes, that such kind of peccadillos have upon her no
other effect, than to excite in her bosom the sensation of gratitude

With the laws of custom, or fashion, she is thoroughly acquainted, and she
consents to follow them as far as they square with the dictates of rectitude;
but she never sacrifices to their documents either her humanity, or her
convenience; she regards, as extremely venial, an ignorance of their despotic
institutions; (indeed the multifarious requirements of mere ceremony, strike
her in so trifling a point of view, that she conceives it rather a matter of
course that they should sometimes be omitted) and she prefers plain manners to
all the glitter of a studied or labored address.

But it is against the unaccountable freaks of the capricious, that all the
artillery of that humor, of which she possesses a natural fund, is levelled;
frank and ingenuous herself, she laughs at the vagaries of the whimsical, and
her heart is ever upon her lips; ^he reflects much, and her judgment is
fashioned by reason; she cannot be seen without pleasure, nor heard without
instruction.

But I am rather describing what Margaretta is, than what she was, at the
period of her history to which we are arrived. Three or four years have matured
her talents, presenting the daily improving and promising girl, a truly lovely
and accomplished woman, abundantly answering the fondest expectations which
were formed of her.

When our beloved charge had completed her sixteenth year, we conceived it full
time to introduce her an interesting and beautiful object to a world, of whose
deceptions we had been careful to warn her, and for whose intercourse, we
flattered ourselves, she was as well qualified as girls at her age generally
are.

It was at this period that Mrs. Vigillius, in compliance with the pressing
entreaties of a friend in whom she entirely confided, reluctantly consented
that Miss Melworth should pass a few weeks in the city of New Haven.

But it may be proper to refer the opening of a new, and important scene, to a
separate essay; and we shall proceed to bring forward the appropriate number,
with all possible dispatch.

No. VIII.
Important period, when the opening germe
Bursts into life -- to each impression warm.

IT was a first parting -- and it cost a shower of tears on both sides, but
avoiding as much as possible scenes which may be better imagined than
described, I proceed in my narration. Margaretta had been absent but two weeks,
when the following letter, giving the alarm to our most anxious feelings, was
read by Mary and myself, with uncommon perturbation.

NEW HAVEN, May 10 th, 1789. Ever honored, and ever dear Friend,
THE tear is still wet upon my cheek! yes indeed, and well it may; for I never
think upon the morning on which I took my departure from --, but the pearly
drops, as my good papa would call them, chase each other down my cheek; the
truth is, (...) the hour which closed the eyes of my p^^^ (...), have never
known affliction so severe. Well, but my mamma has taught me not to dwell upon
the dark side of events; and finding an adherence to her precepts my surest
path, I wave every thing of a melancholy nature, and proceed to say -- that
Mrs. Worthington received me with much affection; that she treats me in all
respects with the same tender attention which she bestows upon her own
daughter, Miss Amelia; and that I do not believe, if I except my own dear
mamma, that there is in the whole world a better woman. Col. Worthington, as we
were told, is at present absent from home; so that, excepting the domestics,
who are decent and obliging people, our family consists only of Mrs.
Worthington, Miss Amelia, and myself. I am delighted with New Haven, with its
beautiful plains, its high surrounding mountains, its neat built houses, its
ample streets, and the tall trees by which on either hand they are shaded. Yale
College, an episcopalian church, and three dissenting meeting houses, are
situated contiguous to each other. You know, my mamma, you directed me to write
as if you were a stranger to every particular. As I walked over the green, the
neighborhood of these buildings seemed to consecrate the spot, rendering it,
as it were, hallowed ground. Yale College is not near to spacious as the
description which we received from Edward Hamilton of the seminary in which he
was educated; indeed, ever since the evening upon which Edward entertained us
so agreeably with an account of Harvard College, I have had a very strong
inclination to behold those venerable domes. Many students, however, prosecute
their studies here; and I cannot but esteem every young creature happy who has
the disposition, and is presented with the opportunity, of acquiring knowledge.
As I have been introduced by Mrs. Worthington as the adopted daughter of Mr.
and Mrs. Vigillius, and as the characters of my dear parental friends are so
properly revered here, I have received the most marked attentions. If I might
be allowed to give an opinion, I would say that the gentlemen of New Haven
appear to me to be friendly, and hospitable, and that the ladies are truly
polite. Perhaps I may be permitted to pronounce, that those whom I have seen,
answer very exactly to the idea of genuine urbanity, which you, Madam, have
taught me to form. Among the many who have most obligingly distinguished me,
the limits of a letter will only allow me to mention Mrs. Edwards. Mr. Edwards,
you will recollect, Madam, is an eminent barrister; and the person who is
permitted to mingle in their social circles, cannot but enjoy a satisfaction of
a superior kind.

The ladies of New Haven are remarkably fond of cultivating flowers; and a
disquisition upon the beauties of the parterre makes a part in almost every
conversation. Mrs. Edwards counted in her garden at one time, no less than
eight hundred tulips all in full blow, among which the various streaks and
shades were innumerable. Doubtless I could be very happy in New Haven, if it
was the residence of my papa and mamma, but were it the paradise of the globe,
I should sigh for the village of their abode; and the elegant saloon which my
mamma devotes to sentimental friendship, the social breakfasting parlour, the
ample dining room, the chamber, of which with such unexampled goodness I was
constituted sole proprietor, the sweet little flower garden, the smooth gravel
walk terminated by the woodbine alcove, etc. etc. these would all live in my
idea as the haunts of perfect happiness. Mrs. Worthington insists on my
tarrying here until the expiration of the Commencement holidays; but in truth,
I am well pleased that my leave of absence extends not near so far; and I am
glad that my mamma has fixed precisely the time of my return; for I always
feel assured and tranquil when I am entirely under her direction. You will
please to assure all my young acquaintance, particularly Serafina and Edward
Hamilton, that they are often present to my imagination; that in my dreams I
still mix in their little parties; and that it is impossible I should cease to
remember them, or to love them very sincerely.

Well, I have written more than two pages, and yet have not executed the
purpose I formed when I sat me down to this employ: You have accustomed me,
dearest lady, to unbosom myself to you, and though this is my first separation
from you, yet the epistolary correspondence, with which I have for such a
length of time, though continued under your roof, been indulged, has given me
the habit of expressing myself to you in this way, with the utmost freedom; and
as a proof that I will never wear disguises, when addressing her whose care
has rendered life to me a valuable gift, I will confess that I make the
following communication with more reluctance than I ever yet, upon any
occasion, experienced; but truth shall be my motto, and to my loved patroness I
will have no reserves. I had been but one hour in the family of Mrs.
Worthington, when a young gentleman, Mr. Sinisterus Courtland, made his
appearance in that lady's drawing room; he entered with the air of an
established acquaintance, and indeed he stands high in the esteem of Mrs.
Worthington; a large party was collected, all of whom he addressed in a manner
truly engaging, and upon my being introduced, paid me a compliment in a style
so new, so elevated, and so strikingly pleasing, that my heart instantaneously
acknowledged an involuntary prepossession in his favor; sensations with which
I was till that moment unacquainted, pervaded my bosom; I felt my face in a
glow, and a pleasing kind of perturbation took possession of my faculties. My
opportunities of seeing Mr. Courtland have been since frequent. Three days
afterward he declared himself my lover; his assiduities are unwearied; he
professes to live but in my presence, and he protests that my rejection of him
will make him the most miserable of men. Mrs. Worthington assures me, that Mr.
Courtland is a gentleman whose addresses no lady need blush to receive; and I
will own to you, Madam, that if a few years more had passed ever my head, as
you have taught me to conceive a union with a man of worth may rationally be
the ultimatum of a woman's wishes; I should think I stood a greater chance for
happiness with this gentleman, than with any other individual of his sex.

Mr. Courtland is a native of V -- in the State of -- he says he had formerly
the honor of an acquaintance with my papa. He is tall and well made, his
address is easy, and commanding; the contour of his face is strikingly
agreeable; indeed, his whole exterior is a combination of elegance and
dignity, and his manners are confessedly descriptive of the finished gentleman.
I am told that he adds to these superficial accomplishments a substantial and
cultivated understanding; that he is a man of erudition, and possesses also,
with a general knowledge of books, an extensive acquaintance with the world. On
my return, he will present himself before my parental friends. Perhaps they may
not approve a connection so disproportioned in regard to years, Mr. Courtland
having numbered full thirty, and I but little better than sixteen. I confess
that I feel a degree of culpability while detecting my heart, thus audaciously
leaning toward an election, until my honored benefactors, pointing the finger,
had unitedly pronounced, "There, Margaretta, there is your congenial soul;
behold the person whom we direct you to regard, as him who is destined the
associate of your future life;" but my fault is altogether involuntary, and I
pray you, my dear lady, to present to my papa my respectful regards; and to
assure him that from his honored lips, and those of my mamma, must proceed the
award which will decide the fate of their ever duteous, ever grateful, ever
affectionate

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


This letter, I say, inflicted upon my bosom the most pungent anxiety. Full
well I knew Sinisterus Courtland. I knew him much better (for my personal
interviews with him had been but few) than he was apprized of; I knew him to be
base, designing, and however incongruous these qualities may seem, improvident
also; his father had bred him a gentleman, leaving him only a slender patrimony
to support his pretensions, while he was wholly destitute of the means,
disposition, or talents, to add thereto; nay, even his small inheritance,
without spending a single thought on the future, he had deeply involved, until
pressed upon by his creditors, he was finally induced to an effort to extricate
himself, by the very honorable method of deluding some woman whose
expectations were tolerable, into an affair of the heart, the matrimonial
termination of which, he considered as an axiom, which was too irrefragable to
admit of doubt; he had spent the morning of his life in fluttering from town to
town, paying his devoirs to every inconsiderate girl, who, allured by his
flattery, and charmed by an exterior which is indeed unexceptionable, and
deceived also by the ease, brilliancy, and eclat of his appearance into a good
opinion of his finances, became the dupe of her own vanity, finding her
inclinations betrayed, in favor of an impostor, who on his part, possessed not
depth of understanding sufficient to render him capable of a serious or lasting
impression.

It is scarcely necessary to add a finishing to the character that now
presented a formidable candidate for the heart of my girl; and, in addition to
the unfavourable light in which I beheld Mr. Courtland, I had long entertained
other views for Margaretta, adjusting my plans in such a manner, as I conceived
well nigh precluded a disappointment: I was sensible, that as I had no near
relation of my own, it was generally supposed Miss Melworth would be my heir,
and I shuddered at the idea of the little fortune which, with much industry,
application and economy, I had accumulated, being squandered by a spendthrift,
while my daughter, and her descendants, were left pennyless! For a moment,
regarding myself as a shipwrecked voyager, bereaved of every hope, I was ready,
yielding the point, to stretch myself upon the barren heaths of despair; but
after deliberating the matter, I conceived, that though my fabric tottered, it
was not absolutely whelmed; and though I was aware that, manured by the
prejudices prepared in the hot-bed of novel reading, the impressions made upon
young minds, with the passions implanted in the tender soil, were not easily
erased, or up-rooted; yet I conceived that the task, however arduous, was not
altogether impracticable; and while apprized that the business in which I was
about to engage required in the management thereof the utmost delicacy, I
concluded, nevertheless, that an object so desirable, was at least worth any
attempt to obtain it. Thus having made up my mind, Mary, who was hand in glove
with me, began our operations, by responding to the letter of Margaretta, in
the subjoined manner.

Village of --, County of --, May 16, 1789.
I PERSUADE myself, my dear Margaretta, that it would at this time be wholly
superfluous to express to you the very high satisfaction which both your father
and myself mutually experience, at that unfeigned complacency in your
situation, which you take every opportunity so gratefully to avow. Once for
all, my dear girl, you may assure yourself that your affectionate regards are
abundantly reciprocated; that we have no idea of a warmer attachment than we
have conceived for you; and, that if the hearts of natural parents beat with
ardours stronger than those which expand our bosoms, they must border so nearly
upon anguish, that we are not ambitious of being able, experimentally to
ascertain the difference; neither shall I, at this time, expatiate upon the
merit of your letter -- my opinion of your epistolary talents, you already
know, though perhaps I should not so easily deny myself a repetition of th^se
fond expressions of admiration, to which I am accustomed, and which, possibly,
in some degree originate in the predilection which my maternal feelings has
induced -- were it not that the important communication you have forwarded to
us, absorbs in my soul every consideration of less weight.

I hardly know where to begin, or how to express to you the anxiety to which
you have given birth in our bosoms. Is it possible, that my Margaretta can love
where she cannot entirely esteem! and can she have so far forgot the lessons of
her youth, as entirely to esteem Mr. Courtland! What is the conduct of a man of
honor in so delicate a conjuncture as you delineate? does he wait till he
has, as he supposes, irrevocably fixed himself in the heart of a young woman,
before he deigns to apprize those whose nights and days have been spent in
watching for her welfare? Certainly not -- but immediately after his proposals
have been made to her, who I grant is the person principally concerned, if he
can discern the smallest appearance of success, (and men are eagle eyed upon
these occasions) he will solicit the sanction of her guardian friends, that he
may either avail himself of them as auxiliaries in his pursuit; or, if
necessary, set about conquering a passion which cannot be consecrated by duty
-- reverse the picture, and the man of duplicity stands confessed; he will steal
into the confidence of the unsuspecting virgin, obtaining what he conceives an
unalterable and undivided ascendency over her mind, and then, merely as a
compliment, the parents are made acquainted with the business, who, if they
presume to enter their caveat, however improper the connection may in fact be,
are accused of tyranny, barbarity, and what not.

Thus Mr. Courtland -- the post passes by our door, but he has not
condescended to pen for us a single line, which might inform us of his
enterprise. Doubtless his intention is to assail your passions during the whole
period of your purposed visit, when deeming the matter irremediable, he will
make us a genteel bow, and insult us by requesting our advice! But from you, my
dear child, we expect a decision more upright -- you have deviated, it is true,
but you have as yet taken but one step, and we doubt not that you will very
speedily recover the path of discretion. You see that our objection to Mr.
Courtland is not altogether on account of his years, though this of itself is
in our opinion insuperable; at present, sixteen and thirty may move in the same
sphere; but pass a few years, and we may almost trace their orbits in opposite
hemispheres; seventy is the age of man -- while fifty-six may enjoy the utmost
vigor of mental and corporeal powers -- indeed, if similarity of dispositions,
sentiments and attachments are requisite to constitute matrimonial felicity,
surely an equality, or nearly an equality of years, ought to be deemed of some
importance in the calculation. I know that to almost every general rule there
are exceptions; but yet, nevertheless, I would not give my voice in favor of a
gentleman's having more than two or three years at farthest, the advantage over
her whom he selected as the partner of his life.

Ask yourself, my dear, what opportunity have you had of becoming acquainted
with the views, habits, or temper of Mr. Courtland; and yet, although, when
your letter was written, only ten days from the moment of your introduction to
him had elapsed, you seriously pronounced him the individual, who of all his
sex is the most capable of making you happy! Such is the natural good sense of
my Margaretta, that I assure myself I need not comment upon this declaration.

I am rather surprised at the part which my friend Mrs. Worthington has taken
in this affair; surely, in this instance, she has been misled by the goodness
of her own heart. Mr. Courtland is only a visitor in New Haven; the place of
his nativity and usual residence is at a great distance; and she can only know
in general that he is a man of family and education. But in truth, I myself
have been wrong; I ought not to have parted with my Margaretta. Yet, while I
palliate my fault, by a declaration that I conceived her extreme youth would
have protected her from overtures so important; I trust, that the tears which I
have shed upon this occasion, will expiate it.

Yes, my love, your father knows Mr. Courtland -- he knows him well; and
without further investigating the character of that gentleman, he bids me tell
you, that he has long entertained views of establishing you in our own
neighborhood. Edward Hamilton -- start not, my dear, at a name, which in the
innocence of your heart you have a thousand times declared you loved -- has
now completed his nineteenth year; he bids fair to be every thing which a fond
father could wish for the man, to whom he yielded the beloved daughter of his
affections; his character is bottomed upon integrity; he is every way
accomplished; his prospects are good; his knowledge of the profession of his
election, indeed his extensive acquaintance with mercantile affairs, is, for
his years, prodigious; with regard to his exterior and address, if we allow
for the charm of novelty, he might rival even a Courtland; and I declare I know
not the youth who can equal him for gentility of mein, and beauty of person.
But these are attractions, simply considered, to which the heart of my
Margaretta, when she suffers herself calmly to reflect, will, I am persuaded,
ever remain impregnable. Before the death of your reverend friend, old Mr.
Hamilton, the plan of uniting our children, supposing their hearts were not
reluctant, was adjusted. The good gentleman regarded his son as almost an
affianced lover; otherwise I imagine he would not have left his ward, the
beautiful and accomplished Serafina, situated as she is in regard to Edward;
who, however unblemished his character may be, is nevertheless, as a young man,
a very ill-judged guardian for a young and unconnected woman. Hitherto, being
desirous of leaving you wholly unrestrained, we have kept our secret close
locked in our own bosoms; and until the receipt of your letter, we have beheld
with pleasure the gradual advancement of our wishes. For Edward, he is wholly
devoted to you, and while hardly conscious of the motives by which he is
actuated, he is assiduous in every thing which relates to you; even trifles are
invested with importance, if they are inscribed with your name -- if you are
unexpectedly mentioned, his whole frame is visibly agitated, his complexion
assumes a more animated glow, his voice is mellowed into an unusual softness,
and his tongue is never tired in rehearsing your praises; but, fear not my girl
-- if we cannot convince your judgment, and woo your best affections, you shall
never be the wife of Hamilton.

Your interest and happiness is the sole motive of our actions; it is the pole
star by which all our movements are directed, and if we can but see you
pleasingly established, and in possession of tranquillity, we shall lay us down
in perfect peace. We regard the unfolding our plan to you at this time, as
premature, and we feelingly regret that our measures are thus unfortunately
precipitated. We have not yet disclosed ourselves to Edward; we are not in
favor of early marriages; and though the laws of Heaven and of good
citizenship, have ordained the sexes for each other, yet we think that years
are requisite to ripen the judgment, and to ascertain the choice, which a young
person may have every reason to suppose immutably fixed. We have conceived,
that a female who takes a step so important, at the age of twenty three, or
upwards, has lost no time; and it was only in compliance with the dying
request of Mr. Hamilton, that we consented, supposing our young people should
be propitious, that you should, at the period when you shall have completed
your nineteenth year, exchange your vows with his deserving son.

But, waving these matters for the present, I have to say, that your father,
after presenting you his paternal regards and blessing, directs me to inform
you, that business will soon call him to New Haven, and that, if curtailing
your visit, you can find it agreeable to return home with him, you will confer
on him a very high obligation; in this request, my dear, I, for my part, m^st
sincerely join; and, if your wishes meet mine, you will please to express to
Mrs. Worthington, my thanks for her indulgence to you -- to offer her my
respects, and to acquaint her, that, sickening for the dear child of my love, I
can no longer deny myself the gratification of her society. Present my
compliments to Miss. Am^^^^, (...), I trust, we shall soon see at our village,
and (...) of me at all times as your truly affectionate and tender mother.

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. IX.
Low should they bend at sovereign Wisdom's throne,
Who are ambitious of that fair renown,
Which wreathes with honor the parental br^w,
And wings with fervor every tender vow.

IT will not be doubted but the urgency of my affairs, very soon made my
New Haven expedition a matter of necessity: nor will it, I presume, be regarded
as problematical, that Miss Melworth, with duteous acquiescence, became the
companion of my return. But alas! that cheerfulness, which had so long presided
in her bosom, had taken its flight; and though joy gladdened in her countenance
at the entrance of our village, and at the appearance of our habitation; though
she seemed, while clasped in the arms of Mary, to be lost in extacy -- yet,
upon her lovely countenance the cloud again gathered; her eye beamed a
melancholy languor; the rose upon her cheek visibly gave place to the lily of
her complexion, and we were well nigh distracted by the gloomy forebodings
which her altered figure originated in our souls. We had concerted our plan,
the ultimatum of which was her felicity; and we were determined, if we could
not bend her to our wishes, to follow her through all the vicissitudes her
unfortunate preference might involve, with every alleviation which we could
furnish. We contemplated the yielding her to the youth we loved, (...) full and
deliberate choice. Nothing short of this would satisfy our affection, or
restore to us the entire possession of that peace, which the late event had
invaded; yet we abhorred constraint, and we regarded persuasion, considering
the tender and conceding mildness of that heart which was almost in our hands,
as no better than a specious kind of tyranny. But being (...) in regard to the
doctrine which extends the empire of genuine love, in my virtuous bosom, beyond
the existence or agency of esteem, we doubted not, if we could erase from the
breast of our orphan, those high ideas she had conceived of the merit of her
lover, the belle passion would very speedily evaporate. Our business then being
to convince the judgment, while we assured ourselves, if this was possible, the
consequences we wished would inevitably follow, against a confidence which we
conceived so highly misplaced, the whole force of our artillery was, of course,
levelled. Having, however, so great a stake, it became us to deliberate much,
to be very cautious in our movements; a precipitate step might ruin our
measures, and it was our aim to be guarded at all points. Courtland very soon
made his appearance in our village, we extended to him the rights of
hospitality; and, as an admirer of Miss Melworth's, we gave him every decent
opportunity of advocating his cause. To this mode of procedure we were impelled
by the following considerations: Should we refuse, to this pretender, that
uniform civility, with which we have distinguished every stranger, the wound
thereby given to the feelings of Margaretta, might very possibly add to the
strength of her attachment; and the idea of his suffering upon her account,
interesting her gratitude, would still more have endeared him to her; while, in
the inmost recesses of her soul, accusing us of injustice, she would
syllogistically have concluded, that error in one particular involved a
possibility of mistake in another. And it would, in truth, have been in a very
high degree absurd, to have denied his claim to common attentions, merely
because he had eyes for the charms of a person, whom our partiality induced us
to think, had merit sufficient to captivate every beholder. In this arrangement
we also made ourselves witnesses of every movement, precluding all necessity
for, and possibility of, clandestine views; and we conceived, besides, that as
Miss Melworth possessed a penetration far beyond her years, frequent interviews
with Sinisterus Courtland would infallibly develope to her understanding his
true character, effectually destroying that mask under which he had continued
to betray the unwary; and we well knew, that could she herself make the
discovery we wished, such an event would operate more propitiously than any
information, however important, which might be handed her from any other
quarter. Perhaps it may be matter of surprise, that being myself in possession
of such material documents, I did not come to an immediate explanation, thus
adjusting the business agreeably to my own designation. But though, as I
apprehend, the preceding remark anticipates this observation, I have yet to
say, I was aware of the subterfuges to which bad men often have recourse: Had I
declared my knowledge of what I termed Courtland's enormities, it would have
been easy for him to have availed himself of the plea of youth and
inexperience, of a change of system, reformation, present regularity, etc. etc.
and, for his poverty, it was an objection which the ardour of young affection
would not only find a laudable generosity in palliating, but it would, with
glowing zeal, assay to enlist against so mercenary and unworthy a
consideration, the most virtuous propensities of the soul. I knew that to erase
impressions, made upon the youthful bosom, violent efforts must generally be
inadequate; that they would much more frequently lacerate, than obliterate; and
I was not willing to leave in the bosom of Margaretta the smallest fear. I had
not forgotten the integrity and the ingenuity which characterizes the morning
of life; and I remembered also, that the enthusiasm of an early love, is
fruitful in its vindications of the object of its preference; and that it is
ready to accuse every objector as prejudiced and unjust. Taking the matter up
in this view, we thought best to await some fortunate crisis, holding the
unquestionable facts of which we were possessed, relative to Courtland, as our
(...) resource.

Mean time, we descended not to disguises: Upon the application of that
gentleman, we informed him of our prior engagement to young Hamilton's father*
of our wishes for the success of the projected (...) of our determination to
take every proper step, which we should deem likely to propitiate the mind of
Margaretta, respecting an event which we regarded in so eligible a view; and we
grounded our objections to him on the disparity of years, the short date of his
acquaintance with Miss Melworth, and the distance of his residence;
nevertheless, we added, that if we had the power, even of natural parents, over
the final decision of that young lady, we should not hold ourselves authorized
to direct her any further than reason pointed; and that we left him at full
liberty to prosecute his suit with what advantage he might, only promising,
that we should not consent to dispose of Miss. Melworth, even to Hamilton
himself, until she had completely rounded her nineteenth year. Courtland, upon
this assurance, reddened excessively; he had hoped his happiness might have
been much sooner accelerated, and some very pressing circumstances, relative to
him, demanded a very early establishment. Our determination upon this head
continued, however, unalterable; while our espousing, as we apparently did, the
interests of Hamilton, occasioned in the bosom of our daughter such a struggle
between inclination and duty, as still looked with a very serious and
unfriendly aspect upon her health. Upon our grand subject, both Mary and myself
held with her many conversations, which, I am vain enough to imagine, might be
useful to young persons thus circumstanced, and which, did not the limits
prescribed to a writer for the Magazine, set bounds to my encroachments, should
most certainly be recounted; but should they be demanded, as they were
immediately committed to paper, future Gleaners shall certainly record them.
One sentiment, however, which dropped from the mouth of Mary, which I
accidentally overheard, and which was perfectly new to me, I cannot excuse
myself from giving. She was, one fine afternoon, while seated with Margaretta
in the arbor to which they were both so much attached, endeavoring, in a
manner peculiar to herself, to sooth the feelings of her daughter; thus
encouraging her to lay open her whole soul, that she might, from such
confidence, the better judge of the nature of the remedy she was to apply; when
Miss Melworth, sensibly regretting that she was so unfortunately situated, as
to feel a disposition to act contrary to the wishes of her best friends; by
turns lamenting and accusing the treachery of a heart which had thus betrayed
her, concluded a very tender harangue, by a declaration, that though Hamilton
was every thing amiable, yet she was certain she could never feel for him that
preference which she did for Courtland; she could never regard him in any other
view than that of a brother. "Will you, my sweet girl," replied Mary, "
re-consider this affirmation? you are fond of reasoning, you know; and trust
me, my dear, when I assure you, that an attachment which embraces not reason
as its auxiliary, is not worth cherishing. You own that Hamilton is every thing
amiable; but you can only love him as a brother! you pretend not to point out a
single virtue, a single accomplishment, a single grace, in which Courtland can
claim a superiority over Hamilton; yet you can only love Hamilton as a brother,
while you love Courtland as -- as what, my dear? Will you, Margaretta, please
to point out the distinction between those attachments which you feel for the
one and the other? You blush, my love; let me kiss off that conscious tear --
Say, my charming reasoner, would these over nice distinctions, for which you
cannot find a name, ever have found entrance into the bosom of a virtuous girl,
were it not for that false taste which is formed by novel reading? What is this
something which you feel for Courtland, and which you cannot feel for Hamilton?
Certainly it is, at best, but the fever of the imagination, the delirium of
fancy; and ever experienced votary of this ignis fatuus, if under the direction
of truth, will tell you, that the duration of the pa^^^xism is extremely short,
that the sober and healthy age of reason awaits, when love and friendship wear
the same face, when only solid advantages can please; and, they will add, that
no well informed person would sacrifice to the illusion of a moment, the
happiness of a life. Did you never, my dear, reflect upon the connexions which
must have been formed by the immediate descendants of the pair who were created
in Paradise? brothers then interchanged the nuptial vow with sisters; they were
unacquainted with the refinements of modern times; the virtues which endeared
the brother, rendered the husband amiable; and we have no authority for
supposing, that their matrimonial felicity was more circumscribed than that of
their posterity. It is true, that the multiplication of our species have
rendered other regulations, relative to the marriage contract, or the parties
contracting, both necessary and proper; and it is undoubtedly true, that an
observation of these regulations, is religiously obligatory; but yet, in my
opinion, the absurdity of holding a character in great estimation, and highly
accomplished, as a brother, which we should at the same time regard with
reluctance as a conjugal companion, is still palpable; and I must repeat, that
the prevalency of such romantic ideas can originate only in the regions of
fancy." Thus far my honest woman. But Margaretta, in a letter to Miss
Worthington, which lately came under my observation, has best described her
own sensations; I subjoin it therefore, verbatim, as it flowed from as
susceptible and upright a heart, as ever beat in the bosom of humanity.

Miss MELWORTH to Miss WORTHINGTON.
Village of --, June 30th, 1789.
I AM, my dear Miss Worthington, highly pleased, that my account of my
reception in -- I had almost said, my native village -- has been productive to
you, of even a momentary satisfaction; and I do assure you that I am not a
little elated, when I am told, your honored mother pronounces my description
replete with some of the most beautiful traits of nature: I know, that to her
partiality and candor, I ought to impute much; but, by the commendation of so
respectable a judge, I am nevertheless exhilarated, and I am almost induced to
think it allowable, to plume myself upon an award so honorary. You will please
to offer to the dear lady my acknowledgments, accompanied by my most respectful
regards.

You ask me if I have recovered my tranquillity; alas, no! and I fear, my
Amelia, that peace has fled forever from my bosom. Mr. Courtland, as you
suppose, is here; would I had never seen him -- I might then have been happy.
Edward Hamilton -- the bloom has forsaken his checks -- the luster of his fine
eyes is no more -- I never saw so total a change in a youth, who but lately
might have figured as the personification of health, enlivened and informed by
the most endearing vivacity: Would I had never seen Courtland -- I might then
have been happy. When Edward Hamilton suffers, I feel that I cannot stand by
regardless; I follow him with the affection of a sister; but of late, he
studiously shuns my advances: It was but yesterday, that with trembling
eagerness, he grasped my hand; something he was about to say; but, as if
recollecting himself, instantly, like the spectre of a dream. he fled away. And
I not justified in sayings that if I had never seen Courtland, I might then
have been happy? Serafina too, is often drowned in tears. Serafina is the
sister of my heart. Why will she not exchange her vows with. Edward? how rich
should I then (...) with such a brother -- such a sister. You ask if Mr.
Courtland is an approved lover -- alas, no! -- alas, yes! -- You will be at no
loss to explain this seeming paradox. I sometimes suspect that my guardian
friend^ must be in possession of some secret, relative to Mr. Courtland, which
they have not yet unfolded; for surely they could not be so strongly opposed,
on account of inequality of years. The engagement entered into with old Mr.
Hamilton was conditional; and you know, my dear, that though I am -- though I
was, I should say, cheerful, it never could be said that I was gay; and I think
I could accommodate myself to the gravest humor: But my parents, you will say,
are the best judges; and you, Miss Worthington, are a good girl, while I,
methinks, am become a faulty, a very faulty creature. My mother -- but my
mother is an angel -- I do assure you, my dear, that I not seldom feel a degree
of awe, while contemplating the character of so divine a woman, which
absolutely deters me from arrogating to myself the title, with which her
condescending indulgence has invested me. This superior woman, you will
recollect, assured me that I should never be the wife of Hamilton, except both
my judgment, and my best affections were consenting; exactly with this
declaration, does every arrangement correspond; and, while neither she nor my
father produce a single argument in favor of the man of their election, which
reason does not fully authorize, they unitedly and repeatedly engage, that
however I may ultimately determine, they will never cease to be my parental
friends. Tell me, my dear, what returns does such matchless generosity merit?
And help me to discharge as I ought, with becoming decency, a daughter's part.
Unexampled indeed is their consideration for me; and still the more to enhance
their goodness, and ally it to perfection, they assay to wear a tranquillity
which is foreign from their hearts; for alas! do I not hourly observe the
anxious solicitude but too visibly pourtrayed in the manly features of my
father -- often have I wiped the tear from the swollen eye of my mother -- often
have I witnessed the chagrin which they have mutually and involuntarily
manifested at any discovery which I have unwarily made of my attachment to
Courtland; and I have but too well marked the joy of their brightened
countenances, at the smallest instance of my tenderness for Edward. What right
do I possess thus to stab the bosoms which have so long fostered me? Better I
had been whelmed beneath those waves which gave death to him from whom I
derived my existence, than thus to become the source of corroding anxiety, to
characters so exalted. Every pensive look of theirs pierces me to the soul; and
I seem to move an evil genius, doomed to chase peace from their revered bosoms.
Amelia, I could not be other than miserable, even possessed of the man of my
heart, if I thus implanted in the pillow of my guardian friends, the rankling
thorn of disappointment.

Forgive, my dear, this incoherent letter; it is expressive of my feelings; the
pressure upon my spirits is extreme; my situation is truly melancholy; it is
precisely that which I would wish to avoid. Could I unite my hopes and wishes
with the expectations of those who have a right to my utmost obedience, how
enviable would be my lot? You demand a long, a very long letter; but what can I
write which will not be calculated to cast a cloud over the charming vivacity
of my lively friend. Yet you would acquaint yourself with every movement of my
soul! well then, as you have expressed a predilection for my little poetical
attempts, I will transcribe for you some lines which I last night hastily
penned, after I had retired from my parents, enriched with their affectionate
and joint benediction; they delineate my wishes; they delineate my feelings,
and they are the fervid breathings of a much agitated, and deeply wounded
spirit.

INVOCATION TO DUTY.
Low, sacred duty, at thy shrine,
Behold thy suppliant bend,
All conscious of thy right divine,
To thee my vows ascend.
With pity bland regard a maid,
To soft obedience formed;
Who, though by tenderness betrayed,
Is still by virtue warmed.
Goddess all radiant, enshield
This ^ond, this treacherous heart;
The arms of bright discretion wield,
And all thy powers impart.
These wayward passions -- oh reclaim --
(...) dear illusion hide;
Give me a faultless virgin's fame,
M^st prudence for my guide.
By thy just influence arrest
(...) wandering wish of mine;
Bind all thy dictates to my breast,
And every hope entwine.
Of Lethe's waters let me drink,
Forgetful of the past;
My errors in oblivion sink,
The veil of candor cast.
Give inclination to recede,
Each rising tho^ght chastize;
Let naught my righteous steps impede,
The tranquil joys I prize.
Give acquiescence to my grasp,
A mild conceding mind;
Give me bright fortitude to clasp,
To all my fate resigned.
Give me no more their breasts to wound,
My orphan life who guard;
Let me not be that ingrate found,
Who angels thus reward.
My God! those tears in that mild eye --
My dear maternal friend;
That anxious brow -- paternal sigh! --
Where will my sorrows end?
For still I struggle -- still complain,
But, sovereign Duty, hear,
My righteous purposes sustain,
And make my steps thy care.
Adieu, my dear Amelia -- that you may still be happy, is, and will continue to
be, the very sincere wish of your

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


No. X.
Yet pressing onward, with the goal in view,
More ardent still our hopes and wishes grew.

THUS, for a considerable time, matters remained stationary as it were, in my
family. Courtland continued his pursuit. In the bosom of Margaretta, the
conflict between duty and inclination was unyieldingly severe; and Hamilton,
with a noble consistency, persevered in declining a competition, which he
deemed unworthy that rational, disinterested and fervent attachment, which
every faculty of his soul had long acknowledged for Miss Melworth.

Courtland, evidently exulting in his success, felicitated himself upon his
opening prospects; and calculating upon the tenderness of Margaretta, he became
confident it would be in his power to obtain a much earlier day, than the very
distant era which we had so peremptorily named.

We were thus circumstanced, when the following little poem that made its
appearance in the Gazette, however inconsiderable it may in fact be, from the
important consequences by which it was attended, merits a place in my narration.

As on the shorn bank I delightedly strayed,
Admiring the meadows, the woods, and the glade,
A nymph whose attendance enlivened the scene,
In ^^ry meanders tript over the green;
And thus, as she rambled, she carelessly said --
Come, depict, if you can, your favorite maid.
My favorite maid, ^ll enraptured I cried,
My favorite maid, o^ her sex is the pride;
The standard of elegance, formed to please,
Her movements the portrait of dignified ^ase;
While each brightening charm which floats on her mien,
Announces her bosom as virtue serene.
Her tresses not borrowed, so neatly entwined,
Proclaim the good taste which so well has designed;
And her dark auburn looks as so glossy they flow,
Contrast as they wave the smooth forehead of snow;
While her soft, mildly beaming, sky tinctured eye,
Evinceth bland pity, and sweet sympathy.
The rose and the lily are blended in vain,
Her sway to extend, or her triumphs maintain,
For though on her face as they dazzlingly glow,
The polish of beauty's own (...) they (...);
Yet rivall'd by graces which dwell in her mind,
To mental inthralment my heart is resigned.
She knows to distinguish -- she knows to reflect,
What measures are proper, and how to direct;
Her manners correct, by fair decency formed,
To complacency sweet, by tenderness warmed,
Inmingles true dignity, chaste and refined,
With soft condescension, for soothing designed.
And thus gem'd by loveliness -- thus gem'd by worth,
The virgin of innocence, beauty and truth;
That swain will be happy, to whose faithful heart,
The gods shall a gift of such value impart;
For amity lives in a bosom so fair,
And love will ameliorate when planted there.
From floods of old ocean the nymph was received,
From white clifted Albion the angel derived.
Hold, hold, it is enough, my fair prompter exclaimed;
This hint is superfluous; each trait you have named
Belongs to your Melworth -- your Melworth alone,
No maiden so perfect our circles have known;
Even as you delineate, the object expands,
And sweet Margaretta conspicuous stands.
These lines, by accelerating our movements, soon put our affairs in a train,
giving us at least a perspective glance of the completion of our plans. The
lighted match is soon in a flame, and the smallest spark will enkindle it; but
I will lead to the catastrophe in course. The lines, as I said, made their
appearance in the Gazette; they had no signature, and who the writer was, we
could not even conjecture. Hamilton, upon pretense of business, had absented
himself from our village for more than two weeks; and besides, though we knew
that when a boy he had indulged an itch for scribbling in rhyme, yet we
conceived that his ripening years had induced him to relinquish every intrigue
with damsels (...) the muses, whose favors are so hardly earned, and (...) so
seldom invest their votaries with that (...), which is in any sort adequate, as
(...) for the unwearied diligence (...) in the (...).

We, however (...) concerned about it; and Margaretta (...) accustomed to
praise to be (...) in the matter. But the amiable (...) girl, (the (...)
charity of whose (...) th^se (...) ^each) her well known benevolence, her
condescending affability to her inferiors, her complacently dignified
deportment to her equals, and her veneration for all those whom years had
rendered her superiors -- had so well established her in the hearts of our
connexions, as to ^ender her an object generally beloved; and, indeed, the
propriety and equality of her conduct had been such, as to produce a solecism
to the adage, which creates envy as the shadow of merit; nor did we know that
the passion of malevolence was in exercise toward her. It was soon noised
abroad that Margaretta had been eulogized in the news paper, and it furnished a
topic for those circles in which she moved; her partial favorers found
beauties in the piece, which perhaps a critic would have been far from allowing
it. They made it their business to find out the Author; they applied themselves
with much avidity to the pursuit; and they determined, if they should be so
fortunate as to succeed, to hail him as the prince of poets.

We had, among the number of our visitors, and old lady by the name of Clacket,
who was also much attached to Miss Melworth, and whose curiosity was upon this
occasion raised to the highest pitch. She roundly taxed Courtland with being
the author of the poem; and the embarrassment which be discovered, abundantly
justified her suspicions.

The piece had, as I hinted, its admirers; and Courtland either saw, or thought
he saw, an advantage in adopting this fugitive relation of the Parnassian
lasses: He managed the matter with some adroitness; his servant was authorized
to whisper, as it profound secret to lady Clacket's maid, that his master had
in truth composed the favorite lines, which had originated to much
speculation; and she reporting it in confidence to her lady, it was in a few
days entrusted to the taciturnity of the whole neighborhood. Courtland was
repeatedly complimented upon his poetical abilities, and he hesitated not to
wear the ^ays.

It happened about this time that Courtland made one of a large circle which
were collected round our social board, when the before mentioned lady
introduced the subject of the poem, and proceeded with all the loquacity of
talkative volubility, to pronounce a panegyric upon our gentleman, as the
author. The poet bowed, blushed, and looked silly. Margaretta was evidently
pleased; while I, regarding the whole affair, as another much ado about
nothing, should have passed it without further observation, had I not
accidentally glanced the face of Serafina, who was also of o^r' party, and
whose countenance, in the course of a few moments, expressed the most lively
sensations. Her heightened complexion during the conversation, now changing to
the clearest white, and now assuming the deepest coloring with which the most
impassioned feelings could tinge it. I marked Serafina, but I marked her in
silence; for, from these suspicious appearances, I was induced to fear that the
specious manners of our gallant, had made also upon the youthful mind of this
young lady, an impression which would be with difficulty eradicated! But I was
not suffered to remain long under this deception; our company soon separated,
and only Courtland, Margaretta, Serafina, Mary and myself, remained. The
chagrin upon the face of Serafina was still visible, when, standing up with
much dignity in her manner, she instantly accounted for the appearance, by
which I had been misled.

Addressing Mr. Courtland, she thus expressed herself: "I am, Sir, the friend
of Edward Hamilton; we have been educated together, almost from the first
moment of our existence, and every secret of his soul is reposed in my bosom. I
am not sure that he would approve of what I am about to say; nay, feeling my
mind at this present in a great measure governed by indignation, I am not
myself positive, that I am quite right; however, like all angry folks I am
hurried on by an impetuosity which I find altogether irresistible. Is it not
enough, Sir, that you have supplanted that unhappy young man in his dearest
hopes? Is it not enough that you have stepped between him and that hoard of
felicity which he fondly fancied was treasured up for him? but must you also
poorly steal that pittance of fame, which justice reserved for him? You know,
Sir, that you never wrote the piece for which you have been contented to
receive the praises of so many admirers. I have at this moment the original
lines upon Miss Melworth, which were written by Edward, in my pocketbook; they
were penned upon yonder verdant bank, during Miss Melworth's continuance at
New Haven, while I was prattling by his side. It is true he imagines they are
destroyed; he requested that I would destroy them; but I have imprudently and
unkindly given a copy of them to Miss Predy, and thus they have found their way
to the press."

What would I have then given for the pencil of a Hogarth, that I might have
sketched the group which my parlour at that instant exhibited. Need I tell
thee, reader, that I am not even a descendant of Hogarth's? I trow not; but I
add, by way of information, that having a mortal aversion to daubing, it is
therefore that I pass hastily over every expressive feature, which was then
replete with the deepest meaning, and only observe, that Courtland, almost
immediately recovering himself, suddenly seized the outstretched hand of Miss
Clifford, and pressing it with much address to his lips, burst into an
immoderate fit of laughter, affecting great surprise, that she took the matter
so seriously, and declaring that he meant nothing more than a jest, and merely
to amuse himself with the simplicity and credulity of lady Clacket.

For my own part, my astonishment at the impudence of the fellow, absolutely
struck me dumb; and I suffered him to give his adventure what turn he pleased,
without even the capability of interrupting him! I saw, however, by the altered
looks of Margaretta; by a degree of disgust which pervaded her fine
countenance, and the pointed reprehension which she darted from her charmingly
expressive eyes; from all these auspicious indications, I gathered, that the
full time for executing my scheme, was at length arrived, and that the mine
being thus accidentally and advantageously sprung, it became me to continue my
operations with all possible expedition.

Courtland, therefore, had no sooner taken his leave for the evening, than
without taking the least notice of the rhymes, or their effect, I observed to
my daughter -- that having long noted with much concern her wasting frame, and
impaired constitution, I was at last come to the resolution of bending myself
entirely to her wishes; that upon the next morning's visit which we should
receive from her lover, I would lead him immediately to my library -- that
possibly I might have mistaken his character, but that I would then enter into
a conversation with him, of a nature so serious, as fully to ascertain our man
-- that I would request her, accompanied by her mother, to ^eat herself in the
adjoining apartment, where they might be ear witnesses of our discourse -- and
that if, after the investigation to which I should oblige Mr. Courtland to
submit, he should still continue the object of a choice, which would then be so
deliberate, I would myself lead her to the altar, at any hour which she should
judge most proper; and, furthermore, that I promised on behalf of Mary, as well
as in my own name, that we would continue through life, in every event, to
partake her felicity, and to gild for her, to the utmost of our ability, every
misfortune which might await her.

Margaretta trembled excessively; her complexion now reddened to the deepest
dye, and now changed to the most deadly pale! we were fearful that she would
faint. Mary addressed her in the most soothing language; this had the desired
effect; and, bursting into tears, she raised her clasped hands, while a kind of
agonized expression was depictured upon her countenance, and, ere we were
aware, with a sudden and tremulous emotion, quitting her seat, she sunk down
upon her knees! sore us. "Oh Sir, oh Madam!" in a broken voice she exclaimed,
"spare your child, spare (...) this trial; your condescension is sufficiently
manifested; never ^ore do I wish to behold the man who (...) this evening
passed your doors; I am convinced that he is poorly mean, that he is capable of
the most deliberate baseness; and never shall my soul bind itself in alliance
with an unworthy pretender, who can thus pitifully stoop to purloin the fame,
with which undoubted merit had invested his superior."

"Nay, my love," rejoined Mary, "you are now again too precipitate; would you
discard the man of your heart, merely because he is ambitious of adorning
himself with the poet's laurel? besides, these tears, these looks of anguish,
these broken accents, and heart-affecting sighs; these all betray a mind not
sufficiently at ease, to make up a determination so important; should you thus
hastily proceed, you may possibly repent at leisure. Come to my arms, my
daughter -- let me press this throbbing heart to the bosom of friendship; let
us take time, my love; your father, whose wisdom not seldom leads him through
the labyrinth of the human heart, shall prosecute his plan, while we, summoning
the aid of mild resignation, abide, with patient acquiescence, the event."

Thus, then, we adjusted our measures; and the returning sun, according to
custom, presenting Mr. Courtland, ushered in an hour which I regarded among the
most important of my life. My unalterable intention was to constitute Miss
Melworth sole heiress of every shilling which I possessed; yet, regarding our
spark, in pecuniary matters, as another Zeluco, I conceived myself justified in
practicing a little address, in order to the unmasking an impostor, who, by
methods so unwarrantable, had obtained such hold of the affections of my
daughter.

Behold me then, gentle reader, with these impressions, seated in my library,
and Courtland, with unblushing effrontery, lolling upon a sofa before me;
listen, also, while with a solemn, but composed countenance, and in a resolute
and peremptory tone of voice, I thus deliver myself.

"I have requested this interview, Sir, in order to obtain your ear upon a very
important subject. I observe that your pretensions to Miss Melworth,
notwithstanding your knowledge of our predilection for Mr. Hamilton, are still
continued; and I repeat, that no parental friends, ought unduly to influence in
an affair, which cannot so deeply interest them, as the individuals who are
principally concerned; we consent, therefore, supposing Miss Melworth's
preference should remain, to yield you her hand, and we assure you that her
matrimonial choice shall, in no sort, influence her fortunes." Here Courtland
bowed exultingly, and I proceeded to say -- "But, Sir, it is just, that upon
this occasion, I add, that, as Miss Melworth is not in fact, our daughter, she
is not by nature entitled to our inheritance. My heart, Sir, my paternal heart,
acknowledges for that young lady the strongest affection; but family claims are
respectable, and the pride of relationship is seldom wholly eradicated from the
bosom. There is now living in a certain metropolis upon this continent, a
distant relation of mine, who bears my name; it is true he is rich, but his
family is large, and as I am fond, I confess, of establishing my name, the
world, in general, will not condemn me, should I devise the greater part of my
real estate to this my kinsman; while prudence directs me to secure to
Margaretta and her posterity, whatever part of my possessions I shall judge
proper to endow her with; and I am positive that Miss Melworth will not accuse
me of want of affection for her, whatever arrangements I may be induced to
make."

I assay not to describe the agitated alterations, which the countenance of
Courtland underwent, during the latter part of my harangue; anger,
disappointment, and the deepest chagrin, were marked there; when, starting from
his seat, with an indignation but ill concealed, he expressed himself to the
following effect: I was informed, Sir, that you had no relation in existence; I
was informed that Miss Melworth would undoubtedly succeed to your estates; and
I was moreover informed, that you had destined a very handsome sum, as a
nuptial present, for the husband of that young lady, upon the day of marriage;
if I am deceived, Sir, though I adore Miss Melworth, yet neither my fortune nor
my family will admit of my union with a young lady, who, (excuse me, Sir) does
not seem to have any well grounded expectations, and who cannot claim a single
person in the world, as her natural relation.

It was with difficulty that I stifled my resentment; but, assuming an air of
calmness, I returned -- "I am ignorant, Sir, who was your informant; but I am
confident I have never before explained myself upon this subject, to any one,
and I am not answerable for the erroneous conjectures of the busy multitude:
But, Sir, you, in your turn, must excuse me, when I say, that I should imagine
a person upon the eve of bankruptcy, if he really loved the woman whom he was
seeking to affiance to penury, would be happy to find her invested with a share
of property, which being independent of his failure, would set her above
absolute want."

This was enough; it worked him up to a degree of frenzy; and, clenching his
fist, with a menacing air, he approached my seat.

"What, Sir, can you mean? What do you mean Mr. Vigillius? I demand an
explanation."

"Compose yourself, Sir," I rejoined, "I am not to be intimidated by those big
looks, or that air of haughty defiance. Had you, Mr. Courtland, when you
presented yourself in my family, as a candidate for the affection of my
daughter, ingenuously favored me with a real statement of your affairs, I
would have used my interest to have adjusted them amicably with your creditors;
and had the attachment of Margaretta been permanent, while I regarded you as a
worthy, though an unfortunate man, I should, notwithstanding my conditional
engagement with Mr. Hamilton, have viewed the matter with tolerable
complacency: but, when you pass yourself upon us as a man in affluent
circumstances, when you act, in every instance, the deliberate deceiver, I
should greatly grieve, did I not know that my daughter's eyes were already
opened: She, even at this moment, regains her former tranquillity. You are no
stranger to me. Sir; your amors, your improvidence, the ruined state of your
finances, etc. etc. I have this moment letters in my pocket, from your
principal creditors, and I could long ere this have apprized Miss Melworth, had
I not judged it expedient that she should make the discovery for herself -- she
has made it, and I am again a happy man."

Courtland's cowardly ^oul now shrunk from my gaze; but assuming, with his
wonted finesse, the air of an injured man, as he darted from the library, and
from the house, he said, It is well, Sir, it is well that your connection with
Miss Melworth is your protection; otherwise I should not fail to call you to a
very severe account, for falsehoods and absurdities, which the bosom of
malevolence has doubtless orignated.

From the library, I immediately passed to the adjoining apartment. Margaretta
hid her blushing face in the bosom of her mother: and while I pressed those
beautiful females to my heart, I protested, by the tenderness which I bore
them, that I was, at that instant, the happiest of human beings.

Margaretta proposed a thousand questions in a breath; and, while she blessed
the hour of her emancipation, she begged to learn the residence of the dear
family I had mentioned, who, from their affinity to me, she gratefully said,
were already imaged in her heart, and to whom she wished speedily to devote the
page of tender acknowledgment, for the share they undesignedly had, in
liberating a mind which had been so unworthily enslaved. Tapping her cheek, I
expressed my wonder that she too had been deceived; for, my dear, I added,
though there is actually, in the city of --, a gentleman of my name,
circumstanced exactly as I have stated, yet I am not personally acquainted with
him; nor do I know that there is the remotest consanguinity between us, in any
other line, than as we are alike descended from the honest couple who had their
residence in Paradise.

In fact, not having, in my conversation with Courtland, absolutely avowed an
intention of alienating from Margaretta any part of my estate; only simply
suggesting the rationality and equity of such a procedure, and having fully
accomplished my design, I was not anxious to guard my secret.

Courtland, who still continued in our neighborhood, was soon apprized of the
stratagem which I had so successfully employed; and such was the egregious
vanity of the coxcomb, that he entertained no doubt of being able to reinstate
himself in the bosom of Margaretta; to which end, he addressed her by many
expostulatory letters; imputing the part he had acted in the library, entirely
to surprise, and disavowing every tittle of what had been alleged against him;
declaring, that those calumnies had undoubtedly been fabricated by some friends
of Hamilton's, on purpose to ruin him in his love; and, that however she might
determine, his inviolable attachment to her would never permit him to be other
than the humblest of her adorers. It was in vain Miss Melworth assured him,
that his real situation, his wishes, or his pursuits, could affect her in no
other way, than as she was a general well-wisher to her species; and that,
having outlived the esteem she once avowed for him, she must beg leave to
decline all correspondence with him in future. No sooner were his letters
returned unopened, than he persisted in besieging every door which she entered;
and, having once crossed the threshold, his clamorous protestations bore a
stronger resemblance to those of a madman, than to a rationally attached lover.
Miss Melworth, however, acquitted herself upon every of these occasions, with
that cool and determined consistency, which was necessary to the establishment
of her character, which confirmed the general sentiment in her favor, and
placed the whole affair in its true light.

But many days elapsed, before my girl regained her wonted self-complacency.
She often lamented the weakness which thus, subjecting her to so humiliating an
attachment, had involved us also in the utmost anxiety; and not being able to
forgive herself, for a time she continued to deplore. But the good sense she so
eminently possessed, leading her at length to impute her error to inexperience,
finally banished every remaining regret, and enabled her to pen a letter to
Miss Worthington, which I produce as a contrast to that which appeared in my
last Gleaner.

Miss MELWORTH to Miss WORTHINGTON.
Village of --, July 31st, 1789.
NEWS, joyful news! my beloved girl. Your Margaretta is restored to her senses,
and she is now the cheerfullest, the most contented, and the happiest being in
the universe. Yes, thanks to the unworthiness of Courtland, my liberated heart
is at this moment lighter than a feather; and I can now behold this once
formidable man without the smallest perturbation, save what is excited by the
recollection of that imbecility, which so poorly subjected me to an
indiscretion which must, as often as it is recurred to, suffuse my cheek with
the blush of conscious error! The story of my emancipation is too long to
relate in the little moment allowed me, for the post is on the wing, and as my
dear Amelia has given me reason to flatter myself I shall soon see her at --, a
bare sketch of this happy event shall suffice, while I voluntarily engage to
fill up the outlines during some tete a tete, which we will sweetly enjoy, in
the woodbine alcove, you have so often heard me mention.

For some time, being left by my matchless parents wholly to the exercise of my
own reason, I had begun to discover that Courtland was not the faultless being
which my imagination had almost deified. He let slip no opportunity of piqueing
Hamilton; he seemed ungenerously to aim at pointing the shaft which so
apparently wounded the bosom of my early friend; and his triumphant exultation
partook a degree of meanness, at which I felt my bosom involuntarily reluct.
Once or twice, too, I looked in upon some poor neighbors of ours, who were
struggling with disease and penury, in order, in my little way, to afford them
what relief my angel benefactor had commissioned me to yield; methought his
soul was not formed for pity or for sympathy; no tear started in his eye; and
while his complaisance induced him to accompany me in my walk, his features
gathered a severe and rigid kind of austerity; that gentle and engaging
demeanor, for which we have together admired him, was no more; his air was
haughty and forbidding, and he deigned not to pour even the oil of soothing
words, into the lacerated bosom of sorrow! Upon these occasions disgust grew in
my soul, and I was conscious that my attachment was gradually diminishing. A
little poem, written by Edward Hamilton, he had the weakness to claim; this
also, exhibiting him in a new and disagreeable light, made large inroads unpon
that esteem, which, while with you, (not considering, that I thereby violated
the duty I owed my revered friends) I had so fondly cherished; but the
finishing stroke was reserved for the investigating wisdom of my father. By the
dictates of equity Courtland was tried, and he came out -- I will not say what
he came out. In short, my Amelia, no longer enslaved by that dangerous man, it
is not my business to pursue him by invectives; he mingles, in regard to me,
with the rest of his species: I owe him no ill will, and I am only solicitous
that no unhappy young body, not patronized and directed, as I have been, may
fall a victim to the wiles which an enemy so fascinating may prepare for her.

For myself, my utmost wishes are gratified; joy once more illumines the
revered countenances of my parental friends: I am conscious that I have
banished anxiety from their bosoms, and this consciousness seems to dignify and
render my existence of importance; it is of itself a sufficient compensation
for years of suffering; from a mighty pressure my soul is relieved; every thing
wears its accustomed face; I skip about the house as usual, and this dwelling
is the same blessed mansion which it heretofore was. Serafina, too, embraces me
with returning rapture; and though Edward Hamilton, who has long been absent
from our village, may probably reject a heart which has been capable of so
improper an attachment, yet he will allow of my sisterly regards; in his
fraternal bosom, I shall find an abode of sincerity; and I shall still be in
possession of the approbation of my next to divine benefactors, and of the
unalterable affection of my much loved Serafina. Possibly also -- but whither
am I wandering? I forget that the post will be gone; but having at length
recollected myself, I hasten to offer my respects to your mamma, and to assure
you that I am, with very sincere affection, your ever faithful

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


No. XI.
When crimes despotic in the bosom reign,
The tears of weeping beauty slow in vain.

SCARCE an hour had elapsed, after Margaretta had forwarded her letter to Miss
Worthington, when the following interesting account from that young lady, which
had been written some days before, was put into her hand.

Miss WORTHINGTON to Miss MELWORTH.
NEW HAVEN, July 25th, 1789.
GRACIOUS Heaven, what are my sensations! Never did I expect to address my dear
Miss Melworth under a consciousness of having contributed (as the event may
prove) to her ruin: But in deed, and in truth, we have not intentionally erred;
and surely the tale which I have to unfold, will banish from a mind, where
integrity and every other virtue have taken up their abode, a wretch, who ought
never to have profaned a temple so sacred.

My poor mother weeps incessantly; she says she shall never know peace again,
if you are not enabled to assure her, that tranquillity is restored to a bosom,
where she has been accessory in planting so sharp a thorn. Listen, my beloved
Margaretta, to the recital I have to make; and let the virtues of Hamilton
obtain their due estimation.

About six years since, a gentleman by the name of wellwood, was one of the
most respectable dwellers in this city; his family consisted only of his lady
and daughter, with their domestics; his daughter had been educated with the
exactest care, and she was, at eighteen, a beautiful and accomplished young
woman. Just at this important period, Mr. Wellwood paid the great debt of
nature; and so deep an impression did this melancholy and calamitous event make
upon the mind of Mrs. Wellwood, who was one of the first of women, that after
languishing a few weeks, under all the pressure of a rapid decline, she also
obtained her passport, resigning her life, a confessed and lamented martyr to
grief.

Thus, in a very short interval, the unfortunate Frances Wellwood saw herself
precipitated from a situation the most eligible, with which the dispositions of
paternal Providence can possibly endow a young creature, to that of an
unprotected orphan; no guardian father, no indulgent mother remained, to direct
her steps, or to approbate her movements! She had been accustomed to regard her
parents as the source of wisdom; no design had she ever executed, unsanctioned
by the parental voice, unpropitiated by the maternal smile; and the authors of
her existence had, in every sense, continued the prop and the confidence of the
being they had reared. Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Wellwood were natives of this city;
none of their kindred resided among us: So that the beauteous orphan viewed
herself as alone in the universe; and when she cast her distracted gaze upon
the clay cold tenements of a father and a mother; upon those eyes, now for ever
closed, which, while the least vestige of life remained, had still darted upon
her the most benign and unequivocal testimonies of affectionate tenderness;
upon those lips never again to be unsealed, which had opened but to enrich her
with advice, admonitions, directions, or benedictions; when, with folded arms,
she contemplated those trophies of relentless death, the unutterable anguish of
her spirit, depriving her for a time of reason, suspended the operation of the
silent sorrow, which afterward reduced her to the very verge of the grave! Not
a benevolent heart in this city, but deeply felt for the lovely mourner; never
did I see a more pathetically interesting object. But time, that sovereign
physician, and the soothing of those friends, to whom her virtues and her
misfortunes had inexpressibly endeared her, at length effectuated in her bosom
precisely that state of tender melancholy, which, in a delicate and sentimental
mind, is described as finding a luxury in tears; and her youth and an excellent
constitution, surmounting the ravages which had been made in her health, she
was gradually restored to a pensive kind of serenity.

The effects, of which Mr. Wellwood had died possessed, exclusive of his
household movables, which were very genteel, consisting altogether of
navigation and articles of merchandise, he had directed in his will that they
should be immediately converted into ready money; and the gentleman whom he had
appointed his executor, with that integrity and dispatch, which are such
conspicuous traits in his character, speedily disbursing every arrearage, and
adjusting every affair relative to his trust, delivered into the hands of Miss
Wellwood the sum of two thousand pounds in cash; this being the whole amount,
after such settlement, of what remained of her deceased father's estate; and of
this her patrimony, she was, agreeably to his direction, the sole and
uncontrolled possessor. Behold her then, before she had completed her
nineteenth year, absolute mistress of herself and fortune: Her apartments were
elegantly furnished; she was in possession of a handsome library, and two
thousand pounds in ready specie^* but her discretion was unquestionable, and no
one presumed to dictate to Miss Wellwood.

Just at this crisis, Courtland made his first appearance at New Haven. His
exterior and deportment, we have mutually agreed, are pleasingly fascinating,
and our unguarded sex are but too easily captivated. His arts of seduction must
be prodigious. When I see you, I will recount the gradual advances, by which he
undermined a virtue, that would have been proof against a common assailant.
Hoodwinking her reason, and misleading her judgment by arguments the most
sophistical, he induced her to view, as the result of human regulations, the
marriage vow; it was not to be found in the law of God, and it (or rather, the
calling a priest to witness it) was calculated only for the meridian of common
souls: True, the institution answered political purposes, and it might be
necessary to preserve a character; but for him -- his nuptial hour -- should it
take place previous to the death of a capriciously obstinate old uncle, who was
a bachelor, and who had made his succeeding to his estate to depend upon his
continuing single, would mark him the most imprudent of men. Mean time, his
love for Miss Wellwood was unbounded; he could not possibly exist without her;
he could not bear the idea of seeing her hourly exposed to the solicitations of
those numerous pretenders, who thronged about her, while he was conscious that
he possessed no superior claim to her attention; and surely, as they had the
sole disposal of themselves, they might, in the sight of Heaven, exchange their
vows; while that Heaven, which would record the deed, would also sanction and
crown with success, a union so pure, so disinterested, and formed so wholly
under its own sacred auspices; this transaction would in fact constitute their
real nuptials, and upon the demise of the old gentleman, they would immediately
submit to authorize their union by modern rites.

Miss Wellwood loved the villain -- Horrid wretch! -- he succeeded but too
well, and she was involved in the deepest ruin! My tears blot the paper --
would to God that they could cancel her faults, and serve as a lethe for her
sufferings. Not a soul was apprized of their intercourse; and so well were
their measures taken, that when, six months after, the young lady disappeared,
amid the various conjectures which were formed, not even the shadow of
suspicion glanced upon Courtland; every one expressed, in their own way, his or
her wonder, grief, and apprehension; the whole town took an interest in her
unexpected removal, and Courtland was with the foremost to express his
astonishment; but as Miss Wellwood was entirely independent, no one was
authorized to commence an active inquiry or pursuit.

The attention excited by any extraordinary event, after having its run, at
length subsides; and Miss Wellwood ceased by degrees to be the subject of
conversation; nor has her strange flight been in any sort accounted for, until
two days since, when Bridget introduced into our breakfasting parlour this
forlorn female, who, immediately upon fixing her eyes on my mother, sunk down
almost breathless at her feet! It is hardly necessary to add, that we instantly
raised the hapless orphan, and that after recognizing, with some difficulty,
the well-known features of Miss Wellwood, we received from her lips the
foregoing particulars.

Upon her quitting New Haven, she repaired directly to apartments, which had
been taken for her by Courtland, in a distant village; her patrimony, you will
not doubt, was relinquished to her betrayer. After sacrificing her honor,
every thing else became a trifle. At first, he vouchsafed to support her; but
for these two last years, either wanting ability or inclination, she has not
been able to obtain from him the smallest sum! Of her furniture, of her
valuable library, of every thing she is stripped; and for some months past she
has been reduced to the necessity of parting with her clothes, and of availing
herself of her skill in needle work, for the subsistence of herself and three
sons, whom she has borne to Courtland; and the little wretches, with their
injured mother, have long been in want of the common necessaries of life! Yet,
through all this, she has been supported, being buoyed up by the hope of an
ultimate residence with the father of her children: By the laws of Heaven, she
regards herself as already his wife, while she has repeatedly, with floods of
tears, besought the abandoned man to confer upon her, by the rites of the
church, a title so honorable; and, though still repulsed, and often with
severity, she has never despaired, until the tidings that Courtland was on the
point of marriage with a young lady, who had abode for some time with us,
reached her ears; this heart-rending intelligence produced her, upon the before
mentioned morning, in our parlour; this has also procured you the sorrow,
which so melancholy a recital will doubtless occasion.

The once beautiful form of Miss Wellwood is now surprisingly emaciated; the
few past weeks has made dreadful havoc in her constitution; we assay to pour
into her lacerated bosom what consolation is in our power; we have made her
acquainted with your character, with its marked integrity and uniform
consistency; and we have encouraged her to hope every thing from a goodness so
perfect. The desolated sufferer will herself address you. Alas, alas! what
further can I say! it is with difficulty that I have written thus far; but this
information we have judged absolutely necessary. May God preserve my dear Miss
Melworth from so black a villain -- every thing is to be feared. For myself, I
stand, in my own apprehension, as a culprit before you. Forgive, I entreat you,
my sorrowing mother; and with your wonted kindness, forgive -- O forgive --
your truly affectionate, and greatly afflicted

AMELIA WORTHINGTON.


Miss WELLWOOD to Miss MELWORTH.
[Inclosed in the preceding.]
NEW HAVEN, July 25th, 1789.
WILL the most faultless of her sex deign to receive a line from one, who, but
for the infatuation of a fatal and illusive passion, meeting her upon equal
ground, might have drawn from so bright an example, a model by which she might
have shaped her course, through an event-judging and unfeeling world. I am told
that your virtues partake the mildest qualities, and that pity, bland and
healing, is empress in your breast; if so, sweet mercy must administer there;
and you will then not only tolerate the address of an unhappy stranger, but you
will be impelled to lend to the prayer of my petition, a propitious ear. Miss
Worthington has condescended to become my introducer, and she informs me that
she has unfolded to you the story of my woes!

For myself, I write not, most respected young lady, either to exonerate
myself, or to criminate an unfortunate man, who has had the presumption to
aspire to such daring heights! Registered in the uncontrovertible records of
heaven, the wife of Courtland, in walks so reprehensible, it would ill become
me to be found. No, Madam, I write to supplicate, and on my bended knees I am
prostrated before you -- I write to supplicate you to use your interest in the
heart of Courtland, in my favor. Help me, O thou unblemished votary of virtue!
help me to reclaim a husband, who, not naturally bad, has too long wandered in
the dangerous paths of dissipation; who has drank too deeply of the empoisoned
cup of error; and who, if he is not soon roused from his visionary career, may
suddenly be precipitated into the gulf of perdition!

I said that Mr. Courtland was not naturally bad; and believe me, good young
lady, I have, in a thousand instances, observed the rectitude of his heart.
Early indulgence, and a mistaken mode of education, has been his ruin; but the
amiable qualities which are natal in his bosom, have, nevertheless, through the
weeds by which they have been well nigh choked, occasionally discovered
themselves. Yet, whatever are his faults, they can never obliterate my errors;
doubtless he observed in me some blameable weakness, or he would never have
taken those unwarrantable steps, which were the consequence of our
acquaintance; and now, circumstanced as we are, a failure of duty in him, can
never apologize for the want of every proper exertion on my side. He is the
father of my children; I have a presentiment that he may be recovered to the
bosom of equity; and, if he will permit me, I will watch over him as my dearest
treasure. Let him but acknowledge the honorable and endearing ties, father and
husband; let him but sanction them in the face of the world, and I will soothe
his aching head; I will smooth his thorny pillow; and, in every circumstance,
in sickness and in health, I will continue that faithful Fanny, whom he has so
often sworn never to forsake, and whom, in the fullness of his heart, he has
called Heaven to witness, he would ever prefer to all created beings.

Perhaps he can no more command the sums which I have yielded into his hands --
be it so, they were mine, I made them his, and he had a right to dispose of
them -- Nay, I think I had rather find him destitute; for such a situation will
acquit him of that cruelty, with which he is otherwise chargeable on account of
his late neglects. What are pecuniary emoluments, compared to that real
felicity, which is to be derived from a mutual, a faithful, and an unbroken
attachment? I have made the experiment, and I can confidently pronounce it in
truth a fact -- that we want but little here below. Let him know, Madam, that I
will draw the impenetrable veil of silence over the past; that we will commence
anew the voyage of life; and that if he will at length be just, his returning
kindness, by invigorating once more this poor, this enervated frame, will
restore alacrity to my efforts; and that I am, in that case, positive, our
combined exertions will procure for ourselves, and our little ones, the
necessaries of life.

What can I say? It is for my children I am thus importunate; were it not for
their dear sakes, the story of my sufferings should never interrupt the
felicity of Miss Melworth. No, believe me, no -- but I would seek some turfed
pillow, whereon to rest my weary head; and, closing forever these humid lids, I
would haste to repose me in that vault, which entombs the remains of my revered
parents, and where only, I can rationally expect to meet the tranquillity for
which I sigh. Innocent little sufferers! -- observe them, dearest lady; to you
their hands are uplifted -- Courtland's features are imaged in their faces, and
they plead the cause of equity.

Nor will we, my children, despair -- we cannot sue in vain: Miss Melworth
being our auxiliary, doubtless we shall again be reinstated in the bosom of
your father.

Forgive, inestimable young lady, forgive this incoherent rambling --
distraction not seldom pervades my mind. But grant, I beseech you, the prayer
of my petition, and entitle yourself to the eternal gratitude of the now
wretched

FRANCES WELLWOOD.


IT was well that my girl had discarded Courtland from her heart, and that she
had almost entirely recovered her tranquillity, previous to the receipt of
these letters; otherwise, the sudden revolution they would have occasioned,
must, in a young and impassioned mind, have uprooted her reason.

Old Mr. Wellwood had been one of the first of my friends; and from his
countenance and advice, on my setting out in life, I had derived material
advantages. The disappearance of his daughter had much perplexed me. I was
fearful she was ill advised, but from the idea I had entertained of her
discretion, I had not the least suspicion of the truth. Yet she never rushed
upon my memory, without giving birth in my bosom to sensations truly painful;
and I had been constantly solicitous to discover the place of her retreat.

Thus, under the influence of equity and gratitude, I hope my readers will do
me the justice to believe, that in Miss Wellwood's affairs, I found myself
naturally impelled to take a very active part. Margaretta speedily responded to
both the ladies; but as her letter to Miss Worthington is not absolutely
essential to my narration, I shall omit it: The following is a copy of her
reply to Miss Wellwood.

Miss MELWORTH to Miss WELLWOOD.
Village of --, August 1st, 1789.
I HAVE my dear Madam, received your pathetically plaintive epistle; and, over
the melancholy recital of your woes, I have shed many tears. I lament your
sorrows, and I honor the propriety of your present feelings and wishes: but a
letter which I yesterday wrote to Miss Worthington, and which she will soon
receive, will, I persuade myself, convince you of the indelicacy and inutility
of my interference relative to Mr. Courtland. Before the name of Miss Wellwood
had been announced to me, I had been convinced of my error, in entertaining the
most distant views of a serious connection with that gentleman; and the
preference my inexperienced heart had avowed for him, was eradicated from my
bosom.

Doubtless, if the ever honored guardians of my unwary steps, had not still
been continued to me. ensnared as I too certainly was, Miss Wellwood's wrongs
would not have exhibited a solitary trait in the history of the unfeeling
despoiler! You must excuse me, Madam, if I do not adopt your mildness of
expression, when speaking of a (...), whose atrocious conduct has blasted in
their early blow, the opening prospects of a young lady, whose fair mind seems
eminently formed for all those social and tender intercourses, which constitute
and brighten the pleasing round of domestic life. Surely, Miss Wellwood -- yet,
sensible that painful retrospection will avail us nothing, I stop short.

But, my amiable panegyrist, though I, myself, am ineligible as a mediatress,
between parties whose interests ought indeed to be considered as one, I am
authorized to offer you the extricating hands, and protecting arms of those
matchless benefactors, who, with unexampled condescension, have dignified the
orphan Margaretta, by investing her with the title of their daughter; nor is
this an empty title; their parental wisdom, their parental indulgence -- but
come and se^. I am commanded to solicit you immediately to repair to an asylum,
and to hearts, which will ever be open for your reception. My father, Madam,
confesses essential and various obligations to your deceased parent; and he
has long been anxiously desirous to render the arrears, which were due to Mr.
Wellwood, into the hands of his ever lovely representative. The bearer of this
letter is commissioned to pay you the sum of fifty pounds, which you are
requested to receive, as a part of the interest, which has been, for such a
length of time, your due; it may answer your present exigencies, and the
principal is still in reserve. It is with much pleasure, I avail myself of the
orders which are given me, to repeat my solicitations, that you would, without
hesitation, hasten to this mansion. An elderly man and woman, who are to return
to our village in the next stage, and who have long been our very respectable
neighbors, will call upon you at Colonel Worthington's, to take your commands;
and if you will be so obliging as to put yourself under their care, they will
see you conveyed in safety to one, who, in addition to the general and
unquestionable humanity of his character, feels his heart operated upon, in
regard to Miss Wellwood, by the ancient and inviolable claims of gratitude.

Mr. Courtland, though not at present our visitor, is still a resident in this
neighborhood; and my father bids me assure you, that every rational step shall
be taken, which can be supposed to have the remotest tendency toward the
restoration of your peace. He himself will undertake your cause; and as his
plans are always the result of wisdom and penetration, he is not seldom
gratified by the accomplishment of his wishes. He will seek Mr. Courtland; he
will assail him by those invincible arguments, with which equity, reason and
nature will furnish him; and should he still remain obdurate, my dear and
commiserating father will, nevertheless, aid you by his counsel, and continue
unto you his protection; he will assist you in educating your young people, and
in disposing of them in a manner, which will render them useful members of
society: In short, no efforts which benevolence can command, will be wanting,
to alleviate your misfortunes. Cheer up then, lovely mourner; the orphan's
friend is ours: I predict that the smile of tranquillity will again illumine
your grief-worn countenance; and should I yet have to raise to you the voice of
felicitation, good, in that event, will be educed from evil, and I shall then
cease to regret a circumstance, which at present, as often as it is remembered,
tinges my cheek with the blush of confusion. Were it necessary, I would add,
that no means shall be left unassayed, which may be within the reach of, dear
Madam, your truly commiserating, and sincere well-wisher,

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


TAKING it for granted, that the candid reader will allow for the partiality of
a young creature, whose high sense of common benefits, and whose gratitude had
rendered her almost an enthusiast, -- I intrude no comment thereon.
Margaretta's letter soon produced Miss Wellwood in our family; and upon the
morning after her arrival, I sat off in pursuit of Mr. Courtland. My most
direct course brought me to rap at the door of his lodgings, and as I was
rather early, I made myself sure of finding him within. My astonishment,
however, was not equal to my regret, when I was informed by his landlady, that
a writ of attachment, being the evening before served upon him, at the suit of
Mr. --, and he not being able to procure sureties, he was then lodged in the
county jail. I hesitated not in regard to the measures which were best to be
taken; a few moments produced me in that abode of the miserable; and I found
little difficulty in obtaining an interview with the prisoner.

Courtland -- never shall I forget his appearance -- all those airs of
importance, which had marked his innate consciousness of superiority, were
whelmed in the storm of adversity, that had at length burst upon him. His
haggard looks proclaimed, that sleep, in her accustomed manner, had forsaken
his dreary abode; his dress was neglected; his hair in disordered ringlets hung
upon his shoulders: In short, scarce a vestige of the finished gentleman
remained; and his folded arms and vacant countenance, as I beheld him
unobserved, were almost descriptive of insanity: But the jailer announcing my
name, his agonized and unaffected discomposure commanded my utmost
commiseration; an expression indicative of mingling confusion, surprise and
apprehension, instantly suffused his cheek; and, with extreme perturbation, he
exclaimed, Good God! Mr. Vigillius -- this is too much -- but, forgive me, Sir,
the uniformity of your character will not permit a continuance of the idea,
that you are come hither either to reproach or insult me.

"To insult you, Mr. Courtland! God forbid. I come hither rather the petitioner
of your favor; and it is a truth, that I at this moment feel in regard to you,
all the father predominating in my bosom; but, having matter for your private
ear, I must beg the indulgence of this gentleman for a few moments."

The humane keeper withdrew with much civility; and the consternation of our
delinquent was unutterable, while I proceeded to inform him of the early
knowledge I had obtained of the commencement and progress of his career; of my
information in regard to the ruined state of his affairs; and of my actual
correspondence with his principal creditors. "I have opened my business, Sir,"
I added, "by this exordium, on purpose to let you know how well qualified I am
to serve you; and however you may have smarted, while I have thus taken it upon
me to probe your wounds, I flatter myself you may be induced to bless the hand,
which is furnished also with a specific. In short, Sir, I am this morning
authorized to act in your affairs -- a fair plaintiff has constituted me her
attorney, and I come to offer you terms of accommodation -- Miss Wellwood, Sir
-- " At the sound of this name he changed color, bit his lips, groaned deeply,
and vehemently articulated -- " Jesus God, have (...) on me!" and, as if that
injured female herself had been present, he thus continued: Miss Wellwood --
lovely, but too credulous fair one -- wretched woman! -- I have undone thee;
but, Madam, my death shall soon present you the only compensation in my power.

"I came not, Sir," interrupted I, " to point to the defenseless bosom the
sha^t of despair: If you please, I will read a letter, which was written by
Miss Wellwood to my daughter." I read; and, as I folded the paper, I beheld
with astonishment, the tear of contrition bedewing his pallid cheek! " Welcome
stranger!" he exclaimed -- (...) w^^^^n -- injured ^aint -- forgiving martyr I
-- Yes, Heaven is my witness, that the tenderest affection of which this
obdurate heart has ever been capable, has still been the undivided,
unalienated possession of Fanny Wellwood -- but, Sir, she knows not the depth
of my misery -- God of heaven! my crimes have already precipitated me into the
gulf of perdition, and there remains no remedy.

But not to fatigue my readers by further circumlocution, I found that our
gentleman had become as wax in my hand; and I proposed to him, that if I could
procure his enlargement, he should retire immediately to my dwelling, where he
would meet Miss Wellwood (...) that the nuptial ceremony being legally
performed, my house should become his castle; that I myself would undertake his
affairs, thoroughly investigate every point, and endeavor to adjust matters
with his creditors.

My proposal was accepted, with the most extravagant and rapturous
demonstrations of joy; and my interest, combined with (...) of a substantial
neighbor's, soon liberating the captive, produced him a happy and a grateful
bridegroom. The rites of the church were performed; not a single ceremony was
omitted -- while Margaretta and Serafina, blooming as Hebe, and cheerful as the
morning, officiated as bride-maids.

Agreeably to my promise, I very soon opened my negotiation with the different
claimants upon Mr. Courtland. New Haven furnished me with many auxiliaries; it
was sufficient to produce the daughter of Mr. Wellwood, to command, in her
favor, the most energetic efforts: We speedily obtained a very advantageous
compromise; our debtor was, by the joint assistance of many respectable
characters, set up in business; and the deficiencies of nature and education,
which we have noted in him, were abundantly supplied, by the abilities,
application, and economical arrangements of Mrs. Courtland. Every year, a
regular dividend of the profits of their business is remitted to their
creditors; a large part of the old arrears is discharged; and they bid fair, in
the run of a few revolving seasons, to possess themselves of a very handsome
competency.

No. XII.
And now the ripening harvest clustering round,
With fruits mature our well formed hopes were crowned.

I AM sometimes wonderfully amused by the various comments upon these my
lucubrations, which in the course of my peregrinations are frequently poured
into my ear. It must be confessed, that as I journey from place to place, I am
sufficiently solicitous to collect the sentiments of my readers; and that
although I am often subjected to extreme mortification in this my anxious
pursuit, yet I have, upon some occasions, inhaled, from the voice of the
genuine critic, the fine effluvia of well-judged praise.

But during a late tour, which I made to a distant metropolis, I was not so
fortunate as to observe that my laurel crown was much indebted to the
brightening hand of fame; for although I then breathed the natal air of the
Massachusetts Magazine, yet I found that upon the ear of the many, even the
name of the Gleaner had never vibrated; and that a considerable majority of
those whose attention he had engaged, seemed more occupied in detecting the
real author, than in essaying to investigate the merit of his productions! An
old lady, (taking off her spectacles, and laying down her knitting-work)
informed me she had been credibly assured, that the Gleaner had in fact never
been married; that he was a young man, a dweller in Worcester, and that he
never having had a bit of a wise, it was impossible to tell what to believe.

A facetious divine, sitting by, gravely replied, "Well, if the scoundrel has
imposed upon the public by a fictitious tale, he ought surely to be tossed in a
blanket; and I, for my part, am willing to lend any assistance in my power, to
deliver a delinquent, so atrocious, to condign punishment."

A sober young woman next joined in the conversation, proceeding with great
solemnity to give in her evidence: She said she had but just returned from
New Haven; that she happened to be there when the story of Miss Wellwood came
out; and that she was, by unquestionable authority, positively assured they had
never heard the name of Margaretta Melworth, until they saw it in the Magazine;
that the Wellwoods, the Courtlands, and even the Worthingtons, (as described by
the Gleaner) were wholly unknown in that city.

"Pshaw, pshaw, young woman," said a pedant, who had eyed the fair speaker with
an air of supercilious contempt, "you know nothing of the matter; but ignorance
is always forth putting. I tell you that I had the honor of receiving my
education at Yale College; I was there at the very period, on which the Gleaner
represents his Margaretta as having passed some time in the city of New Haven,
and I more than once saw that young lady at church, and in several private
families; it is true that being then but a you^^, (for it was my first year in
the seminary) I was not very intimate with Miss Melworth, otherwise, I doubt
not, I should have been made acquainted with every particular which he
records." A testimony so decisive, could not be controverted; the old lady
resumed her knitting, and an air of general complacency took place.

I cannot help regarding this hunting after names, as descriptive of the
frivolity of the human mind: No sooner does an anonymous piece make its
appearance, than curiosity invests itself in the stole of sagacity, conjecture
is upon the rack -- Who is he? Where does he live? What is his real name, and
occupation? And to the importance of these questions, considerations of real
weight give place; as if the being able to ascertain a name was replete with
information of the most salutary kind. Whereas, if the writing is in no sort
personal, and cannot be construed into a libel, a knowledge of the author can
be of no moment, neither can a name designate a character. Facts, real events,
have often been communicated to the world under feigned names; and instruction
not seldom arrays itself in the decent and alluring veil of allegory.

The business of the reader is to scan the intrinsic value and general tendency
of the composition; if that is considerable, if that is laudable, he ought to
leave the author to announce himself under what auspices he shall judge proper.

Passing from these name-hunters, I joined a select tea party, when I had an
opportunity of hearing the work itself very freely descanted upon; and while I
was humbled by the uncandid and satirical disquisition which I underwent, I was
proportionably elated at observing that my daughter was as much a favorite in
the world at large, as in the village in which she has been educated. In
Margaretta every one appeared interested; and, however questionable the merit
of the Gleaner was deemed, Miss Melworth obtained her full share of applause. A
damsel, verging upon thirty, the height of whose feathers was enormous,
pronounced the poetry of the Gleaner pitiful; declared his essays in general
much below a mediocrity; and she added, that in her opinion they depreciated as
rapidly as the paper currency of insolvent memory; that his last numbers were
monstrously unnatural; that the library scene in particular was quite outree,
since it was impossible to conceive of a man so truly polite, thus passionate;
that her friend Mrs. G -- condemned those writings altogether, and that Mrs. G
-- having traveled, and seen the world, must undoubtedly be acknowledged a
competent judge. Yet she allowed Margaretta to be a decent young person; and
she doubted not if she had been left entirely to herself, she would have
generously chosen the man of her heart, whatever might have been the
embarrassments in which his juvenile errors might have involved him.

" Juvenile errors!" repeated a female who sat next her. "Is it possible,
Madam, that you can bestow an epithet so gentle upon crimes of so deep a die?
O! that our sex were conscious of their true dignity; that they were just to
themselves; then should we no longer behold the unprincipled betrayer obtaining
the confidence of virtue; then would the despoiler, banished from society, be
necessitated to press forward to the path of rectitude, and a uniform pursuit
of goodness becoming the price of his restoration to the privileges and
immunities of a social being, he would be compelled to array himself in the
garments of consistent equity. For my own part," continued the fair
rationalist, "I am free to own, however singular it may be deemed, that
unblemished virtue is, in my estimation, as essential in a man, as in a woman;
and that as man is commonly the primary aggressor, I regard a male prostitute
with even greater detestation than I do an abandoned female. I profess myself
an admirer of the Gleaner. I conceive him to be a moral writer; and I must own
that far from thinking the library scene unnatural, I have conceived it
inimitably drawn. Courtland is represented from the beginning as a man
extremely superficial; that shallow waters are not seldom noisy, is a common
observation; and it is as true that in silent majesty the great profound may
stand collected. Mr. Vigillius, with infinite address, had wrought up to the
highest pitch, the sanguine expectations of his man; he is in fancy placed upon
an eminence at which he had long aimed; and having, as he supposed, at length
obtained the enviable summit of his wishes, he is suddenly dashed therefrom.

"Is it then surprising to find him off his guard, especially when it is
remembered, that his reasons for keeping measures with the Gleaner were no
longer in force? Viewing the matter in this light, I confess, it appears to me
rather extraordinary, that his passions discovered no greater excess. But, be
this as it may, I declare to you, that Margaretta captivates my very soul; that
the virtues attributed to Hamilton strike me most pleasingly: I am charmed with
the open integrity, and the m^^^ly consistency of the character of that youth;
and I cannot but hope that the ensuing Gleaner, recounting his union with Miss
Melworth, will give us an opportunity of contemplating the most faultless pair
who have ever lighted the torch of Hymen, since the lord of paradise received
our general mother from the hand of her Creator."

"What in the name of ingenuity," interrupted the lady who was filling tea, "
has ^e done with Hamilton? I protest I am enchanted by that divine fellow; his
disdaining to enter the lists with Courtland, and his absenting himself during
the pursuit of that unworthy pretender, was a deportment at once dignified,
proper and manly. I confess that it has been no small disappointment to me, to
find him in the several last Gleaners but barely mentioned; and I am absolutely
impatient to hear of his return from exile, and of the restoration of his
hopes."

The lovely sentimentalists here adverted to, will recollect a conversation so
recent; and, from the throng which upon that occasion crowded the levee of Mrs.
--, they may possibly recognize the Gleaner; but even in this case, I feel
pleasingly assured, that in the bosom of candor, discretion and goodnature,
my secret is perfectly safe, while I am confident, that by the many I shall
remain untraced. My amiable panegyrists were unconscious that they delivered
their sentiments in the presence of an interested man, who hung upon their
lips, engraving their words in characters indelible upon the tablets of his
breast; yet, as I am happy in an opportunity of rendering to superior merit the
tribute of esteem; so I hasten with alacrity, to pen the acknowledgments of
gratitude; and while, in a manner as succinct as possible, I proceed to bring
down my narration to the present period, it is with substantial satisfaction I
confess that my hopes are invigorated, and my efforts stimulated, by a
knowledge that persons so worthy await, with some impatience, the recital of a
catastrophe which has long since gratified my utmost wishes.

It happened that Mr. Hamilton returned home upon the very evening which
witnessed the nuptials of Mr. Courtland and Miss Wellwood. Being ignorant of
his route, it had not been in our power to follow him by letter; and he was
consequently unacquainted with every thing that had passed in our village,
during his absence. This plan he had purposely concerted, with an expectation
of banishing from his bosom those tender sentiments of Margaretta, which were
inconsistent with his peace; and fondly imagining that he had effectuated his
wishes, he alighted at the lodgings of Serafina, whither he first repaired, in
tolerable tranquillity; but, on inquiring for Miss Clifford, being rather
abruptly informed by her maid, that her young lady passed that evening in the
family of Mr. Vigillius, in order to assist at the marriage of Mr. Courtland,
he discovered, in a single moment, the cruel fallacy of those hopes he had so
confidently cherished. He was unacquainted with the existence and even the name
of Miss Wellwood: It was Courtland's wedding night; he could think of no one
but Margaretta; a thousand varying ideas rushed instantaneously upon his mind;
all his purposes were broken; and he saw that, so far from accomplishing the
laudable end which he had proposed, by tearing himself from the beloved object,
he had too probably accelerated his own ruin.

In speechless agony he clasped his hands, and raising his fine eyes to Heaven,
he hastily withdrew to the retirement of his own chamber, where, summoning
reason, fortitude and religion to his aid, he endeavored to rally his
scattered forces, to recollect those resources which, in prospect, had appeared
so pregnant with consolation; and, upon this occasion, pressing into his
service every balancing auxiliary, in a manner becoming the mind conscious of
its divine origin, of its transitory abode in tabernacles of clay, and of its
beatified and immortal destination -- in a manner honorary to philosophy, and
honorary to manhood, he sought to make head against those passions which were
ravaging all before them, and which were seeking to precipitate him into the
abyss of despair! What progress he would have made in this conflict, and on
which side victory would have declared, I pretend not to determine; for after
the combat had continued, with various success, from twilight gray, until the
sober hour of twelve, the whole phalanx of discretion was thrown into disorder,
by the following little harmless scrip of paper, received from the hand of
Serafina; true, it bore on its milk-white surface certain caballistic
inscriptions, which seemed endowed with magic influence; and Hamilton read with
no less ardour than it was penned, the language of friendship.

"A DELICIOUS moment is at hand -- I myself will be the narrator -- come to me,
my friend, this instant. I would rather lose whole years of my existence, than
the luxury of an hour, which Fortune (I thank her goddessship) has reserved
for her, upon this occasion, devout admirer,

SERAFINA CLIFFORD."


No. XIII.
To the bl^^t haunts of amity he flew,
Hope lent him wings -- and wild predictions drew:
But sovereign truth explanatory rose,
And sweet oblivion whelmed his tender woes.

IT is scarcely necessary to add, that Edward immediately obeyed this
flattering summons: He was at a loss what to conceive, and he was ready to hope
for impossibilities; but a short interval presenting him before the companion
of his youth, he had little time for conjecture; and the propitious explanation
was no sooner given, than, absorbed in a delirium of joy, he lost sight of
every ill, and pronounced himself wholly invulnerable, altogether superior to
the shafts of future sorrow.

The ensuing morning produced him, the image of rationally complacent
happiness, in our bridal circle. He attended Miss Clifford; Mary and myself
were addressed by him with pleasing respect; and while he bowed upon the hand
of Margaretta, his eye beamed unutterable tenderness; a refined and animated
kind of affection, and a glow of ineffable satisfaction, swelled every
expressive feature, mantled upon his cheek, and seemed to invest him with
supernatural graces: In short, the fine manly open countenance evidently
assumed a celestial contour, and the charming youth was never before so
completely captivating.

In the beautiful face of Margaretta, mingling surprise and pleasure were
agreeably blended; a blush of sensibility pervaded her cheek; and an
attachment, which I dare believe will be lasting as her life, gradually
enlisted every faculty of her soul; an attachment, raised upon the
superstructure of esteem, entwining a full growth of amity, and finally
attaining the honorary wreath of rationally approved love. Such an attachment
was alone worthy the bosom of Miss Melworth; and I had the happiness to
observe, that her meliorated passions, rectified and confirmed, at length
pointed to the center of true and chastised felicity.

No sooner was she assured of the continued, and even augmented tenderness, and
of the confiding friendship of her Edward, than she yielded up her whole heart,
without hesitation, to the sweetly fascinating impression. Sanctioned by duty,
authorized by reason, and borne forward upon the feathery sails of
white-bosomed hope, she did not see that she ought to blush at avowing those
sentiments of preference, which her youthful heart acknowledged; and they were,
in truth, as pure as those which are impressed upon seraphic bosoms, amid the
paradise of their God.

During the period which preceded her marriage, she gave and received many
visits to and from Miss Worthington. She made many little tours round the
country; and, possessing a strikingly commanding exterior, with manners so
truly pleasing, she was, of course, followed by a train of admirers.
Courtlands, Bellamours and Plodders, of every description, crowded about her;
and, assailed on every side by the perniciously enervating and empoisoned airs
of adulation, the uniformity of her character was put to the severest test.

Miss Melworth, however, was fully equal to the ordeal which was thus prepared
for her; and she continued to receive her admirers of every description, in a
manner which was truly worthy of approbation. The impassioned feelings of the
devoted heart, never contributed, in the smallest degree, to her amusement: She
had not to charge herself with inflicting a single moment's unnecessary pain;
and no sooner did the serious pretender advance his claim, then his professions
of love, though received with grateful respect, were decisively rejected.
Obligations for every honorary testimony, she was free to acknowledge; but she
was not ambitious to enlist a train of danglers. Her heart, tremblingly alive
to the merits of Hamilton, although the nature of their connection was not
publicly known, was ready, almost indignantly, to resent the officious
competition of those, whom her delicacy induced her to consider as intruders.
But reason, true to its office, corrected the fervid ebullitions of passion,
and always brought her back to that tranquillity of mind, so necessary to the
full exercise of her fine talents. Observation, experience, reason and
judgment, these all combined to confirm her in the election she had made; and,
on the bosom of serenity, her hours rolled on.

Both the mental and exterior accomplishments of our children were still
improving; their mutual attachment seemed daily to augment, and the prospect
still brightened upon us. We often addressed them upon the importance of the
vows they were destined to exchange, representing, with all the energy which
language could command, the necessity of a permanent and unabating affection,
to render silken the bands of wedlock.

Expect not, we exclaimed, a continuance of those vernal zephyrs, which will
fan the genial flame of your early loves: It is true you may embark upon a
summer's sea, but the unavoidable evils, the vicissitudes, and too probably the
storms of life, will arise -- rocks and quicksands await the voyager, and
eagle-eyed discretion ought to set at helm, if you would pass safely between
extremes, which may be regarded as equally dangerous! Mutual esteem, mutual
friendship, mutual confidence, begirt about by mutual forbearance -- these are
the necessary requisites of the matrimonial career; and there is not a virtuous
endowment that can fall to the share of mortality, which may not be called into
action.

We conjure you to consult each other's humors, dispositions, sentiments, and
pursuits -- an interval is given you for this purpose: Congenial tastes,
congenial spirits, you ought to possess, or at least a similarity of views is
absolutely indispensable, if you mean to secure the social enjoyment of your
live^. Be not afraid, dear children of our fondest hopes, be not afraid to come
to the test. Submit with cheerfulness to the most scrutinizing ordeal; the
present is your era of experiments. Look well to your individual faults;
forbear to emblazon your virtues; and, if you find you cannot wholly eradicate
any little peculiarities, which the imbecility of human nature may perhaps have
interwoven with your constitution, examine if you can tolerate them; and seek
not, at the risk of your future quiet, during these peace crowned days, to shut
your eyes upon each other's errors! If you entertain the shadow of a preference
for any other object; if your long cherished attachment experiences abatement
-- shrink not from the voice of public censure -- you are still at liberty --
other pursuits yet open themselves before, you -- your most direct step is an
open declaration of what passes in the inmost recesses of your bosoms, to
parents, who will not fail to patronize and uphold you in every action, which
is, strictly speaking, the result of undeviating rectitude.

Reason authorizes us at this time thus to address you; but when once the
hallowed hour, that shall witness your plighted faith, is past, the transaction
of that hour will be indissoluble! Death only can set you free; and we shall
then, in one particular, dictate for our children a reverse of conduct. A
familiar figure will elucidate our meaning. You are to behold each other's
virtues with a microscopic gaze, while we shall hardly permit you to glance at
a blemish, even through the telescope of affection. It was to this effect we
occasionally, frequently, and solemnly addressed our children, while we were
peculiarly happy in remarking, that even to the searching eye of anxious
solicitude, not a single moment of apathy, hesitation or regret was at any time
apparent.

Thus rolled on the weeks, months, and years, until revolving time produced the
promised era: It took place in the last vernal season, when the humid steps of
April were on the point of resigning their tear gemmed empire to the bland and
flowery feet of the wreath crowned and odor breathing month of May. Margaretta
had then just rounded her nineteenth year; and, much sooner than would have
been our uninfluenced wish, we resigned our lovely charge into the hands of
him, who had long been the deliberate choice of her heart.

Arrayed in majesty serene, the morning broke. The (...) of day assumed to our
grateful view an uncommon cheerfulness -- all nature looked gay -- the flowers
seemed just expanding with emblematic sweetness -- and the birds carolled most
divinely.

We were not solicitous to collect a throng about us upon that auspicious day.
With happiness innate in our bosoms, the pomp and parade of joy we were
contented to spare: and our circle consisted only of those, whose faces we
should have contemplated with pleasure upon every rising morn and setting sun.

But though only a select party were summoned to partake our felicity, and to
gild, by their presence, our bridal day, yet we were ambitious of diffusing the
face of gladness over our village; and we therefore appropriated the sums which
we might have expended in the flowing goblet, and at the festal board, to the
preparing nuptial presents for those who mourned beneath the iron sway of
penury, and who, by this well-timed relief, felt their hearts once more attuned
to the genial voice of pleasure; who halted to entwine for us the wreath of
gratitude, the perfume of which was as the sweetest incense to our souls; and
who, bending at the footstool of paternal Deity, supplicated Heaven to confer
upon us the choicest blessings.

The bride appeared among us arrayed in spotless white; her robe was a delicate
muslin, drawn in many a flower, from the rich variety of her elegant fancy, and
neatly wrought by her own fair hands. She beheld the approach of her wedding
day, unconscious of those terrors attributed to her sex. Upon the evening
preceding the appointed morning, she entertained us, at our first request, with
many of our favorite airs, upon her piano forte. I did not perceive her heart
flying through her bodice! and her tremors being of the governable kind, she
was all her own agreeable self. What passed between her and her mother, with
whom she retired for a few hours, I am yet to learn; but this I know, that the
day itself was not ushered in either by fits, or any violently agonized
emotions. Virgin delicacy only served to animate, to heighten, and to new point
the exquisite beauties which adorn the finest face I have ever seen; and she
accompanied us to the altar, where the ceremony was performed, with a sober and
chastised expression of complacency, which seemed to say -- I have taken
sufficient time to deliberate -- I am under the direction of my best friends --
every sentiment, every passion of my soul approves the man who is this day to
become my husband. Undoubtedly he is every way worthy; I possess his tender and
entire affection -- his entire confidence. I am assured, I am satisfied; I am
happy.

For Hamilton, the unbounded rapture which took possession of his bosom, was
blended, however, with a dignified and manly manifestation of tenderness, which
served to tranquillize his deportment, and to present him in a state of mind
becoming the sacred rites which were to be performed: Yet, when he received the
hand of Margaretta, the big emotions of his bosom refused to be wholly
suppressed -- "Condescending excellence!" he exclaimed "may He, who thus
enriches me, render me worthy of so much goodness." The ceremony, excepting
this interruption, passed agreeably to its sacred arrangement; and, after the
good Urbanius had pronounced the benediction, we adjourned to our own mansion;
and, since, what halcyon days, weeks and months have revolved! Not a cloud has
yet obscured our horizon.

Last week, Margaretta presented Edward with her first born -- it is a male
infant. Let me see -- eleven months of uninterrupted felicity!! Can this last?
The present is a checkered state.

Reader, though we bid adieu to Margaretta for the present, I would not have
thee lament it too seriously. I know thou art tenderly attached to her; and I
therefore give thee my word, that if thy acquaintance with me continuest, we
will occasionally peep in upon her, and thus learn, from time to time, how
matters go on.

No. XIV.
Why dwell forever on the gloomy side?
Say, does not God unerring, still preside?
Why then ungratefully presume to scan,
With impious cavils marking every plan!
Though truth and justice both surround his throne,
And mercy gems the glories of his crown.

I HAVE often contemplated, with serious concern, the prevalency of a trait,
which I have been ready to regard as peculiar to human nature; and which, at
one time or another, seems to be more or less deeply marked in every mind. For
my own part, I pretend not to an exemption from the weaknesses to which my
species are incident; and it is rather by carefully remarking what passes in my
own heart, that I make my admeasurement of the feelings and propensities of
others.

But while I confess an equal, and in some instances perhaps a greater degree
of culpability, than what I attribute to my neighbor, I may be tolerated in
lamenting a frailty, which is common to all, and in an effort to correct, with
that application and avidity proper to a responsible and probationary being,
the disorders which assail the intellectual world.

The particular feature I have at this time in my eye -- or, to express myself
professionally, the field from which I propose to glean the materials for this
paper, is the general ingratitude to that august and self existent Being from
whom they originate, which pervades all orders of men, and is notoriously
exemplified in the language and conduct of every son and daughter of Adam! I am
free to own, that from a charge which it may be thought I have preferred with
somewhat too great boldness, I do not consider the most uniform Christians,
however exemplary their walk in life may have been, as altogether exempted;
and, were it necessary, I could produce instances from their most splendid
harangues, to justify my accusation: But as I revere the progress in the paths
of rectitude, which such have undoubtedly made, and as I respect even the
efforts of duty, I assay not to unveil those infirmities, which they may
probably join with me in deploring. But, if we may with propriety criminate
even the votaries of piety, the sincere and devout worshippers of Deity, what
lengths, in the career of ingratitude, may we not suppose the repining and
inconsiderate children of men may have run! How loud are the complaints which
every tongue, at one period or another, is found to utter! and (...) the
dispositions of Providence, in regard to themselves, are so obviously pleasing,
as to leave them nothing to bewail as individuals, how eloquent do they become
upon the sufferings of others -- of the species in general! and they will
expatiate for hours upon the miseries of poor human nature!

The neat built village wears the most thrifty appearance; the comfortable
dwellings, which cluster round, indicate the substantial landholder; the
vicissitudes of the year have revolved most propitiously; the golden harvest is
gathered in, and a general face of plenty is assumed; yet the untoward
circumstances of two or three scattering families, shall become the theme of
each rural circle, while they will forget to dwell upon the immeasurable bounty
which has so liberally crowned their autumn, and stored their granaries with a
superfluity of good! Would it not be better, if from their abundance they
jointly contributed to restore their oppressed neighbors, and to bid them
welcome to the blessings of equality, than thus by their w^^^y lamentations, to
arraign, at least by implication, the allotments of their common Father?

Behold that pangful sufferer! for two whole years, he has been consigned to
the bed of pain; scarce an interval of ease can he obtain -- sleep departs
from him, or lo^ks up his senses in the most restless and feverish slumbers,
from which he is roused to a still greater susceptibility of anguish; appetite
he has none; he is a prey to continued disquiet; every application for
assistance is in vain; and no help remains for him! Often is the story of his
woes repeated; it is echoed by every voice! all hands are thrown abroad, and
toward Heaven the accusing eye is frequently raised! but while the theme of his
sufferings becomes an exhaustless or standing topic of conversation, amid the
loquacity of language, scarce a sentence is found to express the healthful days
which, during fifty revolving years, he almost uninterruptedly enjoyed; and
scarce a finger is put out, to point to that eternity of bliss, which it is
probable awaits him.

The long happy parents are deprived, by some epidemical and contagious
disease, of the children of their youth! (...) -- the stroke is exceeding
heavy; the calamity is insupportable; it is almost unparalleled; every image in
nature, which is replete with horror, is summoned to shadow forth the mighty
grief; every lyre is attuned, and every minstrel is ready to fling to the
widely-echoing fame-breathing gale the iterated, pity-moving, and long
resounding plaints of woe.

For the soft endearments of their infant progeny, the opening bud of reason,
which was so fondly marked, the interesting prattle of childhood, the big
emotions which swelled the parental bosom, as they beheld the forming virtues
clustering in the progressive mind; for the expansive joy they experienced,
while they witnessed the rapid advancement to an honorary maturity; for the
rich completion of felicity which crowned their wishes, when they beheld their
satisfactory and comfortable establishment; for the marked and grateful acts of
duty, they have continued to receive; for for all these various scenes of
heartfelt good, which for a series of years have been so richly enjoyed -- they
are enumerated, it is true, but not as a balance for the present evil; far from
it -- they only serve to point the poignancy of the distressful era, and to
swell the features of such unheard of misery.

Yet it is a fact, that the removal of these objects of complacency will slope
their passage to that grave in which the good old man and woman must lay down;
and a reunion with their children, in future worlds, they confidently expect.

Is it possible that he who thus tacitly or indirectly arraigns the
designations elanced upon this globe, can believe in the superintendence of an
all-wise, all-gracious, all-powerful and paternal God? Certainly he does. Thou,
Lord, have done this, is a common expression; and yet, strange to tell, he is
constantly found thus cavilling at the dispositions of the Almighty!

Surely it ought to be remembered, that we see but a part of the immeasurable
whole; that he who formed the spirit, can give it, in a single luxuriant
moment, fully to partake an ample compensation for years of suffering.

Those families which are yielded to the hard allotments of penurious fortune,
experience the most lively satisfaction, as often as the flowery feet of bland
and genial charity visit their abodes; they have resources unknown to the
affluent; and highly relished is that refection, however homely it may in
reality be, which is served up with the sauce of hunger.

Exquisite is the moment of ease to the tortured frame; ineffable are the
sensations it partakes; and it is well purchased by the previous sufferings
which are its price. Those who have laid their children or other friends in the
grave, have perhaps enjoyed them long, or much; "they are not lost, but gone
before," and in another, and better state of existence, they shall receive them
again. I say, then, it is more becoming to endeavor to mitigate the ills of
life, than by the routine of complaints to be impiously murmuring against the
decrees of Heaven, which must indisputably result from a righteous and
perfectly consistent arrangement; and I aver, that it is a false calculation
which makes the sum total of human evils more than that balance, which, upon a
fair and open estimation, would appear at the foot of a regular and well
digested account, of those pleasurable or peaceful moments, which are the
portion of mortality.

But to such a pitch of infatuated absurdity has a persuasion of the calamities
incident to the present state arrived, that we are absolutely enjoined to hold
lightly the most virtuous enjoyments, to be constantly looking for an evil day,
and to tremble when we have attained to the summit of our wishes! What would be
the feelings of that father whom his child should thus address: "I will forbear
to take pleasure in the portion with which you have endowed me. I am momently
expecting the exertions of your power against me. I know that the rod of
correction is lifted up, and that you mean to chastise me. I expect evil and
not good from your hands; and though you have at present gratified me, by
putting me in possession of the inheritance for which I have sighed, yet, as I
am confident you mean speedily to resume it, I cannot consider it as my own. I
am fearful of beholding it in an eligible point of view; and, knowing you as I
do, I shrink from the approaches of that tranquil complacency, which would
pervade my bosom!!"

I would rather say, that as I possess much, I will enjoy much; the virtuous
pleasures of my soul shall not meet a barrier; freely I will expatiate, nor
will I know a boundary, save what rectitude shall throw around me; the present
moment is replete with blessings, and though the next may intercept some
pleasing view, yet, it is the hand of a Father which will be stretched out, and
my ultimate felicity will consequently be consulted.

It is well that the Creator, enthroned in majesty serene, is beyond the
capability of adopting that mode of conduct, to which repeated provocations
would precipitate the lapsed nature; it is well that his ways are not like our
ways; it is well that he regards with a steady eye the creature which he has
made, and that neither the caprices nor the inquietudes of the children of men,
can bend the determined purposes of his unchanging plans.

I have been shocked when I have heard the reason for consolation, which is
sometimes offered to the child of sorrow. -- "You have suffered much," exclaims
the commiserating friend, "many are the ills which you have been called to
encounter, and doubtless the period of retribution, winged by hours and days of
smiling tranquillity, is at hand." Ah! is it then true that we can challenge
the Sire of men and angels, as our debtor! most irreverent and impious idea!
Surely if our calculations were more accurate, and if we were under the
influence of gratitude to the Supreme Being, the genuine breathings of our
spirits would be -- In every calamity I have been upheld, and often have I
partook the enjoyments of life. Was I ascertained that the coming hour would
strike me from existence, would utterly annihilate the creature, who has thus
long lived, moved, and been endowed with the powers of reflection, I should,
notwithstanding, have no claims to make upon Him who has called me into being.
It is true, I have experienced my moments of sorrow; but they have been
abundantly compensated by innumerable felicities, by pleasures scarcely marked,
and by gratifications now perhaps forgotten. Witness those indulged and rapture
crowned months, when I was cradled by maternal tenderness, and soothed by every
blandishment, which generally shapes and strews with flowers the path of the
young adventurer; witness all those endearments, those incentives to virtue,
and those wife instructions, which cherished, which formed, and which brought
forward my youth; witness every aid and protection I have from time to time
received; witness the pleasing circle of friends, which so frequently cluster
round me, while my enemies find it convenient to stand aloof; witness those
expansive hopes, which have continued to illume my days, and to fan with genial
influence the feathery hours; witness the months of peace and ease which have
been mine -- how large their number, when compared to those upon which I have
been called to submit to the severe paroxisms of pain; witness the many nights
I have passed in the most salutary and restoring slumbers. -- But, having now
by me, a volume of essays, that may, in some future period, be brought forward,
in one of which I have expatiated upon this theme, I forbear to repeat myself.

And here let us pause for a moment. A succeeding number may take the subject
up in a different view, or at least illustrate the beauty and propriety of
cultivating the most lively sentiments of gratitude to the divine Author of
every good.

No. XV.
And, sure, to raise the ardent song of praise,
And chaunt of gratitude the decent lays,
Would best become the sons of kindred earth,
Who draw new mercies in with every breath.
Beings, who on unfolding kindness live,
Who from a Parent Deity receive
Each blessing which his plastic hand bestows,
And which coeval with existence flows;
With every hour should glad orisons swell,
And on the copious theme enraptured dwell.

IT is beyond a doubt, that much depends upon our efforts to cultivate an equal
and acquiescent arrangement of the passions. We are certainly too prone to be
unmindful of benefits, and to swell, with censurable ingenuity, even to a
gigantic stature, the ills of life.

The jaundiced eye will create the hue that does not in fact exist; sources of
tormenting anxiety, to the murmuring and ungrateful man, will grow thick upon
every bough, while a mind habituated to a retrospect of its privileges and
exemptions, will gather, from the same tree, fruits of the most meliorated and
delicious flavor. I can hardly conceive of an affliction so complicated, as to
drive upon the tumultuous waves of despair, the spirit upon which fortitude
has impressed its image.

The firmly virtuous man will industriously seek the means of consolation; when
stripped of all else, he will float buoyant upon the strong plank of
resolution; he will revert to the good which is past; he will remember the
fluctuating scenes of the present state; he will recollect the character of the
Sovereign Disposer of events; and he will possess light sufficient to shape his
weather-beaten prop, even upon the trackless deep. But how often are these
proper and dignified exertions reversed! The mind which is debilitated by
enervating pursuits and irrational hopes, which has formed the most elevated
estimation of its own deserts, and which has consequently plumed its
expectation to the highest pitch; such a mind, even in the midst of the most
happy arrangement, finds itself a prey to disappointment and disgust; though
surrounded by almost every enjoyment, its feelings are palled, and it
experiences all the disagreeables of satiety; a stranger to moderation, and
unblest by contentment, although marked by success, and crowned by the
completion of many hopes, it is, nevertheless, languishing under the domination
of murmuring inquietude; often it accuses its God of injustice; and it is
frequently found exclaiming -- "If I am not, in future worlds, to be rewarded
for my sufferings in this, it would have been better I had never known a being!"

We do injustice to ourselves, when we supinely declare, that all this is
wholly constitutional; that it depends merely upon the mechanism of the mind;
and that persons are born with a yielding, equal, and cheerful disposition, or
with a refractory, peevish, ungrateful, and gloomy temper of soul: This general
assertion may be convenient for the indolent; but those who assiduously
cultivate the virtues, and endeavor to exterminate the offending propensities,
which together grow in the soil of their own bosoms, while they allow something
to nature, will also acknowledge, that much depends upon the unwearied and
uniform exertions, which it is certainly incumbent upon every child of
mortality to make.

If the physiognomist justly delineated the mind of Socrates, as that
incomparable philosopher assures us he did, we are thus furnished with an
illustrious proof of the inestimable acquirements which depend upon, and are
produced by, the administration of reason. In truth, there is a sweet
pliability in the mind of man, which can familiarize it even with sorrow;
accommodating and acquiescent, custom habituates and almost reconciles us to
grief; we bend beneath the bursting storm; and though, with the elegant and
exquisitely susceptible Philenia, we may " fling the lorn pathos to the passing
gale," yet, becoming experimentally acquainted with the charms of melancholy,
we shall not fail, with that beautiful and plaintive mourner, to gem our
sorrows with a brightening tear.

A friend of mine was once in possession of affluence, surrounded by friends;
he seemed the favorite of fortune; and it was supposed, that the means of
embracing his utmost wishes rested wholly with himself; yet vexatious
inquietude seemed the motto of his life; and a prey to chagrin, amid his ample
endowments, he hardly ever tasted the felicity of a tranquil moment! But my
friend, by various accidents, was reduced to a state of penury; and I have, in
that situation, heard him declare without the smallest appearance of
affectation, even when the last morsel he could command was produced upon his
scanty board, that he felt contented and grateful, experiencing that
acquiescence in the allotments of Providence, and those agreeable anticipations
of futurity, to which he had been a stranger, in those days which had been
regarded as the epoch of his prosperity.

In fact, it is amid the clouds which adversity throws around the child of
mortality, that the efforts of the mind are called forth, and that all the
energetic powers of the soul are formed to action; and it is also irrefragably
true, that heartfelt enjoyments depend altogether upon the cultivation of a
philanthropic spirit, upon cherishing sentiments of general complacency in the
economy of Deity, in ourselves and others, and in thus embodying (if I may so
express myself) the virtues of the mind.

I have at this moment my eye upon two gentlemen, whom I have personally known
almost from their infancy; they are the sons of one man and woman; their
education was the same; their hopes and fears were similar; and they commenced
the career of business with like establishments, like advantages, and like
expectations.

Early in life they were both united to deserving females, to females
apparently of their choice; and they were thus furnished with every incitement
to virtuous perseverance; while the avenues to rational enjoyment were thrown
open before them, and the tranquillity of their days seemed insured.

For some time, fortune, liberal of her favors, acted the part of an impartial
parent, distributing her emoluments with an equal hand; but her various
dispositions at length predominating, the similitude of her operations was no
more.

Placidius, the eldest of those gentlemen, experienced her frowns; the tide of
success began to turn; misfortunes succeeded each other; and without the shadow
of a reason, upon which to ground the smallest impeachment of his integrity, or
a single circumstance, upon which even malevolence could call in question his
abilities, he beheld his affairs irretrievably embarrassed, his best laid plans
frustrated, and himself advancing rapidly to that state of insolvency, which
his upright soul, glowing with a just and high sense of probity, deprecated as
a most aggravated evil. Gradually the means of business vanished out of his
hands; his stock in trade was no more; and even the commodious mansion, which
with much ingenuity and taste, though with a proper attention to frugality, he
had reared, with the hope that it would still remain in his family, even this
habitation became the property of his creditors!

Placidius had ever expressed a great desire to perpetuate himself in his
lineal descendants; and this natural wish, might in him be designated as his
ruling passion: but many revolving seasons passed, ere Placidius hailed the
accomplishment of his wishes in this respect; and when at last, his Matilda
presented him with her first born son, the chalice of joy which he had but
lifted to his lips, was dashed from his grasp, by the sudden death of an infant
upon whose little form the traces of longevity seemed inscribed. For this
stroke he was wholly unprepared; and, to complete his catalogue of evils, his
bosom friend, his long loved, and ever esteemed Matilda -- even at a life so
precious, the king of terrors too surely aimed his missive shafts! the icy
darts of indulged sorrow found their way to the vital stream of life, and,
congealing the purple flow, the virtuous and accomplished Matilda was numbered
with the dead.

Placidius now felt as a man; his reason was the forfeit; and the hour which
restored this regent to her accustomed operations, only gave her to witness the
melancholy void in a mind which had once been the feat of expectations bland
and cheering, and which had been enriched by every white winged hope, which
rectitude could authorize. Recollection, gloomy recollection returned; dreadful
was the contrast with the past, which the present exhibited! Placidius shrunk
from the view; his health became the sacrifice, and for many months he seemed
to languish through all the different stages of a gradual and unyielding
decline. Fortitude, however, was at last triumphant; a calm, and rational
tranquillity succeeded the subsiding tumults which had agitated his soul. The
restoration of the health of Placidius, was the happy consequence of this
change; and he reflected as became a man, a philosopher, and a religionist.

Fortune, too, so far relented as to put it in the power of Placidius to
reimburse his creditors; and he was invested with the means of procuring for
himself a competency. It is true the splendor of his former prospects can
never be restored; but Placidius is contented. "I cannot," said he the other
day, "regard life as an evil: I should be most ungrateful, did I not own, that
to me it has been more fruitful of pleasure than of pain. It must be
confessed, that for a time I sunk beneath the agonizing stroke; for a time I
was wretched! it is true that the blasting of those presumptuous hopes, which I
had arrogantly formed for the meridian of my days, rendered me beyond
expression miserable; but my youth was serenely happy; for a great length of
time I enjoyed the most pleasing prospects; and though I have laid the wife of
my bosom in the grave, yet delicious are the tears which I now shed to her
memory; and in the fairest pages of retention, are treasured up the days,
months, and years, during which I partook with her the highest state of
felicity, which can fall to the lot of mortality, which can be experienced this
side that paradise of the blessed, where I shall again meet the virtuous
companion, in whose faithful bosom I reposed the fondest hopes and wishes of
which my being was capable; where I shall be reunited to a Matilda ever
blooming, ever immortal -- united too, by ties which will be then indissoluble.
And though no son or daughter will gem my parting moments with a filial tear,
yet the family of mankind is wide, the children of my adoption are many -- from
one source we originated, and my bosom feels and owns the great fraternity.

For Agetius, the brother of Placidius, we need scarce do more than reverse the
picture. In one even tide of prosperity his commercial transactions have glided
on; or if a trifling loss has sometimes originated a cloud, his subsequent
gains, by presenting abundant compensation, has speedily dissipated it: As a
merchant he is established; his trade is lucrative; every year enriches him; he
has lately completed an elegant dwelling; and the amiable and gentle Anna
still remains the social partner of his days. His son and daughter possess
pleasing exteriors, and improving minds; he has educated them agreeably to
plans which he deliberately formed, and they will soon take rank with the first
young people of their circle. Agetius has still possessed an uninterrupted
course of health; and no person can recollect any serious misfortune which, as
an individual, he has been called to suffer -- yet Agetius always appears
anxious, and even perturbed; he seems fearful lest you should suppose him
enjoying a single good -- he will not acknowledge a tranquil moment -- " no one
can so well say where the shoe pinches, as him who wears it," is an adage
frequently in his mouth; and he sometimes passionately declares that he wishes
he had never been born!

I said that I conceived such manifestations of ingratitude peculiar to man;
and surely, as far as we can observe, the children of instinct fail not to
enjoy the good which they possess.

In the early days of Placidius and Agetius their minds discovered, to common
observation, no essential difference. One remark I have however gleaned:
Agetius, when a boy, attempted not to restrain a haughty, choleric and
unreasonable ambition, which might be common to both; and his little heart
swelled with indignation, as often as he encountered a superior, in any of
those advantages, which are calculated to captivate the inexperienced eye. Upon
these occasions, his brother was ever at hand, to present the mirror of reason;
and he has often been heard to say -- "Turn, my dear Agetius -- turn thine
eyes to the multitude below thee, and from thence let thy comparisons be
raised; aspire not to such dangerous heights, but learn to estimate properly
thy own exemptions, thy own privileges, and to cultivate complacency in that
happy mediocrity which is allotted thee."

Placidius early habituated himself to commune with his own heart; he had a
serious turn, and was fond of useful information; he endeavored to moderate
his desires, and to entwine, with every arrangement, the blessings of
contentment; he aimed at regulating his passions, at obtaining a due
subordination in the intellectual system; and his plan was, to reduce every
movement of his soul, and every action of his life, to the domination of
reason, irradiated by genuine religion.

No. XVI.
Philanthropy, I know thy form divine,
Godlike benignity and truth are thine;
A citizen of the wide globe thou art,
Expansive as the universe thy heart;
Yet still to thee, the sufferer is most dear,
And over his woes thou dropp'st the pitying tear.

ALTHOUGH I have conceived a very high idea of the ancient and time honored
institution, which is the boast of that respectable fraternity, the Free and
Accepted Masons; yet, with all due deference to the worshipful brethren, and
with the most profound veneration for those occult mysteries, which have
remained inexplicable to so many ages, I take the liberty to confess, that I
have not been altogether pleased with one or two prominent features in this
wonderful order. The first which I shall point out, (which is, I confess, the
least commanding) is the contracted spirit which their practice not seldom
evinces in the irrational partiality they discover to men of their own
description; whereas, if the advantages of a brother are as great as is
insinuated, an unworthy mason should take rank in the lowest grade of mankind.

I know that masons make very pompous professions of philanthropy, and that the
broad expansive glow, the ties which bind the universal brotherhood, is full
often the theme of their lectures. "Upon the unalterable region of nature," say
they "our most ancient and honorable fraternity is established. As this can
never be invalidated, disannulled, or made void; so neither can the obligations
that render this extensive society indissoluble ever be abolished or in the
smallest degree violated by such as walk in the light of masonry. They that
occupy these mansions of truth, unity and joy, which the royal craft has
furnished for social delight, may as well annihilate themselves, as by the
least oblique direction to deviate from the square of integrity, in any
imaginable ratio to diminish the circle of benevolence; or in the smallest
instance to fail of laying righteousness to the line, and judgment to the
plummet."

All this is very fine; and if realized, it would indeed prove the magnificent
theater of simplicity, which they boast they are employed in rearing, to be
founded in the most splendid region of the orient beam; and we might in truth
expect to see, in real characters upon this mysterious stage, all the graces
and virtues that bless and adorn human nature. The exhibitions upon this
theater would doubtless inspire the most rapturous complacency; and the
beholder could not but rejoice, as he marked the kindred streams of devotion
and philanthropy, refreshing the gardens of paradise, and reinstating mankind
in that felicity for which the race was first created, and to which it is
asserted the royal laws of masonry are infallibly calculated to restore them:
But rhapsody apart; who does not know, that example has ever taken the lead,
in point of utility, of the fairest precepts? Yet I repeat that the
appropriation of benefits to a select party, is not that commanding or
distinguishing trait in the craft of which I principally complain; for it is
undoubtedly true, that although this exclusive disposition is very
conspicuously marked in the conduct of the associates of the Lodge, it is not,
however, peculiarly masonic; since it more or less characterizes every detached
body of men, pervading even the most liberal codes, and thrusting its
forbidding front into every congregated society, enlightened combination, or
sect of benevolence.

But the grand discriminating peculiarity which I have particularly in view,
and which I have regarded as objectionable, is that impenetrable veil of
secrecy, they affect to draw over their proceedings. Reason, disengaged from
the thin bandeau, with which they assay to hoodwink her, naturally interrogates
-- If the institution consists with rectitude, and is replete with that
salutary influence attributed thereto, why limit its operations within such
narrow bounds? Why circumscribe, either by compass or square, the progress of
genuine utility? Why not throw open the doors to investigation? Why not freely
communicate? and, unlocking the treasury of knowledge which they may have
accumulated, encourage those, whose abilities are adequate, to new light their
lamps at a flame so refulgent and so unextinguishable? Who can say, what such
an event might produce; what flowers might spring up; what scientific
discoveries might be made, if, like that impartial orb whose face of fire
decorates and dignifies the masonic insignia, the lights they have obtained,
were to become generally diffusive, extending their genial countenance, and
powerful patronage to the meritorious of every age, sex, and description? Thus
far reason. And should masonic superiority be once more urged; should it be, as
heretofore, again asserted, that the mysteries of the royal craft are too
sacred for the unconsecrated or vulgar eye; holy truth, which ought to be the
rule of speech, as well as action, and every principle of self complacency,
which is confessedly coincident with benevolence, will reluct at the very idea
of subscribing to a concession so humiliating; and the atrocious deviations and
paucity of intrinsic worth, or apparent respectability, sometimes exhibited in
the character of the free and accepted mason, will look with a very unfriendly
aspect upon every attempt to hallow his person.

Perhaps, in this levelling age, which seems to be marked as the era for
destroying all arrogant distinctions, the period is not far distant which may
throw down every separating barrier, which may annihilate every aristocratic
elevation, and the terms worshipful and right worshipful may sound as
discordant upon the democratic ear of knowledge, as that of monarch, prince, or
duke, upon the auditory never of the political hero. The literary or the
masonic world may hear the voice of liberty; in the empire of arts a Thomas
Pain may arise; and we may chance to hear of a cidevant grand master, who may
then be content to relinquish this high sounding title, for a more humble and
equal appellation; the avenues to the goal of wisdom, being widely expanded,
proficients of every description may throng her ample courts, and to every
member of the mental Commonwealth, the road to literary honors may be alike
open.

But, to be serious -- for in fact, while thus engaged in the routine of my
occupation, I have, almost without design, wandered through the gate of an
enclosure, which the owners have been careful to guard from the approaches of
every Gleaner, and at which it was my purpose but barely to glance; I confess,
that in thus trifling, I appear rather the inconsiderable idler, than that
careful and pains taking being, who is industriously employed, in honestly
acquiring the means of supporting his pretensions to either a natural or
literary existence; but the desultory fugitive, of necessity eccentric, is
seldom beside his vocation; and while I beg pardon for an attempt to scale an
interdicted wall, I will endeavor to recover my path, to that fair field, to
which, in the beginning of this essay, I had intended to shape my course.

But before I proceed a single step further, I will present the reader with a
most excellent letter, which carries its authenticity upon its very face; and
which, as I am truly solicitous for his entertainment, I very sincerely wish
may be productive of as much genuine satisfaction and heartfelt pleasure to
him, or even to her, as it afforded me; although I must own, it was the
association of ideas it originated in my bosom, that gave me to leap those
hedges, which have served, from the days of the castle builder in Paradise,
even unto the present time, as the ancient boundaries of a self created order.

I think, however, I shall not again, even by the fascinating charm of
philanthropy, be betrayed into walks, which have been so seldom trod, except by
the hallowed feet of the close and uncommunicative proprietors.

Yet, notwithstanding its influence over my conduct, the facts contained in the
letter, merit the pleased admiration of every feeling heart: Here follows a
faithful copy thereof.

To the GLEANER.
Cape-Cod, Harwich, May 16, 1793. SIR,
HOWEVER little you may be known in the metropolis of Massachusetts, you will
find by this address, that your fame has reached one of her remote dependants,
and that you are at least read in the good town of Harwich.

It is not my design to retail the various opinions formed of your writings in
this place, nor even to express my own sentiments thereof; for I have been, for
many years, an irreconcilable enemy to the custom of praising a man to his
face; nay, I have not to charge myself, since I could write man, with any thing
like adulation, even to a woman, whose understanding I have conceived one tenth
part of a degree above par. No, Mr. Gleaner, nothing of all this; and had you
been ten times more excellent than you are, though I should have continued
reading you with much avidity, yet, had I not a communication to make, which I
have long with much impatience expected to see issuing from the press, and
which I think will figure, most meritoriously, in the annals of benevolence, --
my pen would have still continued dormant.

Regarding you as a man, in whose mental composition the milk of human kindness
redundantly flows, I have for some months formed the design of ushering my
little narrative to public view, through the channel of your paper; but
observing you engaged in a regular detail, I have waited until you have
conducted your account to a convenient pause; not thinking it proper, or even
entertaining a wish, to interrupt you in the midst of such interesting
occurrences; but learning by your last number, which I perused a few evenings
since, that you have for the present suspended your domestic sketches, and
wishing very sincerely, that your Margaretta may figure as pleasingly in the
character of a matron, as she has in that of a daughter, I hasten to execute my
purpose, lest I should not be in time for an exhibition in the present month.

I experience not the smallest apprehension, that the anecdote I am about to
furnish, will be viewed by the general eye as trivial or indifferent. The full
period is at length arrived, when the interests of humanity are pretty well
understood; and what ever circumstance contributes to throw down the barriers,
which have so long divided the common and extended family of mankind into
sections, circles, or parties, will, I have no doubt, be allowed its full
proportion of merit. Well, but as you are a wise man, I take it for granted you
are not a lover of prolix exordiums; and as I am sensible that it is very ill
judged, to render the dimensions of the portal more spacious than the building,
I shall therefore come immediately to the point.

Captain Mayhew, a very worthy and respectable inhabitant of this town, and who
is also a navigator of considerable merit, has for some time been employed in
the whale fishery, by Captain David Pearce, a very useful and enterprising
merchant, in the town of Gloucester, commonly called Cape-Ann. He was lately on
his return from a whaling voyage, which had been uncommonly prolonged, sinking
under a scurvy of a most alarming and distressing nature. That truly shocking
disorder, so afflicting in its consequences to the hardy sons of the ocean,
seizing him with every indication of a fatal termination, he was reduced to the
most deplorable situation; the seamen too, were all languishing under the
melancholy effects of this debilitating and mind affecting malady; and there
was hardly ability left with a single man, to discharge the duties which were
absolutely necessary to their common existence. Captain Mayhew was destitute of
every thing, which could be considered as a specific, in this cruel disease;
and the salted or dried meat, which they were obliged to swallow, hourly adding
to the evil, gave it the most frightful appearance. Thus, in effect disabled,
he was reduced to the necessity of putting into the island of St. Helena.

As the island of St. Helena is a domain of the British crown, and as Captain
Mayhew was a subject of an American republic, so recently esteemed a
rebellious, and now a dismembered territory, the probability was that the
rights of hospitality would be but sparingly exercised toward him; and it was
only the urgency of his condition, that determined him to flee for succor to
so questionable a port.

It happened for some time previous to the arrival of Captain Mayhew at St.
Helena, that the fertilizing showers had been withheld, and the insufferable
blaze of day, so genial when qualified by their bland and humid influence, now
spread over the face of nature a sickening and deathful hue; the thirsty earth
visibly mourned the continuity of its intense and gairish rays; no silvery dews
bespangled her now yellow mantle; her once velvet covering became parched and
heathy; the green vegetable lifted not its head, while even the stinted growth
which the ground, thus circumstanced, produced, were by this melancholy drought
cut so surprisingly short, as to yield the inhabitants but a scanty and even
penurious support. This intelligence was as a death warrant to Captain Mayhew
and his company; the fruits of the earth were become indispensably necessary to
their existence; it seemed impossible to procure them, and they viewed death as
inevitable.

Daniel Corneille, Esquire. was at that time (and for the benefit of human nature,
unless he is removed to a more extensive sphere of operation, I trust that he
still is) governor of the island, and Henry Brooks, Esquire. deputy governor. I
confess I take a superior pleasure in penning the names of those philanthropic
gentlemen; and if the general tenor of their lives corresponds with their
conduct to Captain Mayhew and his comrades, I pronounce, that both their names,
and acts of liberality, ought to be engraved "by the concentred rays of the
sun, upon the azure surface of the heavens."

The governor's private gardens, and grounds of every description, were
irrigated by means of aqueducts, which conveyed the water several leagues, from
those immense reservoirs, the mountains; and in consequence of being thus
plentifully accommodated by the fructifying streams, the vegetable productions
of nature revelled there, in all the pride and vigor of a healthy and rich
maturity; the hand of skilful and assiduous culture had been regularly
employed; and in addition to the perfection of the plants, the most luxuriant
abundance laughed around.

How many there are, who would have reserved the ripened fruit of such
unremitted care for themselves, or for others of their own description? How
many there are, who would have trembled at the very idea of admitting a number
of strangers, of a grade, too, not accustomed to regularity, into grounds laid
out by the hand of judgment, combined with the most exquisite taste, and kept
with a very exact attention to order? How few there are, who would have sought
out the diseased captain of an obscure whaleman, and his unpolished associates!
But governor Corneille and his deputy are citizens -- they are citizens of the
universe; and it appears that they are perfectly versed in the rights of
humanity.

To their beautiful gardens, Captain Mayhew, with the rest of the sick, were
conducted; they were authorized to make an unrestrained use of the necessaries
with which they were stored, and a free access was at all times granted them!
The sick and debilitated seamen strolled at pleasure there; under the wide
spreading tree, upon mossy seats they reclined; or, stretching themselves in
the foliage crowned arbor, as they slumbered upon the enamelled grass, they
inhaled the salubrious breeze, which, richly impregnated with the restorative
effluvia, collected from a thousand healthful sources, new strung their nerves,
presented the sovereign panacea, communicating to the life stream, which had
moved with morbid and slow paced languor, the animating and sprightly glow,
thus bequeathing to the whole system returning agility. The tall, finely formed
and white grooved celery; the medicinal watercresses, with every other
antiscorbutic, with benevolent avidity were plentifully furnished; and when, by
these salutary means, such a measure of strength was obtained, as to enable
them to pursue, with renovated spirit and returning alacrity, a voyage which
Capt. Mayhew was ardent to terminate; by the same liberal hands they were amply
supplied with every vegetable, and other requisite, which could be procured in
the island of St. Helena.

It is, I conceive, hardly necessary to add, that both the governor, and
deputy governor, disdained a pecuniary reward. The truly philanthropic man,
conscious that he is amply repaid by the feelings of his own heart for every
benevolent action, possesses too much integrity to accept a second recompense;
and I have only fervidly to wish, that the Corneille's, and the Brooks's, of
every age and country, may still find themselves, from so rich and exhaustless
a source, reimbursed for every humane and benign interposition.

It seemed as if Capt. Mayhew, who was still in a degree enfeebled by the
effects of his disorder, had obtained the particular patronage of some
powerfully propitious invisible, whose agency was employed in causing the sons
of philanthropy to pass in review before him. As he proceeded in his course,
crossing the equator, he met with several European ships, making their homeward
passage from a West India voyage. By the commander of one of those ships, who
was a descendant of the Gallic nation, (and right sorry am I, good Mr. Gleaner,
that I cannot give you his name) he was hailed, who finding him a sufferer from
a malady so common to seamen in long voyages, most generously insisted on his
accepting wines, cordials, vegetables, and live stock, to a very considerable
amount; and when Capt. Mayhew ventured just to hint at the propriety of his
receiving some kind of compensation, this humane Frenchman nobly, liberally,
and in the true spirit of cidevant French politeness, replied, " Pardonez moi,
Monsieur; my whole ship and cargo, were they necessary to your relief, should,
I assure you, be at your service."

What truly complacent sensations, must gladden the expanded heart, as it
contemplates remote individuals, descendants of the same stock, when
accidentally collected, thus benignly engaged in the exercise of good offices;
thus benevolently contributing to the relief of their fellow men. But, Sir, I
invade not your province; many a scattered reflection you will doubtless glean;
while I, satisfied with having published this testimony of the gratitude of my
townsman, Capt. Mayhew, and with an attempt, to the utmost of my poor
abilities, to do justice to characters, which, by the divine influence of
general munificence, were truly ennobled, -- shall content myself with assuring
you, that I very ardently wish the success of your literary career, and that I
am your constant reader,

ROBERT AMITICUS.


Philanthropy, I know thy form divine -- essence of benevolence, gem of
uncreated luster, originating from, and essentially designating the character
of Deity! It is thou who can humanize and dignify the mind upon which thou
deignest to glance; in every radiant walk we trace thy agency; thy being is
celestial, and thy administration will continue coeval with the existence of
that great First Cause, whose beneficent attribute thou art.

Spirit of energetic influence! with sublime joy I mark thy salutary course;
the face of misery brightens at thy approach; the pallid cheek of sickness is
tinged by a momentary flush of pleasure; the icy hand of penury suspends its
operations; melancholy gladdens in thy presence; and the sons and daughters of
sorrow, mingling their meliorated voices, exalt the dulcet song of gratitude;
charity, white robbed daughter of heaven! beneficence, liberal benevolence,
genial humanity, and every social virtue, these all compose thy train, and
follow where thou leadest.

Thy delight is in the happiness of mankind; thou ^rectest no landmark;
distinctions, if we except those of virtue, are unknown to thee; and the
propitious expansion of thy wishes, not circumscribed by sect, age, country, or
even sex, know no other bounds than those which encircle the one grand, vast,
and collected family of human nature. The features of thy seraphic countenance
are not peculiarly masonic, Pagan, Hebrew, Jewish, deistical, or Mohammedan; and
while thou experiencest a rational predilection for the growth of merit, in
every soil, thou bendest with mild equality and compassionate benignity upon
the world of mankind; thou markest, with enkindling rapture, the progress of
knowledge; thou assistest to unbind the shackles of superstition; thou
assayest, with prompt alacrity, to level the promontories of arrogance, to
exalt the lowly valleys; to make the rough places smooth, and the crooked
straight; and thou rejoicest to behold the emancipated and expanding mind. Thou
adoptest not the error, which represents genuine information as administering
to the domination of sorrow; but fully persuaded of the progressive and
ultimately happy destination of the creature man, thou art apprized of the
eligibility and propriety of his qualifying himself, in this, his novitiate,
for the still higher grades, to which he shall ascend. But, while thine eyes
beam unusual effulgence at the advancement of enlightened reason, thou have a
tear ready for the sons and daughters of ignorance, and thou disposest the
heart to commiserate the sufferer, of whatever description.

Sovereign alleviator of human woes! penetrated with a glow of ineffable
complacency, I behold thee amid thy splendid career; thou observest the victim
of adversity, and thou stoppest not to examine his local situation, his
complexion, the mental arrangement of his ideas, or the fashion of his garment;
it is sufficient for thee, that he is bowed down by affliction, and that he is
a branch of that family, which an all-wise Regulator has placed as
probationers upon this earth; immediately thou originatest a plan for his
relief, and thou art blessed in an exact ratio as thou art successful.

The children of indigence are thy peculiar care, and honest poverty is ever
sure of thy pitying eye and thy extricating hand; thou enterest, with correct
and equal salutations, the hut of penury; thou allowest for the feelings of the
necessitous; thou approachest the poor with respect, and with the utmost
delicacy thou art found administering to their wants; the dignity of human
nature is never degraded by thee; and man, made in the image of his Creator,
however depressed, or sinking under a variety of adventitious evils, fails
not to command thy veneration.

The bosom which is thy domain, is always awake to the bland effusions of
tenderness, all thy purposes are liberal; nor do thou content thyself with
the theory of good, for to the ennobling practice of uniform munificence, thou
art still found stimulating thy votaries.

Blessed genius of benevolence! thy dominion shall ultimately become a universal
dominion; every malevolent passion shall flee before thee, and the salutary
effects of thy extensive operations shall issue in the establishment of general
harmony and never ending felicity.

No. XVII.
Wherever the maiden Industry appears,
A thrifty contour every object wears;
And when fair Order with the nymph combines,
Adjusts, directs, and every plan designs,
Then Independence fills her peerless ^eat,
And, lo! the matchless trio is complete.

I HAVE sometimes been induced to think, after a serious attempt to investigate
the causes which have operated in the production of so many needy dependents of
both sexes, upon the bounty of, or civil requisitions made upon, the more
successful, systematic or industrious members of the community; that the origin
of this prevalent evil may generally, with a very few exceptions, be traced to
that luxuriant source of folly, an unwarrantable, and irrational kind of pride,
or false notions of gentility. Parents, in a certain line, either educate their
sons with a view to one of the three learned professions, to a pursuit of the
fine arts, or, apprenticing them to the merchant, or seafaring adventurer,
conceive they have placed them in the road, which will most probably terminate
in crowning them with opulence and respectability.

It is undoubtedly for the interest of society, that a considerable proportion
of our young people should be thus appropriated; but when it becomes evident
that any particular department is overstocked, a wise father ought certainly to
turn his attention to those branches of business, which, by being less
occupied, give the youthful candidate a fairer chance of possessing himself of
that competency, which is so necessary to the supporting real dignity of
character. But gentlemen who constitute the particular grade to which I advert,
look with disdain upon every handicraft occupation; the whole routine of arts
mechanic, or, in other words, useful employments, they regard with sovereign
contempt; and they would esteem their sons degraded beyond redemption, if they
designated them by any one of those callings, which have been appellated
servile. I will just hazard (...) question, relative to the propriety of the
conjugation, which places servile as the adjective of mechanic. Does not that
man bid the fairest for genuine independence, who possesses in himself the
means, whenever he chooses to call his industrious application into action, of
supplying himself even from the wants of others, with the necessaries of life?
And if so, is not the above mentioned attempt at approximation extremely
heterogeneous?

Prejudices so absurd are particularly ludicrous in a government, the genius of
which is, to cultivate as great a degree of equality as will consist with the
requisite order and well being of the Commonwealth; and yet, strange to tell,
perhaps there is no part of the world, where these unnatural distinctions, so
humiliating to the mechanic, and so elevating to the suppositious gentleman,
are so prevalent, or exist more forcibly, than in some of these American
States; and, however obvious it may be, that the predominating bent, or
predilection, with which nature may have endowed the boy, ought to claim some
share in the determination; it is, nevertheless, irrevocably decreed, master
must be prepared to fill a gentleman like sphere; and though it is very
possible, that not a shilling of property may be reserved for his commencing
the career of business; yet, however below a mediocrity his talen^^ confessedly
are, his education must be conformed to the prospects which are formed of his
future destination, to the ideas which his parents have entertained of family
dignity, genteel life, etc. etc. During the hours of childhood, by arrangements
the most ill judged, an undue exaltation is cherished; by degrees he becomes
habituated to consider himself as superior to various classes of his fellow
men; his adolescence is passed in frivolous pursuits, and if his maturity is
supine, indolent, or destitute of enterprise; if he wants genius, which is a
gem as rare as estimable, or even if he is unsuccessful, or unfortunate, (and
who does not know that merit cannot always command its wishes?) he is, of
necessity, thrown a useless burden upon the public.

I said the probability was, that these unjustifiable prejudices, were more
particularly the growth of the American world, than of any other soil; and I
have hazarded this conjecture, from the comparison I have been led to make,
between a variety of facts that have passed under my own observation, and the
records of other nations.

"A printer!" said a young spruce coxcomb, who possibly might have had the
honor to stand behind a counter, and who was fortuitously jumbled into the
stage-coach with Mr. Bache, as it performed its tour of duty through a part of
Pennsylvania -- "A printer!" and, drawing himself up into a corner of the
vehicle, with a supercilious air, he maintained an obstinate silence during the
remainder of a journey, which having, previous to his learning the occupation
of young Bache, conceived, from his appearance, a high idea of his importance,
he had commenced with insignificant volubility; but he was ignorant that he
with whom he journeyed, was the lineal descendant of the immortal Franklin;
otherwise, it may fairly be inferred, that the eclat of his birth, might, in
the opinion of this superficial Billy Varnish, have atoned for the mechanical
complexion of his profession.

A quondam acquaintance of mine, who is a merchant, not extremely remarkable
for the moderation of his desires to accumulate gain, was, some months since,
on the verge of suffering very considerably, from the undue influence of this
very prejudice. He had appointed an intelligent young man to the command of a
ship of his, during a long and intricate voyage. It happened, in the course of
the navigation which the Captain was directed to pursue, that he found himself
necessitated to put into a port in England, at a distance from the metropolis.
A variety of circumstances contributed to produce, in the affairs entrusted to
his care, a very embarrassing and disagreeable event. He was compelled to
depart full speed for London, while his ship continued at anchor in Liverpool.
An honest gentleman, with whom he had commenced an intimacy upon the Albion
coast, gave him a letter to a trunk-maker in the capital, who, he informed him,
was capable of doing him great service. A trunk-maker! how, in the name of
common sense, should a trunk-maker be instrumental in effectuating any
important purpose? A decision upon the Captain's business remained with the
high court of admiralty; could a trunk-maker influence the determinations of
that august body? The supposition was ridiculous; it could never obtain the
smallest degree of attention in the serious reflections of an American.

The Captain proceeded systematically; he applied to a certain commercial
gentleman, well known in America, and whose extensive exports to this new
world, supply many of our capital dealers with large quantities of European
commodities: By this respectable auxiliary, he was introduced to the American
consul resident in Great Britain, and the most favorable representation that
truth could authorize, was made. The consul, however, received him rather
roughly. Fatigued, perhaps, by a multiplicity of applications, he seemed not
disposed to interpose his good offices, in order to promote an accommodation of
the difficulty; he insisted much upon the ill conduct of American seamen, and
observed that if they persisted in thus carelessly involving themselves in
ambiguities, and in flying in the face of those adjustments, which had been
legally made, they must extricate themselves as they could, or be contented to
submit to the consequences; and he absolutely declined addressing himself to
the lords of the admiralty, or the adopting of any conciliatory measure, except
the Captain returned to Liverpool, and brought with him certain evidence, or
evidences, which he insisted would be the only proper vouchers of his integrity.

It was in vain that our young adventurer remonstrated; that he represented the
amazing increase of expense, which such a journey, and the detention of the
ship, would accumulate to his employer; it was to no purpose he suggested the
possibility, that such an enormous expenditure might issue in his own ruin. The
consul continued unyieldingly obstinate, and the situation of the Captain was
truly distressing! The merchant, to whom he returned to relate the ill success
of his application, had exhausted the utmost of his influence, in presenting
him to the consul; he was not particularly known to the officers of the
admiralty, and he declined any further interference in the business.

It was in this moment of cruel anxiety, that the trunk-maker occurred to our
sea commander; yet the idea was the drowning man catching at a straw; but
having got, however, into the narrowest and most dangerous frith, it might be
necessary he should ply his oars, if a full sail would not avail him. He could
at least deliver his letter; and in a state of vexation, almost bordering on
despair, he presented himself at the door of the trunk-maker, which opened,
only not spontaneously, and he found himself in a shop of a spacious and
thrifty appearance; it was furnished with a prodigious number of trunks, of
various sizes, and different degrees of elegance; and every arrangement
proclaimed the industrious and ingenious mechanic. All this looked very well in
its place; but all this, said our agitated young man, is nothing to the
purpose. The master workman soon made his appearance, and he regarded the
stranger with intelligent civility. The letter of introduction was produced,
which being perused, the trunk-maker with an air of true old English
hospitality, shook the son of Neptune by the hand. "Walk in, Sir; walk in: You
have got a little disagreeably entangled, and I suppose your feelings are all
up in arms. To a young man, undisciplined in the school of misfortune, the
first onsets of disappointment are truly painful; but the vicissitudes of life
are as well calculated to furnish a rational being with hope as with fear; for
light as surely succeeds the darkness, as the darkness the light. Probably you
may be at a loss to conceive in what manner my assistance can be of use to you,
and as I am at present a little engaged, if you will throw your eye over them
loose papers, they may help you to a clue, which may unravel the mystery."

The Captain, it will not be doubted, eagerly availed himself of this
permission; and so regular was the disposition of the different essays, which
this uncommon compting-house displayed, that a cursory glance was sufficient to
evince the literary abilities of the author; his consequence to certain persons
high in office was extremely obvious; and it was apparent that his merit,
rendering him necessary to the great, had procured him free access to their
private ear, and a considerable degree of influence over their determinations.

In two days our Captain received an invitation, to dine in a family way with
the trunk-maker; and his reception at his patron's was marked with an
expressive smile, which indicated a happy termination of his difficulties. The
trunk-maker had conversed with the lords in office, he had made the necessary
representations, and he had obtained explicit and indisputable credentials for
his client, who having gratefully partook of a plain, substantial dinner,
received with transport his legal permit; and, returning to Liverpool, with a
heart gladdened by the joys of emancipation, immediately reimbarked, proceeding
with all expedition to prosecute his voyage.

Was I the father of a family, the trunk-maker should be my model; it would be
my wish to furnish the opening reason of my children with every help which
might be necessary to produce them with advantage in the career of knowledge: I
would aid them to figure in the most polished circles; I would stimulate them
to every laudably splendid pursuit; the avenues of literature should be thrown
open before them, and they should receive as much information as it was in my
power to procure for them: But as, with all my gifts, I should be anxious to
endow them with the means of obtaining as great a share of independence as
might consist with humanity, I would certainly aim at investing them with some
useful qualification, which might serve them in the last necessity, as a fund
upon which they might draw sufficient to command the necessaries of life.

But if the male part of our American world are, in the morning of their lives,
too much neglected in this respect, females have abundantly more reason to
complain. Our girls, in general, are bred up with one particular view, with one
monopolizing consideration, which seems to absorb every other plan that reason
might point out as worthy their attention: An establishment by marriage; this
is the goal to which they are constantly pointed, the great ultimatum of every
arrangement: An old maid, they are from infancy taught, at least indirectly, to
consider as a contemptible being; and they have no other means of advancing
themselves but in the matrimonial line.

Perhaps this is one of the sources, from which originate the infelicities, too
often witnessed, in wedded life; the young creature, ardent in the pursuit, is
sedulously employed in displaying all her accomplishments; fearful that if she
refuses the present offer, no future suppliant may advance his suit; she throws
herself away upon the first pretender, though, possibly, he may be very ill
calculated to embark with her upon the voyage of life.

Well, but she has gained her point; and the pursuit over, any further efforts
would be useless; every attempt to please is given up; and the consequences
which must follow, are too obvious to need the pen of an observer to point them
out.

I would give my daughters every accomplishment which I thought proper; and, to
crown all, I would early accustom them to habits of industry and order: They
should be taught with precision the art economical; they should be enabled to
procure for themselves the necessaries of life; independence should be placed
within their grasp; and I would teach them " to reverence themselves."

Marriage should not be represented as their sumum bonum, or as a certain, or
even necessary event; they should learn to respect a single life, and even to
regard it as the most eligible, except a warm, mutual and judicious attachment
had gained the ascendancy in the bosom.

If they were thus qualified to administer by their own efforts, to their own
wants, the probability is, that impressions of this nature, would frequently
prevent precipitation, and call into exercise that deliberation which ought,
upon all occasions, to be the concomitant of every important step.

Girls, by the avidity and marked design of their operations, generally defeat
their own purposes. I would have the fair minds of young women occupied by
schemes of enjoyment, and by modes of living, which, depending principally upon
themselves and their natural connexions, would involve a greater probability of
fruition.

Surely the situation of that young creature must be very pleasing, who, by her
sweetness of disposition, engaging manners, and many accomplishments, has
endeared herself to the circles in which she moves. Why should contingent
events be held up to her view, or made an absolute part of her expectations?
and if her hours are passed in endeavoring to augment her little income,
whatever it may be, or in cultivating the means which may render her, as an
individual, superior to the caprices of those about her, she will certainly be
less likely to look out of herself for happiness.

But as I am fond of illustrating my sentiments by example, I will in my next
Gleaner produce a little narrative, which, while it will be calculated to
elucidate, will, I flatter myself, both interest and please; and as I devoutly
wish to compensate the reader for the trouble he may take in traveling through
these pages, I shall, of course, be highly gratified.

No. XVIII.
The paths of dissipation lead to death.
Reason her barriers round our footsteps throws;
But headlong folly leaps over every bound,
And, taught by pride, the voice of prudence spurns.

WHEN I was a young man, I had a friend, to whom I was particularly attached;
we had lived from our boyish years in habits of intimacy; and I was of course
an interested observer of all his movements.

His family was distinguished by the marked integrity of even the minutest
transactions of its individuals; my friend was the youngest born, and every
branch, except himself and his eldest sister, were established in little
families of their own. They were industrious and frugal, realizing, in
consequence of their own exertions, an income which enabled them to live in a
genteel style; and as they were of that grade which is termed well born, their
right to mingle in the politest circles was indisputable. But, as I said,
living within compass, they were easy in their circumstances, they were
affectionate to each other, and always ready to relieve, to the utmost of their
abilities, the necessitous of every description.

My friend, at length, after making frequent visits to New York, presented them
with a daughter and a sister, who, though both a beautiful and an amiable
woman, had nevertheless received from education, different ideas of life. Gay,
unthinking, and profuse by nature, she had never been accustomed to set bounds
to her inclinations; and though she truly loved her husband, she was constantly
involving him in difficulties, in order to support a style of life to which his
finances were inadequate, and which, however, the reciprocality of his
attachment induced him to exert every nerve to maintain. All his connexions saw
with pain that his ruin was, by hasty strides, approaching; but the subject was
delicate, and it was supposed that an interference would be ineffectual.

A period of seventeen years was marked by dress, equipage, and entertainments,
while even the idea of economy never once molested the pleasurable arrangements
of the fair Amanda. At the expiration of this term, that ill-directed female
was seized with the small pox, of which she soon became the victim; and her
unfortunate companion, (who was before sinking under the united pressure of
broken health and spirits, that were doubtless produced by a certainty of the
rapid approach of those calamities which his good sense could not but
acknowledge as the procurement of folly) was, in the course of a few succeeding
weeks, inhumed in the same vault with the beloved object who had cost him so
dear.

Two beautiful females were the issue of this ill-fated marriage; they were not
however destitute; for though the effects of the deceased Henry would not give
his creditors ten shillings in the pound, yet the rites funereal due to the
hapless pair, being decently performed, and the hallowed earth that encircled
their cold remains embalmed by a filial tear, these lovely orphans were
immediately sheltered in the bosom of their friends.

Miss Helen, then just fifteen years old, accompanied the sister of Amanda to
her abode in the city of New York; and Miss Penelope, who had nearly attained
her fourteenth year, continued with the relations of Henry.

By way of exemplifying the force of example and the different characters,
which the two young ladies from that period assumed, I select, from a
correspondence that continued unbroken during their separation, the subjoined
letters.

Miss HELEN AIRY to Miss PENELOPE.
New York, May 31.
I DECLARE, my dear Pen. I am utterly at a loss to comprehend the meaning of
your last letter; and indeed, if I made up my judgment by your general style of
writing, I should certainly conclude that you had passed your grand
climacteric; but the preachments contained in your last, are absolutely
intolerable. Let me see -- I want, at this present writing, one month of
nineteen; and, if I mistake not, unless she has very unceremoniously, and even
irregularly, taken a miraculous leap over my head, my dear, good, sober sister
Pen. will not have reached the very grave age of eighteen, until two tardy
months have fully measured their slow paced round! I vow I would relinquish the
pleasures of the next ball night, just to take a peep at your sweet face, were
it only to count the wrinkles which I presume your deep thinking must have
implanted there!

But to be serious -- for once I will endeavor to meet my lovely Monitress
(and dearly do I love my Penelope, notwithstanding the air of superiority, and
style of reprehension, which her letters assume) upon her own ground; and, by
way of responding in the most explicit manner to her catechizing epistle, I
will take a slight glance at the years which have elapsed since our separation.

Upon my arrival in this city, the pressure upon my spirits which I have
already recounted to you, and which was occasioned by the lamented death of our
parents, by my removal from my native place, and from a sister whom I held
dearer than any thing else which this world contained, was almost
insupportable. However, the efforts of my kind aunt, with the united good
offices of my numerous relations and friends, by degrees restored me to
tranquillity; and as I have naturally a great deal of vivacity, my wonted
gaiety did not long stand aloof.

Since that period -- what has taken place since that period? Positively I am
a mortal enemy to reflection; and my cousin Caroline declares a young lady has
no business with it. So, my dear Pen, you must even receive, as the sum total
of visiting, cards, balls and plays, that fascinating comprehensive little
word, pleasure; and this very pleasurable mode of enjoying life, you, forsooth,
presume to christen by the odious term dissipation; and my poor superannuated
grandmother, and my good old aunt Dorothy are alarmed at the dissipated life
which I lead; and because, truly, I have no fortune, I am to make a mope of
myself altogether. I remember this aunt Dorothy of ours never visited my mother
but she left her in a fit of the vapors; yet if she had intended us for the
humble dependants of some wealthy fool, she should have forbid our receiving
such instructions as were calculated to unfit us for so servile a destination,
though it is well known that the good old soul was always fond of our attaining
every accomplishment.

For my part, though perhaps I may lay in bed until ten in the morning, and
though I am not so egregious an ignoramus as to be governed by any of your
stupid rules, and plodding regulations, yet I can make shift, when I am up, to
work a sprig upon my muslin; to chant to the sound of my piano forte, upon
which, by the way, I am much improved; to put on the head-dress which I have
received from my milliner with elegance; to figure in any polite assembly; or
if, by way of variety, I should choose to pass an hour in my own dressing room,
I have always the prettiest sentimental novels imaginable at hand, to amuse me.
Now these qualifications my dear aunt M --, who has been as the tenderest
mother to me, declares are quite sufficient for a person in my line of life;
and for calculations of every kind, and all peeps into futurity, as I pretend
not to the least skill in astrology, I leave all these occult matters to the
wise penetration of my sister Pen.

One thing, however, my dear, that you may not be unnecessarily concerned for
your giddy sister Helen, I will just whisper you -- I can, whenever I think
proper, procure myself the most genteel establishment. Many sighing swains are
in my train; they do full justice, both by words and actions, to my charms; and
though they have not yet ventured an explicit declaration, they wait but my
imperial nod to submit themselves implicitly to my decisive election.

In the mean time, any little articles of which I stand in need, are liberally
supplied by the ready generosity of my friends; and I really experience much
complacency in my situation, except (you will excuse me, my dear) when I am
broken in upon, by your wise lectures; and after all, my dear girl, though you
rise early, live systematically, and are as grave as the sanctified wife of a
sober country parson, yet I do not see that your prospects are in any sort
better than mine; and I think the only advantage which you seem to have
acquired over me, is the privilege of documenting your eldest sister, whenever
your economical disposition of your time will permit you to spare an hour.

Say, Pen. is not this true? Have you any matrimonial scheme in your little
head? if you have, do in the name of laughter let us have it. O how delighted I
should be to see my dear sage sister soberly pacing to church with one of the
still life methodical enamorato's by whom she is surrounded; but I rather
think, and if she will indulge me so far, I will say, hope, that she will have
judgment sufficient to spare my risibles this trial.

Now I talk of judgment, and am impelled by your remonstrances to a kind of
retrospect, I recollect but one capital transaction, in which my judgment has
ever been called into action -- You remember, upon the day of my departure from
H --, that our uncle Horatio, one hour before I took my leave, presented me
with a hundred pounds, advising me to consult my uncle and aunt M -- in the
disposal thereof: But my indulgent benefactors thinking it right that I should
have the sole and absolute direction of this sum, I locked it up safe in my
dressing-box, until it was proper for me to appear in colors, when I expended
it in purchasing as complete and as elegant a suit of clothes, if not as rich
with blond lace, and every other appendage, as New York can produce! There, my
girl -- as I know that my uncle Horatio presented you with a like sum, let us
hear if yours was more advantageously disposed of.

In short, dear Pen. I doubt not but I shall make out very well: We shall
continue to exhibit the most enchanting contrast in the world; I with my Caro
Sposo, (for married I intend to be) figuring in the politest circles, and you
soberly sitting at home, darning your husband's stockings, or combing your
children's heads.

Yet, however we may continue antipodes in every thing else, I trust that we
shall meet in the center of mutual affection; at least I know, that in all
events, I shall still continue your truly attached sister,

HELEN AIRY.
N. B. Remember me as you think proper to my grandmother, uncles, aunts and
cousins.




Miss PENELOPE to Miss HELEN AIRY.
Town of H --, June 15th.
I THANK you very sincerely, my dear Helen, for every tender expression which
your letter contains. It is in vain you would assay to smother the feelings of
your sisterly heart; the ^ire of natural affection diffuses through your lovely
bosom its genial heat. In your last half angry letter, it breaks forth in a
variety of places; and I am soothed by the concluding assurance, that you will
still continue my tenderly attached sister.

I do assure you, my dear, I have learned to respect the superior rights, with
which some months eldership have invested you; and if I have been betrayed into
any undue warmth, I am positive that your never questioned generosity will
forgive me, when you consider that the fervor of my remonstrances has
proceeded entirely from my solicitude, respecting my beloved Helen. Perhaps, in
my responses, I may again be so unhappy as to offend; but pleasingly confident
of the advocate which I retain in your breast, and penning my remarks with all
the frankness of sincerity, I shall rely wholly upon your invoked candor, to
award my pardon.

No, my facetious sister, deep thinking has not yet furrowed my cheek; and had
I no other view than the preservation of the smooth polish of my complexion, it
would be incumbent upon me to realize such a mental fund, as would enable me to
encounter with due equanimity the ills of life, thereby avoiding that hurricane
of the passions, which in its progress not only levels intellectual
tranquillity, but makes also dreadful ravages in the beauty of the finest face.

I pass over, without a comment, your account, with its sum total, of your
manner of passing your time; but I cannot forbear expressing the keen regrets I
experienced, when my honored grandmamma, reaching forth her hand for the
letter, that had been announced from the child of her affection; from that
child, for whom her revered bosom hourly heaves the tender and apprehensive
sigh; my feelings, I say, were perfectly agonized, when I found myself
necessitated to deny her a gratification which she had fondly anticipated; but
when I beheld the venerable matron, matured by wisdom, and dignified by a
length of years, every hour of which had been marked by propriety, and elevated
by a uniform pursuit of virtue, when I was daily receiving proofs that her
strong mind, superior to the decays of nature, was still augmenting its
acquirements, was still more invigorated by observation, could I so far outrage
her tenderness, or violate that deference which was due to her experience, as
to put a letter, in which she was so unworthily mentioned, into her possession?
Neither to my aunt Dorothy could I be more communicative -- Alas! alas! But I
will only say, that in the name of sacred duty I conjure you no more to pen a
line which I cannot read for persons, who are at least entitled to your
inviolable respect.

Our aunt Dorothy, my dear, wishes not to see us dependant upon any one; she is
anxious to inspire our bosoms with the noble ardour of independence; and, to
this end she is solicitous that we should cultivate, to their utmost extent,
the talents we possess.

The supplies which you receive from our York friends, are pleasing instances
of their generosity; but can you not conceive a superior pleasure in being
able to administer to your own wants? And do you not remember, that agreeably
to the course of nature the probability is, that those nearest to you in
consanguinity, will be removed; and will you be content to remain the dependant
upon the caprice, or even bounty, of more distant relations?

You seem to question if the arrangements which I have been directed to make,
are more promising. I proceed, my dear, to sketch them for you, and you may
then be able to form an accurate judgment, relative to the comparative
eligibility of our prospects.

To begin with the hundred pounds, of which you require an account. It was,
agreeably to the direction of my aunt Dorothy, the very next day after its
receipt, put into the hands of a substantial friend, who accounts with me for
it, upon legal compound interest; if it had been a less sum, I should have
disposed of it precisely in the same manner; nor have I ever yet availed myself
of the profits of a single penny arising therefrom.

I will confess to you, that having observed the general approbation by which
my aunt Dorothy was distinguished, I have regarded her as my model.

My time, since our melancholy separation, has been divided among my numerous
friends; and they are so indulgent as to consider my visits rather as a
pleasing circumstance. But though they are in general possessed of the means of
living genteelly, yet I know that they are in the practice of economy. I do not
choose to lessen the patrimony of my cousins; and if I consent to receive any
pecuniary mark of their favor, it must be some trifle, which I accept as a
memento of their affection.

One month's perseverance, enabled me to rise each morning, mechanically with
the sun; and this habit now constitutes one of the pleasures of my life, nor
would I relinquish it, was I empress of the globe. I do not neglect to pursue
those studies, of which my dear and tender parents were careful to furnish the
rudiments; neither my reading, music, drawing, or geography are forgotten; they
make a part of the employments of every day; they serve to improve and to
polish my mind; and when I have made sufficient progress therein, they will
open to me, should there be occasion, new sources of emolument as well as
pleasure.

With regard to my apparel, the handsome dividend of that which was the
property of my beloved mother, and which fell to my share, is to me an ample
supply of almost every article. You will perhaps be surprised, when I tell you
I do not wear wrought muslin; it is true, much of my time is devoted to the
prosecution of this fashionable and elegant employ; but my younger cousins are
ornamented by the product of my industry, while I receive, for every hour of
needle work, not necessarily appropriated to myself, a liberal compensation;
and, from sums thus accumulated, I not only command the articles of which I am
in want, I have not only made handsome additions to my original fund, but I
always have in reserve, little sums, which I consecrate to the relief of the
necessitous; and, believe me, my dear Helen, that when I am arrayed in my
decent plain muslin, or milk white muslinet, fitted close to my little waist, I
feel an innate consciousness of much greater propriety of character, the
mediocrity of my circumstances considered, than if I was arrayed in flowing
robes of the finest texture which ever issued from the loom, in the most
variegated tissue which art has ever yet invented.

It is really surprising, how much order and industry will accomplish; and my
retrospect is truly pleasing, when I reflect upon the different pieces of
needle work, which I have, in the course of a few years, so advantageously
completed. Yet my application is not unremitted; and I visit, as often as is
necessary, though I must confess, that upon such occasions, my singers are
generally employed.

I sometimes mingle in a ball-room; dancing is an amusement of which I am
peculiarly fond; and I have literally murdered some evenings at cards. An
opportunity of seeing a good play, as they are with us so unfrequent, I have
not to charge myself with ever missing; and I am careful to take as much
exercise as will conduce to my health. Stimulated by my aunt, in every action,
independence has been my ardent pursuit; and I am solicitous to realize
sufficient, should I be overtaken by ill health, to prevent my devolving as a
burden upon others.

It is the wish of my aunt, as she has no immediate descendants of her own, to
dedicate her little fortune, upon her demise, to charitable uses; and as she
cannot conscientiously gratify this her favorite plan, if she leaves behind
her any needy relation, she is the more desirous that her family should,
individually, possess the means of obtaining for themselves an honorable
support. God forbid, that ever my dear Helen, or myself, should, however
remotely, curtail the sums that may be employed for the salutary purpose of
wiping the tear from the cheek of indigence.

With regard to my matrimonial expectations, upon which you are so ludicrously
playful, I have to say, that the idea of marriage makes no part of my present
plans; this, my dear, is a calculation, at which you seem to be abundantly more
expert than myself; it is a contingence which, being within the chapter of
possibilities, may, or may not happen; if it should, my arrangements must, in
some respects, be different; if it should not, I am contented; at any rate, I
esteem it an error; to reckon upon an event, which is at best but uncertain. I
am ignorant, if I have ever yet been regarded with particular attention by the
other sex; no one has professed himself a candidate for my election; and,
however assiduous any gentleman might be, I should not deem myself authorized
to set him down as a lover, except his declarations were of a nature the most
explicit.

To say truth, I am not over solicitous upon this head; having before me such
an example as my aunt Dorothy, I know that respectability, usefulness,
tranquillity, independence, social enjoyments, and holy friendship, are to be
found in a single life; and I am induced rationally to conclude, that if minds
are not congenial, if they are not discreetly, mutually, and permanently
attached, a state of celibacy is by far the most eligible.

But having, by my circumstantial replies, dimpled the blooming cheek of my
charming Helen, perhaps by a smile of pity; I only add, the warm and tender
salutations of her sincerely affectionate

PENELOPE AIRY.
N. B. Please to present my grateful respects to our York connexions,
particularly to our uncle and aunt M --.




Miss Helen put up her pretty lip -- her sister's letter was unanswerable; but
she was unconvinced, or at least uninfluenced, and they both progressed on, in
the different paths in which example had produced them.

The virtues of Penelope were soon distinguished by an amiable man, who was
indeed her congenial soul; his fortune was moderate, and his prospects were
good: A happy hymen was the consequence, and they continue as amiable a pair as
over exchanged the matrimonial vow.

The dissipated manners of Helen, her fondness for dress and show, with the
extravagant sentiments which she at all times avowed, deterred the sensible
part of the male world from cherishing an idea of a serious connection with a
young person whom they conceived it impossible to domesticate. Her uncle and
aunt are no more; and their prodigality expended even the patrimony of their
children. A similar mode of living has circumscribed the career of all her
boasted maternal connexions; and Miss Helen, now rapidly approaching the
decline of life, has become a fixed appendage to the family of her sister; a
dependant upon the liberality of those, whom she regarded with sensations
bordering upon contempt: But their fine qualities will doubtless render that
dependence as silken as possible.

No. XIX.
Say, who is authorized to probe my breast,
Of whatsoever latent faith possessed;
If in my life no crimson stains appear,
Nor badge schismatic I am known to wear;
If I obedient to the laws am found,
By the same bands my brethren own, am bound,
What is the mode of my belief to you,
While I the track of rectitude pursue?
Religion is 'twixt God and my own soul,
Nor saint, nor sage, can boundless thought control.

I INTRODUCE this nineteenth number of the Gleaner by a letter, which last
evening's post conveyed to my hand; and which I produce as an apology for the
present essay.

Barckley Recess, September 13th, 1793. FRIEND VIGILLIUS,
I DO seriously confess unto thee, that I am not a little pleased with the
light which seems to be within thee; yet feeling myself wonderfully at a
loss, what conclusion to draw concerning thee, I am jealous over thee with a
godly jealousy. From some precious gems which have been scattered up and down
thy publications, I have been ready to think, that thou were truly of the
fraternity of Friends, that thou had obtained uncommon lights, and that thy
heart was indeed touched by that seraph, who, taking a coal from the altar,
consecrated therewith the till then unhallowed lips of the prophet Isaiah. I
must acknowledge that I have assiduously, and perhaps vainly, encouraged this
idea; and moreover, that when I saw thee lead the comely maiden, whom thou have
cherished, to the altar, after the manner of the profane, with no small
inquietude I relinquished my hopes in regard to thee.

But if thou art not a Friend, the question remains, What then art thou? I
believe that thou meanest very well; and that thou have great goodness of heart
at the bottom; but suffer an honest observer to set up for thee a landmark;
take care that thou art not misled thereby, that thou stickest not fast in the
quicksands of error, or, that following an ignis satuus, thou runnest not on
shore upon the shoals of misconception. There is a fatal delusion, which is now
but too prevalent in our country; a delusion, the fundamental principle of
which, restoring the lapsed nature, finally returns every individual of the
degenerate children of men to the state of felicity which they have so
notoriously forfeited: Verily I shudder at the bare penning of so pernicious
and heterodox a vagary; and I am rendered the more fearfully apprehensive, from
a knowledge of the plausibility with which its enthusiastic advocates enwrap
the soul-destroying heresy! Many paragraphs in thy lucubrations, render me
suspicious that, under the influence of benevolence, thou have inhaled the
streams which have issued from so poisonous a fountain; but again, from a
number of choice sentiments, which thou have occasionally interspersed, I am
led to suppose that thou look upon thyself as a responsible being, that thou
conceivest thyself accountable for thy actions, and that thou rationally
concludest thou shall receive a reward according to the deeds done in the body.

Thus am I continually tossed about in my opinion concerning thee; and thus am
I induced to ask thee two important questions. What do thou think of the
final state of mankind? What are thy sentiments of Jesus Christ, and his
redemption? I hope, friend Vigillius, that thou will excuse this plainness of
speech, and that thou will not fail to number, among thy sincere well-wishers
and faithful friends,

ZEPHANIAH DOUBTFUL.


As a general answer to friend Doubtful, it may be sufficient to say, that the
Gleaner aspireth not to the dignified chair of the theologician; that whatever
are his sentiments, he has entire complacency therein; that he is content with
proposing them to the reason of his family, without parading them to public
view, or enforcing them upon any one.

Yet, thus called upon, though he does not propose himself as a sectarian, and
though upon this occasion, he may not avow the creed of the christian
Universalist; he yet craves the indulgence of his readers, while he takes leave
to hazard a few remarks.

He is free to own, notwithstanding the despotism of tradition, the prejudices
of education, and the predominating sway of revered opinions, that he cannot
help regarding that plan as the most eligible, which represents the Father of
eternity, as beneficently planning, before all worlds, the career of a race of
beings, who however they were immersed in ills, and from the various
vicissitudes of time, plunged into a series of misfortunes, were destined,
nevertheless, to progress on to a state of never ending felicity. Jehovah,
while thus employed, appears augustly good, as well as augustly great, and
every faculty of the mind rejoiceth to adore the paternal Deity.

We hesitate not to combine, in our ideas of the great First Cause, with an
unrivalled sovereignty of power, that unerring prescience, which, indeed, seems
truly necessary to infinite wisdom, and the fullness of the Godhead.

Would it not be impious, to suppose the Creator originating the vast designs
of creation with a disposition unpropitious to the well being of his creatures?
Would it not be most absurdly irreverent, to represent the creature as
independent of the power which had formed him, and as unexpectedly escaping
from the orbit in which he was placed? Would it not be blasphemous to arm him
with strength sufficient to frustrate the benevolent purposes which primarily
gave him existence? Is not that conjecture highly irrational which renders him
capable of obtaining the knowledge of good and evil, without the permission of
that omnipotent Father of universal nature, who had molded him agreeably to
his own designation, who had shaped for him his little part, who had commanded
him into being, who could make him whatever he pleased, and who could, in a
single moment, recall the animating breath of life, which he is said to have
breathed into him? We can easily reconcile, with the arrangements of equity,
allotments which may be clouded with misery, through the lengthening period of
many revolving years, provided that the horizon at length brightens upon us,
and we are finally presented with a happy termination.

The soul of man is indeed capacious; it can inhale, in one luxuriant moment,
such large draughts of divine enjoyments, as may in effect obliterate the
painful remembrance of calamitous centuries; and, in a future destination, we
may awake only to the sacred rapture of corrected pleasures. Nor do we know
that sentiments of this complexion are unfriendly to the interests of virtue;
for, besides the often cited observation, that rectitude insures its own reward,
and that a state of suffering must ever be considered as an appendage to vice;
there is a view in which we may still be regarded as probationers, as
accountable beings; and rewards and punishments must ever remain in the hands
of our common Father.

We conceive that the system, which, bounding the salutary operations of Deity,
confines his gracious interference to an elected few, while the many are
consigned to perdition, and which considers this awful decree as irreversible,
looks with a much more unfavourable aspect upon the moral walk, than the
denounced sentiments of the Universalist; since it as effectually destroys
every exertion to obtain the prize of future beatification, for the immutable
determination of Jehovah has unalterably fixed the destiny of every candidate.
This discriminating plan, while it merits, in a high degree, the accusation of
unwarrantable partiality, (the most reprehensible characters not seldom
becoming the objects of its predilection) throws open, at the same time, the
widely terrific gates of despair. It is moreover the parent of schism; and it
invests the arrogant mind with every incentive to pride and undue
self-estimation, authorizing the supposed privileged being to believe, that the
eternal difference, which must of necessity forever exist between himself and
the greater part of his fellow-mortals, may justify proceedings against them,
for which a jury of philanthropy would find him guilty of high treason against
the Rights of Man.

We think the hypothesis, which is ever goading us to the performance of duty,
by threats of the uplifted lash, is not a little derogatory to the dignity of
our nature. Generosity and gratitude are plants which we wish to see cultivated
in the soil of humanity. We would wish to see persons proselyted to the beauty
of virtue; we would wish to see them in reality, sensible of the charms of a
regular and meritorious life; in one word, we would wish to see them embrace
innate goodness, merely for the sake of its intrinsic worth.

I remember, some fifteen or sixteen years since, being on a visit to a friend
in the capital of the State of Rhode Island, that chance threw me one evening
into a company, in which a certain transatlantic preacher, The author's design
in thus expressing herself of a person with whom she boasts the most intimate
connection, will be obvious to every intelligent reader. Concealment, even from
the gentleman alluded to, was essential to her plan; and this manner of giving
the anecdote, appeared the surest path to the attainment of her wishes.
well known for the liberality of his sentiments, made no inconsiderable
figure; this gentleman did at that time, and I am told that he still continues
to attract much attention in the religious world. Perhaps he may justly be
styled the father of the Universalists in this country; and however censurable
I may be deemed, I freely confess that I was not, upon the occasion adverted
too, displeased at his ideas. Among other curious anecdotes and observations,
which constituted his quota of the conversation, he produced a dream, which
made no small impression upon my mind; whether he himself was favored with
this nocturnal vision, or whether it was the privilege of a friend, I do not
recollect; nor is it of importance to determine.

Its outlines were as follows: Sleep had spread over the closed eyelids its
sombre veil, and the illimitable region of fancy became illumined by a
prodigious variety of lustres; myriads of winged beings seemed to flit around;
now, the empress of the slumbering hour crowded the scene with motley sketches
of every object which a teeming imagination could devise; and anon, as if
solicitous to vary the entertainment of the night, a splendid solitude
gradually pervading, extended itself around. It was at this moment that an
interesting form, robed in spotless white, and moving with inexpressible
velocity, presented herself before the sleeper: Dignity was inscribed on her
very mien, her aspect was majestic, and every look became expressive of some
important designation; in her right hand she grasped a blazing torch, and in
her left she bore a transparent vase, which, constantly issuing a copious
stream, seemed to possess the properties of a living spring. Hasting along,
with inconceivable rapidity, she pressed forward, and it was with difficulty
that he detained her, while he humbly requested information respecting the
nature of her office and employ; briefly she replied, "Know, inquisitive
mortal, that, commissioned by the Ancient of Days, I go forth, with this
flaming torch, to light up a conflagration which shall consume the heaven of
heavens, while the exhaustless fountain in my left hand shall pour forth a
flood, whose waters shall utterly extinguish the devouring, fires of Tartarean
hell; and, know also, that when my mission is accomplished, then will the era
be produced, in the which our God shall recognize some disinterestedly sincere
worshippers."

The consternation produced by this astonishing piece of information, dispelled
the somnific influence of the drowsy goddess; and the reflections which it
originated in his bosom, must occur to every serious mind.

I have been amazed when I have listened to the declarations of those, who have
protested, that if a state of retribution was not in reserve, they would
embark, with a full sail, upon what they have termed the ocean of unlicensed
pleasure, and that they would take in large draughts of illicit gratifications!
-- Surely, such persons have never yet awaked to the best enjoyments of life --
are yet to receive the perceptions, which alone can entitle them to a rank
among the dignified order of rational beings.

Independent of every future consideration, how serenely rolls on the days of
that individual, who is solicitous to employ his time, his talents, and his
abilities of every description, in a manner calculated to do honor to himself,
and to conduce to the best interests of his fellow mortals!

View the well regulated family; no sooner do their eyelids unclose, than their
grateful orisons spontaneously and individually ascend the vaulted skies; with
the first uprising of the orient beam, they are assembled in the neatly
furnished parlour, where, from the sacred oracles, a portion for their
improvement and consolation is selected; where their common teacher, in words
fitly chosen, energetic and concise, and in a manly and endearing tone of
voice, offers up their united and early thanksgivings, supplications and
praise, to the universal Sire of angels and of men.

This separate and collected intercourse with Heaven, will constitute them
reciprocal guards upon themselves and each other; they will be cautious of
offending; their words and their actions they will consider, and they will be
anxious to conduct as persons privileged by a frequent access to the Sovereign
Disposer of events.

The domestic departments will be filled in an allotted and regular manner; the
affairs of the household will go smoothly forward; the individuals will
reciprocally assist each other; and plastic order, with affectionate harmony,
will preside among them. They will look abroad, and, finding a complacency in
communicating good, they will feel it their interest, as well as their duty, to
relieve, to soothe, to succor, and to support, to the utmost of their ability,
the suffering sons and daughters of men; and while thus engaged in mitigating
foreign woes, in extending the extricating hand, they will find that the
blessings of heaven-born peace have become natal in their bosoms.

In the varied and interesting offices of social life, they will cheerfully
engage; they are apprized of what their characters demand of them; and the
happiness of their extensive connexions, they are careful to promote. As
members of the community, they will discharge with propriety their parts, and
they will ever reflect the highest honor upon their country. When they are
overtaken by the unavoidable calamities incident to the present mode of
existence, in every affliction, they will naturally pour out their spirits in
prayer: This is a privilege which will meliorate their sufferings; and,
accustomed to address the great Origin of being, they will hasten with alacrity
to the throne of grace. Whatever may be their employments or amusements, in the
course of the day, or during the closing evening, being careful to combine
innocence withal -- they will gladly turn from every inferior or trivial
pursuit, and when the empire of night is commencing, they will re-assemble in
the peaceful apartment, that will be thus consecrated, and, by the mouth of
their revered head, they will perform the evening prostrations of their devoted
spirits, worshipping with sincere hearts, enumerating the multiplied blessings
of the day, and offering up their mingling hallelujahs, thanksgivings and
adorations. Their errors, of whatever nature, they will deplore with contrite
hearts; but with child-like dispositions they will approach, and they will be
confident that their august Father, who pitieth their infirmities, bends to
their supplications a gracious ear. Calm, grateful, and disburthened of their
heaviest load, they will retire to present their separate ejaculations, and
they will commit themselves to the slumbers of the pillow with heart felt
tranquillity.

The theme is copious; I have rapidly hurried along; I could dwell untired upon
the charms, and the unquestionable utility, attendant upon the present hours of
an unoffending and useful life. But the fear that I may again exceed the pages,
with which I am indulged by the obliging Editors of the Magazine, forbids my
expatiating further.

No. XX.
Then are the shafts of disappointment barb'd,
When of her well formed hopes the soul is robbed.

"ALL is not right at Margaretta's" -- said my poor Mary, some nights since, as
she laid her head upon her pillow. It was an involuntary expression, and from
the fullness of her heart it escaped her: She would gladly have recalled it, or
at least have palliated its effects, but it was too late, for the impression
was indelibly made -- all is not right at Margaretta's! Her words reverberated
through the inmost recesses of my soul; they seemed to possess a deadly power,
which, at a single blow, annihilated the serenity of my bosom. A thousand
painful ideas rushed in a moment upon my mind, and they originated the most
alarming and affecting conjectures.

I had observed, that a kind of pensive melancholy had for some time clouded
the fine open countenance of my wife; that her wonted equanimity was
interrupted; that her slumbers were disturbed and broken; and that the
admirable regularity of her movements were evidently discomposed. As I
possessed a perfect confidence in her prudence, I had forborne to press her
upon so distressing a change, well knowing, that whenever it was advantageous
or proper, discretion would not fail of prompting her to pour into my ear the
sorrows of her heart.

Maternal affection had armed her with an anxious and vigilant attention to her
daughter; she had for some months marked a visible alteration in her child; the
dimpling smile of complacency no more spontaneously welcomed her approach;
thick glooms encircled her brow; and while she visibly struggled to preserve
appearances, the tenor of her soul was apparently lost! Whenever Mary
occasionally looked in upon her Margaretta, if her visit was unexpected, she
was sure to find her bathed in tears; and the apologies which she seemed to
study, but ill concealed the discomposure of an agonized bosom.

Mary, with all her penetration, could not divine the cause of an event, which
she so greatly deplored; she imagined that her daughter was in possession of
every thing which could conduce to the most pleasing kind of tranquillity; and
she conceived that the grateful affections of her heart ought to be in constant
exercise. Competency beamed its regular, mild, and equal blessings upon her;
her infant was not only lovely and promising, but he seemed almost exempted
from those disorders, which are usually attendant upon his imbecile age; her
own health was uniformly good; and though Edward Hamilton partook, of course,
the morbid contagion of her grief, yet he was still the pensively pleasing and
entertaining companion.

Mary concluded, that nothing remained, but for Margaretta to reassume the
accustomed equability of her temper, in order to the perfect restoration of
that sunshine, which had for a season illumed her hours; and tenderly
interested, while her heart was torn by anxiety, she could not forbear to
interrogate -- but the only replies she could obtain were sighs and tears,
interrupted by broken assurances, that indeed she was -- she was very happy;
and that she supplicated her dear Mamma to put upon every appearance the most
candid construction. Her mother, however, made wise by the observations she had
collected from books, from the study of her fellow mortals, and from a large
share of natural discernment, could not be thus easily deceived.

Curiosity was, upon this occasion, her smallest inducement; and she trembled
at the impervious darkness of a cloud, which she rationally apprehended
involved the dearest hopes of her Margaretta! Baffled in repeated attempts to
fathom a mystery, which had yielded her bosom a prey to the keenest anguish,
she changed the mode of her attack; and, addressing her daughter by letter, in
the language of discretion, in the language of tenderness, she penned the
feelings of her soul.

To Mrs. HAMILTON.
IS it possible for Margaretta Hamilton to conceive her mother a calm spectator
of that corroding inquietude, which is gradually and too surely undermining the
peace of a child, who is, she had almost said, dearer to her than any other
human being? As I have not been stimulated by an idle wish to obtain your
secret, I am hurt that my inquiries have proved so ineffectual. Can Margaretta
wish to veil herself from the eye of the guardian friend of her early years?
Believe me, I seek only to probe the wound, that I may the more assuredly
arrest the progress of the envenomed poison, and be enabled to judge what
prescription may operate as a specific.

But, for the tender age of innocence, the advice of the physician is the
superstructure of conjecture; and in this instance I am necessitated to follow
the example of the benevolent practitioner, at all hazards assaying to throw in
something, which may possibly preserve the opening life of those budding joys,
the growth of which I had fondly hoped to have watched, until I had gratulated
their confirmed maturity.

When we gave our Margaretta to Edward Hamilton, we conceived that we had
yielded her to the man of her heart; and, believing him to be every way worthy,
we congratulated ourselves upon the establishment of the felicity of our child.
What, my love, can have produced a change so affectingly agonizing? Whenever
you appear tolerably composed, it is evident that you are acting a part.

I tremble lest your father should penetrate the thin disguises which you
assume; and, sanguine as his expectations in regard to you have been, it is
difficult to say, what serious consequences his disappointment might produce.

Oh, my child, my soul is torn by the most fearful conjectures! will you not
endeavor to assuage the sorrows of my heart? will you not at least relieve me
from the pangs of suspense? Can it be, that Mrs. Hamilton is so far subjected
to sexual weakness, as to have delivered herself up to the most alarming
chagrin, merely because, perhaps, she receives not from the husband such
adulatory devoirs as distinguished the lover? Surely I ought to regard this
idea as inadmissible; and yet, the strongest minds may have their moments of
imbecility; and, my Margaretta, all accomplished, all lovely as she is, must
nevertheless still be considered as a young and inexperienced woman.

If this is indeed the source of your perturbed anxiety, I persuade myself that
some such reflections as the following, will ere long awaken you to reason.

It is impossible to change the order of nature. Delighted admiration of
pleasing novelties, is the spontaneous growth of every bosom; a second view
finds us more calm; a third, a fourth, may possibly rouse us to pleasure; but a
constant repetition will create that indifference, which will constitute a
perfect contrast to the keen edge of our newborn feelings. The impassioned
ardours of the soul must of necessity subside; they are but created to expire:
But I pity the mind which prefers not the calm rational affections that
succeed, to all the hurricane of the passions.

Love, as it is commonly described, is undoubtedly a short-lived being; it is a
luxurious glutton, that invariably gormandizeth to its destruction; but from
its perfumed ashes arises a star-gemmed soother, that the wedded pair may
either crush in the birth, or agree to cherish, as the security of their mutual
happiness. Esteem may sometimes be traced as the parent, but I think it will be
found that it is oftener the offspring of love. Young esteem, entwined by
smiling confidence, enwreathed with sweet complacency, how fragrant is its rosy
breath, how necessary to the hymeneal career, and how much is it in the power
of the affianced friends to render its existence permanent!

Behold your Edward in a large circle of ladies; doubtless, he is all
attention; his features are animated; and if they are young, beautiful and
sentimental, he is all soul; he seems to tread on air, and he has no eyes or
ears, but for them; he will address to them the most refined gallantries, and
he will appear lost amid a constellation so splendid. But think you, my love,
that he would experience sensations thus highly wrought, were he to mingle
every hour in their society? and would you wish to exchange for such mental
gewgaws, if I may so express myself, the solid pleasures of endearing
familiarity; the advantages resulting from unbroken confidence, from a social
intercourse, uninterrupted by the fopperies of language, and from all the
matchless and serene enjoyments which wedded friends may know?

Are you not apprehensive that the continued clouds which gloom your lovely
face, may prematurely destroy your bloom, and, by imperceptible degrees,
alienate the affections of your husband? If once you relinquish your place in
his bosom, it will require a series of the most arduous efforts to restore you
to the possession you will have thus imprudently abdicated!

I am not an advocate for undue gentleness, or submissive acquiescence; such
conduct may border upon meanness; a woman should be just too, she should
reverence herself: I am far from conceiving that the female world, considered
in the aggregate, is inferior to the male; but custom has established a
certain order in society, and custom is a despot, whose chains, I am fearful,
it will be in vain that an individual will assay to burst.

I know too, that it is for the interest of every person who singly considers
either him or herself, to cultivate an equal and serene temper of mind. If you
array yourself in the garments of tranquillity, if you seek to clothe yourself
with innate cheerfulness, habit will at length render you in reality
complacent, and it will not be you who will derive the smallest share of
advantage therefrom.

In short, my dear girl, you have every inducement to call forth your most
unremitted exertions. Parents tenderly anxious for your welfare -- Parents,
whose felicity is inseparably entwined with your own; a husband acknowledged as
highly deserving, and a beauteous infant, whose little eyes are raised to you
for protection, for instruction, and for peace: Oh! cloud not his budding life
by a grief so strange and unaccountable; his lovely cheek should not thus early
be washed by the tear of sorrow. Oh, pierce not thus the bosom of her who has
reared you to womanhood, whose prime hopes of temporal enjoyment rest with you,
and who, in consequence of that authority, which by high Heaven is vested in
her, demands of you an account of that latent woe, which, gaining strength by
concealment, is thus preying upon all your promised joys. Speak, I conjure you,
speak; and let your communications mitigate the pangs, which cease not to
lacerate the bosom of your afflicted and commiserating mother.

The evening of the day, which had presented the foregoing address, returned
Mary the subjoined reply.


To my dear and honored MOTHER.
PITYING angels -- and must I then speak? assuredly I must -- every
consideration unquestionably points out an explanation.

I have sunk, mortifyingly sunk, in the estimation of her whose approbation I
would die to preserve; and I have inflicted upon her the severest anguish; yet,
probably, her tender bosom may be disburthened, by a knowledge that her
Margaretta is not altogether so culpable as she has apprehended: And duty
seems to impel an unreserved confidence; for the honored woman, to whom I am
primarily indebted for every thing that can render life valuable, has
commanded me to be explicit.

But stop! -- can duties clash? Ought the discreet female to accuse him to whom
she has voluntarily yielded her most sacred and solemn vows? Can Margaretta
criminate her Edward!!!!

Yet, possibly, what I have to urge in my own defense, may not exhibit my
Hamilton in a censurable point of view; from a mutable being we are not to
expect immutability; and, if my conjectures have their foundation in truth,
though I may be wretched, I will not be unjust. It is necessary that I justify
myself to my mother; but I will not dare to cast a shade upon the character of
a man, whom I regard as the first of created beings.

Hardly three months after our marriage had elapsed, when Edward exhibited
marks of a growing and deep-felt inquietude! an impenetrable gloom overshadowed
every feature! Had you witnessed, as I have done, and still do, the lasting and
serious sorrows of his bosom, your maternal remonstrance would have been
addressed to him, rather than to your unfortunate child. Often has he regarded
me with a fixed and melancholy attention: and when, alarmed and terrified, I
have sought the cause of his mysterious deportment, as if unable to command his
grief, he has fled with precipitation from my importunities. To induce him to
disclose the fatal secret of his heart, no means within my power have been left
unassayed; and although failing in my well intended efforts, I have still
endeavored to soothe and woo his steps to the sweet and flowery paths of peace.

With the severe eye of unrelenting rigor, I have examined my own conduct:
Probably I am under the dominion of self-partiality; for, in regard to him, I
cannot view myself as reprehensible either in thought, word, or deed.

When, by your direction, I announced to him my expectation of presenting him
with a little being, who would bring into the world with it, its claims to his
fondest affections, -- Oh, Madam! instead of the effect which we naturally
imagined, the sorrows of his heart became ungovernable; with convulsed and
agonized emotions, he clasped his hands -- Never shall I forget his
exclamation; it sounded like a death-warrant to my ear -- " Gracious God!
wretch, wretch that I am!" -- What he would have added, I know not; for,
overpowered by my grief and my surprise, I sunk lifeless at his feet; and when,
by his endeavors, and those of the attendants whom he summoned to my relief, I
was recalled to sense and to recollection, I found him kneeling by my bed side,
assiduously and tenderly employed in my restoration, and his transports at
beholding me, as he expressed himself, once more open my eyes to love and to
him, at seeing the bloom again revisit my cheeks, were, he declared, the most
exquisite he had ever experienced!

You will not doubt, that I seized this tender moment, to expostulate with him
relative to his heart-affecting and soul-piercing expressions of grief, and
continued melancholy; but, although he beheld me, as I then supposed, with
unabating affection, although he soothed my spirit by the most delicate and
unequivocal assurances, he nevertheless turned a deaf ear to the voice of my
supplication! Edward Hamilton has a strong and determined mind; fortitude is
innate in his bosom; he can wear to the public eye, and even to the circle of
his friends, a face of tranquillity, while his breast is a prey to the most
perturbed sensations.

Fearful of disgusting him by my persecutions, I banished from my lips every
expression of my anxiety; and, as far as was in my power, I dismissed from my
features the inquietude of my bosom. I studied, by my every movement, his
pleasure; and I flattered myself, that the birth of my child, by giving a new
turn to his ideas, would restore my felicity. It is true that I had nothing to
complain of, except the corroding grief, with which he evidently struggled, and
which, notwithstanding his efforts to conceal it, was generally the companion
of his private hours: For the rest, I judged myself in possession of his heart,
and his deportment was descriptive of the most refined and faithful attachment.

Thus passed the days, until the arrival of my pangful hour. You, dear Madam,
were a witness to the distressing agitation of his soul, during that perilous
and tremendous period; you heard and repeated his fervid vows for my safety;
they were music in my ears; doubtless they were sincere, for the heart of
Edward Hamilton is as tender as it is manly. You also witnessed the rapt
sensation of his grateful spirit, when he received his son; you heard and
marked the paternal blessings, which he poured upon his youngling head; and, it
is true, that the little creature is as dear to him, as the vital spark which
warms him to existence -- but alas! this is the sum total of my enjoyments! The
anguish of heart, which is destroying the father of my child, seems daily to
augment! The tears, of which he is apparently unconscious, often bedew the face
of my infant! Frequently, as if by mutual consent, we gaze in silent sorrow
upon the dear innocent, and when Hamilton supposes himself unobserved, his eyes
and hands are raised toward heaven; and in all the majesty of innate woe, he
pathetically makes his appeal to the Searcher of all hearts, while rectitude,
it should seem, is the motto of his life.

Yet, I will not withhold some circumstances, that have produced inferences,
which my full soul has recoiled at admitting. Alas, my mother! will you not
esteem me wretched, when I confess to you, that I have but too much reason to
suppose myself the origin of his misfortune.

Some weeks after the birth of my little William, I was alarmed by the frequent
absence of Hamilton; and as I forbore any remarks thereon, being unwilling to
embitter, by my expostulations, the few moments which he allowed me, I
continued ignorant of the manner in which he appropriated his time. Accident,
at length, informed me that all those hours of which he had robbed me, were
devoted to Serafina! and from her he always returned a prey to the deepest and
most fearful chagrin.

The shock which my tenderness and my sensibility received, in a moment so
replete with anguish, I assay not to describe; but reason, I bless God, darted
athwart the region of my soul her beamy influence. Serafina was the sister of
my heart; she was a lovely and an amiable woman. Edward and Serafina had been
educated together from early life; their habits of intimacy were confirmed; and
I considered, that if her society possessed more charms than mine, Edward was
unfortunate, but not culpable.

I immediately formed the resolution of soliciting her to become an inmate in
our house; and when I made my proposal to Hamilton, he received it with more
satisfaction than my feelings could well tolerate; he kissed my hand with
rapture; a gleam of joy vermilioned his cheek, and he flew to acquaint Miss
Clifford with the wishes which I had expressed.

Serafina too demonstrated the highest complacency; a residence with her
Margaretta, she was pleased to say, would complete her felicity; and she could
not hesitate, when a situation every way eligible way tendered to her
acceptance.

Our plan was no sooner concerted than put into execution; Miss Clifford was
established in this mansion, and Hamilton no longer wandered abroad! When I am
present, Hamilton has never, for a single moment, abated his marked attentions
to me; and he regards Serafina in his accustomed manner; but if I unexpectedly
join them, although they have apparently been engaged in the most affectingly
interesting conversation, they are immediately silent, embarrassed and uneasy!

The fine eyes of Serafina are often drowned in tears, and the grief of
Hamilton seems to know no bounds! Two weeks since, upon the morning of the day
on which you surprised me yielding up my whole soul to sorrow, supposing
Hamilton in his closet, I took my needle work, with a design, while sitting
beside him, to make one more effort to allure him into the sweet and flowery
walks of tranquillity. He was not there -- but an open piece of paper lying
upon his scrutoire, written by the hand of Serafina, in which I saw my name in
large characters inscribed, caught my attention. I read it -- its contents are
indelibly engraven upon the tablets of my heart; and, with a trembling hand, I
transcribe them for your perusal.

THAT I love not my own soul better than I do my Edward Hamilton, I trust he
will always believe. I have received his expostulatory letter, and by that love
which we mutually avow, I conjure him to consider, weigh, ponder, and reflect.
Can Edward consign Margaretta to ruin? Can he be forgetful of the interest and
well-being of his infant son? If Hamilton will give to these claims their due
weight, I persuade myself that he will then listen to the voice of prudence --
of that prudence which is, in this instance, regent in the bosom of

SERAFINA CLIFFORD.


I read, I say -- and the agony of my spirit was inexpressible -- with a wild
air I turned toward the window, and, as if fate had determined to make me
completely wretched, I beheld Edward and Serafina, arm under arm, walking down
the gravel-walk of our little flower garden: This, at such a moment, was too
much. With precipitate and unequal steps, impassioned almost to frenzy, I
hasted from the closet, flying, as for refuge, to my own. It was at this
distressing juncture, that you, Madam, looked in upon me; you saw, and your eye
condemned the irregular expressions of a sorrow to which you was a stranger;
but I flatter myself that you will, in future, rather pity than censure your
Margaretta.

Real illness, through that fatal day, served me as an apology for not making
my appearance at dinner, or at evening tea time; and, in the course of the
night, reason taught me sufficient self-command, to appear tolerably composed
at breakfast the next morning. As I left the writing precisely as I found it,
there cannot be an idea entertained of the suspicions which wound my bosom; and
if it is mine to suffer, I am determined to suffer in silence. -- Thus, dear
and honored Madam, you will see that I have no common cause of sorrow -- that
I am not so very faulty as you conceived. Thus have I entitled myself to your
advice; and thus you will be induced to pity your

MARGARETTA HAMILTON.


Mary hesitated not to dispatch the following approbating reply.

To Mrs. HAMILTON.
NO, my poor sufferer, you do not stand in need of advice -- persevere as you
have begun -- Mr. Hamilton is a man of sense and feeling; he will rouse to a
recollection of your virtues, and your reward will be great. Believe me, I
glory in my child. -- My tears flow so fast, I cannot add; and I can only say,
that I am indeed your commiserating and tender mother.


No. XXI.
Worth, sterling worth, amid the ordeal shines,
Conviction gems it -- truth the polish gives;
Asbestos like, it whitens in the flames,
And in eternal records brightening lives.

SITTING, last evening, in the little apartment which I have devoted to
pleasures, properly termed sentimental, I was endeavoring, while Mary was
seated by my side, to amuse the hours which she employed at her needle, by a
re-perusal of Gibbon's Roman History. We had passed our afternoon, in a vain
attempt to investigate the cause of the infelicity of our daughter; we went
over and over the ground, we traced and re-traced, we exhausted the powers of
retrospection, until wearied amid the wilds of conjecture, we attained the
precise point from which we at first sat off.

I had forborne to question either Mr. or Mrs. Hamilton, imagining that the
discretion of Margaretta must inevitably become finally triumphant; and I
conceived, besides, that any interference, considering the exquisite
sensibility and delicate circumstances of the parties, must unavoidably
increase the evil we lamented.

But to delineate the agonized perplexity which tempested the bosom of Mary, is
impossible (...) the perturbed sigh, humid cheek, and swollen eye, proclaimed the
anguish of her spirit; while she in vain endeavored to reassume the wonted
fortitude and equability of her disposition.

Last evening, however, wiping from her face the tear of maternal woe, and
calling into action all those efforts which it is the privilege of tender
esteem to embody, I so far succeeded in my attempts to soothe her mind, as to
procure a temporary calm; and pressing, as an auxiliary, my admired historian,
my purpose was to draw her off, at least for the moment, from the contemplation
of the melancholy consequences of her daughter's marriage.

We had but just invested our pensive tete-a-tete, with a degree of apparent
serenity, when Mrs. Hamilton, without being announced, rushed hastily into the
apartment. Our astonishment at so unexpected a visit, was in no sort abated by
the wild extravagance of which her air and manner were descriptive; it was,
however, the mania of joy; and, without giving us time for reflection or
interrogation, throwing herself suddenly at my feet, with clasped hands, and
all the delirium of rapture, she exclaimed -- O Sir! O my father! bless, bless,
your happy child! -- delay not to bestow your benediction upon this, the most
blissful period of her life; thus giving the paternal voice, to sanction and
complete that measure of felicity, which perhaps her wayward and desponding
heart has but ill deserved.

Alarmed and apprehensive, I would have folded her to my breast, at no moment
hesitating to pronounce a blessing, which was ever the spontaneous dictate of
my heart; but ere I could utter a word, springing up and hasting forward, she
threw her snowy arms around the neck of Mary. O my mother, my more than mother!
embrace your now not sorrowing, but perfectly assured and extaticly enraptured
Margaretta!

Mary, alternately clasping her to her bosom, and regarding her with looks of
agonized terror, struggled in vain for utterance; the impassioned feelings of
her soul disdained language, and the perturbed emotions which agitated her
spirit, were expressed only by an affecting and descriptive silence.

For myself, I am free to own, that the scene had almost unmanned me; and, that
trembling equally for my wife and daughter, I could not have supported it a
moment longer. It was interrupted by the entrance of Edward Hamilton and
Serafina. "Ah, my love!" cried Hamilton, why do you thus cruelly deprive me of
your presence; at a moment too, when you have, as it were, renovated my
existence; when you have relieved me from a burden that, by its mighty
pressure, had well near crushed my every hope of happiness this side the
eternal world; when you have new pointed every felicity, and taught me still
more highly to appreciate the inestimable worth of yourself, and of your
ennobling affection! Were it possible I could call my Margaretta unkind, her
absence at such a time, would be the only plea that could justify my
accusation. But who talks of accusation? Margaretta, like the Being from whom
she originates, and who has formed her a near resemblance of his blessed self,
unreservedly forgives; and, influenced also by an example so fair, while urged
by their own lenient benevolence, our revered benefactors, parents, friends,
will likewise condescend to sign my acquittal; and thus their once almost
despairing culprit, restored to peace and to them, will new plume his hopes,
and, re-embarking upon the voyage of life, he will trust that prosperous gales
may attend his once shipwrecked prospects.

Margaretta, encircled in the arms of her husband, bent her sweet face upon his
bosom, while Serafina, enthusiastically pressing her hands to her lips, (...)
in broken sentences -- Lovely and forgiving sister! a sister indeed! angelic
Margaretta! May God in heaven greatly reward and forever bless my indulgent
Margaretta.

But not to fatigue the reader, by the incoherently agitated manner, in which
we finally obtained an explanation of these mysterious appearances, I will
piece together materials which, through many breaks and pauses, I received, and
present a succinct narrative of circumstances, that have produced an
ecclaircisement, which has rendered Margaretta, in her own estimation, the
happiest of women.

The opening dawn of yesterday presented a serene autumnal morning, and the
advancing day confirmed the pleasing indications of its rosy harbinger.

The ripened fruits of autumn gathered in, the industrious swain once more
hailed the interval which, crowning his hopes, permitted him to indulge a
suspension of his labors; the very air, gently moving the motley foliage of
the grove, impregnated with the seeds of bland and social peace, and
disburthened of the undulating and busy clang, seemed to breathe the true
spirit of grateful and unmolested contemplation; while all varying nature
apparently wore the semblance of tranquillity.

Margaretta made the comparison -- she could no longer support the dreadful
contrast which her bosom exhibited; and, asserting herself, she determined to
be peremptory in her demand of an explanation. For many hours she revolved her
important purpose; her spirit labored with its interesting design; her breast
was the seat of inquietude, and her soul was heavily oppressed. How to present
herself; how to introduce her subject; in what language to clothe those sorrows
which she had hitherto so assiduously sought to veil from the eye of Hamilton
-- these were questions which strongly agitated every faculty of her mind; but
all her attempts to concert a plan of operation were ineffectual, until at
length, tortured by reflection, hesitating, trembling and irresolute, she bent
her steps toward that saloon, which Edward had consecrated the scene of his
most retired moments; thither, at certain hours of the day, she knew that he
repaired; upon this solitude she had never before ventured to intrude; yet, by
slow and solemn movements, urged by despair, she now approached: She drew
toward the recess, the door was but half closed; Edward and Serafina, for the
purpose of obtaining an uninterrupted conference, had previously retired there.
Serafina was seated on a sofa, her face bathed in tears; Edward, evidently
overpowered by grief, reclined by her side; he pressed the left hand of
Serafina to his lips, while her right was thrown affectionately over his
shoulder!

"O Edward!" with a voice almost choked by sorrow, exclaimed Miss Clifford,
why are you thus unkindly persevering? False sentiments betray you. My
attachment to you is closely interwoven with my existence. I stand upon the
brink of a precipice, down which your unyielding obduracy will not fail to
plunge me! Again I assure you, that my happiness or misery is involved in
yours! If you become an exile from your country, doubtless I shall be the
companion of your flight; but whither shall we go? in what recess can we hide
ourselves? Is it possible that we can voluntarily consign to irremediable ruin,
the lovely and affectionate Margaretta? Is it possible that you, that a father,
can deliberately resolve to blast the just budding prospects of him, who now,
unconscious of the threatened danger, lulled in the cradle of innocence, smiles
with celestial sweetness?

Margaretta had entered unobserved; she had beheld the attitude of two persons
whom she had accustomed herself not only tenderly to love, but reveringly to
esteem. The most envenomed pangs of despair at that moment pervaded her bosom
-- a feverish kind of anguish seemed to drink up the purple stream of life --
her voice was lost, and her sight well near absorbed. Unable to proceed, she
sunk upon the ready settee, which the second step presented -- she distinctly
heard the exclamation of Serafina!! -- and the powers of animation suspending
their operations, she sunk motionless upon the settee -- a sigh burst
spontaneously from her bosom -- a sigh, that might well be imagined the
immediate harbinger of death; it first drew the attention of Serafina --
Hamilton started from his seat, and with mingling surprise, anguish and terror,
they mutually flew to the supposed expiring sufferer. Their applications were
in part successful; the active principle of life resumed its functions, and a
gradual resuscitation pervaded the system. Reason, nevertheless, as if
indignant at the outrages which she had sustained, stood aloof; and it was but
too evident, that Margaretta possessed not that fine arrangement which had
hitherto regulated the feelings of her dignified and gentle mind.

Her wanderings, however, imbibed the hue, and partook the prevailing bent of
her natural disposition; and amid her incoherent ramblings, the true situation
of her soul was expressed.

In pathetic language she lamented her own hard fate; and, addressing Serafina,
whom she believed to be Mary, she questioned her in regard to the propriety and
eligibility of a separation from Edward. She said that her attachment to her
husband could never know abatement; but (lowering her voice, as if fearful of
being overheard) as he was devoted to another, she thought it was becoming her
character to relinquish her claims; she wished, indeed, that Edward and Miss
Clifford had sooner understood the nature of their mutual attachment -- But
perhaps they might have much to plead in their own defense; and that, for her
part, though she was at a loss to trace the origin of the calamity which had
overtaken her, and could not justly accuse herself of intentional error, yet
she wished every body well. That they need not be reduced to the necessity of
abandoning the country; for if she could but obtain one of those moss-grown
caverns, which she had heard were so numerous in the dominion of Old Ocean's
God, in those watery abodes she would seek her deceased father; possibly too,
her supplications might draw down the sainted spirit of her injured mother; and
if she might be permitted to take with her the darling boy, for whom her last
sigh would arise, they would be a family of love -- she would soothe the
woe-fraught bosoms of her parents -- she would prepare for her infant son an
oozy bed, the seagreen turf should pillow his little head, and, by the
murmuring waters of some coral grove, he should be lulled to rest.

Hamilton, agonized beyond expression, in the frenzy of the moment, would have
put a period to his existence; but by Serafina, who is ever present to herself,
he was wooed, and awed to some degree of composure.

Serafina, by the assistance of a faithful female, conducted Margaretta to her
chamber; and, while she offered up to Heaven her silent and fervid vows for the
perfect restoration of her friend, she availed herself of the idea she
entertained that she was her mother; and, assuming the mildly commanding air,
she had so frequently observed Mary to wear, she gently remonstrated, pressed
and soothed, until she had placed Mrs. Hamilton upon her pillow, when, seizing
the exact crisis, in the softest key, she proceeded to chaunt the most
plaintive, harmonizing and dulcet strains, within the compass of her musical
voice, until she beheld the disordered mourner embraced by those slumbers, from
which she doubted not she would awake, in the full possession of her charming
intellects. Having thus effectuated this salutary purpose, leaving Margaretta
to an attendant, her next care was to rejoin Hamilton.

It was impossible not to understand the nature of the suspicions, which, it
was apparent, had so deeply impressed the soul of Margaretta; and a
retrospection convinced them, that even in the bosom of apathy, reason, from a
variety of circumstances, would have originated conjectures. Edward
acknowledged, that a desperate disease demanded a decisive remedy; he trembled
for the consequences; but his dearest hopes now pointed out the most unreserved
confidence. Alas! had he known the heart of my daughter, how many pangs he
might have spared her. But the limited pages of this publication forbid remarks.

Serafina, obtaining full power to act agreeably to her own discretion,
returned to the chamber of Margaretta, fraught with a sovereign specific for
her wounded spirit; when, dismissing the girl, and seating herself beside her,
she impatiently waited her release from that salutary repose, to which she had
been so solicitous to consign her.

Margaretta at length opened her grief-swoln eyes; the traces of deep-felt
melancholy were visible in her countenance; but reason, it was evident, had
resumed her operations, and the expression of every feature was descriptive of
a mild and affecting kind of resignation.

"How are you, my sweet friend?" soothingly questioned Serafina.

"Not well, Serafina;" returned Margaretta; and, after a moment's pause,
letting fall some tears, in an affecting tone of voice, she added; I am, Miss
Clifford, the daughter of misfortune; my parentage was early announced; and
though the interposition of my blessed friends and benefactors, would, by
adopting me into their family, have snatched from me the bitter cup of
adversity, yet, to struggle against the unalterable decrees of an all-wise
Providence, it is in vain we assay!

Serafina, inexpressibly affected, delayed not her remedy, but immediately
taking her hand, which she bedewed with her tears, she delivered herself to the
following effect: --

You are undoubtedly an angelic woman; hardly any lot could be considered as
fully adequate to your uncommon merit; yet, if my admeasurement of the mind of
Margaretta is just, the secret which I have to communicate, will banish from
her bosom its most corroding sorrows.

I shall make my recital in as few words as possible; and, although I may
criminate the everlastingly absent, yet I will not be so unjust to myself, as
to suppose that the fact which I have to state, will lessen me in your esteem.
The bosom of my Margaretta is the natal habitation of candor; and, while I
inform her that Edward Hamilton and myself, owe our being to the same father,
the sensation that is most prevalent in my breast, is a pleasing kind of
conscious pride.

While Mr. Hamilton, the elder, transacted business in Europe, he saw and
distinguished my unfortunate mother. A circumstantial narrative of the tender,
though unwarrantable connection, which was the consequence, you will find in
these sheets, which are the handwriting of my father; the characters are
familiar to your eye, and I yield them cheerfully to the perusal of some serene
hour.

It appears, that the only fault of which my ill-fated mother could be accused,
was her unjustifiable and fatal attachment to my father: the struggles of her
soul were great; her sufferings were accumulated; a number of extenuating facts
the narrative faithfully records; and the filial feelings of a daughter's
heart, naturally suggest a persuasion, that when, at the moment of my birth,
she yielded up her life, the sacrifice may be regarded as an expiation for her
indiscretion.

My father called me by her name; and, returning to America, presented me, then
only six months old, to his lady, as an orphan, whose person and fortune were
entrusted to his care by her expiring parents, and to whom he was determined to
discharge the part of a tender and faithful guardian.

The soul of Mrs. Hamilton was the seat of unsuspecting virtue, and she
received me to the bosom of commiserating affection; but I had not passed my
third year, when this excellent lady was summoned to the mansion prepared for
her; and my father exchanged no second vows. The attention which he paid to my
education, has often been remarked to you; and though, until I had completed
my twelfth year, I viewed him only as my guardian friend, yet upon the tablets
of my heart the sincerest veneration for his character was inscribed. Edward,
born during the absence of his father, had only one year the advantage of me,
and it was on the twelfth return of my natal day, that, leading us to his
library, and putting into my hands those papers, which I have now committed to
yours, he thus expressed himself: Receive -- Serafina Clifford -- and the big
tear rolled down his venerable cheek -- receive the recital of your mother's
woes. I have marked, with a perturbed and anxious kind of pleasure, the
uncommon attachment by which my children distinguish themselves; yours is the
age of innocence, and your affections bud on the stem of virtue; but a little
onward, and the passions of youth too often assume a baleful and fatal hue --
these, alas! may perhaps precipitate you into a gulf of ruin -- I judge it
proper to commit to you a secret -- that I command you never, but in an hour of
unavoidable necessity, to divulge -- Know, Edward Hamilton, that Serafina
Clifford is your sister; she is the daughter of your father -- Know, Serafina
Clifford, that Edward Hamilton is your brother; he is the son of your father;
and upon the heads of my children may the blessings of Heaven descend! Here the
emotions of his soul became too big for utterance; he was unwilling to submit
them even to the eye of duteous affection, and he hastily withdrew.

For us, our bosoms were awake only to the mingling sensations of surprise and
joy. I, for my part, never experienced a rapture so sincere; and, no longer
restrained by the presence of our father, we flew into each other's arms, eager
to exchange those vows of eternal amity, which we have ever since inviolably
observed.

With one half of his ample fortune, my father, by gifts, investitures and last
testament, scrupulously endowed me; and, as I enjoy no maternal inheritance, my
every pecuniary emolument is derived from him: Yet, he so well concerted his
measures, as to lead every one concerned to imagine, that he was only
relinquishing a trust that had been reposed in him.

The remainder of my account I shall pass rapidly over. When Mr. Courtland's
pretensions were apparently approbated by you, my brother, struggling in vain
to rise superior to an attachment, which he then deemed unfortunate, sought a
remedy in absence; and, flying for refuge to the southern States, melancholy,
and almost despairing, he assayed the various rounds of dissipation; gaming
became his favorite amusement; and, in a few weeks, it is scarcely credible
what immense sums of money were squandered! Mortifying embarrassments were the
consequence; and had it not been for the extraordinary interposition of a
friend of uncommon merit, his immediate ruin would have succeeded.

Viewing himself, however, as young, and unconnected, he was prepared to meet
the frowns of fortune; and supposing he had obtained the cure of a passion,
that had gained strength with almost every added year of his life, he returned
home, well pleased with his expedition. The event proved what an erroneous
calculation he had made; and when he received your hand at the altar, he
trusted that future successes, economy and application, would retrieve his
affairs. What shall I say? -- every month he has accumulated misfortunes; and
the rapid decline of his finances has operated as a severe check upon his
dearest pleasures. When you communicated to him your expectation of augmenting
his felicity, by presenting him an invaluable pledge of love, he was then
struggling under the pressure of a recent disappointment; he reflected upon
himself as a prodigal, who had wasted the patrimony of the unborn. You must
recollect his unguarded and impassioned expressions, with the alarming effects
which they produced upon you. He accuses himself as a wretch who has deceived
you; and he is miserable. The generous forbearance of his southern friend, has
hitherto upheld him; but that benevolent creditor has himself become a
bankrupt, and the state of my brother's affairs can no longer be concealed. My
lovely sister must soon have known, that her husband is some thousands in
arrears, which he has not a shilling to discharge. My fortune would completely
reinstate him; often have I tendered it -- Interrupt me not, my love; -- for
Margaretta was eager to express her feelings; I have written, I have repeatedly
remonstrated: To effectuate this favorite purpose of my soul, I have revolved
a variety of plans; my nights have been spent in tears, and my days in attempts
to conceal from you my chagrin.

Edward is withheld, by false principles of delicacy, from availing himself of
what the laws of his country, but for the regulations of his father, would
undoubtedly have invested him with: Gladly would I commit myself wholly into
the hands of my brother. The good or evil which awaits him, I would wish to
share; I would have but one interest between us, and I would be regarded only
as the sister of his heart.

But for him, he styles himself a wretch who has deceived and betrayed you,
and, under this appellation, he shuns your presence; he cannot bear to appear
before your parents, the victim of extravagance; he meditates absconding from.
America, and if he cannot be induced to relinquish his design, his sister will
bear him company in exile: But if matters can be adjusted, Edward may receive
my interest, at least as a loan. If Margaretta can forgive, and will become my
auxiliary, she may yet possess tranquillity; and she will ensure to herself the
eternal gratitude of two persons, who will, upon all occasions, devote
themselves to the promotion of her felicity.

As Miss. Clifford proceeded in her narrative, Margaretta had quitted her
couch; she had continued highly agitated, traversing up and down her apartment.
Now her clasped hands, raised eyes, and accelerated movements, expressed the
big emotions which struggled in her bosom; now she threw abroad her hands in
admiration, and now raised them to Heaven, in a delirium of joy: Vehemently
seizing the first pause, she repeated -- Tranquillity! -- Gracious God! -- Can
Serafina Clifford Hamilton -- my divine sister -- my angel friend -- my
peace-speaking, hope inspiring genius -- can she give so cold a term to the
extatic rapture of this blissful moment? Creator, and Almighty Preserver of my
life, how have I deserved this fullness of felicity, which, like a mighty
torrent, now bursts upon me? O Edward! my faultless, my injured husband! but
instantly, on my knees, I will supplicate the benign tenderness of that manly
bosom, to intercede in my favor.

Margaretta glided through the passage -- Hamilton met her in an adjoining
chamber; where, with a perturbed and anxious spirit, he had waited the result
of what he termed the crisis of his fate. It was not in his power to prevent
the humble posture of his charming wife; Margaretta bent before him; and, with
streaming eyes and supplicating hands, besought his pardon for the error, into
which a hasty, inexperienced and suspicious spirit had precipitated her. Edward
in vain assayed to raise her; by the events of the day her reason was still in
a degree disordered, and she insisted upon receiving her forgiveness in form.

"My God!" cried Edward, flinging himself beside her, this is too much; receive
once more your offending Hamilton; endeavor to erase from thy lovely bosom
every painful remembrance of his past irregularities, and you may then number
him among the happiest of human beings. Dearer to my soul than the light of
heaven, my Margaretta has ever been: All amiably consistent; and mildly good
as she is, she has not, she never could be found in a reprehensible walk; and
consequently, her husband must have marked her progress with an approbating
eye; consequently, he can have nothing to condemn, nothing to forgive.

The appearance of Miss Clifford suspended the^^ tender contention; and
Margaretta embraced the opportunity of hasting to impart to us, the astonishing
change which had taken place in her favor.

The subsequent scene, in my reading parlour, naturally resulted; and, I only
add, that if there are, who do not greatly admire, and highly applaud the
unequivocal demonstrations of joy, with which my daughter received the
knowledge, that she must relinquish the independence of affluence, and descend
to the humbling grade, which scanty and precarious circumstances enrolls, -- I
pity the frigidity of their bosoms.

No. XXII.
DECEMBER, 1793.
Majestic over the plains December bends,
In flaky heaps, over hills and dales descends;
With icicles his hoary head is bound,
The tempest shrieks, the cold winds bellow round;
Darkness supreme in gloomy triumph reigns;
From time revolving, added subjects gains;
Wide over our world his sable mantle spread,
The sunny hours and breezy gales are fled.
Yet howsoe'er replete with partial wrongs,
Still to December ceaseless praise belongs;
Period august! thy star-gemm'd records give
That sacred truth which bids the mourner live;
On thy broad disk the splendid beam impressed,
Where unborn nations are supremely blessed,
Produced in thy train the expected morn,
On which a liberating God was born;
The general we^l all potent to secure,
To pay the forfeit, and our woes endure:
While hallelujahs should ascend the skies,
Paeans high wrought from every tongue arise.
White bosomed month, glad hearts thy foots^^ps hail,
Sweeter thy carols than the vernal gale:
With thee, the renovating ^ork began,
That immortality bequeaths to man;
Surpised, he glances over the vast profound,
And marks, rejoicing, thy eventful round;
So, on the vestments of the long dark night,
(...) day star dawns, blessed harbinger of light;
While the lorn wanderer, erst of hope beguiled,
Dragged doubtful on through many a dreary wild,
Shapes to the opening gleam the matin song,
And once more mingles with the cheerful throng.

MY mind, much occupied and greatly exercised, by the deranged state of Mr.
Hamilton's affairs, together with some other very painful and deeply lacerating
events, has not found itself at liberty to pursue, with wonted avidity, its
accustomed avocations.

Thus circumstanced, as a substitute for the subject on which I had intended to
expatiate, I present, for the perusal of the reader, the contents of a folded
paper I lately picked up, in one of my solitary rambles; and which, being
without a signature, it is not in my power to restore, in any other way, to its
original proprietor. The sentiments and language of this little performance,
are evidently the devout and spontaneous breathings of a christianized mind.
And, as I think that the piece, altogether, may properly enough be
characterized, a Eulogy upon the month of December, I have chosen to christen
this Gleaner by the name of that celebrious portion of time.

[ Here follows the Paper.]

"DECEMBER -- it is true thou have been fruitful to me of misfortunes; many a
time have thou lacerated my bosom, by ravishing from me my dearest enjoyments;
thou have stabbed me in the tenderest part, and thy broadly wild and congealing
eye has seemed to glut itself with my tears; into thy frozen ear it is in vain
that I have poured my sorrows; harder than adamant, thou seem to arrest the
stream of pity, and thou regardest my lamentations with stern and unrelenting
severity; thy storms have been as a whirlwind to my soul; and thy tempests,
up-rooting my peace, have well near whelmed, beneath the barren heaths of
despair, my every hope.

Fell Despoiler I have called thee -- for thy hoary visage has still for me
been marked with terror -- But hark! what sweet voice is that which issues from
yonder Angel of peace? -- it soothes my spirit by the most consolatory
assurances -- reason and religion it combines -- with the Shepherd of Israel
the commission originates -- and, with bland and gentle pity, deep in my bosom
it implants immortal Hope.

December -- blessed era! -- thou art the natal month of the Savior of the world
-- Let thy winds convey my individual sufferings to that oblivion, to which the
Redeemer has, eventually, consigned the woes of the exonerated children of men.

To the private considerations of corroding sorrow, let me no longer listen --
Let me gird up the loins of my mind, and look forward to that blissful
consummation, the dawning of which was presented in thy administration.

Hail! returning period -- white-garbed month! -- thou shall ever be right
welcome to my devoted bosom -- Every moment which constitutes thy
admeasurement, should be consecrated as sacred to the most refined enjoyments
of the soul -- Henceforth, waving my accumulated griefs, I will love thy flaky
footsteps -- I will anticipate their approach; and my spirit shall solace
itself, by a confiding view of the accomplishment of that arrangement, which
was designated in thy apportioned round.

December -- blessed period! -- most illustrious in the order of time! -- thou
containest the natal day of the Son of God -- and thy broad encircling eye
extendest from the man of paradise, to that infant who shall latest swell the
sigh of humanity.

Yes, I will love thy flaky footsteps -- darkness cannot overshadow thee -- Thy
shades but serve to render the brightening splendours of thy course the more
conspicuous. The natal day of the Son of God! -- what records have engraven so
stupendous, so salutary, so momentous a truth! -- Thy hours register his birth
-- the birth of the Prince of Peace -- During thy progress, the Virgin brought
forth her firstborn son -- and renovated nature smiled extatic -- healing
breezes chase the chills of winter -- and celestial spirits cluster round the
haunts of men.

Soft as the vernal shower his doctrine distilled -- and the plant of
perfection attained maturity -- From the storm he is a Hiding Place -- and the
burning eye of Divine Justice can never pierce that invulnerable envelopement,
by which he has encompassed the sons and daughters of men -- Sickness flees
before him, and imbecility dwells not with him -- Evil shall be exterminated
from his dominion -- rectitude shall administer unto him -- peace shall erect
an immortal standard -- and innocence, adorned with chaplets of equity, shall
be the gift of the Most High.

The deaf shall hear his voice -- the blind shall behold his day, rejoicing --
the lame shall speed before him -- the dead, even the dead, shall hear the
voice of the Son of God -- and they who hear shall live!

Blessed thought! -- the dead shall again be raised -- And the hour approaches,
when, inmingling with departed saints, we shall rejoin that privileged and
beloved circle, over whose open graves we have poured the comfortless,
unavailing and corroding stream of sorrow -- But from every eye every tear
shall be wiped away -- nor shall the wide extended universe contain a son or
daughter of adversity.

Such will be, such is, the effects of his sway, who first breathed in
mortality during the division of hours, which make up thy allotment. Hall,
first of months! when I forget thy distinguished auspices may I be dead to the
voice of the charmer -- when I cease to mark with gratulations thy annual
return, may the blessed sounds uttered by the tongue of our holy, sacred, and
animating religion, no more vibrate upon my heavy ear.

Toward the close of the month, which closes our year, the Savior was born --
so, in the last day of time, when the divine arrangements are well near
completed, the restitution of all things shall be made manifest, and the
winding up of the great drama, bringing forward the accomplishment of the
designs of an all-wise Creator -- Crimes of every kind shall be banished from
the family of man -- the train of ills, which have infested the works of the
Eternal Mind, shall accompany their origin; and sin being annihilated, sorrow
shall be no more.

Evangelic month! -- again I repeat it -- surely I will love thy days, O
December! and the event produced under thy domain shall ever be right precious
to my soul!"

No. XXIII.
Justice an eye of fire should broadly open,
Yielding to virtue the rich germ of hope;
Each latent cause pervading to its source,
Her firm decisions potent to enforce.
Fortune bandeau'd may blindly mark our way,
While radiant justice spreads celestial day.

TAKING my seat, the other evening, in a front box at the playhouse, I was,
previous to the drawing up of the curtain, not a little amused by the chit-chat
of a couple of sprightly girls, who occupied seats at my right hand. The house,
the company, and the expected entertainment, alternately engaged their
attention. I found, by their conversation, that they, as well as myself, were
strangers in the metropolis, and that the witnessing the representation of a
play, was rather an extraneous occurrence in their catalogue of enjoyments.

"In the name of wonder, sister Peggy," exclaimed the youngest of the girls,
"who is that figure that seems placed as a sentinel over yonder avenue, and who
is at the same time so curiously bandeaued, that one might be ready to imagine
him just starting off upon a game of blind-man's buff?" "That figure? sister
Clary," replied Peggy, "why that figure, my dear, is the figure of Justice." "O
my conscience, sister," cried Clary, " Justice, do you say? Why surely, Peggy,
you must have made a monstrous blunder; for I have heard a thousand and a
thousand times, that Justice was nothing but eyes, and that she could see every
way at once." "You are thinking of Argus, Clary: The poets indeed describe him
with his hundred eyes; but Justice, believe me, is always painted blind." "Poh,
poh, Peggy, you are certainly in the wrong; or, if it is as you say, your great
writers, or painters, or whoever they be, must certainly all have been in a
dream: Why I would not suffer a blind man to choose me a set of ribbons, much
less should he decide upon a question which involved my life, my character, or
even my estate."

The girl's observation was the spontaneous language of nature, and truth and
nature are generally upon the same side.

How long my fair neighbors continued their entertaining confab. I know not,
for the ingenuity of Clary, throwing me into a train of thinking, from which I
was only roused by the appearance of the players, I unfortunately lost the
remainder of their remarks.

The sentiments of the lively Clary are certainly authorized by reason. Fortune
is described as blind; and she is said to bestow her benefactions most
capriciously. The rich, it is thought, considered in the aggregate, derive not
their claim to the distinctions with which they are invested, from the suffrage
of virtue; Fortune is frequently lavish of her favors to vice, while the good
man is seen struggling with all those ills which are the accompaniments of
penury. Yet did Fortune always thus designate, we might be ready to say she had
undoubtedly the gift of sight, and that the depravity of her taste led her to
select her favorites from the children of error. But to shield her goddessship
from a conclusion so derogatory to her moral character, instances may be
produced, where the votaries of rectitude bask in the sunshine of her smiles;
integrity is sometimes crowned by her with affluence, and the upright, being
liberally endowed, are appointed to administer to the necessities of the sons
and daughters of adversity.

Fortune, moreover, is extremely variable in her dispositions, and in the
constant revolutions of her wheel, those who are today standing tip-toe, upon
the highest eminence, may tomorrow be precipitated into the abyss of
entanglements, embarrassments, and comfortless despair. Ingenious therefore is
the allegory which permits us to attribute the caprice of Fortune to her
deficiency of vision; and those ancients were happy, who, thus regarding her
distributions, consoled themselves in the deprivation of her favors, by the
possession of that intrinsic worth, which it is not in the power of so
uncertain a being to designate or to bestow.

But whatever may be urged for veiling the optics of dame Fortune, is
undoubtedly point blank against hood-winking the goddess Themis, or Justice. I
am aware that the decisions of Justice should ever be impartial, and that her
visual ray is said to be thrown into the shade, to prevent the bias in favor
of appearances, that her judgment would otherwise have received; but it should
be remembered that Justice, divest of fable, is one of the most dignified
attributes of Deity; that it partakes the nature of its august Original; and
that it is, by consequence, infinitely superior to party.

Justice is enthroned far above all law, since no human arrangements can take
cognizance of every possible event, and much must at all times be left to the
spontaneous dictates of this illustrious vicegerent of Omnipotence.

Were I to personify Justice, instead of presenting her blind, I would
denominate her the goddess of fire; she should possess a subtle essence, which
should penetrate through, and pervade the inmost recesses of the soul; by every
insignia of light I would surround and designate her; while among the ornaments
which composed her crest, a broad and never closing eye should stand
conspicuous; she should possess the power to unravel the knotty entanglements
of the most sophisticated web; piercing as the forked lightning, instantaneous
and penetrating, she should disclose, at a single glance, the secret and
crooked windings of the most profound labyrinth, while, patient and unerring,
she should listen with calmness to the various disquisitions of the interested
claimant; and, careful to investigate, her decisions should always accord with
her own important nature and office.

Uniform in her awards, neither youth, beauty, nor innocence, should possess a
charm to soften her firm inflexibility; dignity, age, the venerable head of
snow, these should not awe; adversity should not excite an improper compassion,
nor should the tears of the widow, or of the orphan, unduly persuade. Of
unbending integrity, Justice should feel, hear and see, but truth alone should
be the pole star, by which she should shape her movements, and equity only
should constrain her determinations. To the ravages of wayward passions she
should be at all times superior; and her administration should be under the
regulation of wisdom. Elevated beings are dishonored by the supposition, that
they can possibly be influenced by improper or foreign representations, and my
delineation of Justice, armed at all points, should be inaccessible even to the
suspicion of imbecility.

August and dignified delegate of the great First Cause! to thee the nations
appeal, whatever form their governments may assume, whether democratical,
republican, oligarchal, monarchical, or despotical -- still they are careful to
give their doings the investiture of thy sacred name; they affect thy sanction,
they arrest thy titles; the violation of thy laws, is the ostensible reason for
the battles which they seek; and, assuming thy banners, they anticipate
success, exulting in victories, which, agreeably to thy allotments, the
iniquity of their cause may forbid their ever obtaining. Nor is the general
disposition of great events alone under thy direction; thou take cognizance
of the minutiae of human life, and with an unerring hand, thou directest all
those occurrences in the career of being, which the infidel is accustomed to
ascribe to the agency of a blind and undescribable chance. To thee the good man
raises the eye of confidence; virtue is sure of thy award; and the oppressed of
all ages have flown to thee for refuge.

Thus far I had written, aiming, gentle reader, at thy amusement -- when Edward
Hamilton looked in upon me. "You are busy, Sir, and I will not interrupt you."
No, my son, I have always leisure to receive your visits. Sit down, Sir, and
unfold the tale, to which your perplexed countenance is a preface.

"I come, Sir, to take your direction in regard to the line of conduct which
the untoward state of my affairs renders it proper for me to pursue." I threw
down my pen which I had till then held in my fingers; and, grasping his hand, I
eagerly exclaimed -- Justice, Sir, Justice must be your guide -- you are an
excellent young man, Mr. Hamilton; and I am happy in the assurance, that you
will find no difficulty in following the course of the radiant director, which
I take the liberty to point out as the guardian of your every step. Endeared as
you are to me, Sir, your very fault, the occasion considered, serving to
interest me still more in your happiness, I could at this moment with pleasure
divest myself of my little inheritance in your favor: Start not, Sir, (for he
was extremely agitated at this suggestion) considerations of tenderness to the
unborn, forbid my taking this step, and the possessions of her father, must be
secured to the children of our Margaretta. I approve much of your declining to
avail yourself of the generosity of Miss Clifford. Justice would redden
indignant at such a sacrifice. Nature, however, legislators may have ordained,
gave that young lady a right to the patrimony she enjoys; and your fraternal
affection ought not to suffer you to risk property, the loss of which would
render so amiable a woman dependent and uneasy.

Such, my son, has been the uniform integrity of your commercial transactions,
that, to abridge you of your liberty, not a single creditor will present
himself. Possibly you might go on to accumulate arrears; but Justice,
inflexible and unyielding Justice, must here interpose; a full statement of
your embarrassments, with an estimate of your possessions, must be immediately
given in; not a single article must be withheld; your family seat, which has,
for such a number of years, continued the residence of hospitality, if you are
allowed time to attempt its redemption, you will confess an obligation;
meanwhile, it must be occupied to the best advantage; it may be converted into
an annual income, which will considerably augment your finances; this house is
large, and the hearts of your parents are open to receive you; hither, until
the storm be overblown, you must retire; and by the restoration of that
society, the loss of which, I do assure you, we have not ceased secretly to
regret, our domestic enjoyments will be inexpressibly advanced. Fortune is
blind, and her dispositions are extremely variable; you must perseveringly
pursue her; possibly she may relent, and should she in future bestow upon you
her gifts, you must not fail to discharge, to the last farthing, every just
demand which can be made upon you. I bless God that your own habits, and
upright way of thinking, will irresistibly stimulate you upon this occasion.
Bankrupt and limitation acts may succeed each other, and all these may be very
well in their place; but the honest man will hear the voice of Justice, he will
bend his ear attentive to her pleadings, and Virtue will be the motto of his
actions.

Fame once wafted to my ear, a little narrative, which indelibly impressed
(...) mind; and I have never reflected upon it, without the accompaniment of an
exquisite kind of complacency. I will give it you, my son, as an example.

A gentleman, engaged in the mercantile line, had followed business with little
success; his integrity, his efforts, and his abilities were unquestionable, and
for many years they enabled him to make head against a tide of misfortunes,
which would have overwhelmed a common capacity; his creditors themselves, well
convinced of the propriety and frugality of his arrangements, readily
contributed the means, which his continued losses only converted into an
accumulation of his arrears. Weary, at length, of a warfare that fate seemed to
render so unequal, he summoned all those to whom he stood indebted, and forcing
upon them, according to the amount of their demands, an exact proportion of the
interest which remained with him; after thus voluntarily divesting himself of
every shilling of property, he found, to his great regret, that it was only
adequate to the discharging of a very small part of his arrears; he received,
however, from his approbating creditors, receipts in full; and, thus exonerated
in the estimation of the law, he very soon made up his mind, relative to his
future destination. A generous friend supplied him with a small sum, by the
means of which he embarked upon a foreign voyage; prosperous gales soon wafted
him to his desired port, and he presented himself with such credentials as he
merited. Shakespeare says, there is a tide in men's affairs! he had embraced
the favorable moment of opportunity; every thing he undertook was prosperous;
all his transactions were marked and crowned by success, and a few years saw
him master of a very handsome property. He had kept no correspondence with his
friends during what he termed his period of exile; but he no sooner attained
that independence, after which his noble spirit had so long and so ardently
sighed, than he departed in a ship of his own, richly freighted, full speed for
his native country. Information of his return was conveyed to his creditors,
through the medium of a card, soliciting their presence at a public house, to
partake of an entertainment which he had ordered for them. His creditors
remembered him as an unfortunate, but an honest man, whose arrival they should
gladly welcome, and they obeyed with avidity his summons. The first compliments
were marked by mutual expressions of satisfaction, and from the lips of the
welcome claimants the warmest gratulations spontaneously issued. A superb
dinner, with much elegance, was served up, and the covers being removed, the
bottle was briskly pushed about; but who can express their astonishment, when,
in the midst of their hilarity, every man was presented with the full sum he
had so formally relinquished, together with every shilling of interest, which
would have been legally due, had they received promissory notes instead of the
releases they had so voluntarily given! A generous contention immediately
ensued; but our merchant convincing his friends of his ability, they finally
yielded to his remonstrances.

They were, however, determined to exhibit a monument of their admiration and
their gratitude; and they solicited and obtained permission of the government
to erect, in a public stand, a magnificent obelisk, the faces of which were
inscribed with the name of the upright debtor, and with a circumstantial
account of the whole transaction.

How much more honorary is a virtuous fame, than the possession of houses or of
lands. The law was not made for the votaries of integrity; their own feelings
are sufficient to them as a rule of action; and Justice, unerring Justice, is
the great standard of their lives.

No. XXIV.
Leaning on morals when the Drama moves,
Friendly to virtue when the vision proves --
Lessons adopting formed to mend the heart,
Truths meliorated, poten^ to impart;
Her splendid fictions wisdom will embrace,
And all her scenic paths enraptured trace.

THE various parterres, now putting forth their promising buds, in many
sections, in this our country, looks with a very favorable aspect upon a man
of my profession; and I cannot but hope, that in the occupation of a Gleaner, I
shall be able to cull many a fragrant flower, wherewith to compose a bouquet,
that may throw an agreeable perfume over the leisure hours of the sentimental
speculator.

To express myself less technically. The progress of the Drama, in this new
world, must assuredly interest the feelings of every observer; and, being under
the pleasing necessity, in the routine of my excursions, of visiting many parts
of the United States, and thus, having frequent opportunities of presenting
myself in our several theaters, from the elegant house in Philadelphia to the
temporary resorts of itinerant companies, in those little country towns, which
will invariably copy the examples they receive from the metropolis, I
naturally, in the course of my perambulations, pick up many observations, that
may possibly serve for the amusement of my readers.

The great question which does, and ought to occupy the mind of every patriotic
moralist, is the utility of licensed stage-playing. Perhaps I may as well
withdraw the word licensed; for, in the present enlightened era and
administration of liberty, the citizen would hardly consent to an abridgment of
those amusements, the evil tendency of which could not be unequivocally
demonstrated to his understanding; and the late struggle in the State of
Massachusetts, evinces the futility of erecting barriers, not substantiated by
reason.

The law in that State was outraged in its very face: the flimsy subterfuge of
moral lectures deceived no one; and though, as I am informed, the theatrical
prohibition is but partially repealed respecting the Bostonians, and remains in
full force upon the rest of the State, yet it is notorious, that itinerant
players are constantly marching and counter-marching from town to town, to the
no small diversion of the good people of this very respectable member of the
Union. But, without presuming to intermeddle with the policy of the
legislature, my design is, to hazard a few remarks upon the subject in general.

As I abhor the domination of prejudice, and, upon the strongest conviction,
regard it as a tyrant, that if once brought to the guillotine, would (provided
it is not of the Hydra kind) leave an opening for the introduction of an era
far more friendly to the progress of genuine and corrected liberty, than the
murder of all the humane, virtuous, and religious princes in the universe; so I
most sincerely deprecate its despotism; and whenever I seat myself, with the
pen of inquiry, I am solicitous to raise a rebellion against encroachments,
that, however sanctioned by time, cannot, in my opinion, be considered in a
court of equity, as legal or natural. The objections to theatrical amusements
are many and plausible. I pretend not to decide for others; I would only
investigate.

If I mistake not -- Waste of time -- Imprudent expenditures -- Encouragement
of idleness -- and, Relaxation of morals, stand foremost in the catalogue of
objections.

Prodigality of time, is indeed an irremediable evil; and if it can be proved,
that an hour devoted to the theater would certainly have been appropriated to
any beneficial employment, for which no moment of leisure will in future
present, I, for one, shall be impelled to allow the validity of the allegation;
and, I do hereby invest such plea with full authority to detain every such
person from all dramatical representations whatever: But, with the same breath
I contend, that those evenings which are immolated at the shrine of Bacchus,
which are loitered in a tavern, in unnecessary gossiping, cards, scandal, and
the numerous vagaries of fashion, will be comparatively redeemed, if marked by
an entertainment so incontrovertibly rational.

The complaint of exorbitant expenditures, is of a similar description. A
friend of mine, who resided for some time abroad, once informed me, that he had
frequently been stopped, when in full career to the playhouse, by a
consideration that the indulgence he was about to procure himself, would supply
some tearful sufferer with bread, for at least one whole week. Now, all such
persons, provided they can make it appear, they are not in the use of any as
expensive and more superfluous gratification, shall be released, upon their
parole given, that they will absolutely and bona fide employ their six
shillings to the aforesaid purpose.

To the third objection I cannot allow the smallest weight: Who, I would ask,
are the Idlers? Perhaps there is no mode of life which requires more assiduous
and laborious application, than that of a good and consistent actor. School
exercises are certainly not the most pleasurable employments of adolescence;
and every adult can tell, how much more easily he could imprint the memory of
his early years, than that retention which is the accompaniment of his matured
life. But the ambitious and principled actor has past the age of flexibility,
and still his days are, almost unceasingly, devoted to study: By frequent
repetitions, such is the constitution of the mind, the finest sentiments too
often pall; and the well informed, ingenious and meritorious performer is in
danger of losing his taste for the highest mental enjoyments; while the
entertainment which he produces for others, is the result of unremitted and
painful labor to himself.

Why then, permit me to ask, if he is solicitous to blend, with our amusements,
the highest possible improvement; if he professedly pursues the means of
living; if his manners and his morals are unblemished; and if, by becoming
stationary, he in effect takes rank with our citizens -- why, I ask, is he so
lightly esteemed? Surely, if, under the influence of reason, of gratitude and
impartiality, I must unhesitatingly acknowledge, persons ardently engaged in
procuring for us a rational entertainment, are entitled to a degree of genuine
respect, to encouragement, and even to patronage.

It is asserted, and the assertion does not appear unfounded, that a virtuous
theater is highly influential in regulating the opinions, manners, and morals
of the populace.

Here we are naturally led to the fourth and last division of our subject.

Relaxation of morals. -- And I ask, Does not a virtuous theater exemplify the
lessons which the ethic preacher labors to inculcate? I take it for granted,
that none but a virtuous and well regulated theater will be tolerated. In the
southern and middle States, Philadelphia particularly, no performance can make
its appearance upon the stage, without passing under the previous examination
of the governor and two other respectable magistrates, who, by their avowed
approbation, become responsible to the public for the merit of the piece.
Similar restrictions will, perhaps, be adopted, wherever the Drama shall
progress; and my confidence in the trustees of the Boston theater, represents
to my view every apprehension, not only as superfluous, but absolutely
injurious.

Virtue then will be adorned with all her native loveliness, and vice
exhibited, deformed and misshapen, as that detested hag, which Milton's
energetic pen has so hideously pourtrayed. Is there a bosom that will not
hasten to embrace the one? Is there a mind that will not shrink with horror
from the other? The man of firmness, of principle, and of worth innate; the
mild, the consistent, the regular, the maternal fair one; these shall be
rewarded with bursts of heartfelt applause; while the imbecile or irresolute
votary of error, the unprincipled betrayer, the fraudulent villain, the
licentious, perverse and abandoned female; these characters shall be
stigmatized with reproach, exhibited in their native atrocity, and set up as
beacons to deter our young people from pursuing a path, which will render them
odious to every person possessed of sentiment and virtue.

Socrates, Cicero, and even Cato, have mingled with the audience in a theater;
and as it is presumed that the buffoonery of an Aristophanes will not be
tolerated upon an American stage, it is pleasingly believed, that the dignity
of years, of wisdom, and of virtue, will, in no instance, be outraged by the
children of the Drama.

The Pompeys of our day, it is to be hoped, will learn many a useful lesson;
they will commence students in the school of the rights of man; and, becoming
proficients in the laws of equity and of nature, like the Roman general, they
will retire from the theater, converts to the virtuous and impartial
designations of equality.

Religious worship, it is said, gave birth to the Drama; and under proper
regulations, it may still conduce to acts of devotional piety. To Athens and to
Rome, the theater became a source of information, refined perception, and
genuine morality; and we have only to avoid the causes which finally produced
its degeneracy in the elder world, to continue it among us, in these States, an
excellent exemplar and preservative of rectitude. The theater opens a wide
field for literary exertions; and we anticipate a rich harvest of intellectual
pleasure and improvement. The sons and daughters of fancy, the sentimentalist,
and the moralist; these will engage in the interesting competition. They will
consider that their productions are not intended barely for the amusement of a
solitary hour; that the Drama, pointing every excellence, will imprint upon the
heart the sentiment of worth; that it may be in their power to fashion, and to
lead, a national taste; that by exalting virtue, and adorning religion,
rendering vice disgusting, and stigmatizing infidelity, they will most
effectually second the endeavors of that revered body, professedly engaged to
beautify morality, and elevate religion.

We trust that a spirit of laudable emulation will be excited; and while the
summit of fame, in brightening perspective, uprears its wreath-crowned head,
writers will be animated to the splendid career, and with glowing ardour they
will hasten forward to the desired goal. How delightful the employ! the mind,
while engaged in painting the native charms of genuine and philanthropic
religion, catching the fervor of divine inspiration, will necessarily become
rectified and ameliorated by the delineation. Rectitude, adorned by her sister
graces, heaven-born contentment, consequent felicity, and ever blooming joy --
these will captivate every beholder. Economy, attired by her handmaid
competence, with serene tranquillity, presenting to view the peace reflecting
mirror, will not fail of reclaiming from the paths of profligacy the most
dissipated wanderer; and frugality and equity will remain prevalent in the
mind. Nor will the exhibition of vice be unattended with its salutary effects.
Conviction will be pointed to the bosom of the aggressor; the deformity of
atrocious offenses, striking by illustrating examples, will present the
disgusting figure, which the conscious culprit will assuredly recognize, and
the probability is, that abhorrence and reformation will ensue.

Shakespeare, that penetrating observer, skilful investigator, and indisputable
judge of the human heart, makes his Hamlet say, " I Have heard, that guilty
creatures, at a play, have, by the very cunning of the scene, been struck so to
the soul, that presently they have proclaimed their malefactions. I Will have
these players play something like the murder of my father, before my uncle."
And again; " The play's the thing, wherein I Will catch the conscience of the
king."

If it may be presumed, that the stated objections, thus considered, are
obviated, I conceive it will not be denied that, from a chaste and discreetly
regulated theater, many attendant advantages will indisputably result. Young
persons will acquire a refinement of taste and manners; they will learn to
think, speak, and act, with propriety; a thirst for knowledge will be
originated; and from attentions, at first, perhaps, constituting only the
amusement of the hour, they will gradually proceed to more important inquiries.

Clarinda Meanwell, the daughter of a gentleman whom I highly respect, whose
education has been upon the very best plan, continued nevertheless, for the
first twenty years of her life, without manifesting the smallest literary
curiosity. It was impossible to interest her, even in the pages of a novel; and
whatever she learned, was more the result of a disposition naturally conceding,
than of voluntary application. A company of itinerant players visited her
native village; the night of exhibition was announced, every body, as they
phrased it, was going; but Miss Clarinda could not be animated to a wish for
the entertainment; her accustomed complacency of disposition yielded her,
however, the companion of her associates; the piece was interesting; it
forcibly seized her faculties; it possessed, to her, in every sense, the charms
of novelty; for the world she would not be absent upon any future occasion. In
the course of the day preceding a theatrical entertainment, that she might the
better comprehend the several parts, the play-book was in her hand, a laudable
spirit of inquiry obtained in her bosom, and with amazing rapidity she ran
through, and compassed the sense of every volume within her reach. History,
geography, astronomy -- in all these, her proficiency is prodigious; and, in
one word, I hardly know a better informed, or more amiable young woman in the
circle of my acquaintance. But Clarinda Meanwell is not a solitary instance;
and as I have very frequently observed the good effects of dramatical
representations, I trust that my readers are enough acquainted with a heart,
the feelings of which I have, upon various occasions, essayed to sketch, to
give me full credit, for that throb of deep-felt complacency, which I
experienced upon receiving information of the elegant and superb theater, which
has so recently been erected for the reception of the Drama, in the State of
Massachusetts.

And here, gentle reader, I would with all my soul gratify thee by a full and
complete description of this well built and beautifully decorated mansion of
the Muses -- such as it appeared upon the first drawing up of the curtain; but
from the multiplicity of ideas which then crowded the mind, it is impossible to
prepare an accurate description, and as I write for posterity, I would not
willingly leave a single pillar, capital, architrave, entablature, or cornice,
unnoted: Future opportunies may present, and, if I am not forestalled, a future
Gleaner may delineate the building. My brother Russell has already informed
thee, that "the house was filled from the lowest note to the top of the
compass;" and his observations upon the audience may be recognized by truth.
The long expected era arrived; it was indeed replete with expectation -- the
interposing veil was thrown back, and that pleasing actor, whose eulogy has
been so frequently pronounced, made his entrance amid the most unequivocal
demonstrations of satisfaction which a sensible, anticipating, and admiring
assembly could exhibit. The effects of a reception, which must have been every
way adequate to his wishes, were pleasingly evinced, by a susceptibility
honorary to the manly character; and the prologue then first vibrated upon the
public ear, with every advantage, which that truly classical performance so
indisputably merits.

That this prefatory address is a genuine prologue, notwithstanding every
objection which has been advanced, I take leave to affirm. What can so
properly be constituted the harbinger of a dramatic performance, as a succinct
account of that drama it is intended to introduce? and what so natural for a
general dedication of a theater, as a delineation of the progress of the art,
to which it is consecrated? If variety, and richness of imagery, classical
allusions, found morality, nervous expressions, beauty of diction, and much
information, constitute a first rate poem, the prologue is certainly invested
with the fairest pretensions to the honorary palm. To point out all its
beauties, it would be necessary to insert the composition entire; yet I cannot
forbear repeating the following charmingly figurative lines: Warm to the heart
the chymic fiction stole,
And (...), by moral alchymy, the soul.
And again, The globe's proud butcher grew humanely brave!
Earth staunch'd her wounds, and ocean hushed his wave.


The allusion to the general deluge is strikingly and inimitably beautiful. The
poet was most happy in this thought: I think I have not seen it surpassed; and
I question if the Shakespearian panegyrists have ever yet done that immortal
bard more ample justice, than he has received in these finely expressed lines:
But hark! her mighty rival sweeps the strings:
Sweet Avon, flow not! it is thy Shakespeare sings!
With Blanchard's wing, in Fancy's heaven he soars;
With Herschel's eye, another world explores!
Taught by the tones of his melodious song,
The scenic muses tuned their barbarous tongue;
With subtle powers the crudest soul refined,
And warmed the Zembla of the frozen mind.
The world's new Queen, Augusta, owned their charms,
And clasped the Grecian nymphs in British arms.


I have a strong propensity to go on transcribing; but, full many a time, has
the recollection of the stinted pages of a Magazine, damped the most fervid
wishes of my soul. Mr. Pain has certainly done himself great honor; and I
congratulate my country on the possession of a genius, which, in the very morn
of manhood, has boldly seized the golden fruit of maturity. The Poet must
doubtless feel himself much exhilerated, as he contemplates the well earned
guerdon of superior talents; yet I dare say that he will wear his honors with
becoming meekness; and when it is remembered, that Sophocles, the illustrious
ornament and patron of the Grecian drama, absolutely died of joy, upon
obtaining from his competitors the prize of merit, adjudged him for one of his
tragedies, our youthful hard will be tolerated in a considerable expansion of
pleasurable feelings.

The play was admirably chosen; it is a time honored piece; and it contains
many sentiments, which can never reverberate upon the ear of sensibility
without speaking to the finest feelings of the soul. In the very first scene,
in the first act, our attention is forcibly arrested, and we cannot avoid
taking the deepest interest in the disguised hero, although immured in the
mines of Dalecarlia; and while " stretched there, where reigns eternal night,
the flint his pillow, and cold damps his coverings; yet we behold him bold of
spirit, and robust of limb, throwing inclemency aside, superior to the lot of
human frailty." With Anderson, spontaneously, " we breathe the voice of virtue,
of cordial amity, from man to man, and that benignity that whispers to the
soul, to seek and cheer the sufferer."

The sentiments of Anderson, of Arnoldus, and of Gustavus, are the very soul of
valor, benevolence, patriotism, and every shining virtue. The subsequent
discovery, the entrance of Arvida -- the tenderness, the amity of heroes is
personified, and we experience an exquisite satisfaction, in yielding our
applause to those Dalecarlians, of whom Gustavus says, " I Have searched these
men, and find them like the soil, barren without, and to the eye unlovely; but
they have their mines within them, and this the day I mean to prove them."

The character of Cristiern is a complete exemplification of whatever is
detestable in a tyrant: Perhaps no language can more concisely group the
traits, which go to the composition of the insufferable despot, than the
following: " Wretches! shall I go poring on the earth, lest my imperial foot
should tread on emmets?"

The trial of Arvida is admirably conceived; it was an ordeal adequate to the
warrior, the lover, and the friend. In the struggles which lacerate his manly
bosom, we take a deep and affecting part, and every feeling of benevolence
would invest him with that honied balm, which he so well describes -- " Yes,
peace has sweets that Hybla never knew: It sleeps on down, culled gently from
beneath the Cherub's wing -- no bed for mortals -- Man is warfare -- all a
hurricane within."

Christina's description of Gustavus, is the breathings of virgin purity, and
it cannot fail of captivating the bosom of virtue -- " But, O Heaven, what then
was my amazement! He was chained, was chained, my Mariana! Like the robes of
coronation, worn by youthful kings, ^e drew his shackles. The Herculean nerve
braced his young arm; and, softened in his cheek, lived more than woman
sweetness! Then his eyes! his mein! his native dignity! He looked as though he
led captivity in chains, and all were slaves around." When to the portrait,
drawn by love and fancy, we add the finishing touches of the veteran soldier,
we shall not hesitate to do homage to a model so perfect: " Fear fled before;
behind him rout grew loud, and distant wonder gazed -- At length he turned,
and, having eyed me with a wondrous look of sweetness mixed with glory --
grace inestimable! -- ^e plucked this bracelet from his conquering arm, and
bound it here -- my wrist seemed trebly nerv'd; my heart spoke to him, and I
did such deeds as best might thank him -- but from that blessed day I never saw
him more -- yet still to this I bow, as to the relics of my saint: Each morn I
drop a tear on every bead, count all the glories of Gustavus over, and think I
still behold him." These animated and combining testimonials, prepare us to
hear the illustrious chief himself; and he arrests, from every sentiment of the
soul, the full tide of approbation. " Approach, my fellow soldiers, your
Gustavus claims no precedence here; friendship like mine throws all respect
behind it -- It Is enough -- I read your joys, your transports in your eyes; and
would, O would I had a life to spend for every soldier here! whose every life's
far dearer than my own; dearer than aught, except your liberty, except your
honor." But it is not enough that Gustavus is the finished patriot and
undaunted warrior; the milder virtues too are natal in his bosom: Suspicion
cannot take root in a soil so noble. " If thou have aught to urge against
Arvida, the man of virtue, tell it not the wind, lest slander catch the sound,
and guilt should triumph." The interview between the matchless friends, is
uncommonly high wrought, and supported too upon the best principles. Unlike our
modern votaries of an illusion, which they blasphemously term honor, Gustavus,
innately elevated, esteems it no diminution of his glory, to develop a mystery,
which was on the point of precipitating his Arvida into irretrievable ruin. How
does the explanation dignify the hero, and how generously pathetic is his
defense of the beguiled chief: " Unhappy man! my heart bleeds for thee: false I
had surely been, had I like thee been tempted." But the self-reproach which had
planted all its daggers in the bosom of Arvida, proclaims him the proper object
of a hero's confidence, and we most sincerely join issue in his conclusion: "
Pardon can expiate; it is the lethean sweet, the snow of heaven, new blanching
over the black'ning front of guilt, ^^at, to the eye of mercy, all appears fair
as the unwritten page."

To the bosom of filial piety, the apology of Christina is a necessary and
timely relief: " Had I to death or bondage sold my sire, or had Gustavus on our
native realms made hostile inroad! then, my Mariana! had I then saved him from
the stroke of justice, I should not cease my suit for pardon. But if, though in
a foe, to reverence virtue, withstand oppression, rescue injured innocence,
step boldly in betwixt my sire and guilt, and save my king, my father from
dishonor; if this be sin, I have shook hands with penitence. First perish
crowns, dominion, all the shine and transience of this world, ere guilt shall
serve to buy the vain encumbrance." The address of Augusta to the kneeling
beauty, is beyond expression charming: " Ha! who art thou, that looks so like
the 'habitants of heaven, like mercy sent upon the morning's blush, (...) glad
the heart, and cheer a gloomy world with light, tilt now unknown?"

Upon the ear, hallowed by the benign voice of the Savior of sinners, the
following sentiment must harmoniously vibrate: " Soft and sweet as looks of
charity, or voice of lambs that bleat upon the morning, are the words of
christian meekness! mission all divine -- the law of love, soul mandate!" Thus
spoke the man who " from the breast, from out the swathing-bands, stepped the
true child of honor." The scene between Gustavus and the venerable matron to
whom he owed his being, together with the tender fears of that soul-affecting
bud of innocence, his infant sister, is almost too much for the feelings of
humanity; and the sensations of my bosom spontaneously thanked the judicious
Manager, who expunged the whole scene of the lifeless bodies, the bier, etc.
The heart of susceptibility is sufficiently wrung, while listening to the
agonized chief. " Then she is gone -- Arvida! Anderson! forever gone! --
Arnoldus, friends, where are ye? Help here! heave, heave this mountain from me
-- O Heaven, keep my senses! -- so we will to battle; but let no banners wave:
Be still, thou trump, and every martial sound that gives the war to pomp or
levity; for vengeance now is clad with heavy arms, sedately stern, resolved,
^^t silent." I confess, I am happy to find the princess of Denmark again in the
path of duty -- what justness of sentiment -- " Patience and peace possess thy
mind; not all the pride of empire ever gave such blessed sensations, as one,
one hour of penitence, though painful; let us hence, far from the blood and
bustle of ambition. Be it my task to watch thy rising wish, to smooth thy brow,
find comfort for thy cares, and for thy will, obedience; still to cheer the day
with smiles, and lay thee nightly down beneath thy slumbers."

Gustavus, the victorious Gustavus, is still the same as in the mines of
Dalecarlia. " No, matchless men! my brothers of the war, be it my greatest
glory to have mixed my arms with yours, and to have fought for once, like to a
Dalecarlian -- like to you. The sires of honor, of a now born fame, to be
transmitted from your great memorial, to climes unknown, to age succeeding age,
till time shall verge upon eternity, and patriots be no more." And again, "
Fear not, the fence of virtue is a chief's best caution; and the firm surety of
my people's hearts, is all the guard that ever shall wait Gustavus. I am a
soldier from my youth; yet, Anderson, these wars, where man must wound himself
in man, have somewhat shocking in them; trust me, friend, except in such a
cause as this day's quarrel, I would not shed a single wretch's blood for the
world's empire."

The royal maid is also still consistent, still equal with herself, when "
pleading for a father, for a dear, much loved, if cruel, yet unhappy father."
But far surpassing all that is excellent, she bursts upon us with more than
mortal glory, when, with all the dignity of sex, we mark, to the loved,
victorious, supplicating chief, her incomparable reply -- " Now aid me, all ye
chaster powers that guard a woman's weakness! -- it is resolved -- thy own
example charms thy suit to silence. Nor think alone to bear the palm of virtue
-- thou who have taught the world, when duty calls, to throw the bar of every
wish behind them. Exalted in that thought, like thee I rise, while every
lessening passion sinks beneath me. Adieu, adieu, most honored, first of men!
I go, I part, I fly, but to deserve thee!" And again, in return to the hero's
remonstrance -- " The bond of virtue, friendship's sacred tie, the lover's
pains, and all the sister's fondness, mine has the flame of every love within
it. But I Have a father, guilty if he be, yet is he old; if cruel, yet a father.
Abandoned now by every supple wretch that fed his years with flattery, I Am all
that is left to calm, to soothe his troubled soul to penitence, to virtue; and
perhaps, restore the better empire over his mind, true seat of all dominion --
Yet, Gustavus, yet there are mightier reasons -- O farewell! had I never loved,
I might have staid with honor." This finishing of the character of Christina,
is unexpected, and, in my opinion, completes the beauty and symmetry of the
performance.

It is impossible to give language to the feelings of an attentive and
susceptible audience during the representation of this masterly composition.
The finished elegance of the building, the surrounding lights, the brilliant
assembly, so strikingly contrasting the stage scene, where was exhibited the
country of Dalecarlia, the tents in perspective, the hardy veterans, arrayed in
martial order, passing in review, etc. etc. all this, together with the novelty
of arrangements, so far surpassing what we had ever before witnessed, was, in
truth, inexpressibly captivating.

The distant country of the admired chief seemed in reality extended to our
view; and, for myself, I am free to own, that as I glanced my eye from the
stage, to the throng of respectable citizens, occupying the pit, boxes, and
galleries; as I observed the marked attention in the never deceptive eye, the
solemn stillness, the tender tear upon the cheek of beauty, and the humid eye
of manhood, with the alternate bursts of applause, betokening congenial virtues
-- as I marked these effects, the agitation of my bosom became well near
ungovernable.

On the performers, perhaps, I ought not to hazard a remark. As an American,
comparatively new to observations of this nature, I cannot be supposed a
competent judge; yet, so complete was my satisfaction, that I did not hear
without pain, that many individuals expressed displeasure; and I can only
account for this by a supposition that there expectations were too high raised
to admit of gratification in the present infancy of our Drama.

Surely it ought to be remembered, that the plant, however luxuriant, does not,
immediately on being removed to a foreign soil, continue its pristine vigor;
and candor has already observed that the prohibited play then first arresting
the attention of the performers, could not, in so early an exhibition, obtain,
in the representation, the perfection of which it is doubtless susceptible. Yet
we think it must be acknowledged, that Mr. Powell, in the character of
Cristiern, inspired all those abhorrent feelings which the poet intended to
originate; that Mr. Jones supported with admirable kill the part of Trollio,
and that the Swedish priest, by so finely contrasting the treachery and baleful
talents of the infamous bishop, presented to the mind a most agreeable relief.
Such should always figure a herald of genuine religion.

Gratitude and faithfulness, in the character of Laertes, were persuasively
delineated by his representative. Mr. S. Powell seemed indeed Arvida; and
Gustavus shone upon us enriched with native splendor.

In the female parts, the beauty and propriety of filial piety, the captivating
magic of the tender passion, the dignity of the princess and the woman, were
strikingly exemplified by Miss Harrison; her pronunciation was distinct, her
emphasis generally proper, and her gestures naturally expressive.

The Spartan virtues personified in Augusta, and entwining all the tenderness
of the maternal character, demanded the most glowing, dignified, and deeply
(...) action. We conceive the first theatrical abilities were requisite to the
performing this part with propriety.

The young Gustava was truly interesting; nor was there a sympathizing mother
present, whose bosom did not throb to snatch from the envenomed talons of the
fell destroyer the soul-affecting innocent. Mariana was not destitute of merit;
she seemed to deserve the place she occupied in the confidence of the royal
virgin.

To the comic powers, exhibited upon that evening, ample justice has been done.
Unequivocal demonstrations of applause resounded from every corner of the
house, and, for my part, I congratulate the sons of Momus with all my heart;
for, having never yet been able to conceive the smallest evil in laughter,
simply considered, I cannot but give my vote in favor of corrected mirth. Mr.
Collins, Miss Baker, etc. etc. these have all received the tributary laurel;
and I do not feel in the least disposed to enter my caveat upon this occasion.

The Gleaner confesses that his expectations were more than answered; but the
Gleaner has never witnessed the theatrical abilities of a Garrick, or a
Siddons; nor is he certain he ought to regard this as a misfortune.

It is always invidious to point out faults; at least it is to me an unpleasing
task. From an infant stage I look for improvement. The time will arrive when
the performers will in no instance "O'erstep the modesty of Nature." Even
tragedy may deal too much in starts: It should be energetic; it should be
pathetic; but the pompous swell and strut, make no part of its excellence. Ease
and elegance are the naivette of comedy, and its features are the features of
polished and corrected nature.

But I repeat, I look for improvement; gradually we shall progress; the
performers will think more of the audience, and they will, by consequence,
appear to think less; in other words, they will seem to forget the circles that
attend them. Their frequent appeals by eye and hand will insensibly subside;
and, through the whole of the representation, they will see the propriety of
addressing the person, or persons, to whom they are supposed particularly to
speak. In one word -- the audience will refine the players, and the players
will refine the audience.

No. XXV.
Truth, though envelop'd round in mystic folds,
Still brightens to the contemplative mind;
The enraptured eye each latent charm beholds,
Tracing the plan by righteous Heaven designed.

I HAVE often thought, that serious and well disposed believers of the heathen
mythology, must have found themselves wonderfully impelled to acts of
devotional piety. It was scarcely possible for such persons to pursue their
course in any direction, which did not present to their external optics, or to
the eye of their imagination, beings who were, in their estimation, proper
objects of adoration. A respectable writer describes the vast universe as the
solemn temple of the pagans; and, we may add, that in every division of this
superb fane, altars, sacred to their various rituals present. The empire of
fancy is thronged by personified ideas; the prosopopoeia is easy, and gods and
goddesses cluster in every walk. Hesiod, in his genealogical history of the
heathen deities, delineates thirty thousand of these dignified beings, and an
indulgent imagination readily invests them with their peculiar properties and
offices.

To the child of fancy, sheltered in the sequestered grove from the intense
heat of summer, the salutary breeze which gently agitates the leaves is the
rosy breath of the winged zephyrus, and the murmuring of that stream, which
winds its glassy course, is the soft sighing of a river nymph, while, with
equal ingenuity, amid the pelting storm, he considers the hoarse bellowing of
the winds as the sonorous voice of some potent god.

Neptune grasps his trident, and holds dominion in the vast world of waters.
Pluto, borne in his sable chariot, bears the keys of ages and of dea^^; while
Jupiter, ascending the skies, mounts his throne of ivory, extending in his
right hand the avenging thunderbolt, and in his left the scepter of
sovereignty. To these succeed a train of subordinate immortals, all possessing
their peculiar attributes, and occupying their various departments. Of the
seasons of the year, the fruits of the earth, and the different stages of life,
infancy, adolescence, maturity, and old age, a presiding deity took charge. In
the catalogue of divinities, every virtue found its patron and its patroness;
nay, among this multifarious generation of immortals, even the reprehensible
passions were not destitute of their protectors. The sincere votary of this
mythology, I say, must have been continually stimulated to acts which his
directory assured him were proper and necessary; and, for my own part, I am
free to own, that however fanciful reason may consider this fabulous hierarchy,
I see no impropriety, in still allowing it, in the works of imagination, a
visionary being; and poetry, certainly, even to the present era, gathers some
of its most ornamental flowers from this magical, or legendary garden of
antiquity.

The history of the heathen gods and goddesses is so interwoven with the
occurrences of ancient times, that it is impossible to peruse those venerable
pages with advantage, without a competent knowledge of their various characters
and powers. I remember, when Margaretta was a child, I began a little
biographical volume, which entitling a Theogeny, the better to captivate her
attention, I threw into doggerel verse. My design was, to give a succinct
account of those deities who had figured in history, and who still hold their
rank in some of our best poetical performances. An attention to business
prevented my completing this bagatelle; but I am not sure that I shall not look
it up, giving it a form, and the last polish, for the benefit of her children.

If we trace the traditionary fables which make up the bulk of the pagan
system, we shall generally find they originate in some momentous and
incontrovertible truth; and however they may have been combined and
adulterated, in the various channels through which they have adventitiously
passed, they still retain some features, which, to the eye of observation,
sufficiently evince their august parentage.

Through the labyrinth of error, the scriptuarian often follows a clew, which
leads him directly to the fundamental principles of that revealed religion,
which he reverences as of God, which he believes to be most holy, and which he
receives as the ground of his present tranquillity, and his future hopes.

That chaos, which Hesiod dignifies by the appellation of The Father of the
Gods, Moses simply calls The earth, without form and void. Hesiod's relation is
undoubtedly an allegorical account, wherein the various parts of nature are
personified, of that history of the creation, which the Hebrew writer; in
language natural and beautifully sublime, so inimitably narrated. Writers have
appeared, who have supposed the fable of Prometheus to have taken rise in the
character of Noah; others imagine they trace the features of the second founder
of mankind in Deucalion. Plausible reasons are adduced for these conjectures;
but perhaps we hazard less, in yielding credence to the respectable Boc^art,
who conceived this favorite of the Almighty to have been worshipped, in
succeeding times, by the name and attributes of Saturn. The golden age which is
placed under the administration of that deity; the tranquillity, friendship,
and innocence, which is said to have reigned in the bosom of every description
of mankind; the perpetual spring which invariably flourished; the temperate
serenity of the atmosphere, neither veiled by gathering clouds, nor deformed by
bursting storms; these, and similar arrangements, undoubtedly proclaim the
interposition of some philanthropic prince, or benefactor of the race.

The history of the Deucalion flood, if not a description, by another name, of
the general deluge, bears, nevertheless, strong marks of affinity thereto.
Lucian, giving some account of Syria, where it is said the deluge of Deucalion
originated, assures us, That the Greeks assert in their fables, that the first
men being of an insolent and cruel disposition, inhuman, inhospitable, and
regardless of their faith, were all destroyed by a deluge -- the earth pouring
forth vast streams of water -- (in the Mosaic language, the fountains of the
great deep were broken up) -- swelled the rivers, which, together with the
rains, made the sea rise above its banks and overflow the land, so that all was
laid under water: That Deucalion alone, saved himself and family in the ark:
That two of each kind of wild and tame animals, losing their animosity, entered
into it of their own accord: That this Deucalion floated upon the waters, until
they became assuaged, and that he then repaired the human race. Writers also
describe the eminence which arrested the course of this vessel; and by the
authority of the celebrated biographer, Plutarch, we catch a glimpse of the
issuing dove which Abydenus denominates a certain fowl, that being twice let
out of the ark, and finding no place of rest, returned into the vessel.

The metaphor of Pandora, it is conceived, may be easily developed. The beauty,
wisdom, various intellectual endowments, matchless eloquence, and harmonic
powers, with every other combining charm, which so eminently distinguished that
accomplished vision, are picturesque of the assemblage of graces that dignified
and adorned our general mother, while yet, arrayed in spotless innocence, she
presided the sovereign lady of those blissful regions, which her presence
rendered so truly interesting, and which she was so well calculated to
embellish. The mischief consequent upon the disobedience of the first woman,
are exactly figured by the catalogue of ills which followed the opening of
Pandora's box; and poor humanity has ever since been doomed to lament the
discord, anarchy, anger, envy, calumny, crimes in their variety; wars, famine,
diseases, pestilence, decrepitude, old age, and death, which escaped thence --
yet hope, blessed hope, remained at bottom, and the christian investigator will
not fail, in this expressive figure, to recognize the promise given to the fair
delinquent, ere yet her trembling footsteps were exiled from that elysium,
which, previous to her devious wanderings, she was so well skilled to cultivate
and beautify.

The fable of Typhon, and the rest of the giants, with the daring temerity of
those hideous monsters; their audacious insult upon the residence of the
celestials, and their levelling war with the gods; all these astonishing
circumstances may find their origin in the Hebrew historian, who describes the
earth as bearing a race of men of uncommon stature, and complicated atrocity;
who delineates the tower of Babel, and the defeat of that impious confederacy.
The design formed by Agamemnon, of immolating, upon the altar of idolatry, his
unoffending daughter, may be nothing more than a vitiated tradition of that
illustrious period in the life of the patriarch Abraham, which exhibits him as
preparing, at the command of the Almighty, to sacrifice as a burnt offering,
that son, then a beardless youth, among whose descendants he had been (...) to
expect the Shiloh, to whom the gathering of the people should be. But however
amusing the tracing this analogy may be, were I to pursue so fruitful a
subject, I should assuredly multiply words beyond the indulgence of my readers.

It is evident from sacred and profane history, that in the beginning, one only
Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient Sovereign of the universe, was deemed a
proper object of adoration; and this unknown Being was devoutly hailed as life,
light, and wisdom. All created beings were supposed to be beneficently directed
by a self-existent and eternal mind to the preservation, protection, and final
felicity of the whole. This great First Cause, ere yet the imagination of men
had clothed him in the habiliments of caprice, was addressed under several
appellations. Perhaps the rational religionist of every age has found no
difficulty in adopting the language of Seneca -- "By Jove," says that
celebrated Roman, "the wise men among the ancients, did not mean such a one as
we see in the capitol, and other temples, but the Guardian and Ruler of the
universe, a Mind and Spirit, the Master and Artificer of this mundane fabric,
whom every title suits. Would you call him Fate? you will not err; for he it is
on whom all things depend: The Cause of causes. Would you call him Providence?
you are in the right; for by his wisdom is the world directed; hence it moves
unshaken, and performs its every office. Would you call him Nature? it is not
amiss; since from him all things proceed; and by his Spirit we live. If you
call^ (...) the World, it is well; for he is all in all, and (...) by his own
power." It is not strange that a lively and pious imagination, should gradually
deify the attributes and favors of so unsearchable, august, and beneficent a
being. Thus the family of the gods claim their origin; and, in process of time,
the depravity of mankind endowing them with absurd and reprehensible passions,
rendered them in their descriptions altogether like unto themselves.
Respectable persons of both sexes were next pressed into this sacred order, and
thus the multifarious catalogue was swelled to an enormous size. The joys, the
sorrows, the apprehensions, and the calamities of mankind, supplied the
materials from which the convenient deity was shaped; the apotheosis was
conferred, and divine honors were next in course.

It is needless to inform thee, gentle reader, that I am no pagan. The heathen
system is long since exploded; and we have, by common consent, circumscribed
their deities within comparatively narrow bounds; but yet it may be a question,
whether in ceding to them the empire of imagination, in leaving the domain of
fancy open to their jurisdiction, we have not assigned them circles which are
sufficiently ample. However, be this as it may, I am free to own, that while I
trace in the Jupiter of antiquity many of the features of that Omnipotent, who
presideth over the informed mind of more refined ages, arguing from analogy, I
am fond of conceiving, that not a few of their subordinate traditions
originating in truth, may thus possess a right to claim their ancestry in the
invisible world.

A plastic and beneficent hand, fashioning and upholding the great and various
productions of nature, is momently evinced, both to sense and to reason. A
thousand circumstances assure me that I exist by the omnific power of a
self-existent Being; an innate persuasion of immortality triumphs in my bosom;
I confidently expect a never ending futurity. Those who are departed are not
lost: they have only obtained an earlier emancipation; in the general assembly
I shall rejoin them -- the social virtues, commencing on earth, shall be
perfected in heaven; amity shall wear a never dying wreath; and, progressing in
knowledge, we shall of course recognize those with whom, while habited in
garments of mortality, we have tasted the pleasures resulting from a
sentimental intercourse.

The doctrine of guardian seraphs -- this also makes a part of my creed. Some
bright celestial was commissioned at my birth, to preside over my infantile
years, and to continue the attendant of my mortal career. During the hour which
shall terminate my present mode of being, he will be busy round the bed of
death, and he will gratulate, with ineffable transport, the liberated spirit. "
Myriads of beings tread this globe unseen, both when we wake and when we
sleep." I persuade myself that truth guided the pen of the poet in this
assertion. The gross film of mortality veils for the present the visual ray;
yet there are, who have been so favored, even while sojourning in terrestrial
abodes, as to catch a glimpse of those natives of Elysium; and the period
hastens when the wide expanse shall be outspread before us. But beside those
beneficent seraphs who, with angelic vigils guard our path, the shades of
departed friends hover round; and, when worn by sickness or by sorrow, the
gradually attenuated machine admits, through apertures thus made, the dawning
light of paradise. These tenderly interested and sympathizing denizens of the
celestial world, not unfrequently, with mildly sympathizing aspect, stand
confessed to the patient sufferer, pointing him, with the finger of affiance,
to that opening heaven, upon which he is so apparently verging: And hence
perhaps it is, that the period of dissolution is seldom to the expiring
individual, marked with those horrors, which in a state of health and vigor
are commonly anticipated. Possibly the felicity of those who have bid adieu to
time, may not be completed until the final consummation, which shall present
the family of man entire. They may witness our actions; when our conduct is
marked by regularity and propriety, we insure their approbation. When,
deviating from the line of rectitude, we engage in reprehensible pursuits, we
incur the censure of beatified spirits, and they experience that kind of pain
to which immortals of this description may be subjected; the luster of
celestial visages are dimmed; a transient cloud obscures their brightening
joys, and the pearly drop of regret suffuses the radiant eye of seraphic
pleasure.

What a forcible incentive to a perseverance in the career of virtue, do
considerations of this nature furnish! The eye of my mind is at this moment
thrown upon an amiable and elegant woman, whom I have long known; her whole
life has exhibited a uniform exemplification of every social, every humane,
and every endearing excellence; her conjugal engagement has been remarked, for
some uncommonly splendid traits, and the chaste correctness of her manners have
been regarded as the pattern of feminine demeanor. Her married life has
comprised a period of forty years. She has never been a mother, and yet perhaps
the annals of her sex cannot produce a more perfect model of the maternal
character. No less than twenty orphan girls, at different periods of time, with
great care, assiduity and tenderness she has genteelly educated. By her
assistance and patronage, they are comfortably established, and they look up to
her, as the revered source of their every enjoyment.

She is even now, in the present advanced stage of her life, surrounded by a
virgin train, who pay her honors, surpassed only by those which they devote to
heaven. She has her stated days of festivity, the return of which are very
frequent, when she summoneth her children, as she calls them -- all those who
have taken rank in families of their own, to join with her in tender and
grateful commemorations. No sovereign, attended by the dependants upon his
bounty, ever looked round with half the exultation, which, upon these
occasions, glows in, and elevates her bosom. The figure is not good -- she is
not a sovereign, she is a tender parent, regarded with the cheerful eye of
duteous affection, by the little community which her own hand has formed to
virtue and to happiness.

It was on one of those convivial days, that, induced by curiosity, I lately
looked in upon her. She was seated in the midst of the pleased and pleasing
assembly. Methought I had never seen an object more interestingly beautiful:
Yes, beautiful, for the wrinkles of her face possessed more charms, than adorn
the red and white of the polished skin of that giddy flutterer, whom all the
energy of sentiment could never raise to the ennobling swell of elevated
thought or exemplary action. Dignity was impressed upon her every feature, and
it was impossible she could fail of inspiring the venerating glow of
admiration. I was coxcomb enough to pay her a flourishing compliment, which I
concluded with pronouncing decisively -- The reward of your benevolence,
undoubtedly, Madam, will be very great.

Echoing my last words with inimitable grace, she replied, " Will be very
great? Trust me, dear Sir, I have no arrearages to demand. If, as you say, I
have obtained the approbation of the good, that approbation is of itself a rich
reward; and, Mr. Vigillius," placing her hand upon her breast, " I have peace
at home; the plaudit of my own bosom is indeed of countless worth; besides
which, the duteous complacency at this moment imprinted upon the countenances
of these dear girls, is in truth a great and immeasurable reward; every decent
gesture, every proper action, every grateful expression, have still continued
to me, through a course of many years, a ready source, from which I have
momently derived a ceaseless and abundant recompense. And, Sir, if you will
indulge me so far, I will confess a sentiment which has, through life, very
forcibly operated upon my mind. I have ever supposed myself constantly under
the inspection of numerous, although viewless, witnesses of my actions. These
encircling spectators I have regarded as beings of the angelic order,
associating with those spirits who were once clothed in mortality; and the
approbating smile of celestial joy, which I have considered as illuming the
seraphic countenances of the progenitors of these my adopted children, while
they have seen me busied about their offspring, engaged in eradicating the
evil, pruning the luxuriant growth of sentiments, equitable in their source,
and in directing and cherishing the principles of rectitude. Such observance,
and such complacent applause has frequently given energy to my efforts, placed
me buoyant upon the utmost stretch of that invention, which is sometimes
necessary to allure to virtue the steps of youth, and abundantly strengthened,
encouraged, and confirmed me in those walks, which lead, as I conceive, to the
paradise of the good. And, Sir, you will give me leave to add, that ideas of
this kind obtaining in my mind, operate at once as an incitement to regularity
of conduct, and constituteth a fund, from which I can freely draw the largest
compensation."

The Gleaner joins issue with these conjectures; by this controverted
hypothesis, he confesses his mind is essentially influenced; nor can he,
gentle reader, conceive it dangerous to embrace opinions which probably are the
offspring of truth, which wear an auspicious aspect upon the interests of
mankind, which produce benevolence in their operation, which furnish motives
for goodness, and which stimulate to every proper, every becoming action.

That skepticism, which is the growth of false reason and degenerated
philosophy, may abide during the calm serene of the vernal or summer breezes,
which make up the gentle and prosperous gales of life; but, being the
superstructure of false and insidious conclusions; in other words, being
bottomed upon the sand, it will fall before the mountain torrent, before the
combined and desolating storms of wintry time; and, bending under the
accumulated pressure of mighty ills, the dweller in humanity will of necessity
lift up his mental eye to some propitious, although invisible power, who, he
will conceive, is adequate to his assistance.

By the self poized hero, and the worshipper of chance, the Gleaner,
henceforward, may be accounted a ridiculous visionary: But he is persuaded that
the Christian religionist will enlist upon his side -- for in the oracles of
his God, the scripturian will find, that the Author and Finisher of his faith,
has sanctioned the idea of guardian spirits, where he pronounces that the
angels of the sojourners in mortality, do always behold the face of Omnipotence.

The immediate disciples of the Redeemer spoke confidently of the angel of
Peter: And the apostle to the Hebrews characterizes the angels, as spirits,
ministering unto the heirs of salvation. Upon our knowledge of deceased persons,
the scene displayed upon the mount of transfiguration, decides: For Peter said
-- Lord, if thou will, let us make here three tabernacles; one for Moses, one
for Elias, and one for thee. And Jesus speaks of sitting down in the kingdom
of heaven with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

The Gleaner perceives, while embracing this persuasion, viz. the doctrine of
angels and of spirits, that a most pleasing tranquillity pervades his mind; and
he cannot willingly relinquish it, except, in exchange for sentiments, that he
can conceive more divinely consolatory, or more morally influential.

No. XXVI.
[WRITTEN APRIL, 1794.]
Now, by my manhood, my full soul disdains
These dark'ning glooms, which suddenly pervade;
True dignity an equal part sustains,
Lending its calm and persevering aid.

THAT melancholy pause, and extreme dejection, which at this present so
apparently pervades every order of citizens among us, is, methinks, rather
derogatory to the American character. The question, relative to opening the
temple of Janus, seems to be agitated with unbecoming warmth; and a zeal, not
properly tempered by knowledge, is, I conceive, strikingly exemplified by every
party.

That our country has, during a most auspicious period, been borne forward
upon the full tide of prosperity, no one but the embittered, the cynical, or
the interested incendiary, will deny. Peace, with her olive wreath, was to us
the celestial harbinger of unexampled felicity; agriculture has flourished in
primeval beauty, fostered on the bosom of liberty, and fanned by the genial
airs of the meek-eyed goddess, it is rapidly approximating the highest
perfection of which it is susceptible. Our manufactures have surprisingly
advanced. Our navigation is extensive; almost every stream conveys the well
freighted bark; and our commerce, wafted by the breezy gale, has accumulated
riches upon the far distant shore. Whether trade ought not to partake in some
degree the nature of its favorite elements; and whether under the general
regulations of rectitude, it would not find its own advantageous and equal
balance, may be considered as problematical: at any rate, unaided by treaties
of commerce, our merchants, obtaining the object of their wishes, have, in many
instances, found their enterprises crowned with uncommon success.

The arts and sciences are also attaining naturalization in our soil; and
literature, blessed source of rational elevation, literature has enlisted its
votaries: The extensive and energetic movements of the soul are afloat; the
sciences and the virtues love the venerable shades and sequestered haunts of
liberty; and, cultivated successfully in this new world, we had hoped they
would become patrons of frugality, temperance, and that holy religion, which
smootheth the bed of death.

Our citizens, intuitively, as it should seem, had become sensible of that
indiscriminate advantage, derived to the community in general, where each
individual receives from the common fund, and where every member contributes
his quota, for the benefit of the whole; in one word, every one seemed sensible
of the blessings of a good government, and federalism was the basis, on which
we were successfully building the superstructure of every thing useful, every
thing virtuous, every thing ornamental. What a fearful and destructive hydra is
faction! War is its eldest born, and with the eye of the basilisk it seeks to
annihilate the cherub peace. Dreadful is the progress of war; it is retrograde
to almost every virtue; the duties of benevolence it inverteth; it enjoineth
upon every individual to afflict and harass by every possible means.
Cultivation is no more. Destruction, with shocking exultation, exercises in
every goodly walk its fatally blasting influence. Population laments its
murdered millions; the earth is humectated by the blood of our fellow
creatures; and those infernal demons, discord and malice, are glutted by the
calamities of the human species. A late elegant writer inimitably pourtrays the
consequences even of successful war; perhaps a review of the picture may be of
use. -- We must fix our eyes not on the hero returning with conquest, nor yet
on the gallant officer dying on the bed of honor, the subject of picture and
of song; but on the private soldier, forced into the service; exhausted by camp
sickness and fatigue; pale, emaciated, crawling to an hospital with the
prospect of life, perhaps a long life, blasted, useless, and suffering. We must
think of the uncounted tears of her who weeps alone, because the only being who
shared her sentiments is taken from her; no martial music founds in unison with
her feelings; the long day passes, and he returns not! She does not shed her
sorrows over his grave, for she has never learnt whether he ever had one. If he
had returned, his exertions would not have been remembered individually, for he
only made a small imperceptible part of a human machine, called a regiment. We
must take in the long sickness which no glory soothes, occasioned by distress
of mind, anxiety, and ruined fortune. These are not fancy pictures; and if you
please to heighten them, you can every one of you do it for yourselves. We take
in the consequences, felt perhaps for ages, before a country which has been
completely desolated, lifts its head again; like a torrent of lays, its worst
mischief is not the first, overwhelming in ruin towns and palaces, but the long
sterility to which it condemns the track it has covered with its stream. Add
the danger to regular governments which are changed by war, sometimes to
anarchy, and sometimes to despotism. Add all these, and then let us think when
a General performing these exploits is saluted with Well done, good and
faithful servant, whether the plaudit is likely to be echoed in another place.
But however deplorable the calamities of war, such is the nature of the present
scene of things, that there are circumstances which fully involve the necessity
of appealing to the sword. When our dearest, essential, and most important
interests are invaded, when our existence, as a nation, is put to the hazard,
when negociations fail, when we are subjected to contumelious indignities, when
we are despoiled of our property, and stripped of the hopes of redress -- in
emergencies thus pressing, every sentiment of self-defence will throw the
gauntlet for the battle. That it is precisely upon these evil times we have
fallen, many resentfully and vehemently pronounce; and, not yet freed from the
jealousies and entanglements of European politics, while the hemisphere of the
elder world is thus dreadfully tempested, nothing but an overweening
self-partiality, could lead us to expect escaping at least the outskirts of the
hurricane; but if we have been unwarrantably and unnecessarily injured, and if
our abilities are adequate to the contention, let every American play the man
for his country. Let not our faces thus gather paleness; but, when properly
authorized by the authority which we have conferred, let us combine, hand and
heart, to work out our own political salvation; and if our cause is thus
righteous, the God of armies will again lead us forth, and doubtless the palm
of victory will be ours.

But deliberation here makes a pause -- Against whom shall we commence
hostilities? So many are the wrongs which we are said to have suffered from the
maritime belligerent powers, that an unprejudiced American will hesitate
against which to prefer the loudest complaints; and the investigations made in
the general council of our nation, so nearly poizeth the scale of depredation,
that the closest observer, uninfluenced by party, is at a loss to decide upon
the question. Yet, it is said, our obligations to France, furnishing a balance
in her favor, ought in equity to destroy the equipoise; and indeed it is
greatly to be wished the conduct of that nation had been such, as to have
sanctioned the most unlimited election of her interests. If, when emerging from
the benighted clouds of despotism; if, when exonerating herself from the
intolerable oppression of unlimited authority, she had known where to erect the
barriers; if she had not outraged every feeling of humanity, most atrociously
committing acts, at which even the bosom of stoism agonizes at every pore, over
which rectitude must pour the never failing tear, and at which fortitude has
learned to weep; if she had supported the constitution which she swore to
maintain, we should doubtless have felt for her like veneration, as when the
gallant and virtuous La Fayette, directing her councils, led forth her armies,
and, pointing her steps to victory and fame, extorted the mingling and
unhesitating applause of an admiring world. But alas! France exhibits, at this
period, a spectacle, from which lacerated truth indignantly hastes, at which
reason stands aghast, while morality and holy religion have received from base
and murderous hands a fatal stab.

Perhaps the only advantage which the revolutionary tribunal can boast over the
lettre de cachet, or the justly execrated Bastile, is, that not prolonging the
sufferings of its victims, it hastes to bestow upon them, through the
instrumentality of the executioner, a speedy emancipation from its tyranny.
Whole hecatombs have been immolated; every person who differs in opinion from
the ruling faction is arrested, tried, and executed. The federalist finds no
mercy; and even an avowed wish to qualify their boasted indivisibility, by a
single feature of the American government, is estimated as treasonable. With
regard to our obligations to France, it ought surely to be considered, whether
gratitude can ever teach us to abet, even the most liberal and disinterested
benefactor, in deeds of darkness and of death: And, when it is remembered, that
the well-timed aid, from which we derived advantages so indisputably
beneficial, was procured through the instrumentality of him, whom we then
hailed as our magnanimous ally -- which ally has, by the most sanguinary men
and measures, been, by violent hands, arrested in the middle of his days! when
these circumstances are adverted to, they may possibly be regarded as an
extenuation of our crime, although barely for the sake of evincing our loyalty
to the Gallic name, we should not conceive ourselves obligated to leap the
bounds of rectitude.

Yet, strange as it may seem, faction has introduced its cloven foot among us;
with astonishing effrontery it has dared to list its baleful head; and,
drawing the sword of discord, it is preparing to sheath it in the vitals of
that infant constitution, whose budding life expands so fair to view, and whose
docile texture, yielding ample hope to cultivation, ensures the mellowing
growth to every desired improvement. Is not the idea of murdering in the very
cradle so promising an offspring, a conception which can have received a form
only in the maddening pericranium of hell-born anarchy? Is there an individual
who will not devoutly say -- May the Parent of the universe shield our country
from the progress of that Tartarean fiend which has so long desolated France!
Yea, we confidently pronounce that every patriotic bosom has glowed with
indignation, and every virtuous sentiment has recoiled from the frenzy of that
parricide, which so licentiously suspended over the head of our matchless
Chief, the execrable guillotine! over the head of that venerable patriot whose
bosom is the seat of every virtue; whose disinterested efforts for the public
weal, stand unrivalled in the records of immortal fame; whose superior talents,
and whose revolving hours are invariably appropriated to the general good;
whose unyielding magnanimity, has gleamed athwart the darkest and most
distressing moments, the luminous rays of manly hope; who, far from bending
beneath the load of national depression, has considered every event, with the
firmness of inflexible virtue; who, like another Atlas, has still supported
the mighty fabric of a various and complicated government; whose penetrating
genius, and expanding resources, unravelleth the intricacies of duplicity, and
presents the extricating hand of wisdom; who glows with the rapture of the
hero upon every instance of national elevation -- in one word, who was the
illustrious leader, the boast, and the very soul of our armies, and who
continues the brightest gem in the enfolding robes of peace.

Will ye not veil to the father of your country, ye associated declaimers? Is
it your element to arraign, to cavil, to censure, and to exercise a kind of
fanciful despotism? Why will you thus pervert talents capable of rendering you,
to this younger world, the richest blessing? Yet, if ye will still
pertinaciously proceed, the hand of freemen can never arrest your course; for
still ye are cherished by the genial influence of that liberty, whose equal
ray, in imitation of its great prototype, invigorateth the poisonous as well as
the salutary germe.

But, suffer a fellow-citizen to make the inquiry -- What is your object? Why
are you thus studious to create divisions? Why are you ambitious of forming an
aristocracy in the midst of your brethren? Ought not the nation at large to
constitute one vast society of people, bound by common ties, common wishes, and
common hopes? Has any part of the Union constitutionally delegated their
powers to you? To whom will you appeal? The late envoy of France, in effect, at
least, threatened an appeal to the people! But surely, neither the quondam
ambassador or his adherents have sufficiently attended to the origin, nature,
and completion of our happy constitution.

If ever any government might, strictly speaking, be characterized, in a
rationally republican sense, the government of the people, the regulations made
for the administration of order, in these States, is indubitably that
government. This is an axiom which I should imagine could never be
controverted. Perhaps, the manner of obtaining and establishing our government,
has not, in every respect, a parallel. Delegates appointed by the free,
unsolicited, uncorrupted, and unanimous voice of the people, were, by the
people, invested with authority to weigh, ponder, and reflect; they assembled,
they deliberated, examined, compared, and finally arranged. To the
consideration of the sovereign people, the result of the collected wisdom of
our Continent was presented; every article, every sentiment was examined, in
every possible view; it was analyzed and scrutinized, in the completest, most
uncontrolled, and rigorous manner. Orators embodied the whole force of their
eloquence; writers exercised their most energetic talents, and in the strict
examination the best productions of the press were engaged: Every member of the
community had an undoubted right to investigate; public bodies lent their
luminous aid; and, in the momentous research and expected decision, friends and
enemies alike combined. Behold the catastrophe -- how loudly does it pronounce
the eulogy of our constitution -- how does it dignify and eternize the American
system! One State and another, time after time, gradually and deliberately,
adopt and ratify a plan, which so evidently embraces the interests of the
people at large. In some of our governments, the sanction yielded is unanimous,
and, in every part of the Union, the large and respectable majority of the
people, is unexampled in the annals of legislation.

Surely, I say, a government thus originating, thus sanctioned, and thus
established, may be unequivocally pronounced, in every proper sense, the
government of the people. To whom then, from such a government, can we appeal?
The answer is obvious; but, may our political Hercules crush the Hydra faction,
however multifarious may be its power of mischief, or however widely diffused
its poisonous influence.

In this era of general consternation and perturbed suspense, it is undoubtedly
our wisdom to abide the result of those investigations and debates, which
properly constitute the department of gentlemen, whom we have commissioned to
take upon them the administration of public affairs. If the Gleaner might be
permitted to breathe a wish, it would be for the general observance and
establishment of order, and that every citizen would learn, habitually, to
venerate offices and characters devoted to, and engaged in, the administration
of justice, and to which every good and worthy member of the community is alike
eligible^.

The Gleaner, from a series of accurate and unimpassioned observations, is
induced earnestly to hope, that the general government will still continue to
preclude all illegal interference, all foreign, unconstitutional, and
unbecoming influence. And he confesses, that he experienced the enthusiasm of
approbation. when he observed in the public prints, that dignified movement of
Congress, which directed the galleries to be vacated, upon an indecent attempt
made, to approbate men and measures, by testimonies, proper only to mark the
merit of the votaries of the sock and buskin. Yea, verily, this new world is
the heritage of liberty; but it is of that liberty which decidedly avoweth her
system, her regulations, her laws, her subordination; to all of which she
exacteth the most scrupulous obedience. I am not ignorant, that licentiousness
too often assumes the sacred name of liberty: Licentiousness, engendered by
darkness, nursed by ignorance, and led forth by impudence; murder and
devastation are her ministers; hell-born ambition is her incentive; and the
most confirmed and rigorous despotism remains her invariable object.

Liberty! heaven descended goddess, rational and refined -- No, she has not a
single feature of the audacious impostor, who, with such astonishing
effrontery, artfully arrogateth her character and offices, and who, by a series
of execrable machinations, after clothing herself in the sky-wrought robes of
the bright celestial, demands her honors, procures against her the most
shocking and libellous declamations, and wounds her in the upright exercise
of those pure and wholesome institutions, which are replete with the most
salutary and benign influence, upon the morals and happiness of our species.
Nay, the blighting and contagious breath of licentiousness, stigmatizeth decent
and corrected liberty, as the most degenerate and servile traitor! and,
denounced by anarchy, the terms, usurper, despot, and tyrant, with every other
frightful appellation which the black catalogue can produce, is liberally and
indiscriminately bestowed upon her. Between liberty and licentiousness we
cannot trace the smallest analogy; they have been strikingly and beautifully
contrasted. Liberty has been compared to an informed, elevated, and well
regulated mind; her movements are authorized by reason; knowledge is her
harbinger; wisdom administereth unto her; and all her interpositions are mildly
beneficent: Tranquillity results from her arrangements; and a serene and equal
kind of contentment is her eldest born. Licentiousness is said to resemble the
unbridled and tumultuous career of him, who, intoxicated by the inebriating
draught, and having renounced his understanding, would invert the order of
nature; eager to pour the inundation which shall level every virtue, and
annihilate every distinction, he exulteth in his fancied prowess, riots amid
the confusion which he creates, and unduly exalting himself, he posteth full
speed to destruction.

But my subject unexpectedly growing upon me, the fear of exceeding my limits
induces me to postpone its termination to a future Gleaner^

No. XXVII.
Necessity her various grades designs,
And with subordination peace combines.

I SAID that genuine liberty recognized her systems, her laws, and her regular
chain of subordination; to all of which she exacted the most scrupulous
obedience; and, if this were not true, I confess that I, for one, should be
inclined to deprecate her domination. Surely, that state must be fruitful of
calamities, which admits not an acknowledged superior; where every person
has, in every respect, an absolute and uncontrollable right to consult his own
feelings, submitting himself to no other empire than that of his wayward
passions.

It is not, in every sense, true, that Nature is equal in her productions. The
same plastic hand that formed a Newton, lends existence to an oyster. Nature
levels and diversifies her wide extended lawns, winds her serpentine walks, and
spreads her ample fields; but she also erects her mounds, fashions her knolls,
elevates her acclivities, and piles together her stupendous mountains. The
ocean rolls one vast world of waters; but the little stream murmurs gently and
pleasingly along. The huge leviathan and the polypus, are alike inhabitants of
the sea. The elephant and the tatou, the ostrich and the humming bird, respire
in our world, while naturalists are at a loss even to name the numerous grades,
which make up and complete the shades between these extremes. A various growth
of flowers please the eye; vegetables sustain and nourish; fruits regale the
palate; and poisonous plants, obtaining a luxuriant growth, rear their baleful
heads. To trace the varieties of nature, is indeed a fruitful avocation; the
region of fancy is stocked with reflections, while, to the curious observer,
engaged in the pursuit, hardly an hour revolves, which produces not an
accession of ideas.

Light and shade are productive of the finest effects; the eye is offended by a
continuity of the same objects; hills and valleys, succeeding each other,
furnish the most enchanting views; the interjacent plain is pleasingly
terminated, by the sequestered grove; the glade beautifully diversifies the
forest; and yonder tall majestic eminence is gracefully skirted by the
enamelled meadow which is outspread beneath. The seasons succeed each other,
and the revolutions of day and night, possessing their peculiar charms, are
salutary and grateful. Nor is this multiformity observable only in the less
nobler parts of the creation: The human being has varieties, which may almost
be pronounced endless. The degrees of intellect, if we may judge by effects,
are very unequally proportioned. Now a luminous genius darts through the
complicated arrangements of nature; its pervading ken is subtle and energetic;
its powers are adequate to researches the most profound; it investigates, and
obscurity is no more; the arcana of ages, yielding to its animated and
elucidating progress, relinquisheth the impenetrable veil; its versatility, and
the depth of its observations are astonishing; and, amid the blaze of refulgent
day, it lifts its aspiring head. But the natal place of this luminary, the same
village, perhaps the same family, ushered into being the unfortunate idiot,
whose faculties are scarcely adequate to the absolute calls of existence. Some
dignified minds, born to all the energy of being, devote their time and talents
to inform, to rectify, to improve, and in every sense to benefit mankind;
others again, are so absorbed in self, that were it not for the catalogue of
their individual wants and wishes, we should not know that they continued to
vegetate. If persons of this description have any principles but that of self
love, they are so completely under the direction of, and assimulated by this
their ruling passion, that it is difficult to trace, in their actions, the
smallest vestige of a foreign influence. Is it just to refuse to merit its
unquestionable dues? Is it equitable to deny to virtue the palm of honor? Or,
ought we to hesitate in doing reverence to a superiority indubitable and
decided?

Where is unvaried equality to be found? Not in heaven, for there are
principalities and powers: Not, certainly, in any of the distributions which we
have traced on earth; for it is unquestionable, that variety constitutes one of
the principal beauties in the arrangements of nature. Nor is it the growth of
the Tartarean regions; for there the arch fiend exercises those powers, which
proclaim his regality; and, even Licentiousness has her chosen favorite whom
she constituteth chief of the savage band of murderers. I do not say, that my
reading and observation are sufficiently extensive to decide; but were I to
hazard a conjecture, I would suggest, that, from the days of that first
murderer who slew his brother, the levelling scheme has, strictly speaking,
continued a chimera, floating only in the brain of the speculatist, or figuring
splendidly in the theories, which his fertile imagination has commissioned to
issue from the press.

Perhaps the late Doctor Johnson, who may be styled the monarch of literature,
however rich in resources, could not have hit on an argument more effectually
calculated to flash conviction upon the feelings of a certain female historian
(of no inconsiderable merit, notwithstanding) than when waiting upon her, in
her decent apartments in the city of London, and assuming the humble and
serious features of conviction, he addressed her to the following effect: --
Madam, influenced by your good sense, and the irrefragable strength of your
arguments, you at this moment behold before you, the proselyte of your
opinions. I am at length confident, that the children of men are all upon an
equal footing; and, Madam, to give you proof positive that I am indeed a
convert, here is a very sensible, civil, worthy, well-behaved citizen, your
footman; I make it my request that he may be permitted to sit down and dine
with us. Doctor Johnson, upon this, or some similar occasion, made a remark,
which, agreeably to the general tenor of his observations, carries its
evidence along with it, and which the experience of every day may serve to
corroborate. "Your levellers," said the Doctor, "wish to level down as far as
themselves, but they cannot bear levelling up to themselves; they would all
have some people under them; why not then have some people above them? I would
no more deprive certain characters of their respect, than of their money. I
consider myself as acting a part in the great system of society, and I do to
others as I would have them do to me. There would be a perpetual struggle for
precedence, were there no rules to discriminate rank."

There is no calculating the disorders which may result from relaxing the
series of subordination; if conviction is suspended, we need but make the
trial. I am surrounded by a family of men and maid servants. I am placed upon
extensive grounds, which call for the regular aid of cultivation, for all the
various routine of agricultural attention. The vernal season is hasting forward
-- the morning is delightful. On a day so propitious much business may be
accomplished: With the early dawn I quit my pillow, I supplicate Mary to direct
her woman to prepare me an immediate breakfast; she, carelessly, pronounces me
quite as eligible to that task myself. I apply to Abigail, who refers me to
another, and another; and, as equality admits no distinctions, the
probability is, that I am finally brought back again to Mary herself. Possibly,
after many entreaties, the females may all combine; one bear a cup, another a
saucer; a table is dragged from that apartment, and a tea-kettle from this;
ignorant of each other's plans, and having no one to direct, the process is
impeded and confused, and when at length the motley assemblage is completed,
and the refection presented, the spoiled tea, coffee, chocolate, and bread and
butter, all evince the opposite hands employed in their manufacture. But this
is the fair side of the business; they might have engaged in a tumultuous
fracas, and, consigning the whole apparatus to destruction, they might have
left me no other consolation, than that of soothing my vexation, by singing, in
Homeric numbers, the dismal crash of that eventful morning.

Well, but to proceed. Breakfast over, I sally forth. I advise that the cattle
be yoked, and that such a parcel of manure be conveyed to yonder sterile spot.
Jonathan insists that the horse-cart is sufficient to drag it. Thomas is of his
opinion. William sides with me, and we prepare for a trial of strength; equally
divided, our opposition bars our purpose; from words we proceed to blows; the
females are alarmed; they take their sides; the plot thickens; appearances grow
formidable; a doughty battle ensues; bloody noses are the consequence; and the
day is sacrificed to discord. Every morning is thus ushered in; every portion
of time is marked by opposition. Now the land shall be hedged with bushes, anon
the ready rock shall present the barrier, and again the wooden enclosure is all
the rage. To day we will plough, tomorrow we will sow. Nay, you are too early,
you are too late; this is sufficient, that is not enough; we will go hither and
thither, every where, and no where.

Thus roll on the days, weeks and months. Autumn is at the door, the lands are
uncultivated, and famine, with its meagre stride, is rapidly advancing to our
borders. Meanwhile, even in this tumultuous era, my house, my estate confesses
a potentate. Anarchy reigns supreme, and desolation administereth her
commands. To prevent, or to guard against consequences, which every sober
sentiment must deprecate, becomes impossible; no member of the family has
authority to interpose the dictatorial document, and the commands of the fiend
are perforce obeyed. Who shall prevent the spreading evil? If licentiousness is
successful in her imposture; if, assuming the mask of liberty, she completeth
her deception; if we prostrate before this baleful destroyer, where, I demand,
is my safety? What security can I have, that my neighbor, whose sinewy arm can
bear away the prize of strength, will not snatch from me that patrimony, which,
descending from a virtuous line of ancestors, I have preserved, at the expense
of laborious days, and many a self-denying conflict? Surely, language, in
attempting an enumeration of the calamities of licentiousness, is baffled in
the description! and even conception must fall short of the mischiefs which she
produces.

But if the theory of equality is not practicable in the contracted circle of
domestic life, much less will that experiment succeed which would realize it,
in regard to the heterogeneous collection of beings who constitute a nation.
Does not Liberty associate her laws, her regulations, and her distinctions? Is
not good government the basis on which she erecteth the superstructure of all
those operations so beneficial to mankind? Yes, Liberty, sacred and genuine
Liberty, draws with precision the line, nor will she permit a litigation of
the inherent Rights of Man. She allows no imaginary claims; she is fearful of
disturbing the regular succession of order; she is fond of the necessary
arrangement of civil subordination; and she dreadeth that tumultuous and
up-rooting hurricane, which, inmingling the various classes of mankind,
destroys the beautiful gradation and series of harmony, again restoring all
that wild uproar, resulting from the rude and misshapen domination of chaos.
Yes, we repeat it, that people, that nation, that tribe or family, which is
destitute of legislation, regulation, and officers of government, must
unquestionably be in a deplorable situation. The strong will invariably oppress
the weak; to the lusty arm of athletic guilt, imbecile innocence will fall a
prey, and there is no power to redress! Hence the time registered axiom, It is
necessary to relinquish a part, for the preservation of the whole. Liberty
delegates her powers, and to this effulgent goddess, her anointed ministers,
with that integrity and patriotic firmness which becomes the servants of a
patroness, who still regards the children of men with an eye of benignity, fail
not to render up their accounts.

Let us suppose a people in a state of nature, and let us suppose them made up
of all those varieties of constitution, intellect, passions, and corporeal
strength, which are commonly found in a community. Experience has convinced
them, that anarchy is pregnant with every evil; and they finally combine to
form the league of government. What is the mode for the administration of
justice, which we would recommend to such a people? Possessed by a wish to
render permanent, and give the requisite dignity, energy, execution, and
obedience to the social order which we should aim at establishing, we should be
solicitous to adopt in our form of polity, that gradatory junction which would
cement and bind together, in an amicable and mutual exchange of good offices,
the various classes of citizens. Fancy, for a moment, invests me with the
venerable and honorary character of a legislator; and, for the purpose of
forming, for a set of well disposed men, a code of regulations, I imagine
myself seated, with the pen of inquiry in my fingers, and my design being to
compile a government of laws, rather than of individuals, I am naturally
solicitous to promulgate institutions, which shall be at once salutary,
efficacious and pleasing. With a view of tracing and combining an eligible
plan, I might turn over huge folios of information, and, pursuing a science of
such vast importance to mankind, which in its operations is capable of the
highest public utility, or which may become the root of every evil,
investigation can hardly be too scrupulously exact. But what would be the
result of an application to various writers? Doubtless we should find ourselves
involved in a labyrinth of opposite testimonies; and, confused by a
multiplicity of contradictory and perhaps fallacious opinions, reflection would
be absorbed, and decision at a stand.

The ancients have remarked, that, cultivated by the hand of liberty in the
dwellings of freedom, the arts and sciences flourished with invigorated charms;
that neither the Persians or Egyptians understood their beauties; that from the
Greeks, although too often engaged in hostilities, and struggling in the toils
of poverty, they obtained maturation; that they declined with that freedom,
once the glory of the Grecian republics, and that, with their august patroness,
winging their etherial way to celebrious Rome, they there continued their
splendid career, until the immolation of liberty, in that imperial city,
muffled in dark and portentous clouds those intellectual luminaries; and hence,
from these incontrovertible facts, it is confidently asserted, that the arts
and sciences can never flourish but in the soil of freedom. Yet, in opposition
to a conclusion which may have been too hastil^^ formed, we are told, that
modern Rome and Florence have enwreathed with perfection, sculpture, painting,
music and poetry; and that Florence, after the usurpations of the family of
Medici, made the most rapid proficiency in those arts. Ariosto, Tasso, Galileo,
Raphael, and Michael Angelio; these illustrious painters, poets and
mathematicians, it is observed, were not born in republics. Reubens, it is
said, collected and established his school at Antwerp, and not at Amsterdam;
and in Germany, the true polish of manners is rather to be found at Dresden
than at Hamburgh.

France has undoubtedly furnished a striking example of the prosperity of
literature in an absolute government. Philosophy, poetry, dramatic eminence,
oratory, history, painting, architecture, sculpture, music -- these have
received the most extensive cultivation, and the highest honors in the kingdom
of France: And we are moreover assured, that the cidevant subjects had
astonishingly meliorated that most grateful and beneficial of all arts, l' Art
de Vivre, the necessary and social art, which involves a mutual interchange of
sentiments.

Thus contradictory are those streams of information, which yet may have
originated in the fountain of wisdom. The superstructures of governments have
generally been raised upon apprehension and compulsion; in such circumstances,
error has been almost unavoidable, and it can never be matter of wonder, that
human systems are susceptible of improvement.

In the novelties of Lycurgus, the features of artifice and fraud are but too
prevalent. Solon, although the votary of wisdom, and undoubtedly the mild and
beneficent friend of mankind, yet even Solon entertained despotic ideas of the
powers vested in him, and we cannot forbear observing, that he considered
himself as possessing an optional authority, to implant the germe of despotism,
or to emit the rays of bland and corrected freedom. Numa, by virtue of the
goddess Egeria, might have originated the grossest impositions; and it is an
indubitable truth, that the rights of man are irreconcilable with a
relinquishment of that privilege of inquiry, which may erect a barrier to the
inundation of evil. Turning, for a moment, from all those reservoirs of
knowledge, which, nevertheless, I must ever unceasingly venerate, I wave the
occupation of a Gleaner, and simply lighting the torch of reason at the flame
of experience, I will, for the organization of my sketch of immunities, consult
those sentiments and conclusions, which are the natural growth of a plain mind.

Common sense pronounces, that a people destitute of a leader, and destitute of
legislation, loudly demand the protecting hand of a guardian power; and,
liberty adds, that a chief should be obtained by the joint suffrages of the
people at large. To this end, they must be convened in their several districts,
where, uninfluenced by party or by passion, let them commission him, whom they
esteem most worthy, to assume that august title -- The Father of his Country;
and, after reciprocating the most solemn engagements, after consecrating him by
their joint affections and benedictions, let them invest him with authority to
lead them against their combined enemies, to fight their battles, and, by the
wisdom of his regulations, to procure them victory, and to guarantee their just
immunities. Let this their chosen patriot be aided by a general council,
consisting of delegates according to the number of the people. Let these
delegates be appointed by a decision, influenced only by the intrinsic worth of
the candidates. Let them form two distinct deliberative bodies, or houses,
properly qualified and authorized to ACT AS CHECKS upon each other; and, let
these three branches be invested with powers, fully adequate to all the
purposes of legislation. To the departments thus appointed to these high
offices of trust, let the utmost veneration be annexed; but I would ordain,
that the individuals who filled them, should, after a stated time, be removable
at the pleasure of the people. Even the First Magistrate should hold his place
but in consequence of frequent re-elections; and for high crimes and
misdemeanors, he should be considered as amenable to the laws. Upon legislative
acts he should possess only a conditional negative; and while his
fellow-citizens were aided by his counsels, they should be secured from his
encroachments. He should always be considered as the Chief Warrior of the
people; but in the formation of treaties, he should call in, at least, one
branch of the legislature, and the same concurrence should be necessary to the
appointment to offices. The commerce or currency of the nation should not be
subjected to the prescriptions of its Executive, nor should he arrogate, in
matters of conscience, even the shadow of jurisdiction. As a faithful and
vigilant friend of the people, he should be unwearied in his informations,
recommendations, and all such constitutional measures, as he should conceive
would conduce to the public weal; and, during his administration, he should be
careful to exact a faithful obedience to the laws. If in any single instance I
entrusted him with discretionary or absolute power, it shall be in granting
reprieves, or remission of offenses; for, as I would always give the scale to
preponderate on the side of mercy, so I would arm the Executive with the lenity
of clemency, while I debarred him the exercise of measures unduly sanguinary.

Yet with the dignified and honorary distinctions of government, I would be
careful to invest the Man of the people. Ambassadors, and other public
ministers, should mingle in his train, and every rational insignia of respect
should ornament his department. His office should ensure the highest respect;
and I would yield obedience to the individual as long as he was entitled to
public confidence and respect.

The judicial power should be separate from the executive, and I would invest
it with as large a share of independence as could consist with reciprocality
and union; while the degree of guilt involved in crimes of almost every
description, should be determined by the empannelled peers of the culprit. "But
all this is only collecting the instruments, while the code of institutions are
yet unfashioned." True, but as legislative acts should be the result of the
most mature deliberation, we will search in the great volume of nature, we will
turn over the leaves of experience, and thus selecting the gems, and from time
to time accumulating our system, we will finally present the luminous
compendium to the consideration, and, as we hope, to the acceptance of
unprejudiced reason. Meanwhile, skimming the surface of my subject, I present
only the rudiments of a system, which fancy has pleasingly contemplated.

Does the reader exclaim -- " Surely these hints are nothing more than the
lineaments of the constitution of the United States!" Well, honest friend, they
are the lineaments of nature -- the lineaments of liberty -- they make a part
of that contract to which she consents; and, without entering into the complex
and admirable intertexture of those united and separate governments, which
constitute our federalism, we pronounce, that these are the leading features of
that subordination, without which, GENUINE LIBERTY would no longer irradiate
our hemisphere.

May the parties which are originated, stimulate the exertions of her real
votaries; may no description among us ever assume the gorgon head of faction;
and, may the mutual jealousies, dissentions and ambition, which pervade, serve
as antidotes to each other. Parties, in a state of civil and political liberty,
have been compared to the passions of an individual; and, as the passions are
said to be the elements of life, so the animated and resuscitating spirit of
party is observed to be essential to the existence of genuine freedom. Be it
so; and may the public weal, the public tranquillity, be, by every means,
promoted.

No. XXVIII.
Rich are the splendors of that golden day,
Which breaks triumphant on a night of storms;
The fleecy clouds pursue their azure way,
And every heart with grateful transport warms;
So often when wrapped about in shades of woe,
When the lorn bosom swells the lengthening sigh,
In copious streams when tears of anguish flow,
And memory can no beamy ray supply,
Some blessed event bursts radiant on the sight,
And every sense proclaims the newborn light.

WITH sensations of ineffable complacency and high glee; with feelings, the
felicity of which it would be difficult if not impossible to delineate, I set
me down, upon this 27th day of May, 1794, to recount unto the good-natured
reader an event, which, if I have not been extremely erroneous in my
calculations, will render him, in no inconsiderable degree, a partaker of my
joy.

I say, good-natured reader; for, without incurring the charge of credulity, I
conceive I may fairly presume, that persons of this description have, from time
to time, been constrained to take an interest in the fate of Margaretta
Melworth Hamilton. I say, good-natured reader, because the Gleaner has never
yet had the arrogance to conceive his powers sufficiently energetic to arrest
the attention of the phlegmatic, the saturnine, or the fastidious. Individuals
possessing minds cast in these moulds, he has considered as inaccessible, and
he has imagined them turning from the pages of the Gleaner, with all the
frigidity of apathy, with all the glooms attendant upon rigorous severity,
disgust, or contempt. Nor does he enter this remark as a complaint; he has
been humble enough to content himself with the esteem of the candid and
sincere; in the bosom of sensibility he fondly conceives he has obtained a
place, and he is ambitious of rendering his efforts worthy that degree of
consideration with which they may be regarded. Addressing then the humane, the
benevolent, and the ingenuous; in one word, those who are willing to be
pleased, he hardly hesitates in promising himself at least a hearing: and, he
is free to own, that he possesses such a comfortable share of self complacency,
as to become confident, that whenever he consecrates his efforts by the name of
the daughter of his affection, he ensures a share of approbation; nor will he
consent that this idea should be imputed altogether to an overweening conceit
of his own abilities; for surely it must be acknowledged that an amiable and
meritorious woman, struggling with misfortunes, is an object which virtue must
ever regard with commiseration and applause. For the officious length of this
exordium, I supplicate the indulgence of those gentle spirits, upon whose
favor I have presumed; a candidate for the patronage of benignity should
hasten to gratify the feelings of susceptibility, and after narrating a few
previous arrangements, without further delay, I shall pass on to a
developement, which has not only invested our daughter with high affluence,
but has, moreover, restored to her a blessing, which she entertained not the
smallest conception of ever being permitted to possess.

My last communications relative to Mrs. Hamilton, crowned her with those
honors which bloom most becomingly upon a female brow; the propriety of her
conduct in the matrimonial career could not be questioned, and her patient
merit was, in her own opinion, amply rewarded, by a discovery that neither
misfortunes or caprice had robbed her of, or in the smallest degree abated the
affectionate attachment of him, to whom her gentle heart was unreservedly
devoted.

That tumultuous delirium of joy, of which the sketch of the scene in my
reading parlour, in the month of November last, can have given but an
incompetent idea, gradually subsided into an exquisitely pleasing calm. Peace,
with every accompaniment, which ever clusters in the train of tranquillity, was
reinstated in her bosom; rosy confidence, fruitful in the soil of conjugal
complacency, again lifted its auspicious head, and the rich perfumes which it
breathed around, scattered those salutary sweets that gave to every object a
face of pleasure. Margaretta seemed to regard poverty as the angel of serenity:
Indeed a true knowledge of her circumstances had relieved her from a mighty
pressure, which, becoming quite insupportable, had well near broken the slender
thread of her existence; and an assured knowledge that she still possessed
those undivided regards, which she had strong reason to believe no longer
reciprocated, very naturally, for a time, absorbed in her gentle bosom every
other consideration.

Some days delightfully serene, thus rolled on. I knew that the bursting storm,
the tremendous and uprooting hurricane must succeed; but I trembled to disturb
the innocent and unreflecting felicity of the moment. Mr. Seymour, the generous
young man who had extricated Hamilton from his difficulties, while hopeless
love produced him a wandering fugitive in the southern States, had failed for
some thousands; and although repeated letters, glowing with friendship and
matchless generosity, penned by the hand of Mr. Seymour, assured us, that he
would ward the blow from us, to the extremest verge of possibility; yet as he
continued, for the safety of his person, a prisoner in his own house; as all
his books, bonds, and papers, of every kind, were submitted to the inspection
of his creditors; and, as he assured himself that a fair adjustment, producing
an amicable compromise, would usher in his liberating hour, the utmost
credulity could not flatter us with continued exemption. Mr. Hamilton too, had
many other creditors, and they became much more suspicious, inquisitive, and
troublesome, than we had expected.

The scene once opened, my knowledge of mankind induced me to fear a rapid
succession of distressing events; and necessity, therefore, impelled me to
obtrude upon the halcyon hours of my children considerations which threw open
the avenues of uncounted cares, and great inquietude. Serafina Clifford
continued unwearied in her remonstrances; she was eager to dispossess herself,
in favor of her brother, of every shilling which she possessed; and against
the ardour and generous impetuosity of her attack, honor, justice, and
fraternal affection, although embodied for the purpose, maintained but a
doubtful combat; until availing myself of the rights invested in me by my
paternal authority, I was reduced to the disagreeable alternative of
interposing a positive prohibition.

Miss Clifford, in a kind of frenzy, clasped the little William to her bosom,
and calling upon the shade of her departed father to witness her engagements,
she vowed henceforward to devote herself and fortune entirely to him; adding, I
will, my lovely child, be indefatigable in guarding the soil of thy infant mind
from the admission of that fatal germ, which never fails to produce a growth of
false principles, of principles that prostitute the sacred names of honor and
integrity, bestowing them upon an unsocial kind of pride, a barbarous
sentiment, which compels its adherents, although placed upon a precipice of
interminable ruin, to disdain the assistance of that friendship which is warm,
natural, glowing, and sincere; of that friendship, which, as it originates
affinity and gratitude, as it is the result of the fondest attachment, and
meliorated by deliberate esteem, can surely never be regarded as problematical.
Sweet innocent! may the kindred blood that swells thy little veins, render thee
one day less obdurate than thy dear inflexible parents. From this moment the
interests of Serafina and thine are inseparably interwoven.

Fear not, gentle reader, by virtue of the patriarchal dignity which I have
assumed, I will, upon a proper occasion, grant unto the said Serafina Clifford,
a full and free absolution from this her inconsiderate vow, which I shall take
care to impute to the irresistible impulse of an impassioned moment.

In concert with Mr. Hamilton, without delay I took measures to place the
property in his possession, beyond the reach of any single creditor; regulating
it in such a manner, as would incontestibly be most for the advantage of, and
yield unto every claimant an equal and handsome dividend. Thus prepared for a
contingency that we had but too much reason momently to expect, I requested
Mary once more to call into action that admirable address which she had so
repeatedly exemplified. Go, my love, said I, with all thy winning graces, and
affectionate persuasion; with all thy angel softness, and reconcile our
daughter to that revolution in her prospects, which must place her again a
resident in this family. Margaretta was far advanced in her second pregnancy,
and we judged it necessary to observe, in regard to her, the utmost delicacy;
but we had not yet learned properly to appreciate the mind of our amiable
child. Those particulars, which are generally so alluring to a young woman,
were not considered by her, of sufficient importance to give her essential or
lasting pain. An establishment, ranking as the head of a family, presiding at
her table, giving laws to a train of servants, receiving visits in her own
house, with a number of et-ceteras, which have frequently the power of
fascinating a young mind, were regarded as considerations comparatively of
little or no moment; and while conscious she possessed the affections of the
man of her heart; while she retained his society; while she could clasp to her
throbbing bosom her lovely infant; while indulged with the presence of Miss
Clifford, now more than ever endeared to her, and bound to her soul by motives
of the most delicate and indissoluble tenderness and esteem; while she enjoyed
the approbating countenance of her parents, her superior understanding could
scarce forbear a smile at the solicitude we discovered respecting her removal;
and, relinquishing her elegant apartments, I verily believe without a single
murmur, she hastened, together with her amiable friend, to those parental arms
which were ever open to receive her.

Trials, however, awaited her. It was necessary that Mr. Hamilton, who was
anxious to accelerate the hour that should honorably exonerate him from his
embarrassments, and who was extremely desirous of making provision for the
growing family which he had in prospect, should immediately apply to some
business, which might afford an expectation of putting him in possession of
wishes so indisputably laudable. A ship bound for Europe, in which he was
offered, with the probability of great commercial advantage, a very lucrative
and honorary birth, propitiously presented. Of an opening so fortunate,
interest loudly called upon him to avail himself; the favorable gale of
opportunity was not to be slighted. But his heart bled for his Margaretta; yet
manly decision hesitated not, and every thing was in train for his departure.
We conceived it advisable to conceal our purpose from my daughter as long as
possible; and it was not until two days previous to the period destined for his
embarkation, that I took upon myself the painful task of disclosing to her an
event, which we judged must inevitably take place. Mary, Miss Clifford, Edward
and myself, seated with Margaretta, in a retired apartment, had for some time
been employed in observing her; while on her part she seemed wholly absorbed in
contemplating the features of the little William, who, sleeping on a pillow
before her, displayed a countenance truly cherubic. Soul of sensibility! most
unwillingly did I recall her from her maternal reverie! but necessity
apparently impelling, I thus addressed her:

What is there that Mrs. Hamilton would not sacrifice, to advance the happiness
of the little being, whom she has introduced into existence? Margaretta
started -- it seemed as if her apprehensive bosom comprehended, in a single
instant, the agonizing intelligence which she was about to receive. She
continued, however, silent, while urged by necessity, I reluctantly proceeded
-- There is a duty incumbent upon parents, toward their children, and from the
moment of their birth they are bound to every possible exertion, which they can
rationally suppose will contribute to their real felicity. Upon Margaretta
Hamilton claims of this sort will soon be multiplied, and the probability is,
that a long train of sons and daughters will rise up and call her blessed.
Margaretta will not surely be found deficient in her maternal character; the
expenses attendant upon the education of young people, their advancement in
life, establishment, etc. how quickly will they succeed. It is happy, that when
a single means of acquiring property fails, there are others which present.

The ocean opens its hospitable arms to the unfortunate man, from whom every
other resource is cut off; while the dangers, supposed peculiarly incident to a
seafaring life are in reality chimeras, calculated only to appal persons
unaccustomed to reflect. Those who acknowledge the superintendence of
Providence, the existence of Deity, if they ascribe to him those powers and
properties which are essential to the being of a God, must acknowledge, that
his protecting arm is, upon all occasions, stretched forth; that he can
preserve upon the mighty waters with the same facility with which he upholdeth
the dweller upon the land. The truth is, we are immortal until the separating
warrant passes the great seal of Heaven; and, the breath arrested by a
designation so inevitable, no arrangement can redeem. I flatter myself, my
beloved Margaretta, that your mind, equal, energetic, and considerate, would
not suffer itself to be over much depressed, should the vicissitudes of life
produce contingencies, unavoidably condemning you to a few months absence from
Mr. Hamilton; two or three voyages might perhaps entirely retrieve his affairs,
and you would ever after have the satisfaction to reflect that you had
contributed every thing in your power; every thing which fortitude and uniform
exertions could achieve, in order to re-instate your Edward in that
independence to which he was born. I was proceeding -- but I had not been
sufficiently cautious. My daughter, during my harangue, frequently changed
color; the lily and the rose seemed to chase each other upon her now mantling,
and now pallid cheek; she trembled excessively; and upon my particular
application to her, the agitation of her bosom, becoming insupportable, she
sunk breathless into the arms of that passionately beloved, and truly afflicted
husband, who hasted to prevent her fall.

"My God!" exclaimed Hamilton, it is too much; restore, compose, and soothe
this suffering angel, too often exercised by pangs of so severe a nature; and
do, with a wretch who has betrayed and undone her, whatever seems to thee
good.

Mary and Serafina soon recalled the fleeting spirit of the lovely mourner.
Hamilton once more kneeled before her, and the copious tears, with which he
bedewed the hand that he alternately pressed to his bosom and to his lips,
called forth a mingling stream from the eyes of the beauteous sufferer. The
scene was inexpressively tender, but the humid drops upon the face of my
daughter annihilated at least one half of my fears upon her account. "And can
you, Sir," in a tremulous accent she exclaimed -- can you condemn my Edward to
bondage, perhaps to irretrievable slavery? What means my love? Ah, Sir! do you
not recollect British depredations? Do you not recollect the ruthless and
unrelenting rigor of that fate which awaits the captive, doomed to wear out a
wretched life under the galling yoke of an Algerine despot? Might I but have
been spared at this time! might a step so fatal to my peace, at least have been
deferred, until the face of affairs wore, to the poor, desolate, and exiled
voyager, a more confirmed aspect, I think I could have acquiesced. For a moment
she paused; sighs, expressive of the deepest anguish, burst from her bosom.
Again she resumed -- Gracious Heaven! what an extensive and wide spreading
error has my early indiscretion proved! and perhaps its cruel consequences
will follow me to the latest period of my existence! Had I waited the parental
sanction, ere I lent an ear to a wretch, practiced in the arts of deception;
had I not blindly and precipitately given the reins to reprehensible
inclination, I should never have listened to the pernicious voice of adulation;
the faithful heart of my Edward would not have received a corroding wound; he
would not have been impelled to a voluntary banishment; he would never have had
recourse to an expedient, which has too surely involved in ruin my terrestrial
hopes! Forgive me, O my parents! forgive me, O thou best of men! and thou
sleeping innocent, forgive, O forgive thy wretched mother! It is now indeed
that Margaretta is completely undone!

I was immeasurably affected; yet I knew that my daughter would soon become
capable of reasoning. She possesses, in an uncommon degree, the power of
accurately discussing points, in which she is the most deeply interested; but
altogether unprepared for the present calamity, reason had been violently
forced from the helm, and we unitedly endeavored to restore her to that
reflection, to which we well knew she was eminently adequate. The soothings of
unquestioned friendship are the sweetest solace; they yield a balm which is
endowed with the sovereign power of mitigation, and they are a consolation in
almost every sorrow. It was necessary to bend the mind of Margaretta to our
purpose, and a few hours accomplished our wishes; gradually we opened our plan;
she saw the propriety of every arrangement; the necessity for the steps we had
taken, and the idea, then first held up, of the possibility that the time was
not far distant, which might legally immure her Hamilton within the walls of a
prison, produced the expected effect. Waving her snowy hand with peerless
grace, she pressed it upon her closed lips, and bowing her afflicted head, thus
tacitly gave that expressive, although melancholy assent, of which, from the
beginning, considering the justness of her way of thinking, we had made
ourselves sure. Two days, as I said, only remained, and they were marked by a
deeper sorrow, than any which has yet pierced the bosom of my daughter! It will
not be doubted, that we called into action every motive which could give energy
and firmness to her feelings; yet, while pensive resignation dwelt upon her
lips, her altered countenance and debilitated frame evinced the struggles of
her soul. It was a trial upon which she had never reckoned; in every event, she
had calculated upon the supporting presence of her husband, and that she was
thus unprepared for the stroke, must apologize for the agonized emotions with
which she submitted to the blow! The evening at length arrived, which we
conceived destined to usher in the morning, upon which our adventurer was to
depart for a neighboring town, in order to his embarkation, and its progress
was noted by the heartfelt sighs of corroding anguish.

But just at this juncture, unfortunately, as I then imagined, our Federal
Government interposed the late embargo, and joy once more mantled upon the
cheek of Mrs. Hamilton. Thus it is, we submit to necessity; we are convinced of
the utility of certain arrangements, and we are constrained, by conviction, to
yield our assent to events which, nevertheless, pierce the bosom with the
barbed arrows of affliction: Yet, if an interposing hand breaks the order to
which we had reluctantly submitted; if we are conscious that we have no how
aided in producing the incident; if we have, in every respect, acted up to our
duty, we seem to forget the good we had expected; we rejoice in a change, which
emancipates us from those sorrows we had imposed upon ourselves; we seem to
have attained the goal of felicity; and, for a little moment, we become
unmindful of those compulsory considerations, which had urged the application
of a remedy, acknowledged indispensably requisite. Margaretta, notwithstanding
the good sense of which she is mistress -- notwithstanding the remonstrances of
reason -- not only regarded the embargo as a reprieve, but involuntarily
breathed her wishes for its continuance; and I produce it as an irrefragable
fact, that our country contains not a single partizan, whose bosom glowed with
more ill-advised zeal, for the extension or renewal of this same embargo. The
25th instant, however, arrived -- it passed -- the fleet and welcome footsteps
of no new commissioned express gladdened the ear of impetuosity -- and the
embargo expired -- Hamilton was again on the eve of his departure. Yesterday,
exactly at one o'clock, we were assembled in the dining parlour. This very
morning was to have witnessed the agonized moment of separation -- and
melancholy dejection brooded in the countenance of Margaretta.

My servant, a man whom I have loved for these forty years, entered: -- "A
stranger, Sir, is importunate to see you." Admit him, by all means. Margaretta
was hasting from the parlour; she was solicitous to hide her grief from the
observation of the uninterested; but the stranger was close upon the heels of
the servant, and not being able to make her escape, she withdrew to the window.

The gentleman, the stranger, I say, entered; upon his features were imprinted
the strongest marks of perturbed and tender anxiety; and, moreover, they were
features with which I was confident I had long been familiar, although, for my
soul, I could not recollect at what time, or in what place, they had met my
view. He, however, fixing his inquiring eyes, with impatient solicitude, on the
face of my wife, and drawing up a heavy sigh, thus laconically apologized:

Excuse me, Madam, excuse me, Sir -- but my feelings disdain ceremony. The
scrutiny under which the countenance of Mary passed, was soon performed; and
Miss Clifford next engaged the attention of a man, who, but for the benign
ascendancy, which, amid the most tumultuous agitation I had ever witnessed, was
still conspicuous in his countenance, I should have concluded, entirely
deprived of reason.

"You are lovely," he exclaimed, addressing Miss Clifford, but you are not the
angel -- at least, I think you are not -- of whom I am in pursuit. -- Tell me,
Mr. Vigillius; tell me, ye incomparable pair! ye who have still continued the
matchless guardians of my long lost and unceasingly lamented Margaretta, what
apartment in this happy dwelling contains my only surviving treasure?
Margaretta, who had sought to hide her sorrow-marked visage from the gaze of a
stranger, now, lost in astonishment, mechanically turning from the window,
presented to his view her tearful face; she catched a glance, and, faintly
shrieking, would have sunk upon the floor, had not the stranger, whom we now
regarded with a kind of indignant horror, snatched her to his embrace! Our
resentment, however, soon gave place to all those enraptured emotions, which
the accession of high and unexpected felicity originates in the bosom, when, in
a voice expressive of paternal tenderness, of paternal transport, he soothingly
said --

Compose yourself, my lovely, my admirable, my inimitable child! It is a
father's arms that are at length permitted to enfold his long lost
Margaretta!!! Arbuthnot, thou shall no more invade my rights; it is again given
me to possess my child, and all her beauteous mother stands confessed! Sainted
spirit -- this hour shall render thy elysian still more blessed!

Margaretta shrunk not from his embraces: Strange as it may appear, her
agitated spirit did not entirely suspend its functions; and while she seemed,
in the arms of the stranger, an almost lifeless corse, her lips yet moved, and
every charming feature received an extatic kind of ejaculatory impression.

Among the trinkets belonging to her mother, which had come into her possession
on the death of Mrs. Arbuthnot, was a miniature picture of her father: Perhaps
there was not a single day, on which she did not gaze with filial devotion upon
this picture. It was a striking likeness; and, by its general contour, her mind
was strongly impressed. Hence the effect produced, by a single glance at the
original; and it was a frequent observation of this picture, that occasioned
the confused recollection, for which, upon the first appearance of the
stranger, I was at a loss to account.

It cannot be matter of wonder, that at an interview so astonishingly
interesting, not an individual retained that self-command, so requisite to
common forms: At length, however, recollection resumed, in a degree, its
office. Mary conducted Mrs. Hamilton to a sofa, when, a flood of tears
unlocking for her the powers of utterance, with a look of profound and
dignified veneration, she quitted her seat, and suddenly kneeling before the
honored man, in this devotional attitude, with clasped hands, and in broken
accents, she perturbedly questioned -- Art thou a spirit blessed -- dispatched
from Heaven's high court to soothe thy sorrowing child? -- or art thou indeed
my father? Have thou never tasted death? and, if thou have not, by what miracle
did thou escape those tremendous waves, which we have supposed commissioned
for thy destruction? Mr. Melworth, forsooth, to say it was he, his very self,
raised his kneeling child, and again clasping her to his paternal bosom, in
strains of exquisite tenderness, affectionately replied --

Be comforted, my love; be composed, my heart's best treasure; I am indeed thy
father. At a proper time, thou shall be made acquainted with every particular;
and, in the interim, as I have been informed of thy embarrassed circumstances,
know, that riches, more than thou can want, are in my gift. Thou shall
introduce me to thy worthy husband. I am apprized of the whole of thy sweetly
interesting story; and thy happiness shall, if possible, be equal to thy merit.
Margaretta, wild with transport, now raised her eyes and hands to Heaven, and
the most extravagant and incoherent expressions of joy were upon her lips.
"Then he shall not go," she exclaimed -- Avaunt, ye brooding fiends, that hover
round the land of murder! -- ye shall not intercept the virtuous career of
Hamilton -- ye shall not presume to manacle those hands that have, a thousand
times, been stretched forth to wipe the tear from the face of sorrow -- Avaunt,
ye hell-born fiends! -- Algiers, united for his destruction, shall not detain
him; for lo, a blessed father descends from heaven, to save his well near
sinking Margaretta!

Edward, who, from the entrance of Mr. Melworth, had remained, as it were,
entranced, or petrified by astonishment, roused by his fears for the reason of
Margaretta, now coming forward, prostrated himself at the feet of Mr. Melworth.
No one possessed sufficient composure to introduce him -- nor was this
necessary; the strong sensations which pervaded his almost bursting heart,
inscribing upon every manly and expressive feature, veneration, joy, gratitude,
and apprehension, emphatically pointed him out, and rendered a doubt impossible.

But why continue a scene, which may, perhaps, be conceived, but which words
can never delineate? Our mutual congratulations; our mutual expressions of
felicity; the best affections of which humanity is capable; the most rapturous
sensations of delight; these were all in course -- and these were all afloat;
and I will only add, that Edward will not proceed on his voyage -- that
Margaretta is happy -- that every creditor shall be amply satisfied; and I
hereby advertise -- let them produce their several claims; they shall receive
to the last farthing, yea, and liberal interest too. Seymour -- generous
Seymour! -- if this Magazine shall reach thee, before thou hear from thy
friend, know, that the hour of thy emancipation is at hand, and that a full
reward awaiteth thee, for all the munificent deeds which thou have so
munificently devised.

And, gentle reader, for thy consolation, I give thee my word and honor, that
the very next Gleaner, by recounting to thee every particular, relative to Mr.
Melworth, which shall come to my knowledge, shall, if it is within the compass
of my power, amply gratify a curiosity, which thou need not hesitate to own,
and which I should have been mortified in the extreme, not to have excited.

No. XXIX.
The deed of worth is registered on high.
Owned and approved in worlds beyond the sky --
Nor only so -- we feel an answering glow,
Which but the virtuous action can bestow;
Nor these alone -- an earnest often is given,
Immediate good -- the award of righteous Heaven.

THE author, who leaves nothing to the imagination of his readers, is
frequently accused of blameable arrogance; and it is often asserted that,
puffed up by an overweening self-conceit, he vainly supposes, that the germ of
fancy can flourish no where but in the soil of his own wonderful pericranium.

Now, as the fact is, that I am anxiously solicitous to avoid every occasion of
offense, I shall (taking into consideration the feelings of sensibility, and
properly influenced by an idea of the ingenuity which is its accompaniment)
wave the description of those delightful sensations, which, in rapturous
succession, were the natural appendages of the introduction of the father of
Margaretta. The extatic fondness with which he hung upon the accents of his
daughter -- the mingling pleasures and regrets -- the big emotions which
surprised his soul, as he traced each lovely feature -- those well-known
features, which exhibited to his view a beauteous transcript of those that he
had early learned to admire in the face of her departed mother -- the exquisite
sensations with which he traced the kindred lineaments -- comparing them
separately and collectively with a miniature of his lady, which he wore in his
bosom, and which might have passed for an exact copy of Mrs. Hamilton -- the
glowing expressions of paternal tenderness, with which he folded the little
William to his bosom -- the marked approbation, unequivocally demonstrated
toward every movement of the husband of his Margaretta -- the manly and
complacent regards that he bestowed upon Miss Clifford -- the sweet incense of
expansive and immeasurable praise, that he addressed to me, styling me the
savior, the benefactor, the genuine father of his poor orphan girl -- the
elevated regards, short only of adoration, which he devoted to my dear Mary --
those charming effusions, consisting in expressive looks, broken words, and
unambiguous gestures; effusions which were the spontaneous growth of uncommon
felicity, the reciprocity of exquisite satisfaction which we abundantly inhaled
-- All this, and whatever else the soul of sensibility can conceive, gladly do
I refer to the glowing mind of the feeling sentimentalist; and I do hereby
invest imagination, in the utmost latitude of its powers, with full scope; it
is impossible it can paint too high; language is indeed insufficient, and the
most vivid tints of fancy can alone pourtray.

Nay, gentle reader, I take upon me to assert, that however elaborately thou
may finish thy picture, after thou has bestowed upon it thy last touches, it
may, after all, fall vastly short of the original; and, right sorry am I, that
my powers are so circumscribed, as to render it impossible for me to place it
in its genuine luster before thee. But, finite efforts, being doomed to submit
to a necessity, the effects of which it must ever be unavailing to lament; we
will, without further preamble, proceed in our narration. And here I would not
have thee conceive, that I am so unreasonable as to condemn thee to the
drudgery of accounting for the sudden appearance of Mr. Melworth, nor can I
consent, that, setting me down as a descendant of Merlin, thou should place
in my hand the magic wand; invest me with the powers of incantation, the gift
of working miracles, or, of summoning " spirits from the vasty deep." No,
believe me, I am no conjurer, and the better to banish every idea of a
supernatural interposition, I hasten to bring forward the promised facts.
Imagine then, that the tumultuous and perturbed sensations of ungovernable
transport, which were consequent upon the late developement, are succeeded by
that kind of satisfaction which is the result of high complacency in the
present, and the most agreeable anticipations of the future; or by that state
of tranquillity, which must always be considered as a desirable substitute for
the hurricane of the passions, whatever may be the magnitude of the event which
produced it. The extreme of joy and sorrow, originating commotions as
destructive to the order of the mental system, as the uprooting storm to the
apparent harmony of the natural world; the mild and equal disposition cannot
but regard as a relief, the regular succession of events. Imagine that our
happy circle is retired to the little apartment sacred to sentimental
pleasures; to that apartment, upon which the step of inconsiderate levity, or
indifference, obtrudeth not. Margaretta is seated between her enraptured
father, and that husband, who experiences for her exemplary worth, with every
rising hour, augmenting admiration and new esteem. Mary, Serafina and myself,
complete the group, and Mr. Melworth, pressing the hand of Mrs. Hamilton, thus
commences his interesting communications.

I observed, my dear, the sweet blush that tinged thy lovely cheek, upon my
mentioning in terms of reprehension, the name of Mrs. Arbuthnot; yet you must
allow for the feelings of a desolate father -- but for her unforgiving and
obdurate spirit, the probability is, that your angelic mother would, at this
delightful moment, have partook, and doubled all those exquisitely charming
sensations, which swell a parent's bosom, and which present such an ample
compensation for every evil. From the hour which blessed me with the hand of my
Margaretta, she continued sedulously intent on procuring a reconciliation with
her sister; for the companion of her youth the sigh of her bosom still arose,
and while the utter improbability of obtaining her wishes embittered our most
pleasurable moments, her intense and unavailing solicitude visibly impaired her
health!

I flattered myself that the period which gave thee, my love, to her arms,
would supply that void in her heart, which, however ardent the attachment of
your sex to the man of their choice may be, such is the delicacy of the female
mind, a tender and respectable female friend can alone fill. Your mother, my
dear, was early left an orphan. Her sister had for a long period reigned
supreme in her bosom. Fate presented her not a Mrs. Vigillius; goodness so
unexampled is not the growth of every clime; neither was a Serafina Clifford
contained in the circle of her connexions. Yet, as I had hoped, the birth of
her daughter opened a source of new and exhaustless pleasure; and when she
clasped her lovely infant to her bosom, she forgot, for a moment, her sister;
but memory, too faithful to its office, officiously presented the mirror. --
"Dear implacable Henrietta!" she exclaimed, "why will thou stand aloof? why
will thou refuse to heighten the transports of this delicious period? Thy
presence, thy sanction would indeed add a completion to my felicity, which
would mark me the most blessed of women!

The novelty, however, the soft endearments, the thousand nameless
perturbations, and tender interest of the maternal character, were powerful
alleviations, and the tranquillity of the mother was in a measure restored.
Eighteen halcyon months revolved, when fate, as if envious of our felicity,
presented me with a prospect of obtaining great emolument, by engaging on board
a ship bound for the East Indies. I was flattered by the idea of obtaining for
my Margaretta and her infant, an elegant independence, and that resolution
which became the superstructure of a basis so proper and so deeply laid, could
not be easily shaken. Margaretta, while she acknowledged the eligibility of my
plan, shrunk from its execution. Her tenderly apprehensive bosom foreboded a
thousand evils. Yet the heroism of her character can never be too much admired.

"Go, my Charles" -- with emotions of tender and unutterable agony, she
exclaimed -- "since it must be so, go! -- and may the upholding hand of Heaven
be, in every event, thy never-failing support!" Repeatedly she sobbed out the
convulsed and agonizing adieu, while ingenious in inventions to retard my
departure, she pressed me to her throbbing heart. "Oh! my love," in broken
accents she whispered, "if we meet again, we shall then be happy. But alas!
alas!" she could not add. Yet still her clasped hands and streaming eyes
continued to supplicate the (...) of that God, on whom her firm reliance was
invariably placed. I was inexpressibly moved. My soul was little less
tempested; yet the splendor of my prospects, my previous arrangements, my
pledged honor, all urged me on; and, by one violent effort, I tore myself from
the most beloved of women! Our mutual sufferings may be regarded as a
prediction of the fatal event. It was decreed that we never more should meet!
Propitious gales attended the first part of our voyage, and I had began to
anticipate the rich harvest that a few painful seasons would enable me to lay
at the feet of my heart's best treasure.

We had already doubled the southern extremity of the great continent of
Africa, commonly called the Cape of Good Hope; and, shaping our course
north-east to the continent of India, we were proceeding with all dispatch --
when, lo! on a sudden, the scowling atmosphere gathered darkness; dreadfully
portentous the winds of heaven arose. Waves beat on waves frightfully
tempestuous. The tumultuous ocean seemed to lash the contending skies. Louder
and louder the destructive whirlwinds bellowed round. Hoarse thunders roared
terrific peals succeeding peals. The heavens poured forth a deluge of rain, and
the forked lightnings were all abroad. Surrounded on every side by the
tremendous world of waters, assistance was impossible -- no asylum presented.
The seaman's art was in vain, and death, in its most shocking form, appeared
inevitable. But to describe the horrors of our situation is beyond the reach of
language. In the latitude in which we then were, there is a large ridge of
rocks, they are pointed out in most of our sea charts; but if our pilot was
aware of them, it was not in his power to avoid them; they accelerated that
fate which, imagining the ship might live many hours, I had not so speedily
expected; and, bilging instantly upon one of those rocks, a second stroke
severed her in twain! The shrieks of the mariners were shocking beyond
expression. How long they survived, or what efforts they made, I am not able to
say; for, seizing a part of a shattered raft, upon which, floating at the mercy
of the winds, and waves, while I momently expected dissolution, I commended my
spirit to that God whose protection and whose favor I had never ceased to
invoke.

And how many of the children of men have been constrained to ask, What
circumstances are beyond the reach of Omnipotence? He who holds in the hollow
of his hand, the great deep, suddenly hushed the winds; and, driven upon a
small uninhabited island, my first sensations, it will not be doubted,
spontaneously issued in the most grateful orisons to the God of my life, who
had thus graciously interposed for my preservation. But soon the image of my
Margaretta, clothed in the habiliments of immeasurable woe, harrowed up my
soul; her forlorn and helpless situation -- her unprotected infant! -- My God!
madness was in the thought. I was on the point of again plunging into that
ocean from which I had so recently escaped; but the good hand of upholding
Deity still prevented me, and was still my shield. Gradually the heavens
resumed a serene aspect; my mind too became astonishingly calm; and, drying the
only vestments which now remained to me upon a sun-beat rock, whose craggy
sides received the most intense rays of that luminary, beneath the foliage of a
sheltering tree I stretched my weary limbs. Sleep spread over me its downy
mantle, and I obtained a temporary oblivion of those lacerating reflections,
with which succeeding hours, in dreadful order, appalled my sinking spirits.

Necessity compelled me to search out the good, if any remained, which was yet
within my grasp. At the salutary stream I slaked my thirst; the nutritious
berry, zested by hunger, afforded me a delicious repast, and by one soothing
hope I was still buoyed up: I traced unequivocal vestiges of the human step --
ships, I was positive, had recently touched there -- I might yet recognize my
fellow man -- I might yet be borne to my native isle. Despair, however, too
often gained the ascendancy, and at such intervals, inexpressible anguish
overwhelmed my soul. But it is impossible to paint the unequalled calamities of
his situation, who is thus circumstanced. Even the glowing imagination of a
Thomson could only sketch them. Yet, not a revolving hour but heard me, to the
listening echo, repeat -- Unhappy he! who from the first of joys,
Society, cut off, is left alone
Amid this world of death. Day after day,
Sad on the jutting eminence he sits,
And views the main that ever toils below;
Ships, dim discovered, dropping from the clouds;
At evening to the setting sun he turns
A mournful eye, and down his dying heart
Sinks hopeless; while the wonted roar is up,
And hiss continual through the tedious night.
But forever blessed be the all-gracious Disposer of events! the term of my
sufferings was cut short. It was the employment of my first rational moment,
after I had been thrown upon the island, to make, with a part of my clothing, a
signal of distress. Upon a prominent angle ascended a small acclivity, on the
summit of which stood the tall trunk of a tree, that contending storms had
stripped of its branches. To this disrobed trunk I contrived to fasten the
beacon of my distress, and I consecrated it, with many supplications to Him who
was alone able to save.

The morning of the fifth day (after I had so providentially escaped the waves)
broke divinely serene. An amazing continuity was outstretched before me. With
solded arms, and an aching heart, I contemplated the extensive main. The
frightful solitude, the awful stillness to which I was condemned, arose
dreadfully terrific to my soul. I threw abroad my anxiously inquiring gaze; a
cloud seemed to gather at a distance -- It is not a cloud -- What can it be? --
Swiftly it approaches -- Great God! is it possible? -- Savior of sinners! it
is, indeed, the white sails of a Heaven directed bark! -- It is bending toward
me! -- Ah! it recedes, and my bounding spirit dies within me!

Again, however, its altered course bore rapidly down upon my desolate abode.
The insignia of calamity reared not in vain its petitioning head. The necessary
arrangements were made. The boat was manned. My heart leaped exulting; it was
too big for its prison. My tongue refused utterance, while, with that
commiserating cordiality, which seamen know so well to practice, and which is a
characteristic trait of their order, I was received on board the ship. To
complete my joy, the captain and crew were English. The captain was a humane
and venerable man, who had numbered more than threescore years: A shower of
tears relieved my bursting heart. I told my tale of woe, and he regarded me
with even paternal goodness. Few know how to respect the unfortunate;
inestimable are the soothings of benevolence to the children of adversity.

A tedious voyage was now to be performed: and although a proper sense of the
divine interposition in my favor, forbid every murmur, yet a recurrence to
those pangs which I well knew would lacerate the gentle bosom of her my soul
held most dear, could not fail of pointing the keenest arrows of affliction!
Ten long months (dating from the time of my departure) performed their tedious
round, ere the white cliffs of Albion again met my longing gaze. With what
extacy did I leap upon the strand. To the parent soil I lowly bent my head;
with filial lips I kissed the kindred turf, and my bounding spirit, struggling
with its mingling sensations, poured forth the rapt orisons of a shipwrecked,
exiled, rescued, and restored man! On the wings of speed I hasted to my native
village; to that village which I supposed contained my only treasure. But what
became of me, when, posting to the apartments of Margaretta, I found them
occupied by strangers! -- Yet, hope still whispered she had removed to some
other abode; and I hasted to the dwelling of a friend, from whom I learned the
sum of my misfortunes!!

You are, my friends, acquainted with the feelings of the heart. Every feature
in your expressive countenances are vouchers of your sensibility -- Why should
I aim at delineation!

When to the height of hopeless sorrow wrought,
The fainting spirit feels a pang of thought,
Which, never painted in the hues of speech,
Lives at the soul, and mocks expression's reach.
I drop the curtain over a train of succeeding ills; sickness, loss of reason,
comfortless calamities!

Mrs. Arbuthnot, when she accompanied her husband to Ireland, bore my child
with her. My aged, widowed mother, gently remonstrated. My supposed death, and
the demise of Margaretta, had centered her every remaining wish in the little
prattler. Mrs. Arbuthnot plead the dying injunctions and bequest of her sister.
This was decisive. The regulations suggested by the everlastingly absent should
be deemed inviolably sacred, and my mother with floods of unavailing tears
submitted. A few painful weeks devoted to heartfelt regret, had succeeded a
separation judged unavoidable, when my unfortunate mother received a line from
Mrs. Arbuthnot, acquainting her that the little Margaretta was no more. This
proved a finishing stroke. So many calamities, in such swift succession,
treading upon the heels of each other, brought down the gray hairs of my aged
parent with sorrow to the grave. Could she have been spared to have witnessed
the returning footsteps of the son of her youth, a gleam of joy would have
diffused its genial and solacing influence over her parting spirit. But Heaven
decreed otherwise, and she closed a life, the sorrows of which had accumulated
with every added moment! What could induce Mrs. Arbuthnot to pen a
misrepresentation, calculated to pierce with so keen a shaft the bosom of an
aged and sorrow worn sufferer, I can only conjecture. Probably she might be
influenced by her plan of passing the child for her own; or, she might imagine
that my mother, being invested with the rights of a parent, would again demand
the child, should the contingencies, peculiar to a soldier's life, remove
Captain Arbuthnot (whom it was well known she determined to follow) to a remote
or foreign destination; and it may be presumed that she made up the matter in
her own mind, by a consideration that if she returned her niece to our village,
the extreme age of my mother, would soon leave her destitute of every natural
guide.

For me, after a long and debilitating fever, obtaining a state of
convalescence, -- youth, and a constitution uncommonly good, soon completed my
restoration. The same interest which had before placed me on board an
East India ship, procured me a second employment. I made several successful
voyages. I accumulated riches; and at length saw myself possessed of affluence.
But alas! tranquillity was not in the gift of affluence. In the variety by
which I was surrounded my heart took no interest; and it refused to acknowledge
a second attachment. Yet I determined to regulate my feelings by the dictates
of fortitude, and to bend my wayward spirit to a state of acquiescence in the
designation of that God who rules in the heavens. I became a citizen of the
world; and, considering myself born for the universal family, and for the
emolument of my fellow men, I industriously made the most of every acquisition.
Under the influence of this sentiment I proceeded in the career of life; and if
my path produced not those high scented perfumes, of which the exquisite
succession of domestic enjoyments is susceptible, I was, notwithstanding, so
far favored, as to obtain a degree of composure. Thus rolled on succeeding
years, until upon an uncommon fine night, three months since, feeling no
disposition to retire to my chamber, I felt constrained to devote an hour to a
contemplative walk, and after having strolled some moments upon the road-side,
I bent my steps toward St. George's fields, where, experiencing an unusual kind
of perturbation, with folded arms, and raised eyes, I continued my desultory
aberration.

Methought the shade of my Margaretta accompanied my steps: The ample heavens,
the starry luminaries, the full orb'd moon, the blue expanse; these all
combined to image the beauteous form of her, on whom fond remembrance still
regretting dwelt.

An association of ideas gave birth to a wish, to pass some moments beside a
sketch of those waters, on which, bidding an eternal adieu to the injured
sufferer, I had heretofore cruelly embarked; and toward Westminster bridge I
rapidly took my way, which having reached, with an expedition for which I could
not account, I descended the steps of the landing place; but no sooner had I
put my foot upon the third stair than an unusual dash of the waters of the
Thames, for which the stillness of the night rendered it impossible to assign a
reason, still further accelerated my movements. I hasted forward, and was only
in time to seize by his garments, an unfortunate man, who had plunged into the
stream, with the unwarrantable purpose of putting a period to his existence. I
remonstrated against the atrocious audacity of the deed that he had well near
perpetrated, in terms expressive of the horror which it inspired. For a time he
preserved an indignant kind of silence; and when he deigned to utter himself,
he breathed only expressions of resentment, for what he termed my officious
interposition. It was manifest that his reason was disordered, and pity grew in
my soul. I addressed him in the language of commiseration, and he gradually
became softened and communicative.

"Generous stranger," he exclaimed, "I give thee no mark of confidence in the
brief recital, which as an apology for my supposed rashness, your apparent
commiseration demands. To him, who is resolved on death, the disclosure of
secrets which effect only himself, can be of little importance. Know then,
that, born to affluence, I was bred a gentleman. Know also, that, pursuing my
pleasures in a neighboring kingdom, I saw and loved a beauteous woman. I wooed
and won her. Her parents were no more; but her brethren, her sisters, a
numerous family, her fortune, her country, her religion -- all these she
forsook, and fled with me to our Albion coast. Indiscretion and misfortunes
have robbed me of every penny which I possessed. I have no means of obtaining
the common necessaries of life; the few articles of which I have not yet
disposed, will not discharge the debts already contracted. Those flatterers,
who basked in the sunshine of my fortune, have now utterly forsaken me. My
wife, my beloved wife, and her helpless children, are reduced to the last
extremity. I have left no means unassayed, by which I could presume upon
relief; but every effort has proved ineffectual, and I have now quitted my
Almira, with an expressed hope, for which, alas! there is no foundation. She
will expect me with the returning sun; but she will no more behold me. I can no
longer exist a witness of those ills, of which I have been the wretched cause!"
Need I add, that I was eager to speak, to this son of sorrow, the words of
consolation? Considering myself as the banker of the unfortunate, his draught
upon me was indisputable; and the rays of night's fair empress, lent a light
sufficiently strong, to evince the authenticity of its characters.

I accompanied my new claimant, now incredulous, and now frantic with joy to
his dwelling. I had determined to keep guard the remainder of the night. We
entered softly. His little family had retired to rest. I insisted that he
should instantly speak peace to his beloved. I insisted that he should not
revisit the parlour, until the rising sun should enable me to commence my
proposed arrangements. I will repose, said I, in this easy chair; or here are
books, with which I may amuse myself. Awed by that tone of authority which I
had assumed, with looks of astonishment, and the most profound obeisance, he
left me; and sleep being beyond my reach, I endeavored to obtain sufficient
composure to amuse myself by reading. I turned over the books -- it would not
do. A new and painful kind of agitation hurried my spirits; at length a parcel
of Magazines seized my attention. I glanced confusedly upon the bundle. The
Massachusetts Magazine caught my eye -- an American production -- curiosity was
enlisted; I opened one and another; an irresistible impulse still urged me on;
the first page of the Magazine for March, 1792, arrested my ey^ -- " Bless me,
cried Margaretta," -- you will recollect, Sir, that you thus commenced the
enchanting narrative.

The appellation Margaretta vibrated interestingly upon my ear; it was the
sweet talisman of a thousand mingling sensations; no power on earth could have
prevented my reading on. I accompanied you in your journey to South Carolina,
and I entered with you the city of Charleston. The little Margaretta's tap at
the door possessed a fascinating power -- the introduction of the lovely cherub
penetrated my very soul; I waited impatiently for the issue; I attended at the
bed of death -- but, great and good God! what were my sensations when I heard
from the lips of Mrs. Arbuthnot, the well known story of my Margaretta's
sufferings -- when I learned that the dear pledge of our sacred loves was yet
alive! when I recognized her in the person of the little petitioner -- when I
became assured that she had been received by such protectors! I shrieked aloud,
wrung my hands, wept, laughed, prostrated myself in adoration of a preserving
God -- traversed up and down the apartment, until, at length impelled by
perturbed anxiety, I was constrained to trace my daughter's wondrous fortune
through the various Magazines, which, until the close of the month of November
last, presented themselves in order before me. How did my full soul bless her
godli^e benefactors! During the connection with Courtland, the most tumultuous
agitations tempested my bosom; but the catastrophe, I conceived, gave her
honored guardians a title to almost divine honors. Again I became a prey to
all those agonizing fears which can lacerate a father's heart. Even of Miss
Clifford, I must confess, that I was not a little suspicious. My feelings
against thee, my son, were replete with indignation; and I bestowed upon thy
supposed inconstancy a parent's malediction. But November presented the extatic
eclaircissement. I saw that nothing was wanting, but what I possessed abundant
ability to supply; and, in broken and almost frantic ejaculations, I sobbed out
my gratitude. The dawn at length broke. Memorable, ever memorable night! Never,
never can I be forgetful of the events which thou produced!

An early hour presented the now not despairing Altamont. He led his Almira by
the hand. I had cautioned him not to shock the delicacy of her feelings, by a
recital of the extremity to which he had been precipitated; and he had been
discreet enough to follow my advice. He had simply informed her that Heaven had
sent him a friend, and this information had proved sufficient to excite the
most lively emotions. Altamont began a speech expressive of his gratitude; but
I cut him short, by decisively pronouncing, that fate had ordained me eternally
his debtor. My disordered countenance, and the energy of my manner, alarmed
him; and he in his turn became doubtful of my reason. I gave him, however, a
simple relation of facts. I held up the divine pages. Had I not met thee; had I
not consented to deliver to thee that dividend of our common Father's interest,
with which he has entrusted me for thy behoof, I had not met these blessed
records; I had not received intelligence, which has communicated to my soul
immeasurable felicity. Th^^ amply has our God rewarded me for designing an act
of common justice.

Grateful tears of rapture, it will not be doubted, we mingled. Every thing was
speedily adjusted to the complete satisfaction of Altamont and his Almira. With
the first ship, I embarked for America. The name of Colonel Worthington, of
New Haven, was my clue; and I bore with me the heaven inspired Magazines. From
Colonel Worthington I learned every necessary particular. I was told, my son,
of your intended voyage, of the consequent anguish of my daughter's soul. I
bless God that I am in time to prevent its prosecution. Every individual shall
receive his dues; that good young man, your forbearing friend, the benevolent
Seymour -- every one shall be happy!

Unwilling to leave the curiosity of the reader ungratified, during the tardy
revolution of another month, I have felt myself necessitated to curtail the
narrative of Mr. Melworth. Many useful observations are omitted. The frequent
interruption, breaks, and pauses, occasioned by the susceptibility of Mrs.
Hamilton, and the agitation of her father; the unbounded and venerating
gratitude of Edward; and the combining admiration, and rapt felicity of our
whole party; all this was in course, and to every thing of this sort, I must
repeat, that the silently expressive touches of that vivid pencil, which is
found in the glowing hand of fancy, can alone do justice.

Already our young people have resumed their elegant family seat. Miss Clifford
is still the companion of Margaretta. Amelia Worthington is now a
congratulating visitor at Hamilton-Place. Mr. Melworth is for the present a
resident in that sweetly romantic mansion; and this very morning, the second
day of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-four, witnessing the birth
of a daughter to Margaretta, has seemed to complete our family felicity.

No. XXX.
Indulgent nature breathes a plastic glow,
From which unnumber'd soft endearments flow;
About the heart her kindred ties she flings,
And closely twines the sympathetic strings;
Her silver cord with touch magnetic draws,
And yielding minds confess her general laws.

THE multifarious ligaments which bind families together, being the handiwork
of nature, and essentially or closely interwoven with our existence, that shock
must be indeed violent, that can burst them asunder. It is true that a long
continued series of disobligation may obscure the vivid glow of those images,
which nature and habit have impressed upon the intellect. Unkindness is the
opaque body, which intercepts the sunny beams of luminous and inborn
tenderness; but the eclipse is seldom total, and the cheering influence of
affection is frequently invigorated, and often becomes the more transcendent,
for the momentary obstruction, by which it seemed well near enveloped.

Surely that heart must be strangely deficient, which the pleasing sensations
that are attendant upon the first stage of being, has not indelibly impressed;
and, that mind is unwarrantably implacable, which, entrenched by inexorable
inflexibility, is incapable of being roused to the tenderness of recollection;
which is not softened by the remonstrances of nature, furnished with arguments,
drawn from a series of endearing and substantially beneficial proofs, of a
generous attachment. Yet I know there are a variety of combustibles, which
although perhaps not radically natives of the human soil, having, however,
obtained a growth therein, and once taking fire, it is difficult to say where
the conflagration may end. I am aware there are injuries which pride and self
estimation, consider as unpardonable. It is a melancholy truth there are
obdurate hearts; and, it may be, that the strong winds of passion may
obliterate, or uproot from the bosom every proper sensation of the soul. But
granting that the empoisoned plant may become rampant in the rancorous breast,
the Gleaner, while engaged in the routine of his profession, has at no moment
bound himself to select the noxious weed; he confesses he is fond of culling
the flowers of humanity, and that, with these, as often as may be, he is
solicitous to furnish and adorn his page.

To the well regulated mind, the contemplation of family harmony is
inexpressibly pleasing. The philanthropic speculator views the little society
unalterably attached, bound together by the strong cords of mutual affection,
and rising superior to the adverse influence of separate or selfish claims, as
a miniature of that vast family of man, which futurity shall see collected
under the protecting auspices of a benign and paternal God. Order, unbroken
confidence, celestial tenderness, energetic love -- in this august assembly,
these shall all triumphantly officiate. Peaceful angels shall hover round;
discord shall find no entrance there; offenses shall be no more; but truth, sky
robed innocence, unimpeached integrity, unblemished virtue, and undeviating
holiness, shall be established, from everlasting to everlasting, and of their
dominion there shall be no end. Yes, it is pleasing to trace the striking
resemblance which is exemplified in the animated sketch. Mild, affectionate and
judiciously indulgent parents; duteous and confiding sons and daughters;
mutually complacent, and unequivocally attached brothers and sisters. The royal
bard of Israel, strikingly, feelingly, and poetically delineates the family of
love: " Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity." Well might the sacred poet summon the aid of a splendid fancy, and
arrest the most expressive figures to image the fine effects and pleasing
utility of domestic complacency; the rich perfumes which consecrated the
anointed priest of the Hebrew tribes, the fertilizing dew descending upon
Hermon's verdant summit, and resting with genial influence upon the adjacent
eminence; these but shadow forth the sublimity of that union, upon which our
God has commanded a blessing, which originates a dignified and blissful
immortality.

Yes, it is pleasing to trace the striking resemblance which is exemplified in
the animated sketch. The contemplation of domestic harmony soothes and elevates
the mind, and although it is undeniably true, that the philosopher will extend
his regards from the little group which constitutes his relative circle, to
friends, to country, to the universe at large, until he commences a citizen of
the domain of heaven; yet he will not refuse to acknowledge those ardors, those
hopes, and those fears, which upon his opening mind, in the white winged hours
that marked his dawn of being, were, by the strong hand of nature, irreversibly
engraved.

Affection is very properly said to descend; and it is generally true, that
while we venerate with pious duty the authors of our being, while our hearts
are warmed for them by love and reverence, we are in the same moment impelled
to acknowledge for our offspring, augmented and more energetic tenderness.
Nature, it is said, has implanted these superior and irresistible sensations,
for the purpose of nerving our efforts for the preservation and advancement of
the infant candidate; but, be this as it may, in whatever wise regulations it
has originated, the fact is indubitable. Family ties of every description are
variously respectable, and variously estimable, in their various departments: I
have been lately led to an appreciation of their comparative value by a
disquisition on which I was a silent attendant, that aimed at deciding what
relative character deserved the preference. The investigation was rather
curious than important; but it served, however, to amuse, during a vacant hour,
which might have been worse appropriated.

The attachment of a well informed and tender father, to an amiable and
grateful daughter, has been said to resemble that which is experienced by a
guardian angel, to the being who is committed to his charge -- tender,
delicate, and divested of all that can debase, the paternal eye regards with
immeasurable complacency, his beauteous, his dependent child; and the finest
feelings of his soul become embodied. To protect her from every ill he is
sedulously attentive; his judicious cautions hover round her inexperienced
steps; his protecting arm would present the invulnerable shield; and his
auspices are those of wisdom. Ever vigilant, ever upon his guard, to save her,
even from the imputation of dishonor, he would consider his life as a
comparatively trivial sacrifice. It is true that he is impassioned, but his
ardours are those of virtue; his affections are pure, innocent, laudable,
elevated, and refined; and, originating in nature, originating in God, they
will be perfected in heaven. All this is irrefragably just, and yet I take
leave to observe, that the fraternal department, when filled by a good and
virtuous mind, more exactly answers the ideas which I have indulged, of that
attendant cherub, ordained to tread with holy vigils, the destined path of the
expecting voyager. In contemplating the character of a father, however
beneficial its offices, we can hardly forbear recollecting, that, having
produced the being which is cherished, the consequent attachment may be the
result of that selfish principle which so universally, more or less, actuates
the human mind; and, it is undeniably true, that the operation of a selfish
principle essentially diminishes the luster of the most beneficial and
exemplary action.

A brother, it has been divinely observed, is born for adversity; a gentle and
confiding female can hardly boast a more agreeable or disinterested relation;
the general arrangements of nature authorizes a hope, that his protection will
continue coeval with her mortal career, and if he fulfils the duties of the
fraternal name, he will still continue a natural, patronizing, and consolatory
resource. What eye is not charmed by a view of the marked and delicate
attention, which is paid by an elegant young man to the gentle and accomplished
maiden, who is the daughter of his father and of his mother. Grant that
opportunities of this kind are extremely rare, the sensations derived therefrom
are, nevertheless, in a superior degree, pleasing. The attachment of a brother
to a sister, if it is genuine and sincere, if it corresponds with the
designation of unadulterated and upright nature, partakes the exquisite
delicacies and refinements of love, devoid of its tumultuous caprices, or
interested and ungovernable fervors; with ineffable satisfaction it yields that
protection, to which nature and education combine to give the sex a claim. It
is not stinted in its regards; it is tender, elevated and refined; it is
generous and communicable; it is sympathetic and permanent. A true brother
unites the duties of the paternal, with the more equal, sweet, and social
pleasures of the fraternal intercourse; the heart of a brother hesitates not to
acknowledge the bland, endearing, and indissoluble ties of amity. A true
brother is at all times a guardian friend; he rejoiceth in his fraternity; and,
I repeat, that his attachment may claim kindred with those sentiments, which
are supposed to actuate the tenderly watchful seraph, who, commissioned by the
high court of Heaven, enters with the first moment of our existence upon his
trust, and fulfils his celestial mission, by attending through every stage of
life his progressing charge.

Richardson exhibits the character, proper to a Brother, in the most vivid and
glowing hues; but if his Grandison originated not in fiction, the portrait
doubtless owes many embellishments to the incomparable pen of that inimitable
writer. It is a melancholy fact, that eminent virtue, of whatever description,
is a gem that the hand of nature, however indulgent, has too seldom produced.
Yet, for the honor of humanity, I cannot deny myself the gratification of
affirming that I, at this moment, contemplate more than one brother who has
uniformly supported that endearing character. Who, as far as circumstances have
called them forth, have amply proved their title to rank in the same grade with
Richardson's finely imagined delineation.

Much do I regret that I am not authorized to name those fair examples, which,
through a course of years, I have been accustomed to admire. But the
emblazoning voice of fame might possibly tinge their cheeks with the hue of
disapprobation; for it is certainly true, that genuine merit " Does good by
stealth, and blushing finds it fame." Yet, if, while sketching the outlines of
characters so replete with excellence, their celebrity should induce the finger
of perception to point out the living portraits, the Gleaner presumes he ought
not to be made responsible for consequences which, by the foreign traits
wherewith he has studiously diversified his descriptions, he has been
solicitous to avoid. It is indubitably an exalted and sublime kind of pleasure
which we derive from a view of transcendent worth; and that writer should at
least be considered as venial, who, fond of contributing to enjoyments
resulting from an unexceptionable source, is careful to collect instances which
adorn and elevate his species. A laudable motive is justly admitted as an
advocate for the propriety of an action. If it issues pure from the fountain of
rectitude, we are not, I have conceived, to be regarded as responsible, for the
adventitious mixtures which it may connect, as it winds its course through the
murky grounds of opinion, malevolence, misconception or detraction. But, be
this as it may, the reflections to which this essay owes its being, have
originated in a view of real life; and the probability is, that if virtuous,
informed and judicious parents were multiplied among us, family attachment
would be continued, and individuals, branching out in their several directions,
would still, however, reverting to their ancient stock, continue encircled by
the bonds of amity. Character may some time preserve its ascendency over
education; but education will, nevertheless, remain a powerful agent in the
formation both of the heart and the manners; and observation convinces us, if
the principals exhibit the pattern, the family will generally be endowed with
the virtues, the graces, and the elegance of humanity.

Happy in my connexions -- I have known many characters highly worthy of
imitation. I have known fathers dignified by the integrity of their hearts, the
clearness of their understandings, and the humane and indulgent liberality of
their sentiments. I have known mothers, who, superior to the frivolity and want
of character, which is rendered by education, and subsequent events, peculiarly
feminine, have contrinuted much to the emolument and elevation of their family.
Possessing minds capacious and extensively cultivated, truth seems to receive
from their lips additional ornament; they express themselves with elegance,
precision, and fluency -- their language is the language of propriety, and they
add a grace to every sentiment which they utter: the sincerity and candor of
their dispositions are equalled only by the frankness which is conspicuous in
the manners, and gentleman-like deportment of their respectable coadjutors in
the voyage of life, and all their plans for the regulation of those who are
entrusted to their care, are marked by wisdom and unanimity.

From such parents we expect a result happy for the individuals immediately
under their tuition, and auspicious to society at large. They will early
endeavor to endow the minds of those sons and daughters, whom they rear to
maturity, with the fortitude so necessary in the voyage of life; they will
fashion in the opening mind a disposition which will teach accommodation to the
unavoidable evils consequent upon humanity; they will cultivate that spirit of
patient resignation which is so proper for the dependent being, whose part it
is to submit without a murmur to the strokes of Providence, and when called
upon to resign into the hands of their Creator God, any of these little
individuals, who are rendered by nature and habit incalculably dear, an
opportunity being thus furnished to enforce their precepts by example, no
impious expressions will escape their lips; the sighs which they will swell,
will be the sighs of submission; with holy acquiescence they will bend to the
decrees of Heaven; in no instance violating the consistency of their
characters, they will support with uniform propriety, the Christian name, and
they will possess that applause which should invariably attend the benevolent
and the good. In the families of such parents, regularity presides. The morning
is ushered in by the devout breathings of cheerful and solemnized spirits, and
the return of " sober suited evening," witnesses their grateful and pious
orisons. The various duties of humanity are punctually discharged, and the
hours of leisure are uniformly devoted to the cultivation of the minds of those
children, whom they design as natural friends to each other, and as useful and
ornamental members of the community to which they appertain.

It was from such a stock that the venerable and truly respectable Hortensius
descended; and, having marked with uncommon satisfaction the serene pleasures
which gild the evening of his days, we wave the privilege of a novelist, whose
character places in his gift a choice of heroes, and hazard the mentioning a
character, the original of which, having continued through revolving years the
boast of fraternal records, may perhaps immediately occur to the reader, who is
at all conversant in the list of those worthies, that in our Columbian world
have given splendour to the present day.

Hortensius was bred to business, and his probity through all the complicated
scenes in which he has been engaged has remained unimpeached. Frugality and
industry are considerable traits in his character; his efforts are crowned with
success, and he is in possession of affluence. A severe disappointment in early
life, relative to the maiden of his election, steeled his heart against every
subsequent approach of the tender passion, and ambitious of the title, Citizen
of the World, he devoted himself to a series of beneficent actions, consulting
in every movement the felicity of the family of man.

Hortensius was exemplary as a son, and it was one of his principal enjoyments,
" to rock the cradle of declining age;" his parents continued in life to
extreme old age, and after gently sloping for them their passage out of time,
he laid them decently in the earth, bedewing their exit with a manly and a
filial tear. In the metropolis, where he was ushered into being, he has
sustained through succeeding years, and with unblemished reputation, the office
of an upright and important magistrate, and he is beloved and respected as
universally as he is known. Hortensius is learned, religious and cheerful, and
his liberality is only circumscribed by his abilities. But if you would give
the finishing touches to the character of Hortensius, you must borrow the pen
of his sister.

This amiable woman, although accustomed to his benignity, can hardly mention
him, especially if you advert to his benevolence, without tears. To the
numerous family, of which he is the head, he at once discharges the duties of a
parent, and a brother; but, by her, he is considered as meriting epithets more
tender, more respectful, and more expressive than language has yet fashioned;
and her tongue untired, delights to expatiate upon his many virtues. She was in
the bloom of life widowed of her dearest hopes, and the hour which marked the
exit of him, with whom she had exchanged her youthful vows, who had been the
deliberate choice both of affection and of judgment, and to whom she was
devoted by every motive which can endear a bosom friend, that fatal hour
yielded her a monument of woe! while the virtues of her lost companion, seemed
amply to justify those demonstrations of heartfelt anguish, which,
notwithstanding the length of years that have since elapsed, she still
occasionally indulges. A number of infant sons and daughters, incapable of
estimating the amount of their deprivation, while they augmented her grief,
armed her with resolution to attempt encountering the ills of life. Yet,
destitute of property, (for a train of pecuniary misfortunes had preceded the
demise of the father of her children) unaccustomed to any arduous effort, and
rendered imbecile by sorrow, the probability is, she must have sunk under the
pressure of calamity.

But Hortensius saw, he pitied, and he flew to rescue. A commodious and elegant
habitation was prepared; his sister and her little family were put into
immediate possession thereof; and, taking apartments for himself under the same
roof, he became her solace, her companion, and her protector; and he was, at
once, the guardian, the support, and the preceptor of her children. Their
education has been the most liberal which our country can afford; her eldest
son is now a barrister of distinguished eminence; her daughters are apportioned
and married into the genteelest families, and they are considered as ornaments
of their sex; while the glad emotions of their grateful hearts unreservedly
hail the good Hortensius as their father and their friend; and they equitably
acknowledge higher obligations to him, than they could have owed to the author
of their beings, whose indispensable duty it would have been, to have reared
and cherished them.

A view of Hortensius, placed in the midst of the charming group, is gratifying
to the best feelings of the heart; he experiences the rapture of a parent,
while the children of his affectionate bounty, attached by affinity, gratitude,
love, and veneration, behold him as a guardian seraph, clothed in the
habiliments of humanity, by that watchful Providence, who designed him their
benefactor, their guide, and their truly munificent resource! Doubtless, the
first of blessings will be found in his train. Nay, he is already in possession
of that " sweet peace of mind, which goodness bosoms ever."

No. XXXI.
Turn how we may, avoid it how we will,
Innate conviction must attend us still;
Religion follows as out guardian shade,
Ardent to bless, though impiously betrayed.
Our every breath Omnipotence proclaims;
A God Omnific varied nature names;
The breeze is his -- the uprooting whirlwind's roar --
The gentle rill -- the waves of every shore;
It Is God directs the day -- and God the night,
As erst he spoke, and Nature sprang to light.

NO -- Atheism will never do. The prime procurer and minister of the French
arrangements, at length accedes to this axiom; and Gallia, having guillotined
her sovereign, and blasphemously sought to dethrone and annihilate the Monarch
of Heaven, becomes, in her present resolutions, solicitous to re-establish the
Deity in her systems, to invest the Supreme with those divine honors, which
the language of nature hastes to bestow, which the dictates of reason
invariably award.

Opposed, from principle, to those sanguinary decrees, which, pronouncing the
death-warrant of whole hecatombs of my species, fail not to let loose the dogs
of war, I will confess, that I have not felt for the name of Robespierre any of
those cordialities which constitute the aggregate of amity. The anarchy and
consequent enormities, prevalent in France, together with those licentious
principles, which have apparently been so generally embraced, I have considered
as replete with incalculable evils, as the baleful precursors of every ill
which can afflict humanity! Such my sentiments, I expected not from the report
of Robespierre, those strong and glowing sensations, which, whenever I attend
to the voice of truth, most delightfully expand my soul -- But I have read --
and, charmed with the prevalent contour of the composition, the energy and
beauty of the diction, and the demonstrative propriety and sublimity of the
observations -- while I do homage to the translator, I cannot but join my
suffrage to those applauses, by which America has marked the newborn piety of
the French politician.

It is true that, as being a member of the protestant community, I am
necessitated, by my creed, to renounce all supplications made to saints,
whatever eclat may have attended their canonization. I may not feel at liberty
to cry out, "Oh! Sancta Robespierre, ora pro nobis;" yet if he, in reality,
shall at length pursue the mild dictates of truth and reason, every sentiment
of my soul will combine to wish him God speed. An admirer of the report in the
gross, I yet conceive that the following extracts can hardly be too often
repeated, can scarcely be too strongly inculcated, or too deeply engraven upon
the tablets of reflection. "What was the wish of those, who, in the bosom of
the conspiracies with which we were surrounded, in the midst of the
embarrassments of such a war, at the moment while the torch of civil discord
was still smoking, suddenly attacked all kinds of worship by violence, to
establish themselves as the furious apostles of annihilation, and as the
fanatic missionaries of atheism? Attend only to the happiness of your country
and the interests of humanity; cherish all opinions and institutions which
console and elevate the mind; reject those which tend to degrade and corrupt
them; revive and exalt all those generous sentiments and those great moral
ideas which they have wished to extinguish; reconcile by the charms of
friendship, and the bonds of virtue, those citizens whom they have wished to
divide. Who has given thee the mission of announcing to the people, that the
Deity does not exist? To you who are attached to this barren doctrine, and who
are not animated in the cause of your country, what advantage do you derive
from persuading man that a blind force presides in his destiny, and strikes by
chance his virtues or his vices; and that his soul is only a transient breath
which is extinguished at the tomb? Will the idea of his annihilation inspire
him with more pure or more elevated sentiments than that of his immortality?
Will it inspire him with more respect for his fellow men, or for himself; more
attachment to his country; more firmness in braving tyranny; more contempt for
death or pleasure? You who regret a virtuous friend, do you not delight to
reflect that the most valuable part of him has escaped decease? You who weep
over the corpse of a son or a wife, are you consoled by him who tells you that
nothing more of them remains than a vile heap of dust? Unfortunate men, who
expire under the stroke of an assassin! your last sigh is an appeal to eternal
justice! Innocence, on the scaffold, makes the tyrant turn pale in his
triumphal car: Would it have this ascendency if the tomb put upon a level the
oppressor and the oppressed? Miserable sophist! from whence do you derive this
right of rending from innocence the scepter of reason, and of placing it again
in the hands of vice; to throw a melancholy veil over nature, to drive
misfortune to despair; to encourage vice, to afflict virtue, to degrade
humanity? The more a man is endowed with sensibility and genius, the more is he
attached to those ideas which aggrandize his being, and which elevate his mind;
and the doctrine of men of this character should become that of the universe.

Ah! how can those ideas differ from truth? At least I cannot conceive how
nature could have suggested to man any fictions more useful than these
realities; and if the existence of a God, if the immortality of the soul, were
only dreams, they would still remain the most splendid of all the conceptions
of the human mind.

The idea of the Supreme Being, and the immortality of the soul, is a continual
invitation to justice: It is then social and republican. He who can replace the
Deity in the system of social life, is, in my opinion, a prodigy of genius; and
he, who without having replaced him, only endeavors to banish him from the
mind of man, appears to me a prodigy of stupidity or perversity. If the
principles I have hitherto developed are errors, I am deceived in what the
world unite to revere. Observe with what art Caesar, pleading in the Roman
senate in favor of the accomplices of Cataline, lost himself in digression
against the doctrine of the immortality of the soul; so well calculated did
these ideas appear to him, to distinguish in the hearts of the judges the
energy of virtue; so closely did the cause of vice appear to him, connected
with that of Atheism. Cicero, on the contrary invoked against the traitors both
the sword of the law and the thunder of the gods. Socrates, when dying,
conversed with his friends on the immortality of the soul. Leonidas, at
Thermopyles, supping with his companions in arms, at the moment of executing
the most heroic design that human virtue ever conceived, invited them for the
next day to another banquet in a new life.

A great man, a real hero, esteems himself too much to be pleased with the idea
of his annihilation. A villain, contemptible in his own eyes, and horrible in
those of other men, perceives that nature cannot afford him a more splendid
boon than that of his annihilation. Religion collects mankind together, and by
collecting them together you will render them better; for when men are thus
assembled, they endeavor to please each other, which can only be effected by
those things that render them estimable. Give to their reunion a great moral
and political motive, and the love of virtuous things will, with pleasure,
enter their hearts; for mankind do not see each other without pleasure.

I had but recently perused the whole of this very excellent moral report, when
one of the best informed, and most sentimental of my friends, put into my hands
a piece selected from the London Morning Chronicle of November 29, 1793.

To the matured judgment of this friend I am in the habit of paying high
deference; and he conceived, that whether we regarded the little narration as a
fact, or an ingenious reproof of the conduct of the predominant party in
France, it contained a sufficient quantum of good sense to merit preservation.
It is a proper supplement for the celebrated report of Robespierre, and in my
office of caterer for my readers, perhaps I could not do better than to offer
it to their acceptance. I subjoin it, therefore, with an added with, that it
may contribute as largely to their pleasures, as it did to the satisfaction of
the Gleaner.

"A few days after the bishop of Paris and his vicars had set the example of
renouncing their clerical character, a curi from a village on the banks of the
Rhone, followed by some of his parishioners, with an offering of gold, silver,
saints' chalices, rich vestments, etc. presented himself at the bar of the
house. The sight of the gold put the Convention in very good humor, and the
curi, a thin venerable looking man, with gray hair, was ordered to speak. I
came, said he, from the village of --, where the only good building standing
(for the chatteau has been pulled down) is a very fine church; my parishioners
beg you will take it to make a hospital for the sick and wounded of both
parties, they being equally our countrymen; the gold and silver, part of which
we have brought you, they entreat you will devote to the service of the State;
and that you will cast the bells into cannon, to drive away its foreign
invaders. For myself I am come with great pleasure to resign my letters of
ordination, of induction, and every deed of title, by which I have been
constituted a member of your ecclesiastical polity. I am still able to support
myself with the labor of my hands, and I beg you to believe that I never felt
sincerer joy than I now do in making this renunciation -- I have longed to see
this day; I see it, and am glad."

When the old man had done speaking, the applauses were immoderate. You are an
honest man, said they all at once; a brave fellow, you do not believe in God;
and the President advanced to give him the fraternal embrace. The curi did not
seem greatly elated with these tokens of approbation; he retired back a few
steps, and thus resumed his discourse:

Before you applaud my sentiments, it is fit you understand them; perhaps they
may not entirely coincide with your own. I rejoice in this day, not because I
wish to see religion degraded, but because I wish to see it exalted and
purified. By dissolving its alliance with the State, you give it dignity and
independence; you have done it a piece of service which its well-wishers would
never have had courage to render it, but which is the only thing wanted to make
it appear in its genuine luster and beauty. Nobody will now say of me, when I
am performing the offices of my religion -- It is his trade -- he is paid for
telling the people such and such things -- he is hired to keep up a useful
piece of mummery. They cannot now say this; and therefore I feel myself raised
in my own esteem, and shall speak to them with a confidence and frankness,
which before this I never durst venture to assume.

We resign, without reluctance, our gold and silver images and embroidered
vestments, because that we have never sound, that looking upon gold or silver
made the heart more pure, or the affections more heavenly: We can also spare
our churches; for the heart that wishes to lift itself up to God, will never be
at a loss for room to do it in; -- but we cannot spare our religion, because,
to tell you the truth, we never had so much occasion for it. I understand that
you accuse us priests of having told the people a great many falsehoods. I
suppose this may have been the case; but till this day we have never been
allowed to inquire, whether the things which we taught them were true or not.
You required us formerly to receive them all without proof, and you now would
have us reject them all without discrimination. Neither of these modes of
conduct become philosophers, such as you would be thought to be. I am going to
employ myself diligently, along with my parishioners, to sift the wheat from
the bran, the true from the false: If we are not successful, we shall be at
least sincere.

I do fear, indeed, that while I wore those vestments which we have brought
you, and spoke in the large gloomy building which we have given up to you, I
told my poor flock many idle stories. I cannot but hope, however, that the
errors we have fallen into have not been very material, since the village has
in general been sober and good; the peasants are honest, docile, and laborious;
the husbands love their wives, and the wives their husbands; they are
fortunately not too rich to be compassionate, and they have constantly relieved
the sick and fugitives of all parties, whenever it has lain in their way. I
think, therefore, what I have taught them cannot be so very much amiss. You
want to extirpate priests; but will you hinder the ignorant from applying for
instruction, the unhappy for comfort and hope, the unlearned from looking up to
the learned? If you do not, you will have priests, by whatever name you will
order them to be called; but it is certainly not necessary they should wear a
particular dress, or be appointed by state letters of ordination. My letters of
ordination are, my zeal, my charity, my ardent love for my dear children of the
village -- if I were more learned, I should add my knowledge; but, alas! we all
know very little; to man every error is pardonable, but want of humility.

We have a public walk, with a spreading elm tree at one end of it, and a
circle of green round it, with a convenient bench. Here I shall draw together
the children as they are playing round me. I shall point to the vines laden
with fruit, to the orchard, to the herds of cattle lowing round us, to the
distant hills stretching one behind another, and they will ask me how these
things came? I shall tell them all I know or have heard from wise men who have
lived before me; they will be penetrated with love and veneration; they will
kneel, I shall kneel with them; they will not be at my feet, but all of us at
the feet of that good Being, whom we shall worship together; and thus they will
receive within their tender minds, a religion. The old men will come sometimes
from having deposited under the green sod one of their companions, and place
themselves by my side; they will look wishfully at the turf, and anxiously
inquire -- Is he gone forever? Shall we be soon like him? Will no morning break
over the tomb? When the wicked cease from troubling, will the good cease from
doing good? We will talk of these things; I will comfort them; I will tell them
of the goodness of God; I will speak to them of a life to come; I will bid them
hope for a state of retribution.

In a clear night, when the stars slide over our head, they will ask what those
bright bodies are, and by what rules they rise and set? And we will converse
about different forms of being, and distant worlds, in the immensity of space,
governed by the same laws, till we feel our minds raised from what is
grovelling, and refined from what is sordid.

You talk of Nature -- this is Nature; and if you could at this moment
extinguish religion in the minds of all the world, thus would it be kindled
again. You have changed our holy days; you have an undoubted right, as our
civil governors, so to do; it is very immaterial whether they are kept once in
seven days, or once in ten; some, however, you will leave us, and when they
occur, I shall tell those who choose to hear me, of the beauty and utility of
virtue, and of the dignity of upright conduct. We shall talk of good men who
have lived in the world, and of the doctrines they have taught; and if any of
them have been persecuted and put to death for their virtue, we shall reverence
their memories the more -- I hope in all this there is no harm. There is a
book, out of which I have sometimes taught my people: It says, we are to love
those who do us hurt, and to pour oil and wine into the wounds of a stranger;
it has enabled my children to bear patiently the spoiling of their goods, and
to give up their own interest to the general welfare. I think it cannot be a
very bad book. I wish more of it had been read in your town; perhaps you would
not have had so many assassinations and massacres. In this book we hear of a
person called JESUS; some worship him as a God; others, as I am told, say it is
wrong to do so; -- some teach that he existed before the beginning of ages;
others, that he was born of Joseph and Mary. I cannot tell whether these
controversies will ever be decided; but in the mean time, I think we cannot do
otherwise than well in imitating him; for I learn that he loved the poor, and
went about doing good.

Fellow citizens, as I traveled hither from my own village, I saw peasants
setting amongst the smoking ruins of their cottages; rich men and women
reduced to deplorable poverty; fathers lamenting their children in the bloom
and pride of youth; and I said to myself -- these people cannot afford to part
with their religion. But indeed you cannot take it away; if, contrary to your
first declaration, you choose to try the experiment of persecuting it, you will
only make us prize it the more, and love it the better. Religion, true or
false, is so necessary to the mind of man, that you have already begun to make
yourselves a new one. You are sowing the seeds of superstition at the moment
you fancy you are destroying superstition; and in two or three generations your
posterity will be worshipping some clumsy idol, with the rights perhaps of a
bloody Moloch, or a lascivious Thamusar. It was not worth while to have been
philosophers, and destroyed the images of our saints for this; but let every
one choose the religion that pleases him: I and my parishioners are content
with ours; it teaches us to bear the evils your childish or sanguinary decrees
have helped to bring upon the country.

"The curi turned his footsteps homeward; and the Convention looked for some
minutes on one another, before they resumed their work of blood."

The Gleaner is aware, that the republishing of the foregoing, cannot fail of
unveiling him to the gentleman, from whom he received the manuscript; but he
has such perfect confidence in the indulgence and honor of the disposition of
his respected friend, and in that of those with whom he stands immediately
connected, as to rest assured that they will not betray a secret, which he, the
Gleaner, has delayed to reveal to the dearest of his associates.

No. XXXII.
Easy the burden, lightly borne appears,
Content her poppies strews -- a wand she bears,
Whose magic power can latent peace unfold,
Changing the iron to an age of gold.

THE value of an equal and accommodating disposition, cannot, I conceive, be
too highly appreciated, too energetically inculcated, or too often expatiated
upon. Such, and so frequent are the vicissitudes of life, that an unbending
mind, refusing to yield to that necessity which is imposed upon its existence,
is broken by the boisterous winds which are abroad, and too frequently
prostrated by those calamities, or adverse transitions, to which an acquiescent
spirit finds it wisdom, with humble patience, to submit. "The burden becomes
light by being well borne." I have not forgot that this is an old adage, but I
repeat, that its antiquity does not deduct the smallest particle from its
rationality; these venerable old saws frequently contain the very pith and
essence of sentiment, and I have often thought that the pen appropriated to the
pointing out their excellence, might be much worse employed.

Say, thou discontented and repining mortal, what emolument have thou derived
from continually tracing the dark shades in the picture? Have thou received
injuries, and do thou find thy recompense in eternally brooding thereon? Do
such contemplations meliorate thy virtues, or promote the sunshine of the soul?
Are the genial and salutary airs of tranquillity originated or wafted forward
by reflections, which wound the mind, and fire the bosom with indignation?

Health of body, serenity of soul, sweet complacency, sprightly mirth -- all
these are among the victims of cherished, gloomy and corroding resentment! The
soul of the vindictive is the region of horror, and the most black and baleful
passions harbor there. What are the pleasures of the angry man? It is
undeniably true that he is his own tormentor; and if he throws the reins upon
that implacability and inveterate revenge which so fearfully predominate in his
breast, his most uniform or confirmed enemy could hardly devise means more
adequate or better calculated for the destruction of his felicity. Have not the
attentions I have received been commensurate with that merit, with which my
self-partiality has invested me? Have I to complain of cold indifference or
neglect from those upon whom nature, circumstances, or amity, had furnished me
with indisputable claims? Have I not only been defrauded of those dues to which
the inviolable laws of society has entitled me; but has insult, and even
outrage been also added? Well, it is really a pity-moving situation, and I
would certainly turn as often as possible from the view. Can thou derive
either satisfaction or profit from an enumeration of thy grievances? I pity the
malignant spirit, which can delight to prey upon food on which the fiends
assembled in Pandemonium might joy to riot. Reader, if thou were ever angry,
then have thou experienced the ravages which the war of the passions makes
upon thy peace -- like all other wars, desolation follows in the train, and
reason can never estimate their profit; yet, if upon a fair calculation, the
sum total proves thee a single dram, or even a half dram, nay, the
hundredth part of a scruple the gainer; I will then consent that thou shall in
future vex thyself to a skeleton more hideous than the brain of fertile poesy
ere conjured up, though sickening envy, or yellow jealousy, or fell revenge,
stalked full in view -- "Yes," cried Maria, the sensations which are attendant
upon the contemplation of a virtuous action, are undoubtedly divine. I would
pass by a thousand supposed injuries, but I would dwell forever upon the
contemplation of genuine worth. The reflections which are the accompaniments of
offenses do not exercise, they do not invigorate the finer feelings of the
soul. I listened to the pleasing matron, continued Maria, I listened with
rapture, for her tongue expatiated upon the philanthropy of Alberto.

"My son," said she, was on a voyage; he was a stranger, and he took rank among
the lowest grade which made up the ship's company -- my son fell sick; he was
dangerously ill; gloomy was his situation -- but Alberto commanded the ship; he
sought out my son; he soothed his woes; he lodged him in his own cabin; he
attended him in person, and my son was restored to health. Immeasurable are my
obligations to Alberto; and his name, next to that of the Supreme, is entitled
to my utmost veneration. Alberto is my brother; I am many years his senior; I
have known him the most beauteous of infants, and he gladdened the hearts of
his parents. How sweet are the praises of a brother! Alberto, dear Alberto, for
this, and many similar anecdotes of thy short life, I will remit unto thee all,
and every one of the peccadillos, which, shading thy character, do but serve to
render thy virtues the more conspicuous. Yes, the genuine benignity of thy soul
shall serve as a sponge wherewith to obliterate all recollection of those
asperities, that the rough contour of thy inborn integrity so frequently
presents.

The election of Maria exemplified her accustomed penetration; for reiterated
observation of proper and becoming actions, has upon the heart the most
salutary effect. Was I called upon to delineate the path which would most
assuredly lead to as great a share of happiness as is compatible with humanity,
I should dictate to the candidate for felicity, a frequent recurrence to the
fair side of persons, circumstances and events; almost every thing may be
viewed in different mediums, and even the various emphasizing of any given
narration, may furnish the same fact with features directly opposite. Resolve
then to view every occurrence in the very best possible light; and if there is
a pleasing construction, seize with avidity the supposition which points to
complacency. Make, I beseech thee, the experiment; determine to be pleased for
one week, and then tell me how smoothly fled the hours. Here I am aware of an
objection; misfortunes may await, the pressure of which may cloud even
fortitude itself. This is certainly true, and yet it should be remembered that
habitual equanimity can blunt the edge even of the real calamities of life, and
that every evil is undoubtedly mitigated by patience.

Resolution can do much, the embodied faculties of the mind, disciplined by
virtue, are equal to almost any situation; and they effectually arrest the
progress of that fretful ennui which is commonly the offspring of indolence,
and strongly marks the want of those efforts that are so proper to a rational
being.

Murmuring, repining, captious discontent, invidious cavilling, these are
fiends armed at all points against our repose; disagreeable recollections,
wounding sarcasms, irritating recriminations -- these are hunted after, as if
they were some hidden treasure, and they stab our choicest comforts; they are
the dark assassins, who, aiming at the vitals of tranquillity, fatally destroy
our peace. Of what consequence is it who was the aggressor? humanity is
subjected to error, and that immacculate Being, to whom alone belongs
undeviating rectitude, has given us a dignified example of forgiveness. Take
the advice of a friend; make the most of life; enjoy with avidity; reverence
virtue, make it the goal of thy wishes; pursue and overtake, cultivate
philanthrophy; give ample scope to every benign suggestion; take not upon
thyself the character of a public accuser, or censor; but, leaving this
invidious office to those to whom it may legally belong, accustom thyself to
expatiate upon the good qualities of thy associates, upon the benefits accruing
from an intercourse with thy connexions, and upon the eligibles of life: Tread
lightly upon offenses; if thou should awake the sleeping mischief, it will
sting thee to the soul; its envenomed shafts will find their way to the deepest
recesses of thy spirit. Do not magnify or even investigate the ill offices
which have been done thee; few circumstances can justify the perturbating
scrutiny; anger will grow in thy bosom. How shocking, how deforming is anger!
Seneca's description of anger is not too high colored; and it is just as true
at the present day, as it was near eighteen hundred years since. Seneca, upon
anger, may not be in your library; I take leave, therefore, to transcribe an
extract from his admired page.

"He was much in the right, whoever he was, that first called anger a short
madness; for they have both of them the same symptoms; and there is so
wonderful a resemblance between the transports of choler and those of frenzy,
that it is a hard matter to know the one from the other. A bold, fierce and
threatening countenance, as pale as ashes, and in the same moment as red as
blood; a glaring eye, a wrinkled brow, violent motions, the hands restless and
perpetually in action, wringing and menacing, snapping of the joints, stamping
with the feet, the hair starting, trembling lips, a forced voice; the speech
false and broken, deep and frequent sighs, and ghastly looks; the veins swell,
the heart pants, the knees knock; with a hundred dismal accidents that are
common to both distempers. Neither is anger, only a bare resemblance of
madness, but many times an irrecoverable transition into the thing itself. How
many persons have we known, read, and heard of, that have lost their wits in a
passion, and never came to themselves again? It is therefore to be avoided not
only for moderation sake, but also for health. Now, if the outward appearance
of anger be hideous, how deformed must that mind be that is harassed with it?
for it leaves no place either for counsel or friendship, honesty or good
manners; no place either for the exercise of reason, or for the offices of
life. If I were to describe it, I would draw a tiger bathed in blood; sharp
set, and ready to take a leap at its prey; or dress it up as the poets
represent the furies, with whips snakes and flames. It should likewise be sour,
livid, full of scars, and wallowing in gore, raging up and down, destroying,
grinning, bellowing, and pursuing; sick of all other things, and most of all of
itself. It turns beauty into deformity, and the calmest counsels into (...): It
disorders our very garments, and fills the mind with horror. How abominable
then is it in the soul! Is not he a mad man who has lost the government of
himself, and is tossed hither and thither by his fury, as by a tempest; the
executioner of his own revenge, both with his heart and hand; and the murderer
of his nearest friends? The smallest matter moves it and makes us unsociable
and inaccessible. It does all things by violence, as well upon itself as
others; and it is, in short, the master of all passions."

Say, my fair friend, does the portrait disgust thee? Fly then, lovely
sentimentalist, from the very first approaches of the fell destroyer; rude and
misshapen, it assimilates into its own frightfully shocking aspect the finest
features; and, beneath its horrid and imperious sway, prostrate beauty fades,
and is extinct; its depredations on the sweet tranquillity, proper to thy sex,
are marked with the most aggravating and unnatural circumstances: -- Gentle
woman should studiously shun that questionable path which may remotely
terminate in the most distant approximation to the hell-born fiend; for every
mild, every bland and social virtue, should constitute the aggregate of the
female character. How charming is the sunshine of the soul! how friendly to the
growth of mental life is the milk of human kindness! how divine is the precept
-- "Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the royal law of love."

But stop -- let me not presumptuously invade the province of the preacher. The
fact is, thought has followed thought, until, having overshot my purpose, I
have widely deviated from my original plan: Indeed, the want of regularity is
not the least of the inconveniences which are the accompaniments of the vagrant
tribe -- but my humble pretensions must, at all times, be my apology.

My design was, to have devoted this Gleaner to the consideration of the
utility of supporting with equanimity, the unavoidable misfortunes incident to
life: And I was furnished with an exemplification of the advantages I had in
view to delineate, during a tour I lately made through the out-skirts of one of
the eastern States: Thus the eccentricity of my occupation too often deranges
my most favorite views, and I am necessitated to admit the multifarious
produce of an excursive or fugitive imagination; yet, although thrown from my
course, I will not be prevented from presenting my example; I think it cannot
fail of striking agreeably, and it may possibly give birth to those very
identical reflections it was my wish to embody.

It was on a beautiful morning of April last that, seeking the pleasures of
solitude, I wandered from the company at our little inn, and, mounting my
horse, I threw the reins upon his neck, determining to leave to chance the
direction of my ramble. We were equally strangers to the road, and a few miles
in a country hardly emerging from a state of nature, conducted us to a thick
wood, when, securing my horse to the trunk of a tall tree, I prepared to
penetrate a coppice which presented the only vestige of the wants or ingenuity
of man, which the eye could trace; and, proceeding onward to the extremity of
the wood, which bordered a few acres of ground, equally remarkable for the
sterility of its soil, and the strong indications it bore of the persevering
patience and uncommon industry of its proprietors, I was roused from my reverie
by a number of voices that, arresting my attention, immediately drew me forward
to the place from whence they proceeded. I suspected the employment of our
rustics, and, lest I should interrupt operations so proper to the season, I
made my advances with care. The opening scene presented a poor built cottage,
which, in language unequivocal, proclaimed industrious poverty; the heathy
appearance of the grounds evinced the stinted produce, with which they repaid
the master's culture; a few sheep and a single cow, whose thin forms
demonstrated the scanty pittance on which they fed, stood forth additional
vouchers of the penurious soil. But a fertilizing stream, which murmured by,
and bore in its bosom various descriptions of the finny tribe, diversified the
view, and gave birth to the pleasures of hope.

A well looking man was busily employed in turning up and shaping the glebe; a
sentimental carol vibrated upon his tongue, and his features were expressive of
content. A graceful female at a little distance, round whom no less than eleven
children, of different ages, were collected -- was directing the eldest boy, a
rosy-cheeked youth, in setting some plants, while she herself committed to the
prepared earth, those seeds from which she cheerfully anticipated the distant
harvest. The vestments of the family were the vestments of penury; and if they
could be considered as garments, they were entitled, for so respectable an
appellation, to the unwearied diligence, which, still following the well worn
robe, had so repeatedly repaired each time made breach, as to render it
impossible to decide, of what hue or texture it was originally possessed: Yet
the voice of gladness echoed round, and the hilarity of the heart seemed
impressed upon every feature.

I contemplated, with folded arms and grateful admiration, the uncommon group.
The face of the matron was not immediately turned toward me, neither had the
shepherd observed me; but the children had begun to amuse themselves with my
figure, when their mother, having finished her employ, was drawn by their
innocent mirth to the spot on which I was fixed. I have already confessed
mingling surprise and pleasure at the gay tranquillity, which was apparently
the appendages of a scene so barren of good, and so remarkably devoid of the
eligibles of life; but no language can express my astonishment, when, in the
countenance of the penuriously garbed matron, I recognized the once opulent,
truly amiable, and highly deserving Flavilla!

Gracious God! -- spontaneously I exclaimed -- Is it possible? do I in reality
behold the long idolized, and ever charming Miss Kneller? Flavilla, accustomed
to the vicissitudes and caprices of events, uttered no perturbed exclamation;
but, with that genuine dignity, which nature delights to confer upon a
consciousness of innate worth, with a grace and manner which I have not often
seen equalled in a drawing room, presenting her hand, she expressed her
satisfaction in an interview so unexpected; and, leading me to her humble
abode, we were soon joined by Honorius and the little family. I had known
Flavilla from early youth: She was born to affluence, and her education had
been in the first line. Her parents, Mr. and Mrs. Kneller, had no other child;
and this daughter, promising in every view, was, of course, regarded as an
inestimable treasure. Honorius was the man of her heart, and her union with the
youth she loved, and who reciprocated her attachment, received the cheerful
sanction of the authors of her being.

Soon after the marriage of Miss Kneller, her parental friends paid the great
debt of nature, leaving Honorius and Flavilla in possession of an ample
fortune. But, from this period, thick clouds began to gather, and they
experienced a most distressing reverse of circumstances. The career of their
misfortunes was ushered in by a dreadful conflagration, in which their
mansion house, containing many valuable articles, was reduced to ashes; a
series of calamities succeeded, until, at length, of all their vast
possessions, scarce a vestige remained; yet a principle of rectitude triumphed
in their souls; of their inborn integrity, the malice of their fate could not
divest them; and discharging, with interest, the last farthing for which they
were indebted, with the poor pittance which was left, they retired, like
Thompson's Lavinia -- " far from those scenes that knew their better days," and
purchased in this remote spot -- 'twas all they could -- the barren grounds
from which they have ever since obtained a scanty and hard earned subsistence.
Their original stock consisted of thirty sheep, one cow, and a yoke of oxen;
the sheep were almost immediately destroyed by the wolves; the cow fell a
victim, probably, to the steril soil to which she was confined; and, in an
attempt to level a tall tree, one of their oxen was killed upon the spot.
Succeeding years has reduced to the lowest state the necessaries which made up
their personal and family wardrobe, and it has not been in their power to
possess themselves of the smallest supplies! Yet, strange to tell, neither time
nor sorrow has been able to infix their deadly fangs in the bosom of Flavilla;
health dances in her veins, and beauty glows upon her cheek; her smiles still
display the dimples of youth; and in her mildly expressive eye, corrected
vivacity yet beams. It was impossible I could forbear expressing my
astonishment and my admiration! and when I inquired by what means they had,
Flavilla especially, supported such an uncommon measure of tranquillity, in the
midst of such a calamitous reverse of circumstances, Flavilla replied --

"It is simply this, we have considered the brevity of life, and the certainty
of our removal to another, a better, and a more permanent state of being; we
have adopted, realized, and reduced to practice, the sentiment of an admired
poet; we have been taught by experience, that " earth-born cares are vain; that
man wants but little here below," we have fully known; and we do not expect to
want " that little long."

To contribute to the relief of Flavilla, or her family, is impossible; for
since the discovery of her retirement, in regard to which she has enjoined the
strictest secresy, however ingenious I have been in my attempts to augment
their finances, I have still found myself, and with a firmness almost
unexampled, uniformly repulsed. To have put Flavilla in possession of every
thing which her situation seemed to claim, would have been the highest luxury
which benevolence could have tasted; but while I regret, as an individual, her
steady rejection of all pecuniary assistance, I cannot but admire the genuine
elevation of her high-souled sentiments. She listened, it is true, to those
remonstrances with which, after more indirect methods had failed, I ventured to
address her; but she listened only to ascertain her rejection.

"No, Sir," with all the calmness of inborn superiority, she replied, "I am but
too much obliged in receiving your munificent proposals, but no one shall say
that he has enriched either Flavilla, or her family. Flavilla, and her family,
will depend only upon Nature, and Nature's God; habit has reconciled us to our
situation; we are resigned, we are contented -- besides, my friend, the
prospect now gradually brightens upon us; by rigid economy, we have replaced
our stock; our children are growing up; my boys will assist their father; we
have already laid the foundation of a little tenement, in which we expect to
meet a tranquil close to waning life. Labor will ameliorate even the steril
earth; many hands will bear from some more friendly spot the rich manure; the
increase of our own fields shall yet spread us a plenteous board. See yonder
flax, already it assumes a promising and healthy aspect. The finest threads are
spun by my girls, and even by myself. Lydia is mistress of the weaving
business; William has a fine mechanical genius, his looms are nearly complete,
and the well made web, the product of our own industry, will ere long furnish
us with decent and becoming vestments."

Happy, deservedly happy woman! felicity, more than wealth can give, is thy
well earned portion.

Felicity hastes from the discordant spirit of the captious murmurer, although
the child of affluence, and enveloped in gold and purple; it hastes to the
bosom of contentment; it seeks shelter in the breast of equanimity, bestowing
on its votaries, although dwelling in a humble cottage, the choicest of its
blessings.

No. XXXIII.
Ambiguous movements wear a faulty hue,
In paths oblique, suspicion will pursue;
While the sweet flow of confidence bequeaths
That treasured peace, a rich perfume which breathes.

DISGUISES are frequently the convenient asylums of villainy; and as they are
always questionable, they are with propriety always suspected. To trace the
labyrinth of folly, into which the flagitious delinquent is precipitated,
requires more than human penetration. Many are the windings and doublings of
the proficient in error; all his paths are intricate; he is fruitful in
subterfuges, and he is enveloped in mystery. I do not say that virtue has
never worn a veil, or that integrity may not suppose it necessary to hold up
false lights; but I contend that the practice of deception, being an expedient
that must be acknowledged extremely hazardous, ought never to be resorted to
but in the last extremity; and I am free to own, I have found a singular
pleasure in indulging a hope, that truth and innocence will generally bear
their own weight.

The smooth surface of the limpid stream out-spreads its azure flow to the most
curious investigation; the orient luminary of day emits a flood of light; it
issues forth a transcendent body, elevated in itself, while its splendours are
confessed by every eye; and the upright ancient wished for a glass in his
breast, that the possibility of concealment might be thus erased from the
catalogue of his abilities. Ambiguity casts a veil over the most irreproachable
life; it originates the invidious ardours of speculation; and it gives to the
features of virtue the contour of folly. I confess I am charmed by frankness of
soul; ingenuity and integrity of manners, carry with them their title to my
unreserved esteem, and upon the honest sincere man, reason, unbiassed by
fashion or habit, is ever ready to pronounce a eulogy. I abhor duplicity in
every form; doubtful meanings, double entendres, playing upon words, with every
bagatelle of this description, are, in my opinion, at least inelegant and
unbecoming; nor can I allow that they make any part of manly sense, true wit,
or genuine humor. In a fair, open, consistent manner of thinking, conversing
and acting, there is both dignity and propriety; and an elevated reputation is
the well earned reward of persevering and unequivocal worth. We listen, with
unrestrained pleasure, to the man of unimpeached honor; to him, whose upright
soul has never been entangled in the wiles of deceit, who has never debased
himself by an alliance with falsehood, nor sported with the credulity of his
associates; who, worshipping at the shrine of truth, has still held her
inviolate, regarding all her instigations as sacred, and disdaining to purchase
the smile of levity at the expense of that j^st which borrows its humor from a
breach of veracity; and it is then that we confer upon him the most honorary
distinction, when, with unlimited confidence, we repose upon his word the most
unhesitating faith.

It is dangerous to amuse ourselves with the semblance of vice; the habit of
uttering merry falsehoods, will soon blunt the fine edge of our feelings, and
we shall easily slide into the most serious and capital violations of truth.
Integrity dignifies a character; frankness is truly amiable, and if the offense
is not highly enormous, softened by the ingenuity of a candid acknowledgment,
we are ready to press the offender to our bosoms; we allow him a second lease
of our esteem, and it depends altogether on himself, whether we shall ever
again serve upon him a writ of ejection. A moment of concealment is a moment of
humiliation; and although circumstances may sometimes render it necessary, yet,
it is certain, that when the paths of innocence are encompassed by ambiguity,
the luster of her crown is dimmed; her blooming honors seem to wane, and we
hesitate, while uttering those applauses which should be reserved to enwreath
the brow of unequivocal merit. Mysterious arrangements excite suspicion;
conjecture is afloat; jealousy is roused; the aerial mischief feeds upon the
thinnest diet, and peace evaporates in its grasp. Monimia is perturbed and
agitated; not an hour in the day but a variety of tormenting ideas succeed each
other in her mind; and the most vexatious inquietude, is the despot of her
dreams. Monimia once boasted of her felicity, and her present sufferings are
the offspring of conjecture; delicacy forbids her to question, and yet her
tranquillity will never be restored, until she learns to what fair hand her
loved Eugenio was indebted for the expressive device so elegantly enwreathed,
and so curiously cut, which has recently come into his possession, and which
he carefully preserves in the cover of his watch. Clarissa is agitated and
unhappy; she accidentally discovered in the escrutoir of Horatio, a lock of
hair; it was beautifully glossy; she is positive that it never made a part of
her own auburn tresses; it was neatly folded in some lines, sweetly pathetic,
and tenderly poetical: Perhaps the rape of that immortalized lock, which Dan
Pope has so sweetly sung, although it interested the celestials, was not
productive of more real anguish -- and I persuade myself that every susceptible
fair one will drop a tear over the sorrows of Clarissa. Cordelia, whose
attachment to her nuptial lord is still unbroken, has passed months of
dissatisfaction, occasioned by her incertitude, relative to the disposal of a
pair of sleeve-buttons, which she formerly presented to her Henry as a pledge
of love.

But these are all unjustifiable sources of inquietude -- they are the
imbecilities of the mind, and, originating in the caprice of affection, they
are of too small moment to merit attention; and they are, besides, too
reprehensible to be countenanced.

I grant they are at present comparatively small; yet if I am unhappy, I am
unhappy, whatever may have produced the evil; and when the peace of a family,
or even of an individual is involved, a full explanation, with every attempt to
soothe, is as necessary as it is generous; and it should always be remembered,
that the unextinguished flame, which, raging with increasing violence, pursues
its desolating career, and issues in the most distressing conflagration, was
once a lambent spark, whose genial warmth might easily have been suppressed,
and whose agency, under a judicious direction, might have produced the most
beneficial effects.

Yes, the peace of families is too often sacrificed to false delicacy, and to
an ill-judged silence on facts and circumstances, which ought to have been
scrupulously narrated and critically examined. Inviolable secresy, preserved
for any considerable length of time, supposing the event we are solicitous to
conceal of importance to those with whom we are intimately connected, is hardly
within the chapter of possibilities; a word, or even a look, accidentally
transpiring, will give the alarm; the truth, however latent, is thus in part
divulged; curiosity commenceth the pursuit, and a clue is obtained, which may
be just sufficient to introduce the interested person into a labyrinth, from
which, never being able to extricate himself, he may be despoiled of all that
treasured serenity, which he had vainly hoped would serve as a fund, for the
support of a life of rational enjoyment.

A lovely woman at this moment rushes upon my recollection; she is not
personally known to me, but although the vast Atlantic rolls its waves between
us, yet, with reiterated pleasure, I have frequently traced the lineaments of
her fair mind, as I have seen it pourtrayed in many a well-written page, the
product of her inimitable pen. She has, I am told, a pleasing exterior, and
her understanding is elevated much above the level of mediocrity. Nature, when
she bestowed upon her uncommon parts, endowed her also with an exquisite
tenderness of soul. Her imagination is lively and fertile, and she has a taste
capable of distinguishing, and highly enjoying the beauties of poetry. Early
enlisting in the service of the Muses, she became one of their most successful
votaries; and, from the beautiful parterres which ornament the Parnassian
grounds, she has skilfully and happily combined many an elegant fancied
bouquet. She was always a nymph of the sober-suited train, and to airs the most
pensively melodious her lyre was uniformly attuned.

Sweet Eliza! in the enchanting walks of poesy, thy feet have ceased to stray;
that confirmed melancholy, which the sunny beams of hope can no longer impress,
will no more permit thee to attune the neglected chords; the voice of the
chantress is forever mute, and the lovely minstrel has forgotten to charm.
Unhappy fair one! the rose of thy tranquillity is blighted, and " thy violets,
alas! have all withered."

It is to the ill-judged silence of Eliza, and her maternal parent, that her
misfortunes must be imputed, The story of her life is simple: I owed
unreturnable obligations to her father; it was to him I was indebted for the
systematic and rational mode of thinking, which has constituted the most
tranquil and refined moments of my existence. He was a man in the literary
line; his writings are copious and energetic; and for strength of argument,
perspicuity of diction, and self-evident demonstration, he has never yet been
surpassed; but having attained, in his favorite pursuit, the highest possible
excellence; he became nearly absorbed in those contemplations from which
originated so large a part of his felicity, and reprehensibly inattentive to
every consideration which he deemed of less moment. It too often happens that
real or original genius, although rich in resources, and distinguished by the
most shining qualifications, is nevertheless found destitute of those very
necessary requisites, which can alone bestow a capability of a beneficial
intercourse with mankind.

Mr. Mortimor, the father of Eliza, made his nuptial choice with so little
discretion, as to exchange the marriage vow with a woman, who, at the very
moment she met him at the altar, knew herself to be the wife of another! With
this perfidiously abandoned ingrate, he lived in total ignorance of her
criminal connection; and lavishing upon her every proof of an attachment almost
unexampled, until the perjured miscreant, having stripped him of every valuable
article which he possessed, found means to abscond with the paramour of her
choice, at a period when the treacherously betrayed Mortimor was engaged in the
discharge of some benevolent offices, which his philanthropic disposition had
imposed upon him as duties.

It was not until after her elopement, that the turpitude of her life was
disclosed to him; and yet he could not, even then, although convinced of her
atrocity, be persuaded to take measures calculated to bring her to condign
punishment! Many years elapsed before the wound he had received admitted a
cure; his tenderness of soul, and his innate sense of rectitude, still combated
his peace, and reason, for a long time, plead in vain. At length, however, the
lenient hand of assuaging years, aided by the intellectual accomplishments, and
prepossessing exterior, of a truly deserving female, effectuated the most
salutary change. Hope once more dawned in his bosom; it gleamed like some
heavenly visitant athwart the melancholy region of his benighted soul; by
degrees it obliterated the gloomy ideas which hovered there, and he again
asserted the native dignity of his character. To the sweet soother of his
sorrows, his hours of leisure were invariably devoted; a sentimental
intercourse commenced; it was ameliorated by the strictest amity, and it
terminated in an attachment of the tenderest kind.

Hymen once more light for Mortimor his sacred torch; and had he attended to
some legal steps, which should previously have been taken, the auspices under
which he entered into this second engagement, would have been most happy: Yet,
those arrangements, which slower souls would have deemed indispensable, must
have occasioned delays; the process of the law was tedious; Mortimor had many
enemies; obstacles might be interposed; and if upon application he should not
be able to obtain the necessary form of divorce, his expectation of happiness
would be defeated. What was to be done? Concealment was a ready resource; and,
wrapping himself about in the veil of secresy, in his own retired apartment, in
the presence of the holy priest and a few select friends, he plighted his
willing faith. Mrs. Mortimor (still received merely as the friend of her
husband) retained her family name; and, although many might suspect, those only
who were bound to secresy could decisively pronounce.

At length, however, revolving months ushered into the world the infant Eliza;
and impenetrable mystery standing sentinel at her birth, she was produced in
society by the name of Montague; and her parents introduced her as the orphan
daughter of deceased relatives. Indeed, having conducted their engagement with
so little observance of forms, however innocent in intention and in fact the
parties in reality were, the severe penalty annexed by the laws of England,
against that irregularity or breach, a description of which would undeniably
involve their connection, rendered it incumbent upon them carefully to avoid an
explanation.

Eliza was educated with the most scrupulous attention; she was nurtured by the
hand of elegance, and trained to the observance of every virtue. As early as
her opening reason authorized a confidence so important, under the strongest
injunctions of inviolable silence, she was made acquainted with the secret of
her birth; and that discretion, armed by filial piety, with which she guarded a
communication on which was suspended the life of her father, abundantly
justified the reposing a trust of such a nature in so tender a bosom. Fifteen
happy years were passed by Eliza, amid the soft endearments of parental
tenderness; each cheerful morn was ushered in by new proofs of provident care,
and the feathery hours were all marked by gentle admonitions, tender cautions,
or well-judged advice; and each returning evening saw her encircled by those
arms, and pressed to the faithful bosoms of persons, who sealed upon her balmy
lips their wishes for the repose of the night, always concluding their pious
benedictions by so natural an avowal of feelings, which were the genuine
offspring of a species of tenderness that perhaps cannot be surpassed. How
fatal for Eliza was the hour, that just at this period robbed her of a father,
who, actuated by a spirit of universal benevolence, and breathing the mildest
and most benign expressions of philanthropy, glowed with uncommon tenderness
for a daughter, whom, in his most unimpassioned moments, he could not but
acknowledge as highly deserving, every way amiable, and comprising in herself
the sum total of a father's wishes.

The demise of Mr. Mortimor presented a moment, in which it would have been
wisdom to have opened on society, with a full and unequivocal eclaircissement.
Death had placed the victim the law would have demanded, beyond the reach of
its penalties; and, clothed in the habiliments of conscious integrity, they had
then nothing to hazard by an explanation. The priest, who joined the hands of
the parents of Eliza, could, at that juncture, have been produced; and the few
friends who were present at the marriage, were still in existence. -- Alas,
alas! they are now consigned to the silent tomb! and, strange to tell, letting
slip the golden season of opportunity, Mrs. Mortimor was still known by the
name of Laughton, while Eliza was addressed by that of Montague!

It is certain that reserves, except imposed by necessity, are never
justifiable; and the necessity of mystery, ceased with the death of Mr.
Mortimor. From this period five succeeding years performed their annual round,
^re the discreet Eliza selected from the circle of those who respectfully
presented themselves as candidates for her election, a youth with whom her
gentle heart could unhesitatingly consent to inweave the silken bands of
tender, conjugal and indissoluble amity. But her choice once made, she deferred
not to banish from the bosom of him she approbated, that perturbed suspense
that so fatally corrodes each promised joy; and although her every step was
pointed by virgin delicacy, yet did she skilfully enwreath therewith a noble
and dignified frankness, which hushed that tumultuous whirlwind of the
passions, that has shipwrecked the peace of many a manly breast. Pity she was
not permitted to be uniformly explicit; but the maternal prohibition was
strangely and unaccountably interposed, and her nuptials were solemnized under
that disguise, which, although justifiable for a time, was most imprudently
continued, and should never have been worn in the presence of a man, whom, in
every other respect, she had honored by the most unbounded confidence; but she
remained perseveringly, reprehensibly silent! and this silence has been fatal
to her peace. The first years of her wedded life were uncommonly serene; she
bore to Altamont many fine children; and none but tranquil days seemed written
for her. How precarious are terrestrial joys! An untoward accident suddenly
reversed the scene. A paper, written by herself, and addressed to her mother,
breathing the language of ambiguity, deeply fraught with mystery, and yet
obscurely hinting at the truth, unfortunately met the eye of Altamont! To the
nicest sense of honor Atlamont is exquisitely alive -- the soul of ingenuity
is his, and the delicacy of his sentiments refuses to tolerate the most
distant appearance of deception. He drank in the contagious lines; every word
operated as an envenomed draught; and while he shrunk from the fearful
contents, they became, in effect, like those subtle poisons, which are said to
procure immediate death; for they infixed their deadly fangs in the very vitals
of that tranquillity, which he had fondly hoped was beyond the malice of fate.

Instantly the fiend, despair, embodied its ministers; they were busy about his
heart; complacency was chased from his bosom; the smiles of benevolence are no
more; a deep and settled melancholy lowers upon his brow; and the sullen
silence which he obstinately observes, effectually bars an eclaircissement. His
house, once the seat of social happiness -- now, alas! dire suspicion, dark
conjecture, and baleful jealousy, hover there; and although months and years
have revolved, no beam of elucidation has yet illumined those heartfelt
glooms, by which he is enveloped. The tear is upon the cheek of Eliza; and her
dream of happiness, of terrestrial happiness, is gone forever.

The deep melancholy which impressed the mind of Altamont, was immediately
succeeded by the most alarming estrangement; his temper seems totally ruined.
He regards the partner of his sufferings with a mistrustful kind of
indignation; she has lost his confidence; she has every reason to believe she
no longer possesses his affection; and, the probability is, that was she now to
come forward with a full and undisguised explanation, it would produce no
salutary effect; her vouchers, as we observed, are numbered with the dead;
Altamont is haughty and implacable, and Eliza, having once indisputably
deceived him, it is to be feared that he will yield her no future credence!!!

No. XXXIV.
Ten thousand ills from false conclusions rise;
Investigation often new views supplies.
With cautious steps let wary judgment tread,
And all her lights elucidation spread.

I HAVE for many weeks back, been largely in arrears to correspondents; and I
have frequently contemplated a Gleaner, which should be wholly occupied by
their various addresses, observations, and complaints. But such of my friends,
whose letters have been long since received, will have the goodness to forgive
my publishing those which have more recently come to hand, when they observe,
that the interesting subjects they take up, require immediate attention. And,
in the interim, I give them my word of honor, that my first unappropriated
Essay shall be devoted to their service. Having thus premised, I proceed to
bring forward three explanatory letters.

LETTER I.
To the GLEANER.
Liberty Hall, December 15th, 1794.
UPON my word, Mr. Gleaner, I believe you are a sly old fellow, after all. Let
me tell you, Sir, it ill suits with your assumed gravity, to be thus foisting
yourself into the secrets of all the young, handsome, married women of your
acquaintance. Mighty fine, mighty fine, truly. Delicacy, forsooth, forbid
Monimia to question her husband; but delicacy, it seems, did not think proper
to interfere, while she contrived to pour her pity-moving tale into the bosom
of nobody knows who -- one who is here, and there, and every where, and very
possibly not of much importance any where. A perfect Proteus to the
imagination, assuming a thousand fantastical forms, and becoming stationary in
no one respectable character; a bird of passage, emigrating from state to
state, and picking up a scanty pittance, after a whole month's toil, which but
ill repays the labor of traveling through the dull pages he is so studious to
multiply. You may think me severe, Mr. Gleaner, but I have the satisfaction of
knowing I am just; and I add, that you might have gone on with your itinerant
gleaning, to the end of the chapter, for me, if you had not roused the feelings
of an injured husband, by thus palpably insinuating, that you are a greater
favorite with his wife than he is himself! Really, Mr. Morality, you make a
very pretty consistent, heterogeneous figure; and I should like vastly to have
your motley image stuck up in a print-shop, by way of relief to the studies of
the chubby-faced schoolboy, as he trudges along the academical way to his
daily labors.

The wise man says, that laughter does good like a medicine; and it is
undeniably true, that the ludicrous is a wonderful specific in every
intellectual complaint. But let me whisper you, good Mr. Prig, you are a
coxcomb; and you may bless your stars that I am not able to collect the trio,
which you have huddled together in your last Gleaner; for, if I could name my
fellow sufferers, we would unite together in obtaining a most signal revenge;
but you are such a doughty hero, and, withal, so evanescent a spright, that you
elude the force of common exertions.

How you became acquainted with Monimia's tale of sorrow, is an enigma, of
which it will be conceived that delicacy forbids me to seek an explanation! The
probability is, that you have practiced upon her simplicity, and, insinuating
yourself into the good graces of the afflicted fair one, by some illicit
methods, you have at length obtained her confidence; and, as I am one of the
best natured men in the world, extending the scepter of my clemency, I shall
view, with proper indulgence, the imbecilities of nature. Doubtless, I could
have restored the tranquillity of my wife, without troubling either you or
myself with my observations; but, besides that I conceive your temerity merits
chastisement, as you have impertinently precipitated me, and an affair which
was wholly mine, to public view. I am induced to believe, that the
eclaircissement has thus acquired a kind of right to publicity.

Monimia will remember, that I not long since paid a visit to my relations at B
--. My kinsman S -- has a daughter, not yet twelve years old, who is very
ingenious, and handles her scissors to admiration; she cut my watch-paper, and
she will be proud of furnishing Monimia with any little fancy pieces which she
may wish. On my return home, I made a display of my acquisition. Monimia,
hastily and tremulously, made some round about inquiries, relative to the fair
artificer -- these I would not understand -- I dislike every symptom of
suspicion in ladies; suspicion looks so like jealousy, and jealousy looks so
like want of confidence, I remained silent, and affected a kind of, what the
ladies call, delicate embarrassment. Perhaps I was wrong; but had I been
apprised that the impression made by so light a thing as a watch-paper, could
have been so serious, I should certainly have endeavored to erase it.

I have, Mr. Meddler, the honor -- the honor -- no, that is wrong -- I have
not the honor -- I have the condescension to be, with honest wishes for your
reformation, and little or no esteem, your constant reader,

EUGENIO.


LETTER II.
To the GLEANER.
Candor-Place, December 18th, 1794. MR. VIGILLIUS,
AS you have given your examples under fictitious names, I am not furnished
with a rational cause of anger; and yet, Sir, you have so well pointed
circumstances, that it is impossible for the real claimant to avoid assuming
habiliments, which can fit no one but himself.

Mystery is indeed the parent of conjecture, and concealment most surely
engenders suspicion. Authors are doubtless justifiable, in procuring every
warrantable illustration of their sentiments, and of those inferences which
they wish to deduce; and even a desire to inform, or to improve, is entitled to
grateful respect. If my Clarissa, or her favored Altamont, can furnish either
amusement or instruction to the Gleaner and his numerous readers, any little
anecdote, relative to us, is extremely at their service. My Clarissa is more
dear to my soul than the lifeblood which warms me to existence; she has not,
she never had, nor ever can have, a rival in my affections. She reigns sole
mistress in my heart, and to her peerless virtues my every thought does homage.
Yet, while I avow a fealty so unreserved, I am bold enough to confess my
property in the beautifully glossy look of hair, a discovery of which has been
so surreptitiously obtained; that I have treasured up this lo^k of hair, I also
acknowledge; nor will I consent to part with it, until the last breath shall
quiver upon my lips. Further, my own hands severed the contested lock from the
head of a lovely female, who was dear to me as nature, as amity, or as my
fondest hopes of happiness. All this is most true; and it is likewise true,
that this female was not Clarissa!

Are you immeasurably astonished? Step to the other side of the piece, and it
will assume another hue. I am not a native of America; I have lived only five
years in this paradise of liberty. I had a sister -- good God! how unfortunate
was that sister! amiable as virtue, and indulgent as Heaven; she merited every
thing short of adoration, from that world which persecuted her, almost from the
first hour of her existence. Execrable world! -- the virtues of a Clarissa were
necessary to reconcile me to an abode among thy deeply designing and
treacherously murderous inhabitants! I have forborne to narrate to my Clarissa
the story of my sister's woes; her misfortunes were too strongly marked with
anguish, to be imposed upon the exquisitely tender feelings of that susceptible
bosom, which melts with soft regrets at the tale of woe, and which has a sigh
even for the common ills of life. Nay, those deplorable circumstances which
hovered round the steps of my ill-fated sister, I have sedulously sought to
blot even from my own memory. I would remember only her virtues, her angel
goodness, her beauteous image, and her saint-like fortitude; but, alas! those
recollections are so interwoven with the cruel events of her life, as to render
a separation impossible.

Orphanaged in her earliest bud; the sport of caprice, malice and duplicity,
through the unsuspecting morn of life; and, in her marriage choice, placing her
virtuous confidence in a man, who, by a specious exterior, villanously deceived
her; who wore the garb of integrity, honor, generosity, and a mild and
conceding disposition of soul, on purpose to betray her easy faith; who no
sooner exchanged the nuptial vow, than throwing off the mask, and commencing
tyrant, he became unweariedly ingenious in his devices to torment the victim of
his power; who persecuted her to the death, nor suspended, for a single moment,
his savage and detested operations, until, with a broken heart, she yielded up
her breath, falling the martyr of assumed prerogative, cruelty and despotism.

Angelic sufferer! mild and submissive, thou uttered no complaint; not a
vindictive expression escaped thee; and had thy murderer possessed but common
prudence, the knowledge of thy unprecedented wrongs would have been consigned
to the grave with thee. Through all thy hard fortune, I followed still an
impotent spectator of thy injuries; but, while appearances were preserved,
custom forbid a brother's interference, and an impeachment of thy husband's
character would have been an incurable wound to thy delicacy. What shall I
further say? He who made her, regarding her with sacred pity, the pity of a
God, her emancipation was accelerated, and she drew her last breath in my arms!
I saw her lovely bosom surcease the corroding sigh; I saw her heavenly form
quietly disposed upon the bed of death; and, my Clarissa, it was in that
agonized moment, that I severed from its kindred tresses, the shining ringlet,
which, straying from its enclosure, fell unconscious upon her snowy forehead.

I grieve that it has been to you the source of inquietude; but its value, at
that distressing period, appeared to me immense; nor has reason or time
essentially depreciated its importance. I could never persuade myself to part
with it to an artist, who would have ostensibly returned it to me, in the form
of cherubs, urns and inscriptions; for I have still preferred contemplating its
natural beauties; and I employed my first serene moments in preparing those
lines, in which to enshrine it, that have been erroneously called poetical. For
the gratification of the curiosity of your readers, Mr. Gleaner, I take leave
to subjoin a copy of them: AH! then is the conflict no more?
And has she forgotten to weep?
Will naught the (...) vision restore?
Has pity no la^^^^ to reap?
How loud was that shriek of despair?
The blossoms of hope are all shed,
No altars to friendship I rear,
For friendship and honor are fled.
The ties are all broke which remained,
The storm has uprooted my peace;
Dark malice its purpose has gained,
And love from my bosom shall cease.
How bright was the morn of her days!
How charming the bud of her years!
Her form, it transcended all praise,
And her sorrow was virtue in tears.
How soothing the words of her tongue!
While harmony wasted the strain,
The (...) melodiously sung,
And gladden'd the listening swain.
Fright honor enlisted the (...),
(...) she hailed,
(...) to prepare,
The (...) al^ars un^^^'d.
But envy, with serpentine tread,
And (...) with it (...),
The (...) outspread,
How deadly the arrows they (...)!
What glooms have pervaded the plain,
The shepherds are silent around,
Neglected each sweet flowing strain;
So deep is the fettering wound.
And must I her counsels resign,
The guide and the star of my youth?
Must friendship no longer be mine,
Integrity, kindness, and truth?
Alas! no loved solace sustains;
How deep is the void in my breast!
This ringlet is all that remains
Of what I so largely possessed!
Dear vestige of pleasures enjoyed,
By cruelty snatched from my grasp,
By rancour insatiate destroyed,
Though still the sweet shadows I clasp.
Momento of friendship possessed.
On nature which blossomed and grew,
And deep on my bosom impressed,
As innocence tender and true.
Although you unconscious entwine,
Yet beauty your texture designed;
Sweet reli^^ of charms that were mine,
Of elegance bland and refined.
My pensive regrets you shall aid,
Companion of every woe,
Of sorrow the talisman made,
While my tears all unceasing shall flow.


The reader will indulge his own reflections; and I have chosen this method of
making my communications to Clarissa; as the emotions which swell my bosom,
when I would attempt to retrace the misfortunes of my injured sister, are too
big for utterance.

I am, Sir, with due respect, and unfeigned wishes for your private felicity,
and public celebrity, your most obedient humble servant,

ALTAMONT.


LETTER III.
To the GLEANER.
Sententious Alley, No. 3, December 21st, 1794. COURTEOUS GLEANER,
IF Cordelia will take the trouble to order her servant to make the proper
inquiries at Mr. Lovegold, the jeweller's, in Middle-street, she will find that
her sleeve-buttons are laid up there, for the purpose of obtaining the
necessary repairs. As Cordelia and you seem to understand one another, I
thought best to give her this information through the channel of your paper.

I am, most profound and sage Sir, the inconsiderate, and timely admonished

HENRY.


"Malice does merit, as its shade, pursue."
I could very modestly propose myself as a new proof of the truth of this
oft-cited sentiment, which if I mistake not, time and observation has elevated
into an approved axiom. I could, I say, leaving those who are offended to chew
the cud of resentment, easily console myself, by so convenient an
appropriation; but I freely confess, that I set a high value upon the opinion
of the world; I mean the worthy part of the world, to be sure; and that thus
stimulated, I feel myself impelled to make my defense, by producing a short
sketch of my plan of operations.

When I was first seized with the mania of scribbling, I very wisely
endeavored to combat it by much deliberate consideration, and many a salutary
antidote. Wisdom, attired in the alluring habiliments of tranquillity, and
armed with the rhetoric of reason, sagely advanced her plea, and with great
perspicuity, and energy of argument, she advocated that kind of serenity, which
is the accompaniment of the unambitious man: who, gliding down the stream of
time, inhaleth not the feverish gale; but wafted onward by the equal breath of
contentment, partakes its mildly influence, and lives but to bless the gently
undulating zephyr, that is thus silently impelling him athwart that ocean, upon
which the adventurous voyager is fated to contend with hopes and fears, and
with all those tumultuous winds of passion, which frequently involving him in a
fearful hurricane, fail not to wreck his peace, whelming beneath their
tremendous waves the brightest moments of his existence! Wisdom pointed out the
wretched state of inquietude, anxiety, nightly watchings, and daily fatigues,
to which that unhappy and misguided wight is condemned, who, betrayed by an
ignis fatuus, is allured from the humble vale of soft and silent repose; from
the calm possession of each social and domestic enjoyment, to encounter the
various ills attendant upon a pursuit of artificial good. Wisdom enumerated a
host of weary toils, of woe-begone regrets, of unrecompensed deeds of worth, of
thankless achievements, and of barbed disappointments; and she painted in
glowing colors the ingratitude of that world to which I would madly devote
those hours, that might otherwise revolve, marked by the most refined, rational
and exquisite satisfaction.

Wisdom delineated the thorny circles which begirt the hill of fame; she bid me
haste from the magic of her voice, from the mad contagion of her votaries; and,
sheltering in the sweet and flowery walks of humility, she conjured me to
embosom my aspiring views in the deepest recesses of my native shades; and,
that she might forever dash my proud pretensions, and invigorate that despair,
which, with icy grasp, and torpid influence, hovered round my steps, she
represented in forms tremendously terrific, those deadly fiends, that with
ghastly features, and unrelenting rigor, eternally guard the glittering domes
of same. Envy, with snaky locks, empoisoned veins, and pestilential breath --
Malice, with tongue envenomed, armed with ten thousand shafts of instant death,
and smiling at destruction -- Pale disappointment, marked by sorrow's train,
with sad and solemn step, heaving corroding sighs, quaffing her copious tears,
and in despondence garbed -- and, last of all, deep shame, with face averted,
eyes withdrawn, and red consuming anguish, confessed thy power, heart
appalling, spirit wounding, soul abashing scorn. Afflicting ridicule -- satires
dread sting -- the critic's whip, which hissed along the air -- with every
plague which a poor author ever knew -- these Wisdom summoned, and in fearful
order the direful phalanx stood.

Yet my aspiring mind, steeled for the conflict, all in armor clad, and
shielded by temerity -- assuming resolution, and armed by pertinacity, presumed
with daring steps, and enterprizing rashness, to penetrate the embodied
opposition, and Reason plead in vain. Headlong ambition, all precepts
notwithstanding, continued inflexibly persevering, and triumphed in the
conflict. Ambition selected its ornaments, and it wore on its left breast,
close to the heart, a bouquet, whose perfumed buds were, with intrepid daring,
snatched from the stock of ever blooming hope. In this it prided much, and
fondly fancied that some future day, bedecked with sunny beams, would give the
deathless flowre^s to enwreath its time distinguished, time adorned brow. Thus
breathing mid such odoriferous airs; incense so sweet inhaling, intoxicated
reason, treading enchanted ground, by magic spells enfolded, and wrapped in gay
delusion, its firmness lost -- Ambition seized the reins -- the die was cast --
and helter-skelter round the world we drove.

But, seriously, although thus rashly embarked, judgment occasionally
officiates; and while temerity sets at the helm, she often, matron like,
interposes her cautionary directions, and to be duly influenced by her
counsels, is a prime object, even in the arrangements of ambition.

There is hardly any thing I have so much feared, as the sands of oblivion; and
that I might produce a stream of sufficient depth to fleet my little skiff, my
faculties, diligently exercised, have been almost constantly employed. Mankind
have generally furnished my reservoir; and I have set in the circles which I
frequent, industriously improving a hint, marking the sentiment of worth,
catching every unwrought gem, and eagerly availing myself of those
circumstances, which I conceived I might honestly appropriate. Names I have
been careful to conceal; and studiously embelishing events, and qualifying them
to convey amusement, information, or even instruction, I have produced them as
candidates for the attention of a vacant moment. Thus occupied, it will cease
to be matter of surprise, that I have treasured even the whispers of
conversation; my ear is constantly on duty, and it has proved to me a truly
faithful scout. Collected in myself, I am often regarded as a mute in society;
but I am careful to hoard every remark, and bearing the multifarious burden to
my working hive, it undergoeth a chemical process; and, after receiving in my
pericranium the destined form, it is with all due humility submitted to public
observation.

Thus Eugenio, if he will give his candor full play, may perceive, that
without being the favorite confidante, " of all the young, handsome married
women of my acquaintance," I may, the loquacity of the sex considered, legally
become possessed of secrets, which are whispered to select friends, which are
gathered from mysterious words, and which sometimes result from those
expressive looks, in which the female world are such proficients, and which
they so well know when to assume. On the whole, while I have generally aimed at
utility, I have studiously endeavored to avoid all occasion of offense; but if
my honest intentions have not been crowned with success, as it is impossible to
recall the past, I can only assure Eugenio, and every reader of his description,
that I will be indefatigably industrious to render my future numbers less
exceptionable.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
THE GLEANER.

A MISCELLANEOUS PRODUCTION.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY CONSTANTIA.

Slow to condemn, and seeking to commend,
Good sense will with deliberation scan;
To trivial faults unwilling to descend,
If Virtue gave, and formed the general plan.
VOL. II.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, FAUST's STATUE, No. 45,
Newbury-Street.

FEB. 1798.

CONTENTS of the SECOND VOLUME.
No. XXXV. SENTIMENTS on education 5 No. XXXVI. Subject continued 13 No.
XXXVII. Letters to the Gleaner, from various correspondents 21 No. XXXVIII.
Answer to Mr. Plodder -- Disadvantages attending the life of a bachelor --
Marriage of Miss Clifford 34 No. XXXIX. Remarks on Captain Seafort's letter --
Advice to Miss Seafort -- Story of Alphonso and Lavinia 47 No. XL. Answer to
Miss Primrose and Monimia -- Sketch of the dress of Margaretta and Miss
Clifford -- Answer to Miss Aimwell -- Thoughts on Clarissa Harlowe -- Letter to
Margaretta -- Remarks on the Count de Poland 59 No. XLI. Letter from Margaretta
to her mother -- Answer to that letter -- Margaretta accused -- Rules for her
conduct 72 No. XLII. Letter from Margaretta to her mother -- Her amiable and
ingenuous acknowledgments still more endear her to her friends -- Further rules
for her conduct 82 No. XLIII. Letter from Margaretta -- The answer -- Instance
of her uncommon excellence -- Strictures on Evelina 94 No. XLIV. Letter to
Margaretta, consoling her on the death of Horatio, and proposing several
interesting subjects for her consideration -- Margaretta's responces 106 No.
XLV. Letter to Margaretta, containing remarks on eminent characters 115 No.
XLVI. To the same -- Strictures on Aristides -- Eulogium on Alfred the Great
124 No. XLVII. To the same -- Sketch of the life of Mary, Queen of Scots 135
No. XLVIII. To the same -- Continuation 147 No. XLIX. To the same --
Continuation 158 No. L. To the same -- Sketch of Mary, Queen of Scots,
concluded 166 No. LI. To the same -- Sketch of the life of Henry IV. King of
France 177 No. LII. To the same -- Observations on Charles I. of England, and
Peter I. Czar of Russia 192 No. LIII. To the same -- Remarks on William Penn --
Letter from the Gleaner to Miss Sophia Aimwell 202 No. LIVE. Propriety of
decreeing public rewards to eminently virtuous actions 211 No. LV. Advantages
of calling into action our own abilities, illustrated by a fact 218 No. LVI.
Subject continued 224 No. LVII. Essay on plagiarism 230 No. LVIII. Story of
Claudius, of Pelatiah Carewell, and of Flauntinetta 239 No. LIX. Virtue
inherent in the human mind -- Story of Acetus and Adrastus, founded in fact 246
No. LX. Reflections on Thanksgiving Day 253 No. LXI. Easy method of being
always in the right -- Character of Patronius 260 No. LXII. Spirit independent
of matter 26^ No. LXIII. Uneducated genius -- Its achievements entitled to
superior admiration 274 No. LXIV. Dignified condescension, descriptive of real
greatness of mind -- Anecdotes of Mrs. Wright 281 No. LXV. Pleasures attendant
on journeying in the Spring -- Letter from Miss Harriot B -- 288 No. LXVI.
Eulogy on Mr. Joseph Russell 297 No. LXVII. Eulogy on the Hon. Thomas Russell,
Esquire. 304 No. LXVIII. Fallacy of expectation -- Fable of La Forete Noire 311
THE GLEANER.
No. XXXV.
Wisdom with careful hand her flowerets strews,
Knowledge in its persuasive charms s^e shows;
She tempts the voyager over the destined way,
And wins him by indulgence to obey.
Plows, in her system, seldom find a place,
(...) worth is not the offspring of disgrace;
The flexile plant bends to the vernal gale,
While in the blast, its leaves and blossoms fail.

"TAKE away this child," said the late benevolent Dr. Cooper, while seated with
the celebrated Dr. Franklin, in a little retired breakfasting parlour -- Take
away this child -- her questions interrupt our conversation, and are an
impertinent intrusion upon the enjoyments of an hour, devoted to an
entertainment of the highest kind. "Nay, nay," cried the philosopher -- let her
stay, let her stay; she is a stranger in our world, and she has a right to make
her inquiries relative to the manners and customs of the people, among whom,
the probability is, she has many years to sojourn.

Men and women are too haughty, and form too elevated conceptions of the
distance between them and the little race of mortals who are, for a season,
their dependants. There is a freedom of access, and a chastized familiarity,
which is very compatible with a due spirit of government; but mild dignity is
an association too little known, and too rarely exemplified in the present
order of things.

The trust reposed in parents and preceptors, is indeed important; the
character of the rising generation is in their gift, and the peace or anarchy
of society must result from them. When we consider how few parents are endowed
by nature, or qualified by improvement, for the judicious as discharge of
duties so essential, we are almost ready to give our voice in favor of that
plan, which, in a certain celebrated community, placed their youth under the
tutelage of the State, commiting their education to persons deliberately
chosen, and properly qualified for their high office. Yet, against this
arrangement, the authority derived from the Father of the universe, forcibly
pleads! The feelings of the parent indignantly revolt; and my right to direct
my own child, is, in my own estimation, unquestionable. Well then, there
remains but one remedy -- Let the cultivation of the minds of the man and
woman, in miniature, be of that description which will, in future, enable them
to assume with advantage, the guardianship of their descendants.

Much, in this momentous department, depends on female administration; and the
mother, or the woman to whom she may delegate her office, will imprint on the
opening mind, characters, ideas and conclusions, which time, in all its variety
of vicissitudes, will never be able to erase.

Surely then, it is politic to bestow upon the education of girls the most
exact attention: Let them be able to converse correctly and elegantly, (in
their native strains) with the children they may usher into being; and, since
the pronunciation is best fixed in the early part of life, let them be
qualified to give the little proficients a pleasing impression of the French
language; nor, it is conceived, ought it to be considered as unsexual, if they
were capacitated to render the rudiments of the Latin tongue familiar. An
acquaintance with history would capacitate mothers to select their nursery
tales from those transactions which have actually taken place upon our globe,
and thus useful knowledge would supersede fairy legendary witches, and
hob-goblins. Geography also might be introduced, and the little prattlers, by
information that the great globe whereon they move, has received the form of
that orange which so pleasingly regales their palate, would, ere they were
aware, be ushered to the avenues of instruction. Astronomy too may lend its
aid; the blazing fire may represent the sun, and the little bird revolving to
its flame, on which they so impatiently wait to feast, under the direction of
the well informed and judicious tutoress, may gradually account for light and
heat, the grateful vicissitudes of night and day, with the alternate succession
of the seasons; and thus would the task of the future preceptor be rendered
easy, a thirst for knowledge created, and the threshold of wisdom strewed with
flowers.

But children commonly pass from the hands of their parents to that of their
tutors at a very early period; and was I invested with the powers of
legislation, or was the gift of conferring honors mine, there is no order of
citizens which I would so liberally endow, and raise to such distinction, as
those individuals who devote themselves to the education of youth. But then
they should be persons unquestionably qualified for their office, and entitled
beyond all controversy to the approbation of their country. Arduous is the
undertaking -- the first abilities are requisite -- and it is impossible to
rate too high the worth of those who are thus suitably accomplished. Permit me,
reader, to sketch the outlines of the character of a Preceptor whom I should
delight to honor. Imagination this moment presents him -- he blends exquisite
sensibility with uniform patience -- he is remarkably enduring -- never hasty
or impetuous -- calmly deliberate in all his movements -- carefully
investigating, nor ever inflicting punishments, but such as both in quantity
and quality are righteously due. He possesses extensive knowledge of the
science or sciences which he teaches -- he is free from every external blemish,
and remarkable for no unfortunate singularity -- his manners are elegant, and
in the best sense of the word descriptive of the gentleman. He is celebrated
for benevolence -- he is an indisputable philanthropist -- he possesses the
happy secret of assimilating dignity and condescension -- his inborn integrity
is undoubted, and he is master of sufficient address to obtain an entire
ascendency over the minds of his pupils -- a stranger to prejudice, he is,
strictly speaking, impartial -- and, to say all in one word, he embodies every
virtue of which humanity is susceptible: Nor is the sketch too highly wrought,
for it is assuredly true, that to accommodate the mind to the various
dispositions to be found in a large school, and so to understand the
intellectual arrangement of each individual as to be capable of rendering him
the important services, which are necessary, must indisputably require every
excellence, and the utmost perfection of our nature.

The austere man can never be successful; he will banish smiles from the face
of that season which (...) made for joy; and if the student is not uncommonly
endowed by nature, he will create in him an aversion to his book. Severity will
always operate upon the opening mind, like the chilling blasts of winter upon
the tender plant; it droops its blighted head, its powers are rendered torpid,
its strength is prostrated, and it is well, if the progressing principle (if I
may so express myself) which is at present latent, does not become wholly
extinct. Blows are the most easy expedient, and are, perhaps for that reason,
too often resorted too -- the castigation of the boy, frequently gratifies the
passions of the master, and he is sometimes vindictive and inhuman in his
punishments. If the giving a wrong sound to a letter, or forgetting a sentence,
is to be marked by blows -- what resource, permit me to ask, has the Preceptor
in the event of capital crimes? A man who is himself free from error, or, which
will have the same effect upon his pupils, who is studious to conceal his
foibles from their knowledge, who is solicitous to attach them to his person,
and who carefully impresses an idea of his own affection toward them, who
labors to obtain their confidence, and makes free use of that noble incentive,
Praise -- such a man will seldom, I imagine, find it necessary to have recourse
to severity; and it is incontestibly true, that punishments, especially blows,
should be repeated as seldom as possible; for assuredly, nothing can be
obtained by rendering the little offender callous, familiarizing him to
disgrace, or banishing from his bosom the hope of unblemished reputation. The
first offenses of children, whatever may be their nature, should invariably be
considered as venial; and it would be always right, if practicable, to convict
them without a witness -- we cannot be too solicitous to spare them he first
^lush of guilt; the second will not be so deep, and they will too soon leap the
boundaries of innocence. I would affect to suppose them incapable of the
turpitude of a criminal action; and I would constantly repeat, while there
remained the least shadow of probability for such an avowal, that I was
confident they would never debase themselves by the infamy of deliberate vice;
thus, it is possible, that the fear of forfeiting our supposed good opinion
would engage them silently to tread back the path they have reprehensibly
entered.

I remember, some time since, being greatly shocked at receiving an account of
an arrangement (which I would fain hope is singular) in a certain school of
some celebrity, situated in one of our seaports not far distant from the
metropolis. Rewards are offered, and every method taken to prove a crime --
say, for example, a falsehood. While the child, in all the simplicity of
infantile confidence, remains unconscious of the conspiracy formed against him!
Irrefragable conviction is at length obtained, and the culprit is immediately
proclaimed throughout the school -- he is entered upon the lying list, and
takes his seat upon a range which produces him a proper subject for the
ill-natured ridicule of the whole flock. Nor is this enough -- his name is
written in capitals with the ignominious term, Liar, at the end of it. The
defamatory sentence is posted up in some conspicuous place, for the inspection,
not only of the children, but of every individual who may happen to visit the
school; and this mark of infamy once affixed, is not taken down as long as the
aggressor continues a student in this seminary!!! My face glows with
indignation, while penning this relation. What has the little wretch to hope
for under such tuition; after such a procedure, (laboring under the weight of
a most opprobrious verdict, and the victim of unwarrantable severity) where
will he find spirits to pursue, with the requisite alacrity, his appointed
studies? Or how can he advantageously receive lessons from the mouth of him,
who has thus unmercifully blistered his reputation? Are not the ill effects of
this arrangement both upon the school in general, and the offender in
particular, sufficiently obvious? Is not undue degradation, envy, rancour,
implacability, everlasting, disgrace, and consequent despair, thus
systematized, and embattled against that order, harmony, and improvement, which
would inevitably result from the adoption of a mild spirit of government?
Gracious God! -- but let me exercise the patience that I would recommend as the
uniform companion and bosom friend of the preceptor, and of which a view of the
situation to which the foregoing discipline, or, more properly speaking,
infamous tyranny, must reduce the offending student, had well near deprived me
-- and let me, with all due deference to the general merit, and superior
abilities of the gentleman, who will feel himself interested in this
representation, calmly ask, would it not be more judicious to aim at acting the
part of an invisible spy, continuing a silent observer of every action until
the transgression is evident or strongly suspected, and even then would it not
be well to follow the offender by private admonitions -- to address his reason;
to enlist his affections; to delineate in forcible language his error, and
energetically to describe the tremendous consequences of an obstinate adherence
to guilty pursuits? Public shame, in the recess of a private interview, might
be flashed in his face; probably he would shrink from its horrors, and the hope
of escaping so indelible an evil, might engage him to return to the haunts of
virtue -- might ensure his dereliction of vice.

Many of my readers will recollect the method pursued by Gang^nell, when an
inferior Ecclesiastic, for the recovery of a beloved and notorious offender;
and all who do, will not fail to applaud. It is, however, a melancholy truth,
that these mild efforts will not always procure a reformation. But surely,
previous to a publication of disgrace, a consultation of parents or guardians
should be obtained; and as those deeply interested characters ought invariably
to coalesce with the preceptors in whom they confide, no important step should
be taken, without their knowledge and approbation. I am aware that this
precludes the idea of secrecy in regard to school discipline; and I must
confess, that I seriously wish the telling tales out of school, was no longer
held up as a bugbear to children, and that the terror it has so long excited,
was entirely abolished. Rectitude submits its administration to the
strictest scrutiny; the more it is known, the more it is admired; and the
arrangements of equity soliciteth inquiry.

The magnitude of my subject, bars the supposition that it can be too warmly
expatiated upon. Children, I insist, should be brought forward with gentleness.
The wise king of Israel was not always wise; and when he is found so petulantly
exclaiming, " Spare the rod and spoil the child," the probability is, that,
crowded upon by the ill-regulated offspring of his illicit and multifarious
amors, he had lost that balance of equanimity, which is so proper to the
philosopher. The tutor should never be permitted to act the part of a despot;
he should ever be free of access, and while he uniformly preserves a mild
spirit of government, the pupil, under proper regulations, should be permitted
a sufficient latitude of inquiry.

Every anxious parent experiences the difficulty of obtaining a preceptor, to
whom he can confide the care of his children. But if the emoluments of the
office were proportioned to the solicitude and importance of the undertaking,
if it was more honorary, and if there were greater distinctions annexed
thereto, an adequate number of candidates, of meritorious candidates, would
present. Countless advantages would accrue to families, and consequences the
most beneficial, would result to the community at large.

The ancients, we are told, formed such just ideas of the nature and momentous
consequences of education, as to esteem the cultivation of the minds of their
young people among their most dignified offices; and persons of the first
consideration, possessing affluence, and obtaining general confidence, engaged
in the arduous task, delighting to employ themselves in shaping the principles,
and pointing the views, of those who were to succeed them in the great drama of
life. And was not this perfectly right? The good preceptor is of course
ennobled; and no just reason can be given why he should not take rank in the
highest grade of the community. For my own part, I again repeat, that
deliberate reflection upon the nature of his duties, and the magnitude of those
effects which frequently depend upon his regency, has constrained me to regard
him as more consequential, and of higher importance, than even the authority
which is constituted supreme in any country; nay, further, that school dame,
reduced by adverse circumstances to confer the rudiments of instruction, and to
call into action the latent seeds of worth, is of more value (supposing she
judiciously and faithfully performs the trust reposed in her) in the great
scale of excellence, than she, who, from considerations of wealth or beauty,
receives the adulation of gathering crowds. This is an obvious truth, inasmuch
as it is the exertions of the tutoress, succeeded by the more extensive
operations of the preceptor, that will render easy the seat of the magistrate,
and supercede the necessity of coercive interposition, giving universal order
to take place, as naturally as the hours succeed each other, or as the
blessings of light proceed from the ^rb of day. From whence is derived the
felicity of families? Undoubtedly from a due regulation of the individuals of
which they are composed, and particularly from a proper arrangement of the
young people who constitute such important parts thereof. From what source
results the well-being of the great body of the people? Indisputably from the
information, correct movements, and order of its members. And is not the due
qualification of teachers, and the faithful discharge of the duties of their
office, the broad and solid basis, on which is erected the superstructure of
whatsoever is necessary in the economy of private life, public usefulness, or
general celebrity? I say then, if these things are true, let us encourage by
every means the worthy preceptor; let us cherish him as the origin of virtue;
and while we discountenance every vestige of tyranny, let us firmly resolve to
strengthen the hands of those, to whom we have deliberately confided the care
of our children.

No. XXXVI.
My son must study -- Learning is a prize --
Her ample stores the mental ^^nd supplies --
And first a parent language he must trace,
Its subtleties, its value, and its grace:
The various parts of speech di^^ect, combine,
And in their ranks the governed words confine:
Thus the foundation takes its proper place,
Embosom'd science rising on its base.

"GOOD Mr. Gleaner," said a rural friend of mine, I think you lose ground by
the prolixity of your numbers; and, to say truth, you often remind me of Farmer
Straggleford, who whimsically erected a number of huge enormous granaries,
which, when completed, remained monuments of his ostentation, for having
rendered himself, by his prodigious exertions, and the extensiveness of his
plans, an insolvent debtor; his buildings, of course, contain nothing of value,
indeed they are nearly unoccupied, and he is regarded as a poor bankrupt, who
has been the fabricator of his own conspicuous insignificancy. Now, had
neighbor Straggleford contented himself with a snug little barn, he might have
kept his grounds, and, storing it every year with the ripened produce of the
season, he might --

Say no more, Brother Thrifty, cried I -- say no more; I perfectly understand
you, although it must be confessed your illustration is rather far fetched;
yet, trust me, it shall be my endeavor in future to circumscribe, as much as
possible, my excursive rambles; and agreeable to this determination I abridge a
number of sheets, that I had entitled an essay on education, confining myself
to a few observations, which I most unfeignedly wish may be duly considered.

The question whether private or public education is of the most general
utility, has agitated the minds, and employed the pens, of many ingenious
writers; but the subject, as far as I am informed, still remains problematical;
nor shall I arrogantly pretend to decide where those Doctors of literature so
widely disagree. Yet the Gleaner, without incurring the charge of temerity, may
perhaps be permitted to ask whether it would not be wisdom to defer the choice
of public or private tuition, until the disposition of the child is
ascertained? The modest, diffident mind, may stand in need of all those
stimulatives that are in the gift of a large school. Retiring efforts are often
roused to action by emulation; and that fame which a conspicuous situation
frequently confers, may at once allure, and give a motive to ambition. There
are minds, peculiarly attuned to all the sensibilities, which are at once the
cement, the ornament, and the source of those gentler virtues that connect,
that meliorate, and that actuate beings who combine, and who are formed to
cultivate the endearing charities, the elegancies, and the blessings of social
life. To accommodate an intellect of this description to the multifarious and
frequently discordant scenes that are to be encountered in a world, where
ill-judged asperities too often wound the exquisitely delicate feelings of
susceptibility, a various and extensive intercourse with mankind may be
necessary. But the boy, whose bold aspiring temper precipitates him upon an
undue assumption of importance, who suddenly rushes forward to those
distinctions, which are only proper to maturity; such a boy, methinks, should
receive the checks of retirement; should be formed to knowledge and to virtue,
amid the shades of sequestered life; care being taken to furnish him with those
views, which may gradually accustom him to a proper estimation of himself.

My wishes, relative to the instruction of young people, comprise every thing
which can be considered as useful or ornamental; but I am especially
solicitous, that they should be made critically acquainted with that language,
in which they are destined to converse, transact business, and adjust their
pleasurable pursuits. Some of my acquaintance have made greater proficiency in
many branches of study, than in their mother tongue; and I know persons who can
pass rapidly through a Latin author, who cannot easily trace the lineage or
description of the several parts of speech in their native English; who cannot
readily decline a noun; who hesitate with respect to the cases nominative,
possessive, and objective; and who are at a loss to follow the verb through
number, person, mood, and tense.

Latidius should be a good Latin scholar; he has received the honors of a
university; and yet it is a fact, that Latidius cannot write a billet, in which
an English grammarian will not be able to point out, I had almost said, as many
errors as there are lines! Is Latidius censurable for this deficiency? Perhaps
he is much less so than those who had the direction of his education. Great
care was taken to usher him into the world, perfectly accomplished in every
requisite except his vernacular tongue; but, while engaged in the study of the
dead languages, he was never taught a due deference for, or proper estimation
of, his own:

I should not be satisfied, if my sons and daughters did not speak, read, and
write English, grammatically, critically, and even elegantly. Perhaps the
accurate observer may, at this moment, shrewdly remark -- Surely, be who takes
upon himself the character of Dictator, or arrogantly assumes the seat of the
Censor, ought to be perfectly free from the errors which he condemns. This is
assuredly true; and, to the well-meaning and candid objector, I calmly answer
-- I have no where proposed myself as a model: It may be, that I am
experimentally qualified to descant upon the disadvantages attendant upon early
inattention. For aught thou know, the Gleaner may have been doomed to the
toilsome drudgery of gleaning his information, when years, diminishing the
flexibility of the mental faculties, have rendered it difficult for them to
receive impressions; and, if I am thus circumstanced, I may be allowed to
delineate the inconveniences of, and energetically to lament a deficiency from
which I so essentially suffer. Admitting, I say, this to be the case, I may,
with the strictest propriety and the utmost consistency, proceed to point out
the shoals which too often impede, and frequently wholly arrest my progress.

One thing is certain; for the rising generation, the devout orisons of my
spirit are daily breathed. I have written primarily for my amusement -- Truth
is my pole star -- I would contribute my mite to benefit my fellow-mortals -- I
have not designed ill -- and, if I err, I humbly entreat those who confer on my
pages the honor of a perusal, to impute my errors rather to my head than to my
heart.

The modern literati are generally sufficiently liberal in the eulogies which
they bestow on the ancients; and, as imitation is commonly the offspring of
admiration, is it not wonderful, they do not more frequently tread in their
steps? Neither the Greeks nor the Romans incumbered themselves with a variety
of tongues; their own language always obtained a just pre-eminence, and never
failed of engaging their earliest and most unremitted application. The result
was, natural children were qualified to converse, and to express themselves on
paper, with elegance and accuracy; they were initiated, in the morning of their
days, into an acquaintance with all the varieties of grammar; they could
delineate the several parts of speech; the intricacies of their language were
rendered familiar to their understandings; they were capable of determining its
compass, and of analyzing every sentence; they could, with the greatest
precision, resolve each component word, placing it under its original head or
description; And hence, it is said, (and the conjecture is founded in reason)
proceeded those works of educated genius, which have stood the test of time,
extorting a tribute of applause from every succeeding generation.

If I mistake not, (and upon this occasion I do what I seldom do -- trust to
the tenacity of my memory) there were periods, when the Romans, measuring the
importance of their language by the dignity of their rational character,
disdained the study even of the Greek tongue. Victors are fond of imposing
their laws, their customs, and their language; and the universal prevalence of
any particular mode of speech, would be one step toward the introduction of
universal dominion. National attachment should, therefore, dictate the studious
cultivation of a national language; and it may be worthy the exertions of an
enlightened legislature, to erect a standard, to raise, to dignify, to perfect,
and to polish a common tongue.

Is the student designed for the profession of any particular art or science, a
vernacular language must be the vehicle of his ideas. Gentlemen at the bar
deliver their harangues in their mother tongue; in native strains they address
the impannelled jury, and justice frequently hangs upon their forcible,
intelligent, and well constructed periods. The sacred Orator addresses his
listening audience in familiar accents. The Representatives of our free,
sovereign and independent States -- Senators enrobed with power -- Chief
Justices delivering their solemn charges -- and our august President, the
Patriot WASHINGTON, invested with all that authority which virtuous liberty can
confer, with every intervening grade -- are all found delivering their
sentiments, and arresting attention, in the well known sounds which designate
the English tongue.

Letters are indisputably the elements of language; and the due arrangement,
and fit construction of those words which they compose, is the broad basis on
which towers the arts and sciences, forming, in their several orders, a
superstructure replete with elegance, beauty and usefulness. It is from this
source that the orator must draw his materials; poets too submit to its
admeasurement; and the grave historian must be tried by its rules. Indeed, an
early acquaintance with the nature, construction and latitude of a vernacular
language, is of such importance to every class of people, that it is wonderful
there should be found parents and preceptors who can preserve their equanimity,
while conscious that those committed to their charge are, in this truly
essential part of education, almost totally neglected.

The train of reflections introduced by my subject, at this moment presents to
my mind a person, who is now suffering much from this unnatural omission; and,
as examples often enforce conviction more effectually than general remarks, I
present him by way of illustration.

Leontius, born in the midst of affluence, was nursed in the lap of plenty; and
being the only son of deserving parents, who were generally judicious in their
arrangements, his education was regarded as a matter of the greatest moment. No
expense was spared; and his preceptors were rewarded for their exertions not
only with a liberal, but with a lavish hand. He had hardly completed his sixth
year, when it was judged necessary he should commence his studies of the Latin
tongue; and from that moment, hurried on from one stage of erudition to
another, no portion of time was found to attend to his progress in that
language, from which he was in a great measure to derive his future
respectability. It was absurdly supposed, (if indeed it ever obtained a place
in the reflections of either parents or tutor) that English would be a matter
of course; and thus the boy was left to form unto himself a style, just as whim
or caprice might direct. For a place at a celebrated seminary he was early
presented a candidate; his acceptance was full and honorary -- ^e passed
through the university, attending the accustomed routine of instruction, and,
enriched with academical applause, he received his first degree. Thus endowed,
he made his entree upon society, better qualified to figure in any walk than as
an English scholar. Without arrogating the gift of prophecy, it was easy to
predict an event, which was precisely that which reason would have calculated.
Awkward and untaught, his education had in effect produced him a stranger to
those scenes in which he was hourly called upon to take a part. If he assayed
the, to him, arduous task of entertaining his friends with an English book,
false pronunciation, emphasis, and accent, were visible in every paragraph;
comma's assumed the distinction of full stops, while the finely turned period
lost all its beauty: Colons, semicolons, notes of interrogation and admiration,
these were all promiscuously huddled together; and while by one continued
monotony of sound, ideas were jumbled, and the auditory nerve disgusted, it was
in vain that his hearers fatigued themselves by an expectation of the sentiment
of an author. Harmonious accents, delicate inflexions of voice, and that
animation, or energetic propriety, which is the vehicle of intelligence -- of
these he had no idea; he seemed in effect the determined foe of good reading,
and he ought to have been arraigned as the murderer of sense. Candor would,
however, have appeared as his advocate; and she might truly have specified,
that such erroneous conclusions had obtained in his bosom, as taught him to
regard every thing merely English with a sensation bordering upon contempt;
and, she would have added, that he had been unavoidably precipitated upon these
conclusions, by the total silence of his preceptors. As a writer, too, Leontius
is highly deficient; and a girl who is dependent upon her needle for her
support, supposing she has been properly educated, ought to blush if she could
not surpass him in the correctness of her epistolary productions.

Yet it was expected that our young gentleman would attain eminence, deserve
well of his country, and make his way to popularity among a race of beings who
spoke, wrote, declaimed, and transacted their commercial concerns, altogether
in English. Leontius was bred to no business; he was, as has been intimated,
born to high pecuniary expectations, and it was presumed that his natural and
acquired abilities would raise him to distinction. His exterior is dignified
and prepossessing; and, notwithstanding his deficiencies as an English scholar,
high ideas of his literature are entertained. He early wedded the discreet and
beautiful Henrietta, and soon became the father of a family; his parents and
the friends of his youth have sunk into the grave, and misfortunes have robbed
him of that patrimony, which, in the warmth of a youthful imagination, he had
calculated as exhaustless.

For Leontius what now remains? Education has unfitted him for the preceptor
of his own children -- he is unqualified for every thing that is simply
English; and while nature has endowed him with abilities which might capacitate
him to become the bard, the essayist, or even the historian of his country,
education interposes its effectual barriers.

The want of an early and critical knowledge of a vernacular tongue, is deeply
felt by a writer; an employment, which might otherwise be advantageous and
pleasing, becomes real drudgery, and the experience of persons thus
circumstanced, will oblige them to confess that it is something late to begin
the study of a language, after the age of adolescence has passed away.

Necessity, however, has called into action the faculties of Leontius; some
beautiful essays, with infinite labor, he has completed; but he blushes at
every line, lest the critic should detect him in doing violence to the
subtleties of grammar; and each revolving day witnesses his lamentations that
he was not early taught his mother tongue.

I condemn not the extensive studies in which our youth are engaged -- far from
it -- French, Latin, Italian, and whatever else the understanding can attain,
these are all little enough; but while my mind continues under the dominion of
reason, I shall ever contend for a decided preference as indisputably due to
the mother tongue; and under this persuasion the necessity of entreating
parents, guardians and preceptors of every description, continually to bear in
mind what country is destined the theater of action to those committed to their
care, becomes apparent.

The English language is by inheritance ours. It is that in which we first
breathe forth our filial gratitude; in those sentences which it comprises, we
manifest our family attachments -- express our amities -- shape our devotional
orisons -- transact business -- form the most tender of all ties -- address an
infant family -- fashion the lives and manners of that family -- and, finally,
embody that last solemn adieu, which is to precede our exit from the present to
a higher order of existence.

The advantage of acquitting ourselves, on these occasions, with propriety,
must be obvious to every thinking mind; and the Gleaner imagines he can hardly
be too importunate on a subject of such magnitude.

No. XXXVII.
At length to corresponding friends we turn --

IT is with superior pleasure, I appropriate this Gleaner to the performance of
my promise, of long standing, made to my several correspondents. Having
arranged in order such of their letters as are admissible, I proceed to publish
them, exactly according to their dates; presuming that the reason heretofore
urged, will apologize for a delay which has in truth been occasioned by a
multiplicity of avocations. They follow verbatim, as they came to hand.

To the GLEANER.
From my Estate in the Country, October 18th, 1794. KIND SIR,
AS Miss Melworth, now Mistress Hamilton, was unfortunately engaged previous to
my application to you; as my plans are all under the direction of prudence, and
as I suppose you have some influence over her sister, Miss Clifford, if you can
insure me, that she will not be so foolishly conscientious as to hold herself
bound by a sort of a promise made to the boy William, who, it appears, is now
in comfortable circumstances; and you must recollect, Mr. Vigillius, that you
became a sort of a surety for the girl; these are your words, which I shall
transcribe just as they stand in your twenty-eighth number. " Fear not, gentle
reader -- by virtue of the patriarchal dignity which I have assumed, I will,
upon a proper occasion, grant unto the said Serafina Clifford, a full and free
absolution from this her inconsiderate vow, which I shall take care to impute
to the irresistible influence of an impassioned moment."

Now I say, Mr. Vigillius, if you do in reality possess such a power, and if
you will absolutely and bona fide clear Miss Clifford, and the heirs lawfully
born of her body, from all claims whatsoever, which the Hamiltons may, on any
future emergency, find it convenient to lay to her estate, I will pass over the
queer manner of her birth, and the odd way in which her true father contrived
to smuggle her into his family, and she shall forthwith become my true and
lawful wife until death. You know, friend Vigillius, there are some men of not
half my property, who would be more squeamish; but so that I do but secure the
main chance, I will not lose a bargain, although its instrument may not chance
to be stamped with other people's ideas of legitimacy, and all that. To say
truth, I think I cannot do better than to enter into your family; and, as you
seem to have so much authority over Miss Clifford, (and she is now, by all
account, the sister-in-law of Mrs. Hamilton) I consider her all one as a girl
of yours; and being more and more determined to marry, I am in downright
earnest in this business.

I have lately lost a sister, who, though she was what is commonly called an
old maid, was nevertheless a very good house-wife, and managed my matters to a
fraction; nothing was lost, and every penny was disposed of to the best
advantage; and yet, Mr. Gleaner, she stood me in no more, take one year with
another, exclusive of her board, (and, by the way, she would live upon next to
nothing) than fifteen pounds per year. Was I to take a housekeeper, who would
not consider my interest as her own, she might waste a great deal, and in the
long run spend much more than a good, sober, discreet wife, while I should have
not one of the comforts of matrimony. I know, Mr. Gleaner, that you are fond of
saving, and that you calculate these things; and I therefore take it for
certain, that you will think with me. It is true, I have a number of other
sisters -- ay, and brothers too, for there are a pretty many of us; the
Plodders are a numerous family; but what of all that? they are every mother's
son of them married and settled; and, having all of them children, some of whom
are grown up, they reckon upon me as free plunder. I can see by the twist of
their features, that they have already divided my acres among them: They visit
me, it is true, very often -- are very complaisant, and all that; but I can
see, plain enough, it is for the loaves and fishes, and that were it not for
the legacies for which they are hunting. I should see but very little of them.
I have a thousand reasons, all clear as day light, by which I am assured they
do not care three brass farthings for me. I have lately recovered from a
dangerous illness, and although they imagine they have topped their parts very
well, and that they are as secure as a thief in a mill, yet I could see, plain
enough, under all their pretended grief, that they were ready to sing for joy,
when the physicians pronounced my disorder incurable; and, moreover, I
overheard their conversation when they supposed me in a delirium; and their
^^ng fa^es, now that I have, contrary to the expectations of every one, got
about again, is as plain as that two and two make four; however, if I do not
contrive effectually to disappoint them, my name is not Timothy Plodder.

I think, therefore, Mr. Gleaner, considering (as I observed to you in a former
letter) my age, that Miss Serafina and myself have no time to lose; and so if
you will out of hand propose the matter, and let me know when I may see the
young woman, or yourself, or her brother Hamilton, we will conclude the bargain
with all possible dispatch, before my relations get scent of the business; for
they absolutely grow very saucy, and I am determined to show them some little
Plodders, whom they little expect to see; and then we shall know who is to be
respected, and all that. I will make Miss Clifford a good husband; she shall
have every thing she can reasonably desire; and I will continue, kind and
respected Sir, yours to serve, until death,

TIMOTHY PLODDER.


To the GLEANER.
DEAR GOOD MR. GLEANER,
MISS Primrose and myself have wagered two five-dollar bills about dear
Margaretta's new father; Miss Primrose thinks that you knows so supereminently
well how to write about loveyers and novels, and all them there sort of things,
and that you have such a little million of pretty phantasticks about you, that
you will, after a while, bring old Mrs. Melworth out of the tomb; and that,
having got some curous English doctor to bring her to life again, she will,
some how or some how, come over here to this here country of America, where
they will be all happified together. Now, though I thinks this would be
delightful, yet, having heard my papa and Miss Sabina say, that such a
denomong, I thinks they calls it, would be a catastrofe that would have too
many inadmissibles to be admitted -- thinks it cannot be -- and so I have
wagered two five-dollar bills with Miss Primrose, that you will, out of hand,
marry Mr. Melworth to Miss Serafina Clifford; for, says I, who would matter his
being a few years older, when the man is such a heroism man, as a body may say,
and is besides so superexcellent; and, as I says, who will Miss Serafina have,
if she does not have this here Mr. Melworth; for now, says I, that Mr. Hamilton
is proved to be her true and deeden brother, born of her own father, it is
certain she can never have him, even suppose dear Margaretta, which I pray may
never be the case, should do otherways than well.

Now I mentions Miss Clifford's brother, I will tell you, Mr. Gleaner, about my
own brother, our Valentine -- Why you must know, that my papa says, how that he
has almost broken his heart; and I am sure for it, that he has made me cry as
bad, every bit and grain, as if I had been reading a tragedy, or a novel. I
will tell you how it was -- why he would be gone from our house whole evenings
together, and sometimes even a most all night, and my papa could never get out
of him where he was, or what he was about; and so, at last, he abdicated
himself from his own home, and his natural-born father altogether, and my papa
could not tell where to look for him, and we never knowed till the other day we
adventitiously found out, that he was privately married to Molly Brazen; to
whom he used to write love letters and epitaphs, and those sort of poetricks,
directing them every one to Miss Clarinda Paragon, and signing himself her
everlasting adorer, Valentine Lovelong -- for my part, I thinks it is a burning
shame, that he should bring such an indeliating disgrace upon names which is so
monstrously fine. My papa says as how that it is all owing to your historettas
and your commedies, and your plays; but I wont believe it; I knows its no such
thing, and it makes me cry, out of pure vexation, to hear learning and
demeanours, and all these gentilities and handsomenesses, which are taken out
of these here kind of books, spoken of in so metreposterous and so absorbed a
manner. I knows better, Mr. Gleaner, I knows that Molly Brazen is a very bad
girl; she is not -- God forgive her -- one morsel better than she should be;
and she would have had my brother, if she could have cotch him, though he had
never looked into a book in the universal world. I knows too that I have read
all the books that I could possibly get, and a great, great many they have
been, more, two to one, than our Valentine ever heard of in his born days, and
yet no desolate deceiving man, has ever come with his deceptionary tales for to
traduce me. It may be, (as I am very sure I should find him out, and soon give
him his own) that I should have no objections to hear what such a sad
depopulating gallant might have to say for himself; but no matter for that --
this is a secret; for my papa would never forgive me if he knew I had such a
thought; but as I am resolved that I will not date this, any more than my last
letter, and as I shall still sign by my fiction name, my papa, unless he had to
do with the black art, will never find me out.

Do then, dear Mr. Gleaner, tell Miss Primrose and I, whether Mr. Melworth is
to have Miss Clifford? Whether Margaretta and Serafina dress their waists as
short as Mrs. Modish, (who positively assures both me and Miss Primrose, she
makes, with her own hands, all their apparel) says they do? What the ladies
think of naked elbows, and whether they have thrown aside their modesty pieces?
An answer to these questions, will insurmountably oblige your ever loving, and
truly obligated servant to command,

MONIMIA CASTALIO.


To the GLEANER.
Dissipation Hall, October 21st, 1794. OLD FELLOW,
I AM willing to believe, as you say, that your girl was absolutely disposed
of, before you received my letter, making known my designs in regard to her;
and I can tell you, old Gentleman, it is well for you that I am -- yes, Sir, it
is well for you that I am -- for I am connected with a set of high-blooded
blades, every individual of whom, have all reasonable attachment to my person
and my interest; and we are, moreover, bound to each other, by the most solemn
engagements, to aid and abet each other, upon all occasions, and to render to
every member of our invincible community all possible assistance; and before
gad, old Square Toes, if you had not given unequivocal demonstration, that your
Margaretta was absolutely and bona fide shackled, before you was apprized of
the honor I intended her, we would have made nothing of tossing your Worship
in a blanket, and of leaving you, after your aerial elevation, handsomely
soused in the first horse-pond in our way. I give you this information for your
future government; and, as I have a new proposal to make, I expect it will be
properly influential. Do not deceive yourself, good Mr. Prig, with an idea,
that the paradoxical mysteries, in which you have contrived to wrap yourself
about, will much longer avail you; for Dick Bluster, Tom Pompous, Ned
Mettlesome, and the rest of us, are expert at finding out the secret haunts of
you sly ones; and we are, moreover, whatever you may think of it, possessed of
a clue to your castle, which will lead us directly upon the ground, and we are
both able and willing to turn knight-errants, to storm enchanted castles, fight
magicians, and deliver all the distressed damsels, who may be sound within the
territory of the United States.

Thus you are forewarned, and if you are but forearmed, that is, if the weapons
of your warfare are not carnal, but spiritual; if you enlist only under the
banners of reason, we may adjust matters amicably enough. Serafina Clifford is
a fine girl, by Jupiter -- my intentions are honorable matrimony, and Miss
Clifford is my object; for although her birth is not quite the thing, yet she
is a good generous girl; and as she appears to be in possession of the ready, I
very gladly make a transfer of my penchant for her little meek sister to her
fair self; and I expect she will not find much difficulty in substituting as
her heir apparent, a gay, handsome young fellow, instead of the little chap of
whom she has appeared so passionately fond -- her husband will very naturally
succeed to her affections, and all her other goods and chattels; and if she
continues her fondness for the smiling brats, y'clepped the comforts of
matrimony, I may possibly furnish her with a plenty of them, while she,
continuing to supply me with the ready, we shall thus very handsomely
reciprocate obligations.

But, in the mean time, as I have already been foolish enough to inform you
that my estate was a little embarrassed, and as her sage brother may not be
over and above fond of the scrapes into which that miserly and despotic old
curmudgeon, Poverty, is so ungentlemanly as to lead the subjects of his ragged
empire; he may probably think it becomes him to make a few pragmatical
inquiries, and as I do not wish to be at odds with the brother of my spouse
elect, you may inform Edward Hamilton, that I have a handsome estate in
possession; it is true, it is encumbered with a few mortgages, but the ready,
which I take it for granted the young lady has in her gift, will easily clear
off all these, and we shall then be as handsome and as fashionable a pair, as
any of the gay circles in or about town can produce. But Edward is a sober dog
-- Well, hang it, so am I -- and all this I am able and willing to demonstrate
at whatever moment, and in whatever place, you and brother Hamilton may
appoint. Please to present my humble duty to Miss Clifford, and assure her,
that I am now immoveably fixed -- that I am the most enamoured and impassioned
of her adorers; and that I will ever continue

her true and faithful Bellamour.
P. S. Although I have never seen Miss Clifford, I can swear to the charms of
her person; and her generosity, presuming she may be persuaded to change its
object, will fix me eternally here is. Do, old fellow, speak a good word for me,
and thus secure to yourself the good will of a set of honest bloods, who will
always be upon the scent in your service, and who will furnish you with
abundant matter for sermonizing. Farewell -- be faithful, and rest assured of
the protection of

BELLAMOUR.




To the GLEANER.
State of Massachusetts, County of Hampshire, November 8th, 1794. GOOD MAN
GLEANER,
YOU have at last got the weather-gage of us; for you have contrived for to
steer the little tight yawl Margaretta, into safe moorings; while we, do you see,
the worse luck ours, are at the mercy of wind and tide. You have proved
yourself, Mr. Gleaner, an able and experienced helmsman: Many a time have I
sweat for you, taking it for certain, that you would run ashore upon the
sands, or split upon the rocks, which, during one whole glass, seemed to loom
for your destruction; but, howsomever, you have worked your traverse well, and
have, in a wonderful manner, understood to a lee, starboard, port, bear up, or
right the helm, just as the wind has chopped about. But, mayhap, you would not
have been so well off, had not your ship-mate have kept so good a look out
alo^t. There is nothing like mounting the top-gallant-mast, when the breakers
are ahead.

Lord, Lord! -- if I had but been suffered to take the command of my own ship
-- but not a rope have I veered out, without orders first had and obtained from
lubbers who never yet understood plain sailing, and who are, over and above,
forever fishing in troubled waters. A thousand and a thousand times have I told
Deborah Seafort what her yaws and her veerings would bring her to; and, sure as
St. Peter's at Rome, she has now run fast a-ground upon a lee shore, and here
we must remain, wearing our sides, and beating, mayhap, against the rocks, if
you, Sir, who seem to know every rope in the ship, do not lend a hand to help
us off. You must know, that when, by the orders of our self-created captain,
Deborah Seafort, we crowded every sail for the land of matrimony, as we had a
gallant ship under foot, we foolishly enough hung out ever so many streamers;
and, not having taken on board a sufficient quantity of ballast, we shipped, in
lieu thereof, such a cargo of self-conceit, affectation, prim-osity, and other
femalities, as rendered us so crank, that we were many a time within an
ame's-ace of oversetting.

But, mayhap, Mr. Gleaner, if you have never ploughed the ocean, you may not
understand these sea terms; and so, do you see, I will endeavor for to let
myself down as much as possible. Why, you must know, that our girl Molly -- for
may I receive the cat-o' nine-tail upon my beam timbers, in presence of the
whole ship's crew, if I ever call her Mary, or Maria, again. -- I say, Mr.
Gleaner, our girl Molly, being a good tight little hussy, and, withal,
handsomely built, rigged, and, though I say it that should not say it, properly
sound, was judged a fit match for any sea-boat whatever. I did not, as I have
hinted above, like her manner of sailing, or the way which she made. Frequently
has she flung out false colors, and after bringing to her lure many a gallant
sail, she has up jibb, and borne away, quite in another direction. This I have
pronounced dastardly, and have thought fit to enter my protest; but I have been
charged with fomenting a mutiny, and belayed fast in the cabin, or the ship's
hold, as a meddling, dangerous and officious fellow. You will understand, that
I speak by way of metaphor, simile, or the like of that. It is in vain that I
have, upon these occasions, run over a whole catalogue of sea oaths, that has
frightened many a Jack Tar into obedience. The women, as they say, have got
hardened to them, and they do not value them a rope's end! Deborah was above
consulting her compass, and I have looked every moment when we should split to
pieces. At length they have sprung a mast, and, entirely ignorant of their
chart, and not knowing which way to wear the ship, and being brought to their
wit's end, they have condescended to place me at the helm. But, Mr. Gleaner,
this being a kind of navigation at which I am not expert, I am much in the same
situation of your land-lubbers, who find themselves at sea in a storm; and I
am, as it were, obliged to bend my course to the harbor of your experience:
You have erected a beacon, and if you can but warp us out of the present
difficult strait, in which we are becalmed, you shall be our land mark in
future.

It goes to the heart of me, Mr. Gleaner, to see our Molly opening the sluices
of her eye-pumps, and pouring forth such a torrent of salt water sorrow. You
must know, Sir, that after she had kept at bay ever so many pickeroons, she was
at last brought to, by a smart, well built brigantine, who seemed to understand
every point of the compass, who was wonderfully trim, and furbished out to the
best advantage. Molly, knowing how to calculate her own force, would not
immediately strike, and, to say truth, our spark rather played fast and loose,
as the saying is -- not choosing to come to an open parley. Howsomever, he
contrived, do you see, to be constantly in the girl's wake; if ever she hoisted
sail, he was sure to follow, and like the old Roman Mark Anthony, who we read
of at school -- who, by the bye, was as little of a sailor as a soldier -- he
seemed to think the world well lost for our Cleopatra. Well, but after Molly
had stood out many glasses, Deborah, who is as yare as any old sea-boat need to
be, having the watch, and having, as she said, thoroughly overhauled the lifts
and the braces, the clew-lines and she buntlines; having top't her yards, and
do you see, got every thing in readiness, thought proper to heave out a white
flag, by way of concluding upon terms of capitulation. But no sooner had we
begun to veer out our fasts. than, zounds, Mr. Gleaner -- for, do you see, it is
enough to make the best minister in the United States swear -- if the cowardly,
rascally pickeroon, did not slip his cable, and sheer off, when, hoisting every
sail, he was nearly out of sight before we knew he had weighed anchor. We
immediately called a council, when, according to our reckoning, the ship had
sailed too many knots for a pursuit; and, moreover, our fair weather spark had
so managed his tack, as to put it out of our power to libel the ship; and, over
and above all this, it is deemed contrary to all rule, to give chase in this
kind of navigation.

Well, here then we are -- and faith and troth, all in the dumps -- Deborah is
constantly snivelling -- I can scarcely keep above water; and poor Molly, like
a disabled weather-beaten yacht, is laid up. For forty years did I follow the
sea -- ay, and many a tough gale have I been in; but, split my timbers, if I
ever knew what trouble was until now. Possibly, Mr. Gleaner, as you have
already shown yourself wonderfully skilful at refitting, you may be able to
splice us together once more, and then, with both wind and tide in our favor,
mayhap we may yet bear a good sail, and after all these storms and tempests,
arrive safe at the desired port. But, Mr. Gleaner, by my soul, you must bear a
hand, for our poor wave-broken invalid is almost a wreck, and she will be
speedily past repairing. I am, Sir, until death, your sorrowful friend,

GEORGE SEAFORT.


To the GLEANER.
From the Saloon of Solitude, December 15th, 1794. WORTHY SIR,
IT is just two years and four months, this day, since I had the presumption to
address you before. I have seen with pleasure the gradual progress of your
Margaretta; she seems to possess every sexual virtue, while her seize
render her in every view superior. A superstructure so rare, however excellent
the materials, could not have been accomplished without the superintendence of
uncommon abilities. The lot of the lovely orphan has been highly distinguished;
and may she, as far as humanity will permit, be happily exempted from every
future evil.

Yesterday my girl completed her twelfth year, and while every moment grows
more and more interesting, my mind is struggling under the pressure of a
thousand anxieties. Sophia Aimwell -- tears stream from my eyes while I make
the confession -- is not exactly what I could wish! It is true her gentle bosom
harbors no particularly alarming propensities, and, that nature has endowed
her with a good understanding, is also evident; but notwithstanding the variety
of expedients to which I have had recourse, I have never yet been able to
impress upon her mind, the necessity of application. She seems unalterably
opposed to uniformity; nor does she ever, by her own choice, pursue either her
book, her needle, or her pen, or even those lighter matters to which her
attention is required, with the regularity which is, I have conceived,
absolutely essential to any considerable proficiency. My wish has been to
produce her in society an accomplished female; but, alas! the execution of our
plans remain not with us. Sophia is particularly averse to reading and writing;
novels have not yet come under her observation. I have thought it too early to
entrust those fascinating volumes to her inspection. It appears, Sir, that you
do not altogether approve of novels, although, submitting to the imposition of
necessity, you have put them into the hand of your daughter. Pray, Sir, did you
not exercise discrimination in this respect, or was Miss Melworth indulged with
the free use of those books? Is it not possible to create, by habit, a taste
for reading, where, unhappily, it is not inherent?

If it is consistent with your plans, you would do me a particular favor, if
you would furnish me with copies of a few of those letters, just by way of
specimen, which passed between Mrs. Vigillius, and her amiable charge, by the
post that was established between their respective chambers; and, any hint of
direction which you may condescend to favor me with, will be received with
much gratitude.

Sophia has never appeared so deeply interested in any thing, as in the story
of your Margaretta; and a word from the Gleaner, will go farther than volumes
written by any other pen. I am, worthy Sir, with high esteem, your constant
reader, and sincere admirer,

REBECCA AIMWELL.


Successive Gleaners shall pay the requisite attention to the letters inserted
in this number; and, in the interim, impressed with all possible consideration
for my respectable correspondents, I offer them that gratitude which is so
eminently their due.

No. XXXVIII.
Joyless the man, who hails no bosom friend,
Whose steps no lovely woman waits to greet;
In his lorn self, whose pains and pleasures end,
Concentrated where all his wishes meet:
How comfortless his solitary home!
In cheerless gloom he wears life's hours away;
Around his board no smiling cherubs bloom,
Nor voice of pleasure wakes the opening day.

THE picture which Mr. Plodder has given of his situation, is truly pitiable;
and I am so far from regarding it as a caricature, that I am induced to believe
its most prominent features will generally stand confessed, in the life of
those, who live and die bachelors. I, however, once knew a happy exception to
this conclusion, who, I confidently conclude, has now taken his station in a
higher state of being. His departure out of time was marked by the orphan and
the widow, with the deepest regret -- sighs and tears were a tribute which his
virtues necessarily drew forth, and his memory is embalmed by the richest
perfumes which gratitude can bestow. But the dwelling of this singular
character was not a dreary solitude; it was irradiated by the smiles of
infancy; and while the sons and daughters of penury, of every description,
shared his bounty, the numerous offspring of a widowed sister, with their truly
amiable mother, who was endeared to him, as well by kindred virtues, as by
consanguinity, graced his board, became unto him as the children of his youth,
and not only threw into action those paternal feelings which were inherent in
his bosom, but furnished also an ample field for the exercise of those uncommon
abilities, which were largely drawn out in the course of their education. All
who knew John Parker, esquire -- generally distinguished by the name of Sheriff
Parker -- of Portsmouth, in the State of New Hampshire, will readily
acknowledge, that the voice of panegyric can hardly swell too high a note, when
sounding the praises of this great and good man, who lived and died a bachelor.

But it is true, nevertheless, that the life of a bachelor is almost invariably
gloomy, or thinly strewed with rational pleasure. My friend Oswald may serve as
an epitome of this class of men; he was bred a lawyer, and his youth passed in
literary application; he either regarded la belle passion as below that dignity
of character at which he aimed, or his moments of leisure were not sufficient
to those attentions which its refinements require. Years rolled on, and
succeeding seasons still found him busily engaged in scientific pursuits, until
he attained the sober age of sixty, without having made a single attachment
which could interest the heart, or forcibly engage the tender affections. The
classics were enchanting; they still continued the fascinating companions of
his studious hours; and, although highly social by nature, his ruling
propensities seem to have been, for a course of years, strangely overruled --
but when once they were set afloat by reflection, he was roused to a melancholy
view of his situation, and could not forbear regarding himself, in a very
essential sense, alone in the universe. The guides of his youth, those persons
whom he had been accustomed to revere, were mostly removed out of time, and the
companions of his juvenile years were, to a man, " doubled in wedlock and
multiplied in children." Oswald was solicited to pass a month at the villa of
Myrtilus, who had been his class-mate; he obeyed the summons, and he found the
mansion of his friend the seat of domestic happiness.

During a period of twenty-five years, the life of Myrtilus had been
ameliorated by the sympathies, corrected sentiments, endearing tenderness, and
faithful attachment, of a lovely and elegant woman; a numerous and beautifully
promising family of sons and daughters seemed to emulate each other in their
filial attentions; eagerly they watched every turn in his countenance, and
while their animated features were impressed by glowing and duteous affection,
they delighted to anticipate his wishes, and were on the wing to fulfill his
commands. Thomson's family piece was strikingly exemplified; the union of
Myrtilus and his charming wife was cemented by sacred love; the holy priest had
witnessed their plighted faith; and, enriched by his pious benediction, their
mutual tenderness confessed the righteous sanction. " The world, its pomp, its
pleasures and its nonsense," were to them comparatively of small estimation;
possessing in each other whatever they accounted transcendantly excellent,
something than beauty dearer, both in the mind, and mind illumined face --
truth, goodness, honor, harmony and love. In natural succession their smiling
offspring rose around transcripts of either parent -- by degrees those human
blossoms blew, while each succeeding day, soft as it rolled, evinced some new
charm, the father's luster, and the mother's bloom -- the skilful hand of kind
assiduous care, had formed their opening minds; to rear the tender thought, to
teach the young idea how to shoot. To pour the fresh instruction over the mind
-- to breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix the generous purpose in the
glowing breast. This had been, of these blessed parents, the " delightful task."
Perhaps they would have found it difficult to embody, by language, the
sensations of their enraptured bosoms, when, glancing round upon their little
family, Nothing struck their eye but sights of bliss -- All various nature
pressing on the heart: An elegant sufficiency, content, retirement, rural
quiet, friendship, books. Ease and alternate labor, useful life, progressive
virtue, and approving Heaven; and perhaps, on such occasions, the tear of
luxury which strayed adown their checks, was the most expressive testimony they
could give of their ineffably exquisite feelings.

On the contemplative mind of Oswald nothing was ^ost -- the past, the present,
and the future, crowding to his view, combined to furnish a most humiliating
comparison; and spontaneously he exclaimed -- These are the matchless joys of
virtuous love; and thus their moments fly. The seasons thus, as ceaseless round
a jarring world they roll, still find them happy; and consenting Spring sheds
her own rosy garland over their heads: Till evening comes at last, serene and
mild; when, after the long vernal day of life, enamoured more, as more
remembrance swells with many a proof of recollected love -- together down they
sink in social sleep; together freed, their gentle spirits fly to scenes where
love and bliss immortal reign. What an enchanting view! how beautiful, and how
highly finished! Did poet ever pen superior lines?

Our bachelor heaved a sigh -- a contrast so glaring was forcibly felt. "No
young props," said he, lift their green heads for my support; not an individual
of the rising generation is bound to me by the silken bands of attachment, and
this is a consequence of the arrangements of nature and of justice; for no mode
of reasoning will invest me with a title to the fervours of that mind, which I
have not particularly contributed to form, and in whose flexile dawn I have not
been solicitous to obtain an interest. No deserving female honors me with her
distinguishing regards -- no gentle bosom swells for me the sigh of affection.
I have not sought to lay the foundation of happiness; and it is in vain that I
look for the superstructure of enjoyment. I have lived in vain, alas! for me it
is now too late to form advantageous connexions, or to enter into engagements
which should be the growth of many ripening suns. When I expire, my name will
be extinct, and all remembrance of me will cease from the earth!!

Our comfortless old gentleman was perfectly right in his conclusions; and we
would advise friend Plodder to take the hint -- should any mercenary female,
caught by the lure of that establishment in his gift, cast her lot with him, we
are apprehensive his chance for happiness will be small. It is too late in life
for him to begin that career, which should at least commence in the meridian of
our days; and, besides, we think his motive for wishing to become a married
man, is rather invidious. Revenge is rarely ever the parent of that tenderness,
which is so indispensably requisite in a matrimonial connection. We think he may
have judged erroneously of his kindred; it will be strange if in a family so
numerous he cannot find a worthy object; we advise him to make the experiment,
to cultivate those attachments which nature authorizes, and to resign, at this
late period (for we have good and cogent reasons to believe him turned of sixty
instead of fifty) all pretensions to wedlock.

But however Mr. Plodder may determine, it cannot affect Serafina. The name of
Clifford is now absorbed in that of Seymour; and the accomplished maiden, who
wore it with transcendent honor, has added one more to the list of those
matrons, who give dignity to, and bestow the brightest ornament upon humanity.
I will own that some months have elapsed since the receipt of Mr. Plodder's
letter; and, farther, that the marriage of Miss Clifford was not then
solemnized; but as I was apprized of her engagements to a worthy man, and as
neither his epistle, nor that of the facetious Mr. Bellamour, contained any
thing which was considered of sufficient importance to stop proceedings, I did
not think it absolutely necessary to derange my plans, by an earlier attention
to their letters. Uninfluenced and undismayed by the threats of Mr. Bellamour,
I might have contented myself with simply announcing the marriage of Miss
Clifford; but feeling a degree of compassion for Mr. Plodder, and sincerely
wishing every man and woman judiciously disposed of in holy wedlock, before
they have fully completed their thir^^eth year, I have produced a more copious
exordium, than is perhaps necessary; and, as I know a wedding is a very
grateful subject to most of my fair readers, I will, after briefly narrating a
few preliminary articles, invite them to that of Miss Clifford.

The reader will have the goodness to recollect the important advantages which
Edward Hamilton received, during his southern tour, from a friend, resident in
the State of South Carolina; he will remember also, the subsequent
embarrassments of that friend, and that circumstances induced a belief that the
state of bankruptcy, into which the generous Seymour was precipitated, if not
procured, was at least accelerated by his efforts in favor of Edward Hamilton.
Ingratitude can never take root in a noble mind; it could therefore find no
place, either in the bosom of Mr. Hamilton, or that of the father of his
Margaretta.

The abilities of Mr. Melworth were, on this occasion, commensurate with his
wishes; and, after devoting a few days to paternal claims, and making ample
provision for the complete adjustment of Hamilton's affairs, he hasted upon the
broadly philanthropic wings of benevolence, to South Carolina. His dignified
mein, conspicuous merit, and letters of address, procured him a free access to
the creditors of Mr. Seymour; and, with that dispatch which evinced the
thorough accomptant, their several claims were examined, and a fund
appropriated fully adequate to the reimbursement of every just debt, while the
unfortunate debtor, unconscious of the steps taking in his favor, wore away
his melancholy hours immured within the walls of a prison.

The misfortunes of Seymour were not the result of misconduct; if there was a
fault in his arrangements, the principle which produced it, conferred thereon a
luster which gave it, both in appearance and effect, the rich coloring of the
most splendid virtue. It is impossible but he who suffers by his extensive
benevolence, and his commiseration for the unhappy, must carry with him his
credentials of superior worth -- must exhibit unequivocal testimonies of the
justice of his title to admiration. It is true that the injunction to be just
before we are generous, is worthy of observation; but if I endow a fellow
creature with the means of obtaining a competency today, and tomorrow the
ship in which was contained my remaining property, is, by a stroke of
Providence, whelmed beneath the waves, I do not see that I am greatly
censurable because I did not, in the dread of this evil, withhold the solace
which it was yesterday in my power to give. Mr. Seymour was of that class of
men who never shut their ears against a tale of woe, and by consequence he
could not lay up to himself much treasure; and when his ships of merchandise
were either wrecked or captured, he had no means of satisfying those rapacious
creditors, who, operated upon by principles the reverse of those which actuated
his bosom, pursued him with unrelenting severity.

It was not until Mr. Melworth had procured a regular course of proceedings;
until every thing was in train; legal documents obtained, and the formalities
necessary to his liberation completely adjusted, that he waited upon Mr.
Seymour in his confinement; and he introduced himself to the then, (in his own
estimation) unfortunate man, by words to this effect: --

"My name, Sir, is Charles Melworth. I am no stranger to the feelings of the
unhappy. I am perfectly acquainted with the history of your rectitude, of your
misfortunes, and of your generous munificence. But, Sir, you must not expect to
contribute so nobly to the necessities of an Edward Hamilton, and to exercise
toward that young man such unexampled forbearance with impunity: The day of
retribution is at length arrived; the son of Charles Melworth, the husband of
his Margaretta, must not submit to unreturnable obligations. Here, Sir, is your
discharge in full; you are, from this moment, exonerated from a pressure, which
must have been truly irksome to a mind like yours; and you receive this
exoneration as a debt, which is your incontrovertible due. At liberty to pursue
your own wishes, you will, doubtless, be expeditious in departing from a place
so little suited to your feelings and your character. But, ere you go, as we
are now upon even ground, I request a lease of your good opinion, to be
continued or forfeited, as I shall, in future, merit."

Melworth might have proceeded uninterruptedly to a much greater length; the
understanding of Seymour underwent a kind of temporary petrifaction;
astonishment absorbed his every faculty. Melworth paused in vain, and it was
not until he had taken a variety of methods to rouse him to attention, that he
was capable of listening to a regular eclaircissement. But to sketch his
feelings, when the liberating truth first opened upon him, were a fruitless
attempt; as well might I delineate to mortal view a disembodied spirit, as give
the form of language to those exquisite sensations which then pervaded the
bosom of Seymour; he however struggled not against the extricating hand of his
nobly generous friend -- his composition contained not a particle of false
delicacy -- he was conscious that a change of circumstances would have produced
in him a similarity of exertions; and his unexpected enlargement, while it
confounded his enemies, restored to his numerous friends that peace which his
misfortunes had chased from their bosoms.

His emancipation, giving him an opportunity of an accurate investigation, he
discovered many frauds by which he had been grossly injured; these he exposed,
and debts to a considerable amount were recovered, while the return of several
cargoes, that had been detained by the British for adjudication, by putting him
in possession of considerable property, once more unfurled for him the golden
wings of successful commerce! Again he floated buoyant upon the stream of
prosperity; and the expanding buds of hope obtained in his bosom primeval
vigor. Hardly had he completed his twenty-eighth year, ere he had witnessed
all those vicissitudes which I have thus hastily sketched; and he may in truth
be considered as an early proficient in the school of adversity. That he
embraced the first possible opportunity of visiting Hamilton-Place will not be
doubted; and it will readily be conceived that his arrival there was expected
by his friends with uncommon impatience. Seymour was not only an accomplished
man, but he had performed the part of a guardian angel to Edward; and both
Margaretta and Serafina regarded the moment which was to introduce them to a
character whose virtues were unequivocal, and to whom they were essentially
indebted among the most distinguished of their lives. Margaretta advanced to
meet the protector of her husband, with that chaste and elegant freedom which
the dignified matron knows to assume, nor did she conceive she transgressed any
rule of propriety when her snowy hand was extended to his manly pressure, and
her lovely cheek was modestly bent to his salute. Serafina acquitted herself
with more timidity -- her manner was characteristic of virgin delicacy; and
while Seymour pressed her hand to his lips, " a higher bloom" suffused her
animated features; and she permitted those civilities to which as the sister of
Hamilton she was entitled, with silent complacency: Admiration and tender
gratitude were, however, evinced in her every gesture; and her expressive eye
beamed those unequivocal tokens of welcome which her tongue refused to utter.

Edward ardently wished to reward the deserving Seymour, by some signal token
of his grateful affection. He regarded the hand of his sister as an inestimable
prize -- too rich, in his estimation, to be consigned to the possession of any
but his friend; and Seymour, on his part, from the moment he beheld Miss
Clifford, became the most impassioned of men. But Serafina, devoted to the
family of her brother, had repeatedly declared her absolute and unalterable
predilection for a single life. Seymour was privately advertized of this
resolution, and its motive, by Edward and Margaretta; and thus obtaining a
secret clue to her affections, he made his approaches with that address, which,
in this age of finesse, seems to be a necessary part of the character of a
finished gentleman. Had he directly attacked the fortress, by the common
methods of assailment, the possibility is, that, prepared for an event, an
expectation of which might have been induced by a variety of circumstances, she
would resolutely have maintained her ground; but, proceeding covertly to
undermine, he slowly made his advances, until, gradually sapping the foundation
of her resistance, a coalition became an event in course. Hamilton and his
charming wife; the little gentleman, whom Serafina regarded as a prodigy, with
the infant Margaretta; these were the themes of panegyric, on which the
enamoured designer copiously dwelt, during those interviews that were
frequently extended far beyond the limits which would have answered the wishes
of common amity. The hours passed unheeded by; they were sentimental and
refined; the heart of Serafina was deeply impressed; she was conscious of her
situation, and she secretly exclaimed -- " Yes, these delicious moments,
snatched with the man who has thus imperceptibly interested my best
affections, are productive of more highly zested pleasures, than I have ever
yet experienced."

Edward and Margaretta saw that their utmost wishes for their lovely sister was
on the point of gratification, and they felicitated themselves on the prospect
of an establishment for Miss Clifford, that was every way commensurate with her
beauty and rare qualifications. They were careful not to interrupt the progress
of a union they had so much at heart. Apparently unconscious of the growing
importance of a friend, to whom they were so warmly attached, not a single
observation escaped them; and thus was Serafina entrapped and captivated,
before she had received the least suspicion of the combination formed against
the singular resolution she had avowed.

Seymour is one of the most accomplished men I ever beheld; his person is
uncommonly handsome, and wonderfully prepossessing; his manners are easy and
dignified; his morals are unexceptionable; and, meliorated in the school of
adversity, he unites, in himself, every requisite which can insure felicity to
a confiding female. To Serafina he every moment became of still more
consequence, until, imaged upon her every thought, that hour was marked by
frigid insipidity, that presented not the man of her heart -- that witnessed
not his indefatigable and tender assiduities.

It was after his return from one of those little necessary absences, which
Serafina secretly lamented as real misfortunes, that, finding her alone, with
his accustomed freedom, he took a seat by her side; and, after relating a new
instance of the benevolence of her brother, he fixed his fine eyes tenderly
upon her; the ready tear, at the recital of Edward's virtues, had strayed
unbidden from its crystal source, and was making its pearly way adown her
lovely cheek, when, unable longer to resist his feelings, he took her not
reluctant hand, and impressing upon i^ the second kiss of love, he ardently
exclaimed -- "Ah! Madam, how happy is your brother! I love you, Miss Clifford
-- passionately love you -- and every faculty of my soul does homage to your
peerless perfections: Forgive, loveliest of women, the freedom of a
declaration, which I can no longer withhold. Surely, the sister of Edward
Hamilton may still preserve that enviable character, and yet condescend to wear
the title of the tender friend of Seymour. Turn not, I beseech you, from my
ardent gaze -- if I am reprehensible for devoting my every thought to you,
thus, on my ^ended knees, sweet arbitress of my fate, I supplicate forgiveness
-- while, with the same breath, I solemnly protest, that an error so extatic,
can never be relinquished, but with my life."

Serafina, overcome by a declaration which she had long fervently wished, had
averted her face for the purpose of regulating those tender emotions, that,
rising in rebellion against their lovely mistress, crimsoned her face, and
filled her eyes with the most delicious tears she had ever shed. Soon, however,
resuming her native fortitude, she wiped from her checks those officious drops;
and, smiling with more beauty than poets ever yet attributed to the dewy morn,
with mild dignity (having previously entreated the supplicating Seymour to quit
his humble posture) she thus responded: "You are, Sir, entitled to my utmost
frankness -- the confidence which you repose in me, invests you with this
claim. I had formed a resolution to continue single: Penetrated by the virtues
of my brother, and my not less amiable sister, I knew not that the universe
produced similar excellence -- But you, Sir, appear to me to possess a mind
fraught with those perfections I have delighted to trace. To adhere to my plan,
after conviction of the error which originated it, would draw upon me the
accusation of obstinacy. True, I imagined myself unalterably attached to it;
but why should I blush to find -- why hesitate to confess -- that justice
necessitates me to relinquish it -- that I relinquish it to the virtues of a
Seymour -- and, that I can have no rational objection to binding, by yet added
ties, merit so unequivocal to a family, to which I am, by affinity, gratitude,
and inclination, unalienably attached? Accept, Sir, this attachment, as a
pledge of that, which duties, yet superior, will impress upon my bosom."

Serafina ceased to speak -- she trembled excessively; and, by a kind of
involuntary motion, threw her handkerchief over her glowing face -- Seymour
caught her hand in ecstasy -- But it was not our design to finish this scene;
and not a step further will we proceed therein.

The now affianced lovers received the congratulations of their friends, with
their accustomed dignity of character; no unnecessary delays were permitted; a
few revolving weeks produced the bridal morn; Seymour plighted his faith with
Serafina at the altar. Mr. Melworth, with that delicacy and propriety, for
which he is remarkable, officiated as the nuptial father of Miss Clifford, and
the venerable Urbanus received, while bending angels registered, their vows.
Serafina was a beautiful transcript of Margaretta; her dress was white muslin,
wrought after the same elegant pattern of the robe, which had been worn upon a
similar occasion by her friend. But our party was not so select as that which
had graced Margaretta's wedding day. Some choice spirits attended the relations
of Mr. Seymour, from South Carolina; and they were resolved, as they said, to
make a day of it. Their boisterous mirth, however, did not essentially impede
the pleasure of the sentimentalist. Margaretta, aided by Mary, presided; and it
is unnecessary to observe, that hilarity was chastised by delicacy. The evening
was concluded by an elegant rural ball, and every arrangement announced the
ample fortune and capacious heart of the munificent Hamilton.

Mr. Seymour has erected a neat edifice in the neighborhood of Hamilton-Place;
he has displayed much taste in his buildings and his gardens; but his elegant
fancy has been no where so conspicuous as in a beautiful grove, on which he has
bestowed every embellishment of art and nature; and his seat, principally
discriminated by this enchanting spot, is best known by the name of
Seymour-Grove.

Mr. Melworth too, has tried his talents at architecture, and he has
distinguished the paradisiacal retirement which he has completed, by the
appellation of the Cottage of Amity. Thither, when we would inhale pleasures of
the purest and the highest kind, our respective families collect; and if
mortality is ever the abode of felicity, this mansion is, upon these occasions,
its residence.

Serafina's attachment to the family of her brother, is, if possible, augmented
since her marriage, and her regards are abundantly reciprocated.

Margaretta has introduced into being her third infant, to whom she has given
the combined names of Mary-Augusta. Serafina continues her predilection in
favor of the little William; but Mary whispers me, that a few months will
probably produce a new candidate for the affections of Mrs. Seymour, who will,
doubtless, generalize, or render less marked, her attachment to the children of
her brother; and, in the mean time, she has perfect complacence in her
matrimonial connection; she regards her husband as the first of men, and
hesitates not to confess herself the happiest of women.

No. XXXIX.
Say, cruel trifler, whence the pleasure flowed --
See thou that face which once in smiles was dressed?
Where is the roseate h^^ that radiant glowed?
Whence are those sighs which swell that snowy breast?
Where are the dimples of that lovely cheek,
Which now so wan and worn by grief appears!
Tell me, if just remorse will let thee speak,
What is the source of that poor maniac's tears?
Hail, doughty hero -- trophied victor, hail!
Deeply entrenched, or, phalanx'd by thy art,
Thou speed'st the arrow, pointed to prevail,
Skilled to transfix the fond defenseless heart!

HONEST Captain Seafort is in possession of the full commiseration of our
respective families. The Melworths, the Hamiltons, the Seymours, with Mary, and
myself, swell for him the sigh of regret. We wish indeed he had taken the
command of his own ship, and we would gladly lend our aid to furnish the
hawser, which should warp the bark into smooth water.

If we comprehend Captain Seafort, when he says -- " frequently has she flung
out false colors, and after bringing to her lure many a gallant sail, she has
up jibb, and borne away quite in another direction" -- we cannot altogether
acquit Miss Seafort. It is true, a weak, inconsistent, and irregular mode of
conduct in the commerce between the sexes, from its supposed characteristic
features, has been hitherto tolerated, or has not excited that degree of
contempt, and severity of reprehension, in the female, as in the male world.
But in this enlightened period, when the sex seem emerging from the clouds
which have hitherto enveloped them, and the revolution of events is advancing
that half of the human species, which has hitherto been involved in the night
of darkness, toward the irradiating sun of science, we had hoped that women
would have been contented to have resigned their charter for absurd and cruel
trifling, and that a female coquette would have been held in as much
detestation as a male. We allow, however, that old habits are not easily
relinquished; gradually the morning breaks, and we are willing to wait, until
midday, for the meridian perfection of the sex.

For Miss Seafort, we hope she will call into exercise the heroism of the
female character. Upon the glassy stream of tranquillity, her own efforts must
again produce her. It is surely a pity to yield a coxcomb such a triumph, as
her continued inaction, and melancholy wearing away, upon the flats of apathy,
would bestow. She will consider that by the " false colors she has hung out,"
she has in some measure provoked the attack, that she is in one view the
aggressor -- that if she has suffered, she has also inflicted sufferings; and
that although it is evident she has not merited the neglect of him for whom
she mourns, yet it is rare that retaliation is consigned to the individual hand
of him, who was originally aggrieved: The past, we know, cannot be recalled,
and we counsel Miss Seafort to view her accounts with the world as adjusted,
the balance struck, and her arrearage fully paid. We recommend it to her to
begin her traverse anew, to place her worthy father at the helm, and to hoist
every sail, and keep a steady course, until she once more makes the harbor of
rectitude.

It may be an alleviation of her misfortunes, to consider, that the silly
fellow, who, without suffering his words to invest her with a legal claim upon
him, has barely amused himself with her easy credulity, would, had it suited
his convenience to conclude with her a matrimonial bargain, have become either
neglectful or domineering; the character of an idle, unprincipled, and
dissipated young fellow, is not necessarily ameliorated by marriage; and a
virtuous woman has no resource but her tears. Miss Seafort cannot esteem her "
fair weather spark." His conduct is not calculated to give a favorable
impression of his mind. Let her remember that love, not grounded upon, nor
invigorated by esteem, is more evanescent than the structures reared by the
aerial illusions of fancy. The life of a woman of sentiment and virtue, wedded
to a man she cannot esteem, is a constant warfare. Alas! that the welfare of
society, and the laws of our country, admit no remedy for so common an evil!

A man, thus circumstanced, it is notorious, is in possession of various means
of dissipating his chagrin, and of eluding the shafts of disappointment -- but
a woman, (such are the laws which propriety enact) must waste her life in
silence, and in solitude. Miss Seafort may be assured, that first attachments
are frequently ill-judged; that they are not indelible; and that a woman of
spirit, if she commits the conflict to resolution, will assuredly entitle
herself to the honorary wreath of victory. The homage paid to first love is a
pernicious idolatry. The sentiments entertained of the durability of la belle
passion, have usurped a prevalence, which has consigned the hours of many an
amiable female to unavailing regret. I contend that love, in a good mind, will
assuredly expire, if not nurtured by esteem; nay, further, I assert that it is
in fact a short lived passion, that its dissolution is unavoidable, its own
intense ardours naturally procure its destruction; and meliorating esteem is
the Phoenix which ascends from its ashes.

How deplorable is the situation of that wedded pair, who are not endowed with
the requisites to insure mutual esteem; their conduct is necessarily under the
daily observation of each other, and to the penetrating eye of keen and
momently investigation their minds are frequently unveiled. How careful then
should the sexes be to endow themselves with those intellectual qualities,
which will procure mutual confidence and mutual complacency. Let Miss Seafort
cultivate the worthy propensities of her nature; let her either continue
single, or wed a man of a sound understanding and cultivated mind, of pleasing
manners and mild integrity, and I hazard my reputation on the trial. I
pronounce positively, that her situation will be much more eligible, than if
she had given her hand to the fop who now probably derides the aggravated
anguish he has originated.

I will confess, that my resentment is forcibly excited against an idea which
has committed such devastation on the peace of society. I am determined that
my children, the little Margaretta, and Mary-Augusta, shall receive timely
impressions of the impotency of that chimera, endowed by imagination, with
invincibility; and they shall be early taught, that discretion ought never to
quit the helm of a female mind; that reason is ordained to triumph over every
weak idea. In one word, we will help them to attain the government of their
passions.

The poor Lavinia is a melancholy instance of the fatal consequence of an
unlimited indulgence of those sensibilities, which, under the requisite
control, frequently make the felicity, and are always the ornament of humanity.
She possessed a heart, glowing with every sentiment which is dictated by
benevolence; she was eminently capable of friendship; disdaining suspicion, her
confidence in the appearances of virtue was exactly what it should have been in
long tried worth, and her susceptibility was extreme. Born to an opulent
fortune, she had multiplied opportunities of gratifying the propensities of a
munificent mind, and she was regarded by the sons and daughters of penury as
the angel of consolation. She had lost her father in her infancy, and she
continued the only prop of an amiable mother, of whom she was the richest
solace; she was beautiful in her person, of a pleasing understanding, and
highly accomplished; her manners were a transcript of her mind, open and
undesigning; and a man of feeling would have suffered death, rather than have
purloined the tranquillity of a bosom so exquisitely attuned, or betrayed the
confidence reposed in him by such transcendent excellence. I think I have never
seen a more amiable female than Lavinia; I recollect attending Mary and
Margaretta, on a visit made to her and her worthy mother. Margaretta was then a
child -- she had been with us only one month; but young as she was, the
prepossessing Lavinia captivated her little heart. A large party was assembled,
Lavinia extorted general admiration; her equal attentions to her numerous
guests, the elegance of her movements, her solicitude to contribute to the
pleasures of every individual, her duteous attention to her mother, the
eagerness with which she hastened to divest her of every care, while the eyes
of her enraptured parent followed her with an expression of extacy, which I
have seldom seen equalled, and never surpassed; all this was calculated to
produce the highest degree of approbation, and she necessarily received the
homage of every eye. At our request, she played and sung, and her execution
gave general satisfaction; dancing constituted a part of our entertainment, and
the movements of Lavinia were attuned by harmony. Every heart congratulated the
mother of such a daughter; and we became assured that Emly-House was indeed the
abode of felicity.

From this sketch it will be imagined that the education of Lavinia had not
been neglected; and indeed, the truth is, that her anxious and tenderly
interested mother had spared, in the cultivation of her mind, neither pains nor
expense; nor was there any deficiency, except in those cautionary guards with
which young people should invariably be furnished, particularly when their
sensibilities are manifestly glowing, and their brilliant imaginations are
sketching scenes, which, alas! the present lapsed state of humanity will never
give them to realize. To throw a restraint upon the confiding innocence, the
fine feelings, and generous propensities of the opening mind -- to plant the
germ of suspicion in that soil which has hitherto produced only a growth of
the most sweet scented flowers, is an act which seems to wear an invidious
aspect, and it is undoubtedly a painful effort; yet, such is the imbecility of
our nature, and such, in many instances, its depravity, as to render it the
duty of every preceptor, to endeavor as early as prudence will permit, or
reason can digest the information, to give his pupils an accurate view of " man
as he is."

It will not be doubted that the personal charms, fine accomplishments, and
independent fortune of Lavinia, produced many candidates for her favor. In
fact, she was surrounded by a little army of admirers; but although her heart
refused to surrender to any of those passionate declarations, which assailed
her ear, (and she invariably received every one who distinguished her by his
regard, with that ingenuous frankness, which, upon these occasions, always
marks the conduct of an amiable woman) they still persisted in their
solicitations, affirming that her avowed preference of an individual should
alone constitute a period to their pursuit. Among the acquaintance of Lavinia,
figured conspicuously an accomplished youth, for whom her gentle bosom had long
sighed. All her secret wishes were breathed for Alphonso, but Alphonso had
never taken rank among the number of her declared admirers. This, however, was,
by the enamoured Lavinia, imputed to an excess of del^^^t^y; and often did she
whisper a selection from a favorite ballad: -- " Among the rest young Edwin
bowed, but never talked of love." Mean time, every day, and almost every hour,
gave new energy to the assiduities of Alphonso; and no opportunity passed
unmarked by his distinguishing attentions. In those rural walks, in which it
was the custom of Lavinia to accompany her juvenile companions, Alphonso was
still by her side; for her the ripened berry was culled, the elegantly fancied
bouquet was presented with a modest and impressive air, and, to encircle her
auburn tresses, he enwreathed a garland of the choicest flowers.

He was careful to procure for her every new publication, and he would pass
whole days in reading to her those volumes which he judged worthy her
attention; every impassioned sentence he would render still more glowing, never
forgetting, by emphasis and gesture, to point to the heart of Lavinia each
moving sentiment. Often did he fix his eyes, apparently beaming with love, on
her glowing face; on these occasions he would assume a tender air, sigh deeply,
place his spread hands upon his heart, anon clasp them in a kind of
enthusiastic rapture; and rarely ever did he conclude this well acted farce
without a tear, which he affected to conceal, and which the too credulous
Lavinia never failed to impute to delicacy, strength of affection, and
unexampled respect. He was invariably her conductor to places of public resort;
and he seemed to regard every gentleman who offered himself by way of escort,
as an invader of his prerogative.

Thus rolled on the halcyon months. Lavinia's attachment every hour augmented;
all her sensibilities were in full force; her unbounded confidence was engaged,
and her highest complacency ensured. Of duplicity she had formed but a vague
idea; she had heard, it is true, of the existence of a propensity which she
esteemed monstrous, and it ranked in her mind, with the stories of giants and
hobgoblins, which she had received from her nurse, in her days of childhood. To
have imputed nefarious purposes to Alphonso, she would have regarded as a most
cruel outrage against the brightest assemblage of virtues, which ever
irradiated a human bosom; and to restrain the expansive flights of an ardent
and luxuriant fancy, she had never been taught. She esteemed -- she loved --
and at the shrine of tender friendship, she offered the most impassioned vows.
The numerous friends of Alphonso and Lavinia, gave them to each other; the
world announced their marriage as an event which would speedily take place; her
professed admirers, conceiving she had made her election, decently withdrew
their pretensions, avowing a manly resolution, to act, in future, " a brother's
part." Alphonso continued to evince himself in every action, and in every
arrangement, the most impassioned of lovers; and yet, strange to tell, his
tongue had never uttered a single sentence, which announced what his eyes were
continually proclaiming; which amounted to the simple declaration -- I love
you. The mother of Lavinia beheld with approbation the growing attachment of
her beloved child -- she regarded Alphonso as a man every way worthy of her
daughter; and she anticipated a rich harvest of domestic felicity, when
Lavinia, wedded, should augment her joys, and probably give to her embraces a
blooming offspring, amid whose endearing caresses she should breathe her last
maternal sigh.

At length, however, the wary matron could not forbear to question -- "It is
strange, my dear Lavinia, that Alphonso is not more explicit -- you have
received his attention with all that indulgent complacency, which is proper to
a modest and a decent girl; he cannot doubt your approbation; what then can
suspend his most unequivocal declarations? What delays his application to your
mother?" Lavinia blushed expressively; but it was not, however, a blush of
conviction. The doubt, implied in the observations of her mother, she conceived
derogatory to the immaculate honor of the man, whom she deemed incapable of
error; and she had never before felt so much inclined to arraign the candor,
and even the justice, of her, who, from the first dawn of reason, she had
regarded as a perfect model of every excellence. Alphonso, she replied, is the
most delicate of men -- of his ardent love I have had incontestible proofs -- a
thousand times has the most unequivocal declarations trembled upon his lips;
but that uncommon respect which inmingles with his regards, his tender awe of
me, has hitherto restrained the fervor of an avowal, which is but delayed.
Ought I to regard as reprehensible a mode of conduct, manifestly the result of
his consideration for my feelings? Alphonso, Madam, is not to be influenced by
common principles; he is affectionate, amiable, and disinterested; his passion
is sentimental, precisely of that description which I wish; and so eligible is
my present situation, indulged, as I am, with the presence and tender
approbation of my dear mamma, and amply gratified by the full enjoyment of
those pleasures, which I derive from contributing to the relief of the
necessitous, that, provided the assiduities and tender friendship of Alphonso
is allowed me, I cannot form a higher idea of earthly felicity.

Thus was the matron silenced; and she the more readily acquiesced in the
sentiments of her daughter, as her upright mind could not conceive of turpitude
so enormous, as that which must excite a being, deliberately to perpetrate the
murder of the peace of a fellow creature, without a single apparent motive to
stimulate to a deed of such atrocity. She also knew how to estimate the value
of her daughter; she was conscious of her exquisite beauty, and rare
accomplishments, and she was sensible that her fortune was amply sufficient to
gratify the most ambitious views; an impartial decision would, she confidently
imagined, pronounce her in every respect the equal of Alphonso, and she
therefore gave to the winds her maternal anxieties.

In this train matters continued many weeks longer: Alphonso contrived to
extend his treacherous entanglements to the utmost possible duration.
Perceiving, however, that he had at length attenuated the thread to the very
point of breaking, he thought proper suddenly to decamp; and having made up his
mind, he announced to the family, quite in (...) manner, his intention of
taking a journey, mentioning it as a thing of course, and, quaintly enough,
expressing his wishes that he might soon meet again, friends, whom he should
ever value.

The mother of Lavinia now saw clearly the fate of her beloved child; but she
hesitated to make a discovery, an apprehension of the consequence of which,
filled her with immeasureable dread! while Lavinia still continued ingeniously
reasoning away appearances. Alphonso was still the best, and most undesigning
of men -- she confidently expected his speedy return; nor did she experience
any other regret, than what his absence occasioned, until many succeeding posts
passed without bringing her a single line; then, indeed, her utmost tenderness
and candor was put to the test, to invent apologies, or to account for a
conduct so ambiguous. Still, however, the particular days in which the post
returned, might have slipped his memory; his letters might have been written;
his servant might have delayed to put them in the office; the courier might
have been unfaithful. In short, struggling to detain the deluder hope, there
was scarce an absurdity which she would not have admitted, rather than suppose
that bosom, where she had treasured up her dearest expectations of earthly
bliss, should have relinquished every good. Conviction, however, could not be
delayed; it perforce obtained; and when she learned that the beautiful Monimia
had become the object of his pursuit, she could no longer doubt.

She received the information with a steadiness and composure, which was more
terrifying to her mother, than the most violent exclamation of grief. She shed
no tears, nor uttered a single complaint; but, folding her snowy arms, with a
look expressive of the deepest woe, and all the aggravated anguish of a broken
spirit, she meekly bent her head in token of resignation; and while evidently
assaying to arm herself with fortitude, overpowered by the magnitude of the
struggle, she fainted in the arms of her agonized parent! On her return to
life, she gave (...) tokens of a deranged intellect; and the disorder of her
mind has hitherto baffled the power of art. For a time, her lucid intervals
cherished the hope of a perfect restoration; but her sensibility was extreme;
and, unaccustomed to yield the control of the passions to the regency of
reason, is it wonderful that, upon an occasion so cruelly calamitous, she
became unequal to the combat?

Let the Monimia's of the female world beware, however meritorious they may be
-- they do not, they cannot surpass the amiable, the highly accomplished
Lavinia; and an Alphonso who could meditate the destruction of a happiness so
well founded, as was that of the now desolate sufferer, is abandoned enough to
harbor the most atrocious purposes.

The glimmerings of reason which Lavinia discovered, during the first weeks
that succeeded her misfortune, were transient, and more and more unfrequent;
and the faint traces of recollection which she evinced, produced the most heart
affecting melancholy that can be imagined. She is now a confirmed maniac; and
so total is her derangement, that some months have elapsed since she has
manifested the smallest attention even to her mother. She frequently holds long
ideal dialogues with Alphonso, responding for him, and it is observable that
she utters the answers which she shapes for him precisely in his tone of voice.
According to the caprice of the time being, she alternately upbraids and
soothes him; and she is, by turns, grave and gay. Now with floods of tears she
weeps his exit, chanting at his supposed obsequies, the funeral dirge; and
anon, in an extacy of joy, she felicitates herself on his restoration to virtue
and to her; not a sentiment does she utter in her strongest paroxysms, but is
chastised by delicacy, but is descriptive of the purity and benevolence of her
soul. The scattered gems glitter with transcendent luster upon the dark clouds
in which she is enveloped; and it is hardly possible to conceive a more
calamitous situation, than to be marked down the hourly witness of her
plaintive sorrows. Yet this task is assigned to a fond, an aged, and a widowed
mother. To other hands she refuses to relinquish the care of her poor
unfortunate! "No mercenary hireling" she exclaims, "shall inflict upon my
gentle child, unnecessary sufferings. It is enough, that the blossoms of her
youth have been thus untimely blighted. It is the part of her mother to soothe,
as far as circumstances will admit, her woe stricken spirit; and no earthly
consideration shall induce me to yield my melancholy charge, or quit for a
single hour my faultless mourner!" Every night her bed is prepared in the
apartment of her daughter; and she takes no sustenance but what she receives in
her presence. Alas! alas! what a heart piercing contrast is momently exhibited,
to those scenes which she had contemplated as unveiling to her declining life,
when, in the full enjoyment of her complacent hours, the children of her
beloved daughter passed in vision before her.

Lavinia, like another Maria, is suffered to wander over the grounds which make
a part of her paternal inheritance. Her insanity being of the melancholy and
pathetic kind, she is never boisterous or unruly; her mother, and her woman,
are continually the companions of her rambles; of these she takes no other
notice, than barely to petition, in the most supplicating tone of voice, for
any article of which she happens to fancy herself in want: She is particularly
fond of straying amid those walks to which Alphonso was attached; and every
tree and shrub is addressed by her in the most pity moving strains!

When death shall deprive Lavinia of her guardian parent, the augmentation of
her calamity will be incalculable. Nor can this event be far distant --
accelerated by the sad catastrophe of her daughter's once luminous
expectations, and by her hourly sufferings, it must soon take place. She will
sink into the grave; a distant branch of her family will succeed to her
inheritance, who, very probably, regarding the deranged Lavinia as an
encumbrance to the accession which awaits him, will, by pretended necessary
severity, hasten the demise, which it will be his interest to procure!!!

I visited Emly-House not long since -- great God, how changed is the aspect of
every object which presents! The servants, the apartments, the superb
furniture, every thing seemed to partake the general gloom! In a remote chamber
I beheld the aged mother -- her head white as snow -- on her bended knees, with
supplicating hands, and streaming eyes, she was conjuring her daughter to
relinquish a purpose, which she had recently declared, of putting an end to an
existence that (with greater manifestations of reason than she had demonstrated
for a long period) she affirmed was no longer to be endured. I joined, with an
assumed authority, the entreaties of her mother, when, waving her hand, in a
manner descriptive of inexpressible anguish, she bowed her assent to our united
remonstrances. Never did I behold loveliness so pro^trated; she is
astonishingly emaciated -- her pallid cheek is wan as death -- the dimples
which played around her enchanting mouth, are succeeded by the cavities of woe
-- no expression of gladness beams from her sky tinctured eye, a fixed
melancholy is brooding there; the lines of her fine face are deeply sunk -- a
premature old age seems rapidly advancing; and her folded arms, (a posture she
generally prefers) while they indicate resignation, proclaim her, also, in the
same moment, irretrievably the child of unrelenting misfortune!!!!

Could Alphonso now behold her -- even Alphonso would pity.

No. XL.
Yes, if I may the anxious parent aid,
To steps maternal point the better way,
Assist to shield from harm the guileless maid,
And scatter over her paths the beamy ray;
Then, with re-kindling joy, I will retrace
Those scenes on which so often before I dwelt;
To retrospection, once again, give place
To days when I have all the father felt.

IT appears that the declaration of Miss Clifford's marriage, has answered only
one part of the letter of my fair correspondent, Miss Monimia Castalio; and, as
I make a point of paying the most minute attention to the epistles addressed to
me in my official capacity, before I commence my responses to the worthy Mrs.
Aimwell, I will briefly reply to the remaining query contained in that address.

Let me see -- Miss Monimia Castalio and Miss Primrose wish to know, what the
ladies Hamilton and Seymour think of naked elbows; whether they have thrown
aside their modesty pieces, and whether they dress their waists as short as
Mrs. Modish says they do? Now, that I may give to my anxious inquirers every
possible gratification, I shall answer their queries both generally and
particularly: And,

First, generally. It is not true, that the ladies are in the habit of
employing Mrs. Modish. It is notorious, that this sometimes excellent modeller,
at all times pertinaciously insists upon her own whims, however absurd and
fantastical they may chance to be, and that she frequently precipitates her
determined votaries into the most ridiculous vagaries. Margaretta and Serafina
take a cursory view of her followers, and adopt only such regulations as are
proper and becoming; they are never fond of extremes; and hence the sudden
transitions of fashion cannot produce them outree figures. If a particular
color is said to be the rage, and it does not happen to suit their
complexions, they do not impose upon themselves the necessity of wearing it;
their ambition is, to display their fine features and persons to the best
advantage, and this their predominant wish in dress is never prostrated to any
inferior consideration; they have no violent desire to be considered as the
standards of mode, or to be exalted to the summit of taste; they have heard a
favorite poet say, that Beauty, when unadorned, is then adorned the most;
and, following the example of all other commentators, they contrive that the
text should square exactly with their own ideas previously conceived; they
produce it as an antidote to all extravagance in the materials or modification
of their habiliments; discarding pomp, they adopt elegance, and generally
appear as if attired by the Graces.

Secondly, particularly. I have never heard them give an opinion relative to
naked elbows; but, since the request of Miss Monimia Castalio, I have
accurately observed their sleeves, or, to speak more technically, the dress of
their arms, and with the assistance of my good Mary, I may perhaps present an
intelligible view of this section of their garments. It seems they have never
worn long sleeves, except when riding; and hence, it will rationally enough be
concluded, they have no violent predilection for a long sleeve; but I will
whisper in the ear of my fair readers, a truth to which they may not perhaps
immediately recur -- they have uncommonly fine arms: Their sleeve, then,
descending one quarter of an inch, more or less, below that well turned
curvature y'clepped an elbow, there receives its graceful slope, the extreme
edge being ornamented with muslin, slight gauze, blond, or Brussels, as may
suit the quality of the gown, or the occasion on which it is to be worn. They
have not thrown aside their veils of modesty -- God forbid they ever should --
but with regard to modesty pieces, so called, in all their varieties, or those
parapets upon parapets, behind which breast-work the fair intrencher seems to
challenge the attack -- as a substitute for all these, their delicate muslin,
simply edged with a border, varied agreeably to the elegance of their fancy, is
drawn round the neck, and fastened with a knot of ribbon behind, over which the
handkerchief receives a form somewhat conformable to the reigning taste. For
their waists, as they never appeared like inverted cones, so their skirts have
not yet obtained an additional half yard in length, for the purpose of usurping
that part of the body where the blond tucker formerly obtained a station. If
the ladies make up a new dress, they so far condescend to the then fashion, as
not to render themselves conspicuous for their nonconformity; and I believe
this piece of accommodation makes up the sum total of their compliance with the
fashionable world.

Thus having adjusted, as I conceive, this important particular, I turn with
pleasurable alacrity to the maternal epistle of the truly deserving Mrs.
Aimwell. Tremblingly alive to every thing which can affect her beautiful
charge, does not Mrs. Aimwell too readily admit those corroding apprehensions
which undermine her peace? She confesses that nature has been liberal, and
that the mind of her daughter is exempt from those adverse inclinations which
too often, even in the bosom of childhood, become fearfully productive. Ought
she not then to felicitate herself upon the happy disposition of her Sophia? I
pronounce that patience and perseverance will perfect her wishes. Miss Aimwell
has but recently attained her twelfth year. It is rather early to expect a
love of uniformity, and a pursuit of regularity, as a matter of choice. The
season of youth is happily marked by vivacity; and the playful candidates for
more substantial good are filled with interesting wonder at every novel scene
that comes under their observation. They love to walk, set, or stand, precisely
as an imagination which does not readily submit to the sober agency of reason,
shall dictate. The young lady in question at present, takes rank among this
little eccentric class of beings; but under the judicious auspices of Mrs.
Aimwell, she will eventually become that accomplished female, who will exhibit
an exact transcript of the model already formed in the mind of her excellent
mother.

Yes, indeed, I do conceive that the hand of skilful cultivation may implant an
ardent thirst for knowledge; or, in other words, a love of reading in that mind
of which it was not the original growth; nay, further, I affirm, upon the
authority of experience, that the useful and fertile exotic will take as deep
root, flourish as luxuriantly, and produce as plentiful a harvest, as in its
native soil; and perhaps the conformation of this artificial taste, is one of
the most eligible uses which can be made of novel reading. Curiosity in the
minds of young people is generally if not always upon the wing; and I have
regarded curiosity, combined with necessity, as the grand stamina of almost
every improvement. Narrative, unencumbered with dry reflections, and adorned
with all the flowers of fiction, possesses for the new plumed fancy a most
fascinating charm; attention is arrested, every faculty of the soul is engaged,
and the pages of the interesting and entertaining novelist are almost devoured.
Thus an attachment to reading is formed, and this primary object once obtained,
in that paucity of those kind of writings, which the watchful parent will know
how to create, the entertaining biographer will become an acceptable
substitute; the transition to history will be in course; geography constitutes
an essential part of history; and the annals of the heavenly bodies will
ultimately be studied with avidity. Pope's Homer may originate a taste for
poetry, even in the very soul of frigidity; and a perusal of the beautifully
diversified and richly ornamented numbers of the Adventurer, induces a
perigrination through every essay which has been written, from the days of
their great primogenitures, Steel and Addison, down to the simple numbers of
the humble Gleaner. In this view, novels may be considered as rendering an
important service to society; and I question whether there is not less risk in
placing volumes of this kind in the hands of girls of ten or twelve years of
age, than during that interesting period which revolves from fifteen to twenty.
The mind is instructed with much more facility, at an early age, than
afterward; and I have thought that many a complete letter writer has been
produced from the school of the novelist; and hence, possibly, it is, that
females have acquired so palpable a superiority over us, in this elegant and
useful art. Novels, I think, may very properly and advantageously constitute
the amusement of a girl from eight to fourteen years of age, provided always
that she pursues her reading under the judicious direction of her guardian
friend: By the time she has completed her fourteenth year, (supposing the
voice of well-judged and tender premonition has occasionally sounded in her
ears) I am mistaken if her understanding will not have made such progress, as
to give her to rise from the table with proper ideas of the lightness of the
repast; of the frivolity of those scenes to which she has attended; of their
insufficiency, as sources of that kind of information which is the offspring of
truth, and of their inability to bestow real knowledge, or those substantial
qualities that nerve the mind, and endow it with the fortitude so necessary in
the career of life.

Under the requisite guidance, she will learn properly to appreciate the heroes
and heroines of the novelist; repetition will create satiety, and she will have
risen from the banquet before the consequences of her intoxication can
materially injure her future life. She will have drank largely, it is true, but
revolving hours will give her to recover from her inebriety, and happily those
hours will intervene ere yet she is called to act the part assigned her; and
she will have extracted every advantage within the reach of possibility, from
this line of reading, while the pernicious effects attributed thereto, can in
no respect essentially hurt her.

When a torrent of novels bursts suddenly on a girl, who, bidding adieu to
childhood, has already entered a career, to her of such vast importance, the
evils of which they may be productive are indeed incalculable! aided by a
glowing imagination, she will take a deep interest in the fascinating
enthusiasm they inspire; each gilded illusion will pass for a splendid reality;
she will sigh to become the heroine of the drama; and, selecting her hero, it
is possible she may be precipitated into irremediable evil, before she may have
learned to make a just estimation of the glittering trifles, by which she is
thus captivated. I say, therefore, I would confine novels to girls from eight
to fourteen years of age; and I would then lay them by, for the amusement of
those vacant hours, which, in advanced years, are frequently marked by a kind
of ennui, the result, probably, of a separation from those companions, with
whom we have filled the more busy scenes of life.

I grant that novels, under proper direction, might be made much more
extensively subservient to the well being of society, than, with a very few
exceptions, they have ever yet been. Was not love, unconquerable, unchanging,
and omnipotent, their everlasting theme, they might abound with precepts and
examples conducive to the best of purposes. This remark leads to the
consideration of the question proposed by my anxious correspondent. In my
toleration of novels, have I not exercised a discriminating power? Most
assuredly I have. There is a class of novels, and of plays, which it appears to
me should be burnt by the hands of the common executioner; and were it not that
the good natured world generally takes part with the sufferer, I could wish to
see strong marks of public odium affixed upon the authors of those libidinous
productions.

But it is as painful to dwell upon subjects of reprehension as it is
pleasurable to hold the pen of panegyric -- let me hasten, therefore, to a
selection which I have conceived indisputably worthy of preference; and, in the
first grade of those writings, that take rank under the general description of
novels, and that are entitled to the highest notes of eulogy, I have been
accustomed to place the history of Clarissa Harlowe.

In my decided approbation of this admired production, I have the satisfaction
to reflect that I am not singular. My paternal grandfather, who was one of the
most respectable characters of the era in which he lived, indulged, perhaps to
excess, an invincible aversion to novels. Yet, the Holy Bible and Clarissa
Harlowe, were the books in which he accustomed his daughters to read
alternately, during those hours in which he attended to them himself. The Rev.
James Hervey, Rector of Weston Favell, in Northamptonshire in England,
celebrated as well for an exemplary life and purity of manners, as for the
elegance and piety of his literary compositions, in a treatise written upon the
education of daughters, recommends Clarissa, as a suitable present to those
young ladies, who are to be trained in the paths of virtue and propriety; and a
late writer, has asserted, that Clarissa Harlowe is the first human production
now extant. He hesitates not to place it, for literary excellence, above the
Iliad of Homer, or any other work, ancient or modern, the sacred oracles
excepted.

But without taking it upon me to defend this opinion. I will only say, that it
appears to me admirably well calculated as a useful companion for a female,
from the first dawn of her reason, to the closing scene of life. It has been
said that many a Lovelace has availed himself of plots, fabricated and
developed in those volumes, which would never else have entered his imagination
-- be it so, I only contend for the placing them in female hands; and I affirm
that they contain the best code of regulations, the best directions in every
situation which they exemplify -- in one word, the best model for the sex, that
I have ever yet seen pourtrayed. The character of Clarissa, it has been
asserted, is too highly wrought: but I ask, what perfection did she possess
that we should be willing to dispense with, in the female, who we should
delineate as an accomplished woman! Was I to advance an objection against a
work of such acknowledged merit, I would say that it is the character of
Lovelace, and more particularly of the Sinclairs, the Martins, the Hortons, and
the Harlowes, of those pages, which are too highly wrought. It is surely much
more easy to conceive of an amiable woman, acting precisely as did Clarissa,
than of that degree of turpitude and inexorable severity, which must have
preceded the perpetration of actions so black, and the manifestation of rigor
so ill sounded and unrelenting.

It has been generally imagined that Clarissa's only deviation from strict
propriety, consisted in her flight from the protection of her father; but a
moment's reflection will evince the error of this conclusion -- that cannot ^e
a fault to which I am compelled. Clarissa met her betrayer with a design to
remonstrate, and to conciliate, but with a determined resolution not to abandon
the paternal mansion; it appears that she was precipitated upon that fatal
step, and, environed by the deep laid machination of the deceiver, her escape
would have been miraculous, yet she continued to struggle, and even at the
moment she was hurried away, the beauteous sufferer still vehemently protested
against accompanying the wretch, who was armed for her destruction. Clarissa's
error ( if indeed, all circumstances considered, she was ever in any sort
reprehensible) must be traced further back; it consisted in her correspondence
after the parental prohibition, and in her consenting to meet the treacherous
villain. Yet, when we take a view of the motives which stimulated her to those
decisive measures, we can scarcely deem her censurable; and she extorts from
every bosom that kind of applause, which we spontaneously yield to persecuted
merit.

Love, in the bosom of Clarissa, was always subservient to virtue. It would
never have taken the lead of duty; and, had she been left to the free exercise
of her fine faculties, had she been permitted to call into action those rare
abilities of which she was mistress, she would have completely extricated
herself from every embarrassment. Love, in the bosom of Clarissa, was the
noblest of principles; it was uniformly solicitous for the genuine felicity,
establishment and elevation of its object; but it would never have permitted
her to have allied herself to a man, who could barbarously triumph in the
destruction of that sweet peace of mind, which is the bosom friend of the
innocent and of the good; who could inhumanly meditate the ruin of those
confiding females who were entitled to his pity and his protection. Liberated
from the resentment of her hard hearted relations, and moving in that enlarged
and elevated sphere, to which her matchless intellect and uncommon information
entitled her, she would doubtless have investigated. The libertine would
inevitably have stood confessed, and would as assuredly have been discarded
from her favor. In one word, love, in the bosom of Clarissa, was what I wish,
from my soul, it may become in the bosom of every female.

The deportment of Clarissa, after Lovelace had so artfully betrayed her into a
step which her judgment invariably condemned, has been the subject of much
cavilling; she is accused of undue haughtiness; but surely such censurers have
not well weighed either her character and situation, or that ambiguous mode of
conduct, which the despoiler so early assumed. How often did he hold her soul
in suspense, and how necessary was it for his nefarious purposes thus to do.

But I am not now writing a criticism upon Clarissa; the foregoing hints will
inform Mrs. Aimwell what class of novels I particularly approbate; and I
proceed, agreeably to her request, to select a few of those letters, which made
a part of the correspondence between Mary, and Margaretta, during an early part
of Miss Melworth's life.

To MARGARETTA.
NO courier ever produced a letter with an air of greater importance than did
our boy Plato, when, ten moments since, he handed me yours. Indeed he seems
much elated with his new office; and I freely own to you, my dear girl, that I
am fond of giving pleasure even to Plato. When pleasure results from duty, as
in the present instance, it can hardly be enjoyed too luxuriantly. Those beings
who are frequently subjected to the caprice of the petty tyrants whom they
serve, derive their existence from the same source with their masters and
mistresses; their destination is also similar to ours; and, considering the
natural love of liberty which predominates more or less in every human bosom,
and the pangs which must consequently result from servitude, it is a duty
incumbent upon us to render that state of subordination in which servants are
providentially placed, as easy as possible. Reflection will suggest the policy
of this conduct, considered in every view; and as the face of things is
continually changing, and it is difficult to say what events time may produce
-- our fate may, in future, remain with him, who is to day under our direction:
At any rate, if we would insure to ourselves a fund of pleasing reflections, we
must treasure up those proper and becoming actions, which will alone stand the
test of accurate investigation.

I thank you, my love, for your letter: It is a charming specimen of what I am
to expect in future; and as you have so well profited by my premonitory
address, I calculate upon your continued docility, and anticipate from this
correspondence the most desirable consequences.

You are captivated by the Count de Poland, by his generosity to his niece, by
Olivia, and by the sprightly Lady Morpeth; and this is precisely what I
expected from my Margaretta. The young mind embraces with extacy the most
prominent excellence, and, (...) dearing ardour, delights to expatiate (...)
too am an admirer of the consistent (...) Count de Poland; his fraternal
virtues (...) bosom the most exquisite sensations of which it is ^^ceptible; I
mark, with pensive sympathy, his a ^^^tion at the view and subsequent
recollection (...) faithful Ananette, with the poor bent sixpence in her
closed hand; and, if there is a melancholy luxury in tears, my penetrated
spirit partakes thereof, as I follow him to the chamber of death, as I behold
his emotions at the emaciated appearance of his angel sister, and as he bedews
the hand of the expiring saint with those testimonials of attachment which,
doubtless, were most consolatory to her fleeting spirit!

His renewed and aggravated sorrow at the sight of the work-bag, the gift of
blissful days -- his emotions as the last offices were performing -- the night
passed in the chamber of the beatified Maria -- the extreme anguish of his
soul, as he perused the woe-fraught recital, addressed to his still confided in
affection, by the pen of his injured, his matchless sister -- all this is
beautifully pathetic; and, when he folds to his throbbing bosom, the smiling
legacy of departed excellence -- when he commences the parent of the
interesting little orphan -- when he vows, upon the clay-cold hand of her
deceased mother, to fulfill every wish which her maternal heart (while yet it
beat in its mortal tenement) had expressed -- when he recognizes this his
solemn vow, as registered in the awful presence of the Almighty, and calls upon
his justice to deal with him according to the exactness with which he shall
perform it! -- when I trace him in the execution of the duties he had so
naturally assumed -- when I view him by the bed's side of the lovely slumberer,
and mark with what fond complacency he contemplates the features of sleeping
innocence -- when I see him bending one knee on the floor, his face close to
the heart-affecting cherub, and pressing her forehead with the caresses of
manly affection -- in every of these scenes, the corresponding feelings of my
sympathetic bosom are beyond expression. The description of the waking infant
is highly finished: I behold, in idea, the long dark eye-lashes, suddenly
contrasted by those mildly beaming splendors, which produced upon the paternal
Count such enchanting effects. In short, the whole of that animated page is
truly charming; and I will confess to you, my dear, that it is with passages of
this complexion, I am most pleased in the Count de Poland.

Ah! my Margaretta, I once had a brother! -- question me not relative to this
brother. His fraternal bosom is now as insensate as the cold by which it is
covered; his mind was the seat of every virtue. Had he lived -- but I forbear
-- Let me not press upon the sweet bud of your opening youth, with those deeply
surcharged sorrows, which a retrospect would occasion -- let me drop over them
the impenetrable veil of silence!!!

With the maternal character of Mrs. Osmond, and with the discretion of Lady
Edgerton, I am much pleased: But it is not the fault of novelists, to be
niggard of the virtues or the graces to those characters which they produce as
objects of admiration. Holding the pen of distribution, it is easy for them to
command an assemblage of every excellence; and these splendid habiliments,
never impaired by use, will suit as well the hero or heroine of the present
era, as those who figured centuries ago. The pecuniary fund of the novelist is
also inexhaustible, and the liberality of those endowments, drawn therefrom, is
only bounded by that sense of probability, which happens to exist in the mind
of the munificent conferer of those aerial bestowments. To say truth, my love,
that particular, which seems least to have commanded your attention, in the
Count de Poland, is precisely that which, in my opinion, constitutes its
principal value; it is a trait rarely met with in works of this kind; but it
is, nevertheless, susceptible of high improvement; and was it often dwelt on,
exemplified, and richly colored, it would probably produce, upon the mind of
the youthful reader, the most beneficial effect. Are you at a loss to
comprehend me? I will be more explicit. I mean the complete triumph, which Lord
Harenbrook and Lady Morpeth obtained over an inconsiderate attachment, that
seemed violently to have tempested the mind of the enamoured swain, and to have
made no inconsiderable impression upon the heart of the fashionable nymph. Her
recovery from those paths of dissipation, into which she had been betrayed by a
pernicious plan of education, is truly acceptable to the interested reader; and
the grateful attachment, which, it is apparent, she ultimately conceives for
Lord Morpeth, is a completion of her character.

Indeed, nothing can be imagined more absurd, than the endowing a hasty
predilection, formed in childhood, or at best, in the days of inexperienced
youth, with invincibility! I do not say that such attachments are always
improper: If they are approved of, after accurate investigation, and crowned by
the sanction of guardian friends, their permanency is desirable, and we ought
studiously to cultivate every sentiment which can contribute to their
establishment. But the election of the uninformed mind is seldom judicious, and
the immortality which we confer thereon, exists no where but in an overheated
imagination. A happy marriage is nothing else but the highest state of
friendship, of which the sons and daughters of mortality are capable; and, in
the choice of a companion for life, perfect esteem should point the election.
If you discover either of the young ladies, to whom your gentle bosom is
already so tenderly attached, to be unworthy of your regard, although she may
still be followed by your anxious wishes for her restoration to virtue, yet you
will no longer confer on her your confidence; and, was the same resolution in
exercise, a discovery of the want of merit in the object, until then beloved,
would as easily obliterate the attachment existing between the sexes, and we
should shrink from the idea of embarking on the important voyage of life,
without the rich cargo of esteem.

May Heaven guard from every evil, my lovely child -- this is the continued
prayer of your affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLI.
The glowing ardour of the youthful mind,
By no admeasurement of years confined,
Dwells all extatic on the notes of praise;
In fervid hues each common act pourtrays:
And when, by gratitude and love impressed,
The bosom's avenues are thus possessed,
Bending obedient to the forming hand,
As Reason points, the faculties expand.

TO arrest the warm affections of the youthful voyager, very little address is
requisite. Easily susceptible of impressions, the opening mind generally
estimates persons and things, with the benefits which accrue therefrom,
agreeably to its own vivid imagination; and its calculations, accumulated by a
productive fancy, highly o'ertop the judgment of reason. Gratitude, if not
spontaneous, is implanted in the glowing bosom, almost without an effort; and
affection, stamped by gratitude, is a substantial basis for the superstructure
of education. To convince young people of our entire attachment, and that all
our views, and every arrangement relative to them, are directed to their
present and future advancement, is indisputably of the greatest importance.
Children will receive lessons with confidence and advantage, from the lips of
those whose tender attachment they do not consider as problematical; and
reciprocity of regards, between the teacher and the taught, is absolutely
indispensable.

Happily, in the mind of Margaretta, an indelible conviction of our unalterable
and disinterested attachment was early produced; and a reciprocation of
regards, a decided preference, and even veneration, for our characters, with
that calm reposing confidence, which naturally results from affection so
entire, and esteem which she conceived so well grounded, originated in her
gentle bosom the warmest sensations, and ultimately procured the very best
effect. Many of her letters are too expressive of the impassioned feelings of a
fervid and enthusiastically grateful heart, to meet the public eye; and, as
Mrs. Aimwell requires only a specimen, I am at liberty to suppress them;
selecting others, as they may happen to occur, without attending to the order
in which they were written. The following are, however, in course.

To my honored MOTHER.
DEAR MAMMA,
I DO not know that there is so happy a being in this world, as your little
Margaretta. Your letters, best of friends, are more pleasing to me than I can
find words to express. Alas! alas! who would have thought it? -- When my aunt
Arbuthnot used to weep over me, apprehending that she should leave her poor
child quite friendless, she would sigh as if her heart would burst; and I, for
my part, had no wish, but to go to sleep on the dear bosom of her, whom I
supposed to be my mother, and never, never more to wake in a world, where I
thought there was no one to cherish and to love the poor little creature, who
was so soon to be deprived of her only friend! Were any one now to see the rich
joyful Margaretta, as happy as the days are long, would it be possible to
conceive her the same little destitute child, who shed so many tears in Mrs.
Thrifty's house in Charleston? Dear me! -- the big waves swallowed up my
father! -- my mother broke her poor heart! -- and my aunt too, very soon
followed to that better world, whence she can no more return, and every body
said, there was no one remained to take care of me! -- But God has sent two
blessed angels to take charge of me; and for this I will prostrate myself
before him every morning and evening, and love and honor him all my days.

Well now, I think, if I should be a third time orphanaged, I should never
again hold up my head! You know, mamma, you have taught me to make observations
and comparisons; and so, standing in the bow window the other day, I could not
help weeping at the fate of the plant, which we have so long cherished and
watched with so much care. It was the last stormy day -- and, although it had
stood upright during the burning heat of summer, and the heavy rains of autumn,
yet, the torrent that burst upon it from the first wintry storm, stripped it of
all its leaves, and levelled it with the earth, from which it has never since
lifted its head. Just so, thought I, it would fare with thee, Margaretta; thou
have survived the loss of thy parents, and of thy second mother; but, if
envious death should deprive thee of thy present guardian friends, thou must
never think to look abroad again; thou must lie down with the prostrate plant,
and all thy fine expectations will be trodden to the ground! Dear me! my tears
fell like big drops of rain. You remember, my mamma, that you had the goodness
to wipe them away with your own handkerchief, that you kissed my cheek, and
wished to know the cause of my sorrow. I could not then speak -- but I
determined to write you about it -- they were partly tears of joy, and partly
of sorrow -- of joy, for the present; and of sorrow, for what may happen; but
your indulgent smiles soon left nothing in my little heart but joy and
gladness. Certainly, as Mrs. Trueworth says, if I am not the best, I shall be
the worst young body in all this world; and if I should ever be ungrateful to
you or my papa, I shall deserve the displeasure of every good person.

Lady Morpeth's disrespect for her excellent parents surprised me very much;
and although I was pleased with her fine qualities, yet, on account of this
circumstance, it was some time before I could be reconciled to her character --
But what a shocking woman was Lady Ann Fostess! Are there such ladies in
England as Lady Ann Fostess? fie upon them, if there are! I am sure they are
not worthy to be called ladies; and if they are, in reality, to be found in Old
England, how happy am I that I have escaped to this new world, where sincerity
and kindness are created king and queer, and where all their subjects obey
their laws. I wish, mamma, you had written me your sentiments of Lady Ann -- I
am sure you must detest her.

I trust I shall never have a friend whom you do not approve; and you speak the
very heart and soul of your Margaretta, when you say, that if any of my
associates were to addict themselves to those habits, which you and my dear
papa have pointed out to me as reprehensible, I should immediately become
desirous of separating myself from them, however dear they might have been to
me; and I do believe it is impossible I should continue to love those, whom you
assure me are unworthy of my attention.

Miss Hayden has been diverting herself this hour past, with what she calls our
funny correspondence; she rushed into my chamber, (you know she visits when and
where she pleases, without ever thinking it necessary to ask her mamma's
permission) having found her way up the back stairs, just as I was preparing to
write. She had not stopped to put on either hat or scarf, and her appearance
was so wild, that it absolutely frightened me! She says she believes it is the
first time that ever people wrote to each other under the same roof, when they
could talk together every hour if they pleased; and she would not be so silly,
even though her mamma should require it! After this she wished to see your
letter, but I refused to gratify her. I know she does not spell properly, and
she reads very badly, with the very tone of (...) which you, mamma, dislike;
and she pay^ not the least regard even to a full stop! It is true, that she
cares for nothing but running about from place to place. She was a whole month
in making a shirt for her father, and it was ill made after all. They say she
lays in (...) (...) nine o'clock! -- and I know that when any one tells her of
her faults, she only laughs at them for their pains; and she says she is
determined to enjoy herself in her own way! Indeed, mamma, I was not sorry when
she took her leave, and neither Miss Clifford nor myself would drop one tear,
if she should never pay us another visit. She thinks herself handsome; but one
of her eyes is plainly a darker blue than the other, and I am sure, therefore,
she cannot be beautiful. I am glad, however, I did not show her my mamma's
letter -- the testimonies of the affection of so beloved a mother, are too
valuable to be exposed to such eyes, by her ever grateful, ever duteous

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


To MARGARETTA MELWORTH.
THE necessity of uttering to my Margaretta the language of censure, of penning
the line of reprehension, will ever inflict upon my own bosom, pangs
correspondent with, if not superior to, those which she may, upon those
occasions, experience. Contrary to my wonted custom, I deny myself the
indulgence of responding to your last epistle in course. Your account of Miss
Hayden is so foreign from your usual style, so unlike every trait I have
hitherto observed in a mind, of which I had conceived I had obtained an
intimate knowledge, and, altogether, so extraordinary, as to demand my first
and undivided attention. Solicitous to preserve the tranquillity of your bosom,
and to eradicate the very seeds of detraction, I am, by consequence, upon this
subject, solemnly serious.

"Miss Hayden rushed into your chamber without hat or scarf." Well, my dear,
she is quite in our vicinity, and this was nothing more than a neighbourly mark
of sociability; and if her mamma chooses to tolerate her excursions when and
where her inclination leads her, without so far interesting herself, as to take
the direction of her movements, I do not see that we are called upon to take
upon us the invidious character of her censors. Her education is not committed
to our charge, nor have I, much less you, any right, either to arraign or
condemn.

I would have my girl regard the faults that may pass under her observation, as
cautionary occurrences, that may direct her to avoid the rocks on which too
many have split; but she must not be eager to detect, nor hasty to expose. If,
from whatever motive, there has not been that plan in the education of Miss
Hayden, without which, scarce any thing valuable can be achieved, is she not
therefore invested with a claim to your kind commiseration? If the health and
leisure of her mamma, had permitted her to bestow that attention, which is so
absolutely requisite in the cultivation of the mind and manners, the
probability is, that her orthography would have been as unexceptionable, her
reading as elegant, and that she might have used her needle as expeditiously,
as girls, who have been thus systematically taught, generally do. Early
accustomed properly to appreciate time, she would not then have slumbered away
her hours in bed, but each returning morning, as it gilded the eastern sky,
would have witnessed the glad orisons of the lovely maiden, would have marked
in its progress those habits of industry so proper, and so becoming, especially
to the season of youth. I am not pleased with your refusing to show Miss Hayden
my letter. It would have been better if, with your usual sweetness, you had put
it into her hand, if you had replied, to the ridicule she endeavored to throw
on our correspondence, in words to this effect: Why, Miss Hayden, my mamma
approves of this arrangement, and she is undoubtedly a better judge of the
utility of the plan than I am; it is her wish to render letter writing familiar
to me; and she thinks the books which she recommends to my perusal with those
adventitious events that may be worth treasuring up, will be more deeply
infixed in my memory, if I dwell upon them long enough to commit my remarks
thereon to paper, than if I passed them by in a cursory manner; besides, she is
thus presented with an opportunity of forming my taste, and correcting my
judgment, which might not otherwise have been afforded her. With regard to our
dwelling under the same roof, I have heard my mamma observe, that we are as
really separated by the walls of our respective apartments, as if we were
placed in different kingdoms. It is often as difficult to recollect the
features of a friend who is in the next room, as if he was removed to the
empire of China. Spirit is not, in this particular, either embarrassed by
distance, or assisted by vicinity. On the wings of imagination, I can transport
myself to the mansion of any family I have visited in Philadelphia, with as
much celerity, as I can be thus borne to the parlour, where I every day meet my
assembled friends; nay, if spirit, when acting independent of material organs,
is in no sort governed by their admeasurement, I can as easily peep into the
city of London, with my bodily eyes, as into the next room, provided I made no
advances to the neighboring apartment; and, seated at my writing desk, without
an observer, I do as certainly address an absent parent, as if she had been
unfortunately called to cross the vast atlantic.

After you had delivered yourself to the above effect, if Miss Hayden had
continued her ludicrous comments, it would have been easy to have changed the
subject; and, conscious of your own superiority, you must have experienced in
such a procedure, a perfect calm. But, on the contrary, you have made yourself
the aggressor -- your indignation is roused by the prattle of a girl whom you
affect to despise -- you unkindly refuse a request that you could have granted
without the smallest inconvenience to yourself -- you enumerate circumstances,
with the odium of which, she is not justly chargeable -- you produce them
against her, and, with a degree of rancour of which I had not supposed you
capable, by pointing out an almost imperceptible blemish -- you endeavor to
detract from those personal charms, which Miss Hayden is generally acknowledged
to possess!!

Natural defects, suppose them to be irremediable, should never be pressed into
the catalogue of faults, since I am not to be responsible for that which in no
sort depended upon me; they may properly excite our silent commiseration, or,
if occasion calls it forth, our expressed sympathy; but a person remarking upon
them in any other way, incurs the guilt of malevolence, injustice, and impiety.
Of malevolence, because it is a manifest indication that we are ill disposed
toward a fellow creature. Of injustice, because, as I have just hinted, we
thereby condemn, or make an individual suffer, for a circumstance not to be
avoided, and which the volition of the being, whose misfortune we thus
aggravate, was no how accessory in procuring. Of impiety, because we thus
irreverently subject to ridicule, and tacitly arraign, the wisdom of that
Supreme Being who presents his productions precisely in the order and manner
which, to his unerring judgment, seems best. There can be but one good
reason, for holding up to the view of the world at large, or the individual in
particular, a deformity either in the intellectual or animal conformation. It
is superfluous to add that this is reformation, and where this is not the
object, those who remark thereon are both officious and ill-natured. The truth
is, the person of Miss Hayden is uncommonly beautiful, her understanding is
naturally good, and had her education been proper, she would undoubtedly have
been acknowledged a very lovely young person. The variation in her fine eyes,
scarcely amounts to a mote; it can hardly be deemed an imperfection.

The voice of praise from the lips of my Margaretta will always sound sweetly
in my ear. Not that I would wish you an indiscriminate panegyrist -- by no
means, but let your silence give evidence of your powers of discrimination.
Applaud with all the energy of language, when incense so rich becomes
righteously due. But forbear to publish (unless to answer some valuable
purpose, that can be no otherwise accomplished) the errors which you may
remark. Believe me, my love, the injurious consequences of detraction are
incalculable; when once the comment of severity has escaped your lips, it is
beyond your control, and while it may inflict the deepest wounds, a remedy
remains not in your gift; you can only lament the melancholy effects of your
indiscretion. Often, also, have I known the tale of slander to implant in the
bosom of the propagator its deadly talons, and the unwary detractor has
himself become the ultimate sacrifice.

But to dwell on the evils of detraction, would require powers more energetic
than words can command. Detraction is the firstborn of envy, the fiend of
society, and the fell despoiler of honest same. Beware then, my child, of its
blighting influence; let your friend Miss Clifford also beware, for there is
not a calamity written in the book of adversity, of which it may not be
productive. I am fearful you have treated Miss Hayden unkindly. I recollect
when she quitted your chamber that she passed the parlour window in tears; and
your avowed complacency in her departure, and subsequent declaration, with that
of your friend, relative to her future visits, abundantly justify my suspicion.
Miss Hayden is a mild tempered girl, and her easy good humor, when told of her
faults, evinceth the serenity of her disposition. To point out faults, is an
office that ought to be sacred to that experience which is the growth of a
length of years, or to that tried friendship that has stood the test of
various situations. Margaretta Melworth is yet too young to take upon her this
important task: If you can influence your companions by the propriety and
beauty of your example, it is well; admonition and censure, must be referred to
a riper age. If you have, indeed, deported yourself with undue reserve,
superciliousness, or mortifying neglect, you have but one way of restoring
yourself to my good opinion. Seek Miss Hayden -- and in your own amiable manner
cancel a fault, which I am willing to consider as proceeding from a want of
reflection -- cancel this essential deviation from the consistency of your
character, by condescending to solicit a reconciliation. Remember, my love,
acknowledgment of error, always adds additional luster to the fine qualities of
a person, capable of conducting so properly; and remember, also, that Miss
Hayden is two years your senior. Put yourself in her situation -- tell me how
you would wish she should conduct toward you, and let your answer decide your
movements.

Do not, my daughter, suffer the freedom of my remarks upon this occasion, to
envelop your future sentiments and actions in a veil of mystery or concealment;
seek not to restrain the frankness of your disposition; but let your lovely
bosom be still open to my inspection. If I am strict to mark; if I carefully
search out the deforming weed, it is because I would utterly exterminate from
so fair a soil, every thing which can offend. Your virtues, I predict, will be
permanent; your faults, I pleasingly believe, will be trivial; and from the
eyes of a censorious world, I shall still be solicitous to conceal the errors
of my child. Anxious for the consistency of her character, I shall, as often as
I see occasion, freely correct; and while I point out those mistakes, upon
which persons less interested will be silent, or, perhaps, assail her ear with
the strains of adulation, I shall thereby best evince my maternal regards.

I am, my dear, enchanted by your letter; and although I have hasted to erase
from so fair a page the extraneous blot, I have not been the less captivated by
its beauties. Your figure of the fallen plant is charming -- it robbed me of
some delicious tears -- May my favorite flower be never more surcharged by woe
-- may the ready prop be still presented -- may the blossoms of her youth be
sheltered from every evil -- may her life be a life of usefulness -- and may
the sweet complacency, attendant upon deeds of worth, be the companion of her
declining years.

Looking over your letter, I find I have yet to respond to the article relative
to Lady Ann Fostess. You wish I had written my sentiments respecting this
character: Why, my love, it requires no developement; atrocious, in a high
degree, its glaring enormities must strike the most superficial eye; and, as it
is unpleasant to dwell upon instances of such depravity, I spontaneously turn
with disgust from the view. But, s^ossibly, I have mistaken the purport of your
question; and you may only be desirous to know if I imagine there exists a
being in real life, who might have sat for the picture of a Lady Ann Fostess.
Alas! my dear, I regret that my veracity impels an answer in the affirmative.
Yes, indeed, your native island has produced a plentiful growth of vice, as
well as virtue. But you are not to suppose duplicity, treachery, and haughty
arrogance, confined to the Albion shore -- Alas! no. Should I suffer you to
retain the sweet delusion, in which innocence has, in the present moment,
cradled your ideas, experience would, ere long, convince you that America is
not exempted from their desolating progress; that human nature is every where
the same; and that, in addition to the substantiality of virtue, her cautionary
guards must still remain on duty. It is with reluctance that I rouse my girl
from the golden dream, in which I have so long permitted her to slumber; but it
is necessary that she should gradually view objects as they really are, lest,
suddenly awakened by the hand of violence, she might, at too late a period,
make discoveries fatal to her peace.

May the Almighty shield my daughter from every ill. I am, ever, her
affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLII.
What clustering blessings mingle in their train,
Who with success a parent's part sustain;
Whose forming precepts mould the docile mind,
By nature for the paths of truth designed.

To my honored MOTHER.
DEAREST, BEST OF FRIENDS,
WHILE you and my papa are continued in this world, there is no misfortune that
can happen to your Margaretta, which will be so heavy as your displeasure. I
saw, immediately upon my entering the dining parlour this day, that you did not
look upon your poor girl exactly as you have heretofore done -- your eye, as it
met mine, did not say, "Margaretta, you are a good girl, and I am," -- as I
remember you have frequently styled yourself -- " your approbating mother." You
called me too, " Miss Melworth!" -- and although you looked tenderly upon me,
when this coolness drew from me a sigh, which indeed came from the bottom of my
trembling bosom, yet I could see, too plainly, that you were not reconciled to
me; and I should immediately have thrown myself at your dear blessed feet,
entreating you to tell me in what I had offended, and supplicating your
forgiveness, had I not been sure and certain, that your disapprobation was
occasioned by my letter, and had you not given it as a rule, that I should not
refer, in conversation, to those letters, until the close of a correspondence
so delightful to me. The wonder is, how I continued at table -- but dinner
over, I was no longer able to suppress my emotions, and I flew to my chamber to
weep over a fault, that I was sure I had committed! Plato followed with your
letter -- with trembling lips I kissed the seal -- I hastened to read, and the
reason for the unusual reception I had met, was fully explained! I read it over
and over again, blushing and weeping by turns. Ah, mamma! it is impossible I
should ever commit a second error of this kind! Most sincerely do I despise
myself, while my mother appears more an angel than before! You are all goodness
and sweet condescension to every body -- every one whom I know has told me this
again and again; and besides, I see it myself every day -- how then could I act
so very different from my mamma! How many tears has my strange behavior cost
me! and, what is worse than all, I, who should give nothing but pleasure to my
mother, have wounded her bosom also!

Well, but when my poor heart was almost ready to burst, I began to see that
there were many lines in your letter, from which I ought to take comfort. You
did not say, your poor orphan child had forfeited your good opinion forever --
no indeed, no such thing -- there was yet one way left, by which I might again
become your own Margaretta; and, dropping down on my knees before the chair,
(in which you usually sit, when you pass those charming moments in my chamber,
that you bid me call the visits of my maternal friend) I thanked God and my
blessed mother, for the consolation contained in that dear charming line, that
there was yet one way left, by which I might be restored to your good opinion
-- and jumping upon my feet, I clapped my hands out of pure joy; and so, mamma,
I immediately tripped down stairs, without either hat or scarf, (for I thought
it right to punish that impertinent pride, which had officiously brought upon
me so much evil) and sat off in pursuit of Miss Hayden. When I entered her
parlour, I began an apology; but she, not in the least attending to what I was
about to say, threw into my arms a little lap-dog, which she said was the most
beautiful creature in the world; that her mamma had just purchased it for her;
and, "Margaretta," she added, you will be pleased when you hear, that for this
one indulgent action of my mamma's, (for she herself detests lap-dogs) I am
determined to become the best girl in the world! Come hither, Florus -- poor
fellow -- rest upon your mistress's lap -- there -- lay still. Yes, Miss
Melworth, I will, if possible, become as good as Miss Clifford, or yourself,
and I am sure I cannot have better models.

I will confess to you, my mamma, that I was mortified to observe Miss Hayden
had thought my rudeness (for indeed it deserves no better name) below her
attention. At that moment I could not forbear acknowledging her superiority;
and, had it not been that I must have passed from your care, I would gladly
have changed characters with Miss Hayden; so much did her manner of passing by
my unbecoming conduct, exalt her in my opinion. But, waving my hand, with an
expression of gratitude for her kind sentiments of Miss Clifford and myself, I
said, while a blush of conscious inferiority crimsoned my cheek -- I have
called upon you this afternoon, dear Miss Hayden, to make confession of the
impropriety of my late behavior to you; to ask your forgiveness; to solicit
your future friendship; and to request, as a token you are indeed reconciled
unto me, that you will read the letter, which, on an occasion so truly
dishonorable to myself, you expressed a wish to see.

Miss Hayden, notwithstanding Florus was reposing upon her lap, immediately
rose from her chair, and, throwing her arms about my neck, she burst into
tears! Never, methought, did any one, except my mamma, appear so lovely. As
soon as she had a little recovered herself from the surprise into which my
address had thrown her, she affectionately said -- I will not deny that I
thought you, Miss Melworth, a little disobliging; you are generally so fond of
giving pleasure, that any thing of a contrary kind from you is so much the more
unpleasant: But when I related the circumstance to my mother, she thought that
my flippant conduct might have drawn upon me your dislike, and she advised me
to set about an alteration of manners, which I was partly resolved to do, even
before she made me a present of my little Florus; and when I saw you enter this
afternoon, it gave me more pleasure than I can say. I thought there could not
be a better time to set about my reformation, as mamma calls it; and I was
rejoiced too, that you thought enough of me to visit me. With regard to
forgiveness, it is too much to say. I was, I remember, very provoking; I felt
uncommonly mischievous. Let these expressions of endearment -- and she kissed
my forehead -- help us to forget the past, and let me be considered in future,
as a wild good-natured girl, who is determined to improve by your example. I
caught her hand with grateful tenderness, and just at this moment her mother
entered; she looked both astonished and delighted at seeing us so
affectionately engaged; we related the termination of our misunderstanding, and
she too shed over us tears of joy.

I produced from my pocketbook your dear letter, and put it into the hands of
the young lady with a look of entreaty; she kissed the paper, and presented it
with inimitable gracefulness to her mamma. Mrs. Hayden read it and commented
upon it, in a way calculated to improve both her daughter and myself. I have
heard you say, mamma, if I remember right, that Mrs. Hayden is an accomplished
woman: She regretted that her Emily had been so little attended to; she wished
she may be permitted to peruse as many of the letters of a correspondence so
well judged, as might consist with propriety; and, that if it were not too
great a favor, she might sometimes be permitted to make one of those reading
parties, of which she had heard so much, and from which it was evident, Miss
Clifford and myself had derived such essential advantages. I ventured to assure
both the ladies, that it would add to the happiness of my mamma, if Miss Hayden
would regularly join us upon our stated reading hours, (was I right, mamma?)
and she will, accordingly, meet us in the reading parlour when we next
assemble. I took my leave, with repeated assurances, that I would endeavor, by
future acts of kindness, to cancel the disobligation of the past; and,
hastening to my own apartment, I could not enjoy a moment until I had given you
this circumstantial account.

And now, mamma, again kneeling at the chair you have so often filled, I do
most earnestly supplicate your forgiveness for the trouble I am sensible I must
have given you. Let me entreat you, in your own charming words, " Restore your
Margaretta to your good opinion;" for indeed, indeed, she is lost to every
comfort until you do! When I see you at tea will you again look kindly upon me,
kiss my cheek, and call me once more your good little girl? If you assure me of
your full and free pardon, and of your restored approbation, then will my poor
heart leap for joy; and then, and not till then, will your ever dutiful child
be again your truly happy

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


To MARGARETTA MELWORTH.
COME to me, my angel child -- come to me immediately -- wait not for the
distant hour of tea. Upon an occasion so every way answerable to my fondest
hopes, we will dispense with forms -- we need not recur by words to an affair,
the termination of which has filled my bosom with unutterable joy -- words will
not be necessary; and if they were, I should not have it in my power to command
them. But my eyes, so lately darting the chilling glances of reserve, are now
humid with the gush of tenderness, and they shall speak every thing my
Margaretta wishes -- every thing she so richly merits. Come to me, my best
girl, and let me imprint upon that lovely cheek, the fondest kiss I have ever
yet bestowed -- we will mingle some delicious tears, and I will clasp to my
bosom, with augmented complacency, as the richest boon which Heaven can bestow,
my sweet tempered, my virtuous child!

I await your presence in my chamber -- no one but your father, whose raptures
are equal to my own, will witness our interview -- we are alike impatient to
behold our now faultless Margaretta. Delay not, sweet love, but hasten to the
arms of your approbating mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


Margaretta, thus receiving permission, rushed instantly into our apartment,
and such were the rapidity of her movements, that, ere we were aware, flinging
herself almost breathless at the feet of her mother, and clasping her knees in
a kind of ecstasy, she exhibited a spectacle the most charmingly interesting
which can be imagined. Mary raised her in her arms -- alternately we pressed
her to our bosoms, and, until that moment, I had never experienced transports
so exquisitely delightful!

Thus ended an affair, that some may possibly regard as a " much ado about
nothing;" but Mary, availing herself of the ascendency she had obtained over
the mind of her daughter, had purposely wrought it up to the highest
importance. She was solicitous to uproot every propensity which discovered the
most remote tendency to the malignancy of scandal. She conceived, that as
impressions are generally made with success in the early part of life, she
could hardly be premature in her efforts to implant a proper detestation of
this hydra evil; and the event proved she had acted judiciously; for this
little circumstance, with all its consequences, was indelibly stamped upon the
mind of Miss Melworth; the serious solemnity with which it had been attended,
engraved it there; it confirmed her the irreconcilable foe to detraction in
all its varieties; and she recoils, with a kind of horror, for which perhaps
she does not always stop to account, from the very semblance of a malevolent
remark; nor do I believe she has, from the above era to the present moment,
ever uttered a single sentence, that could, by any rational construction, be
termed invidious.

It was the design both of Mary and myself, to produce our daughter, in that
career on which she was entering, both theoretically and practically, a
philanthropic moralist. And to this valuable end were directed both my
admonitions and precepts, as well as the conversation and letters of her
mother. We were well aware of the vast importance of the first informed
movements of reason, of first principles, and of a commencement in the path of
rectitude. We were sensible that individuals, connected in society, necessarily
depend upon each other; and that, of course, our felicity or infelicity is more
or less deducible from sentiments and arrangements beyond our control. We
proposed to Miss Melworth the general approbation of mankind, as an object
worthy her unremitting pursuit; and, as we could not conceive of a human being
so insignificant, as to bar the possibility of his, or her, future influence
upon our prospects, so we taught her to estimate the good will of every
individual as a desirable acquisition. It must be remembered, however, that we
always inculcated the necessity of circumscribing a wish for universal
applause, in itself laudable, within the boundaries of virtue; that we erected
our standard of rectitude, and first of all, carefully impressed an idea of the
superior importance of self-complacency, and of approving Heaven. But, having
taken down in short hand, as I was seated at my writing-desk, in a closet
adjoining to Margaretta's, a few disjointed sentences, which fell from the lips
of my wife, during one of those hours appropriated to the instruction of her
beloved charge, I transcribe them from my minutes.

There are, my love, a variety of means, by which you may insure to yourself
the general good wishes and esteem of all those with whom you associate; and
this, too, without parting with a shilling of your property, or the smallest
inconvenience to yourself. Nay, on the contrary, it may happen that you will
thus procure considerable pecuniary emolument; and you will certainly reap
incalculable mental advantages; your bosom will be tranquillized, and you will
possess that harmony of intellect, which few events will be capable of
interrupting. But let me be more particular: Avoid engaging warmly as a
disputant; deliver your sentiments, when called upon, with calmness and
dignity; and never assume a decisive air, or tone of voice.

Accustom yourself to dilate on pleasing facts; dwell with pleasure on every
good action; advocate the cause of the absent, and do not suffer yourself to
repeat those instances of misconduct, which you may have heard. Hide the faults
which may happen to come under your observation, with as much care as if they
were your own; never make them the subject of your animadversions, except you
have good ground for imagining that you shall thereby effectuate some valuable
purpose. Be scrupulously exact in your observance of that intercourse of
civilities, pronounced, by a certain class of people, essential to good
breeding. It is true, we may regard those ceremonies as trivial; but nothing,
in fact, can be indifferent, on which the inestimable enjoyments of society are
made to depend; indeed, a regular observance of punctuality, in every
department, will always be recognized as a virtue.

But while I counsel you to be a tenacious observer of the etiquette,
established in those circles in which you may happen to move, as far as it
relates to others, being careful, in no instance, to draw upon yourself the
accusation of neglect, I would wish you, on your own part, to rise superior to
those, in reality, little punctilios; be not easily betrayed into resentment;
do not indulge an irritable disposition of mind, nor subject your associates to
the necessity of moving as if they trod on glass, for fear of wounding your
feelings. There is one rule to which it will be well constantly to adhere --
never take offense at any inattention you may have reason to suppose
undesigned; when you are in reality injured, accept an apology; and let that
mild indulgence, so proper to a being subjected to error, be ever prominent in
your conduct. With the example of my grandmother, of celebrious memory, I have
been particularly charmed; as often as she found the shafts of slander aimed
against herself, if the calumniator ranked in the number of her ostensible
friends, it was her custom to take an early opportunity of visiting them, not
to reproach them, but to evince, by the augmented urbanity and indulgent
forgiveness of her manners, how little she merited their censure: If the
maligner was found among the sons and daughters of penury, she never failed of
bestowing upon them some extraordinary and liberal mark of the uncommon
elevation of her spirit. Thus did her enemies become her warmest panegyrists,
and every malevolent principle was absorbed in the splendour of her almost
peerless virtues.

But while I am solicitous to put you in possession of the good opinion of that
world, upon the great theater of which you are so soon to make your entree, I
wo^ld not, however, wish you to purchase it at the expense of the integrity or
sincerity of your character. May undue commendation never be found upon the
lips of my Margaretta; adulation debases the mind; and while I recommend the
mantle of candor, with the same breath I would insist, that no temptation
should extort a eulogy upon the indiscreet or the unworthy.

Be not hasty to make professions of friendship, nor credit those feverish
impressions, which probably are, at best, but the paroxysms of an hour; but
regard the deliberate and uniform esteem of persons of established virtue and
reputation, as an incalculable treasure, and endeavor to preserve their good
opinion, by pursuing those seize that, when possessed, will infallibly
bestow upon you the perfumed wreath of sweet applause.

Much has been said respecting the virtue of secret-keeping, and the necessity
of electing a discreet confidant; let me rather hope that you will have no
secrets to keep. You will, I dare believe, be careful to obtain, and to
perpetuate, that equity of thinking, and propriety of acting, which will paint
your cheek with the hue of innocence, endow with modest confidence your words
and actions, and insure a continuity of that charming serenity and cheerful
expectation, that at present triumphs in your bosom. Yet, it is true, that
there are a thousand little delicacies, contingent alarms, hopes and fears,
which alternately predominate in the female mind. These may create
embarrassments, obscuring, possibly, the better way, and enveloping in clouds
those enjoyments, that, under proper regulations, would unquestionably bestow
the richest complacency. Of all those entanglements, and intricacies of every
description, the breast of a maternal friend is the only proper repository.
Years almost necessarily endow with experience; and affection, directed by
knowledge, is demonstrably the surest guide. A judicious mother, rising
superior to considerations, which generally influence a younger and less
interested confidant, will not cherish ill founded hopes, nor give energy to
those passions that are founded in weakness; but she will do better; by her
systematic efforts, she will annihilate the difficulty, and again lead the
footsteps of the lovely trembler into the beamy paths of peace. A mother will
neither indulge nor soothe those errors, which are productive of imbecility;
her plan is, to crush in embryo every thing that may have a pernicious
influence upon the future progress of her child, to nerve by resolution, and to
cultivate that fortitude so necessary in the career of life; and hence it is,
that a mother should be considered as the only proper confidant of her daughter.

I will confess, my dear, that I am not only satisfied, but perfectly charmed
with your conduct. Your resolution to become exactly what I wish, has been
invariably reduced to practice; and the sweet consciousness, and tender
ingenuousness of your apologies, have totally cancelled those mistakes, on
which you have been precipitated by inexperience. Never, I bless God, have I
discovered in you a blameable impatience of reproof, nor censurable haste to
procure your own justification; all aggravating, self-applauding replies,
implied accusations of rigor, audacious pertness and self-sufficient
loquacity, or discontented gloomy reserve, sullen glances, angry and provoking
gestures, with dumb indignation -- from all these you have still been wholly
exempt, and I have to acknowledge your mild submission, sweet discretion, and
affectionate duty, as the richest solace, both to your father and myself.

Such also is your conduct to our domestics, as to merit our highest
approbation. The authority which I have thought proper to delegate to you, has
been admirably supported. Without assuming arrogance, or that imperious
haughtiness, so vexatiously distressing to dependants, you have conducted with
dignity, ameliorated by condescension; and this has insured you both respect
and esteem. I am pleased with your manner of directing; and the habit you have
so happily acquired, of requesting the assistance of those about you, is
certainly preferable, both in form and effect, to that peremptory commanding
tone of voice, and imperious style of language, so generally adopted. Nothing
can merit contempt, but unworthy actions; and you therefore rightly judge, that
the individual, who, in the order of things, is employed in the lowest useful
occupation, provided he sills his sphere with propriety, should not only be
exempted from scorn and derision, but is, in reality, superior to the crowned
head, whose life is a combination of atrocious crimes. It is well observed,
that good servants should be regarded as humble friends. I am persuaded it will
ever be your aim to make their yoke easy; and I repeat, that in this house, the
mild benignity of your temper, and your engaging deportment, without in the
smallest degree diminishing the consideration due to you, as the daughter of
our election, has established you in every heart. It has been your object to
mitigate the unavoidable evils, and to lessen the respective burdens of those
individuals who compose our household; and I observe with pleasure, that you
have become the sovereign lady of their affections.

I am not apprehensive, that the rendering you the praise, so indispensably
your due, will be, in any sort, injurious. You will not, I flatter myself, be
unduly elated -- far otherwise -- the noble energies of your disposition will
be thus stimulated to yet higher excellence. Nothing is more disgusting than an
overweening self-sufficiency and presumptuous pride, particularly in young
persons; modest diffidence carries with it its own recommendation. I should
blush to find my Margaretta; except induced by particular circumstances, making
herself the heroine of her own narrations. Those events which may be
importantly interesting to you, and from which you conceive you derive an
elevation of character, will, too probably, fatigue in the recital; the
indifferent will consider them as insipid; you will be subjected to ridicule,
and assuredly draw upon yourself the odium of egotism and impertinence.

It is wisdom to cultivate a complacency in the scene under your present
observation. Contentment is the richest gem within the grasp of mortality;
hardly any price can be too great for so valuable an acquisition; it is a
substitute for almost every lesser enjoyment, and often supplies, with much
respectability, the place of higher orders of felicity. You cannot call back
the past, you may never attain the future, and, surely then, I may repeat, it
is wisdom to cultivate complacency in the present, and to use all possible
diligence to accommodate your mind to a situation, which you have it not in
your power to ameliorate, however ineligible it may, in fact, be.

My minutes go no further, yet they may serve to give an idea of those
sentiments, which were repeatedly and carefully inpressed upon the mind of
Margaretta; and I can scarcely imagine the reader will think their introduction
in this place stands in need of an apology.

No. XLIII.
Fond to select -- the letters I retrace --
While, in its turn, each line demands a place;
With partial eye I view them as they rise,
While this a thought, and that a grace supplies:
Partiality, to every charm alive,
Even from a fault will excellence derive;
And in a husband, and a parent's breast,
Where the impassioned throb is deep impressed,
Partiality with glowing ardour reigns,
And all its fervours uncontrol'd maintains.

To my ever honored MOTHER.
MY DEAR MAMMA,
IT is impossible for any words of mine to say, with what unequalled pleasure I
read over and over again, those letters which you have condescended to write to
me. I have this morning been placing them according to their dates. I have
bestowed upon them more kisses than there are lines; and, conjoining them with
a piece of purple ribon, I can thus turn to them the more readily; the
impression made by the folds will gradually disappear, and, while I live, I
shall be able to preserve them. The last ten letters These letters do not
appear.
, containing directions for my conduct, in all those situations in which you
suppose I may possibly be placed, I shall certainly read, at least once, every
day.

Surely, never -- no, never -- was poor, rich orphan so completely blessed as
your Margaretta. When you went through Evelina yesterday, I could scarcely
forbear interrupting you by an expression of those feelings of gratitude, which
were all collected, if I may so say, in one delightful emotion of exquisite and
almost ungovernable joy! Evelina, it is true, did not find a mother; but Mr.
Villars was exactly such a man as my tenderly indulgent father; and, methought,
it was my own dear papa who was addressing Lady Howard, when he so
affectionately says, That child, Madam, shall never, while life is lent, know
the loss she has sustained. I have cherished, succored and supported her, from
her earliest infancy to her sixteenth year. Good, kind gentleman -- I was
uncommonly affected. I have been looking over Evelina again this morning; and,
on my knees, I pray God, that both you and my papa may be able to say of your
Margaretta, as Mr. Villars of his Evelina, that she has amply repaid your care
and affection, and that she is all which your fondest wishes had anticipated.

Evelina was very happy to meet in Lord Orville, a friend so like her papa. Is
it not very uncommon, mamma, for so young a gentleman to be in the exercise of
those virtues which seemed to have found a home in the bosom of the venerable
Mr. Villars?

But Evelina deserved every thing -- Was she not, my mamma, a faultless
character? Surely the English reviewers, of whom I have heard so much, must
have spoken highly of those volumes. I have again been weeping over the
sufferings of Lady Belmont -- Sir John Belmont I also pity -- May God protect
me from the cruel impositions of base and interested men! I think, mamma, you
did not give your opinion of Evelina. Your next letter, I hope, will teach me
how I ought to think of it; and may I never take a step without your kind
advice and direction, and may I always continue your affectionately dutiful,

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


To MARGARETTA MELWORTH.
MY DEAR CHILD,
RARELY does a day pass without furnishing me with some new reason to love and
admire my Margaretta. You have experienced that I am not niggard of praise, nor
is it proper I should be so. I would as soon withhold from you the light of
heaven, lest you should become enamoured with the beauty of your face, or the
symmetry of your person, (neither of which you have been any how instrumental
in procuring) as I would keep back those commendations decidedly due to
unequivocal merit, in the fear they might be productive of self-conceit.

Praise operates upon the youthful mind like the vernal shower upon the tender
plant, or like the clear shining of that parent orb, whose genial ray succeeds
the fertilizing irrigation. And I am, at this moment, in possession of a motive
sufficient to extort applause even from the frigidity of apathy. Yes, my love,
since you retired to your pen this morning, I have made a discovery, that,
while it elevates to a degree of rapture, the complacency I am in the habit of
experiencing in my child, incalculably augments my confidence in her virtues.

You recollect when your papa first informed you, that you should receive, at
the close of every week, a small sum, as pocket money, (which has since been
regularly paid you) he at the same time assured you, it should remain entirely
at your own disposal; that he would never require, or receive an account of its
expenditure; and that, however you might think proper to enter it in your
calculation of expenses, it should, on no occasion, be subjected to his
inspection; and by this assurance he has ever since been religiously bound. I
will confess to you, my dear, that having never observed even a vestige of this
money, I have had a strong curiosity to know in what manner it was bestowed;
but regarding the wishes of your father as rules for my conduct, I have
forborne to investigate; and, as the sum was small, I was the less anxious
respecting it. This morning, however, has produced a most unexpected and
captivating eclaircissement. Induced, by its beauties, to prefer a walk to a
book, I strolled further than I have done since the illness under which I so
long labored, and which filled the bosom of my Margaretta with such tender
apprehensions. It happened in my walk, that I passed the cottage of Melona,
whom I have not seen for more than a year; and, indulging a hope, that time,
aided by necessity, might have procured that reformation, for which my counsels
had been ineffectual, I felt a strong inclination to look in upon the poor
woman. I passed her humble threshold, marking, with pleasure, an appearance of
neatness, I had never before witnessed in the dwelling of Melona.

The cottage, you know, has two apartments; no person was in that which I
entered; but it bore strong testimony of the cleanliness and industry of its
mistress; and, moreover, the buz of a spinning-wheel saluted my ear! This is
excellent, thought I, and just as I was about to enter the other room, little
Peggy opened the door, and carefully shutting it after her, tripped into the
street. The child had her eyes so steadily fixed upon the spelling-book, which
she held open in her hand, that she did not observe me; and the grateful noise
of the spinning-wheel still continued. Peggy's apparel was strikingly
descriptive of scanty means, diligently employed to the best possible
advantage; and this circumstance, together with the new face which every thing
in the cottage of Melona assumed, determined me to interrogate the child,
expecting, from her innocence and simplicity, a clue of direction for my
approaches to her mother. I soon overtook her, and interrupted her studies with
a -- How are you, my pretty little Peggy? She had no recollection of me, and
not having reflection enough to teach her to wonder at my knowledge of her
name, with a childish kind of bashfulness, she dropped a courtesy, and said,
"Pretty well I thank you, Madam." Where are you going, Peggy? "I goes every day
to school, Ma'am, nowadays." And what do you read in, pray? "I reads in this
here spelling-book; and I studies my lesson every morning." That is very
proper, my dear; you seem to have a very handsome spelling-book, quite new; I
hope you take care of it: Who gave it to you, Peggy? "That I must not tell,
Madam; for Miss Melworth would be angry if I should." Miss Melworth! said I,
almost gasping for breath; why, child, what has Miss Melworth to do with it? "I
must not say, Madam, for Miss Margaretta herself bid me not to speak; but for
all that, my mamma says how that she is an angel, and that she has saved us
all, and made her a thousand times gooder than she was before; but this is all
a secret, and I would not tell for the world."

Here I will own to you, my love, that your persevering superiority originated
in my bosom, admiration of my daughter, and accusation of myself. But
determining to trace every step, by which you had effectuated so valuable a
change, I took Peggy by the hand, and once more entered the cottage of Melona.
" The wicket opening with a latch," gave us a ready admittance into its back
apartment. Melona threw her eyes over a countenance she had so long known; a
crimson blush instantly suffused her cheek, and was as instantly succeeded by a
death-like paleness; her wheel stopped, and, sinking upon a chair, it was with
difficulty that the immediate application of my salts preserved her from
fainting.

When she was a little composed I began my attack, and managing with some
address, I soon obtained the full confession of a secret, which adds another
beautiful trait to the character of my Margaretta. She informed me of your
appearance under her humble roof upon the week you first received your little
stipend -- of your sage admonitions -- of your earnest entreaties that she
would permit you to put her little Peggy to school -- of your proposal to
purchase the spinning-wheel -- of the assistance she had received from you
during her illness, and that of her husband -- and of the happy change a
patronage so unexpected had produced in her life. Reflecting, she said, upon
the great goodness of so young a lady, upon her stooping to take such a
compassionate interest in her affairs, and condescending to urge her, with such
extraordinary earnestness, to assist herself to have pity on her husband, to
have pity on her poor little Peggy, and to make the best of that little which
was allowed her, filled her with grief, joy and astonishment -- grief, at her
own unworthiness and great wickedness -- and joy and astonishment, that a
little angel had come down from Heaven, to dwell among the sinners of mankind
-- (I give you her own words.) She immediately made a vow, that nothing
stronger than water should, in future, pass her lips; and, that she might have
no temptation to forfeit a resolution so salutary, she forthwith committed the
intoxicating distillation, hitherto carefully concealed for her own particular
use, to the stream which winds its way at a little distance from the cottage;
and, being earnestly bent upon a thorough reform, her application became as
remarkable as her previous negligence had been; and habit reconciling her to
her new walk, frugality, neatness and industry, with all their captivating
charms, soon burst upon her.

Melona informs me, that she long refused to receive any part of your weekly
stipend; but that, on your positive assurance, that the kindness of your
parents had left you no wish ungratified; that you possessed an undoubted right
to dispose of this sum exactly according to your own pleasure; and, that her
acceptance was the only compensation she could make to you for the interest you
so kindly took in her welfare, she had at length consented to receive from you
weekly donations; that you had furnished her husband with many articles
necessary to his business; and that you particularly paid for the instruction
of Peggy. But she added, that she believed, she and her little family were not
your only pensioners! Matchless child! My God! how I glory in my Margaretta! or
rather, in those heavenly propensities, with which thou have endowed her. I
inquire not, my beloved girl, for a list of your dependants; enjoy, in this
particular, the luxury of concealment; but it shall be my care, that your means
shall be immediately augmented; she, who knows so well how to dispose of money,
must not be circumscribed within such narrow bounds.

Do you not think I came home in raptures with those peerless virtues which I
have the honor to cherish and to protect? I could hardly, upon this occasion,
arrogate to myself the title of your Mother, and I felt my mind spontaneously
prostrating before an intellect, whose brilliant dawn surpasses the meridian
effulgence of common intelligence.

Plato met me with your letter. I was prepared to accede to any request of
yours -- and, as your father does not return until the evening, I reserve, till
that period, the pleasure of a circumstantial account of Melona and her
cottage; of the means by which I obtained the delightful particulars which I
shall narrate; and of bestowing upon the brow of merit, the wreath of
unequivocal applause. Shall we not, my dear, enjoy a most enchanting evening?
Well, but you solicit my sentiments of Evelina. Surely, my Margaretta is an
enthusiast in her gratitude -- but the enthusiasm of virtue is a noble
enthusiasm.

The plot of Evelina is well (...), and happily executed. It is a novel to
which we can return with pleasure, even to a second or third perusal, and this
is more than can be said of common productions of this kind. The style is
familiar and easy; and the ideas seem naturally to grow out of each other.

Evelina is said to be a first production, and, if so, it is entitled, or the
abilities of its author, to high admiration. But I think you will esteem
Cecilia (which is a publication of the same author) as a work which merits a
decided preference. The character of Albany, in Cecilia, is a highly finished
original, and has for me peculiar charms. I do not say it is natural; but I
could wish to render such characters official, and to multiply them in society.
Miss Burney's publications have hitherto done honor both to her fine genius
and benevolent heart; and, I think, they have much appropriate excellence. I am
ignorant in what class the reviewers have placed the productions of Miss
Burney; but justice must award them a very high rank in the literary line. Yet,
it appears to me, that Evelina, as a composition, is not without a blemish;
and, I conceive, the heroine herself is strikingly deficient in one particular,
which constitutes a capital requisite in the composition of a young and amiable
woman. The task of a censurer must always appear invidious; yet, for the sake
of my Margaretta, who warmly demands, " Was not Evelina a faultless character?"
I express my sentiments without reserve. Evelina then, was greatly wanting in
that delicacy, which should have marked her deportment to Madame Duval. Madame
Duval had been denied the aids of education; this was her misfortune, rather
than her fault; and a well informed, amiable descendant should have thrown over
this defect the veil of duty, and not have sought every opportunity to have
exposed it in the most glaring colors! In the letters addressed to her
reverend correspondent, the old lady is rarely mentioned without a sketch of
her bad English, as, "Ay now," cried Madame Duval, "that is another of the
unpolitenesses of you English, to go to talking of such things as that: Now, in
Paris, nobody never says nothing about religion, no more than about politics."
And again, " I would have you learn to be more politer, Sir," etc. etc. Was it,
I ask, the part of a well disposed, well educated young lady, to hold up to
view errors of this kind, when found in the mouth of a person, whose years, and
whose affinity, entitled her to a more candid and dutiful representation?

It appears that Madame Duval was indebted to nature for nothing but the charms
of her person, and that her temper was very unhappy and cruelly implacable; yet
it is not insinuated, that her enormities were greatly multiplied. She is,
however, treated as the most atrocious of criminals; and, by the instigations
of a Captain Mirvin and the lover of her granddaughter, she receives the most
absurd and cruel outrage. The gentle Evelina, who is apprized that some
mischievous plot is in agitation against her grandmother, sets out without a
single remonstrance, attended only by the servants, to accompany her to a
justice of peace, although she had expressed previous fears of entrusting
herself to her care! A farce, of which I cannot see the wit, succeeds. The poor
old lady is made to believe herself in the possession of a savage banditti --
her apprehensions for her life are apparently well founded -- she is torn from
the carriage by masked men -- she is dragged along the road, cruelly agitated,
shook, and thumped about -- stuck fast in a ditch -- her legs bound -- tied to
a tree -- and, robbed of her head dress, she is thus left to her own
contemplations, while her granddaughter continues in her chariot, listening to
a tale of love!!

In one sense, Evelina must be considered as accessory to these unwarrantable
proceedings; a single hint would have saved her parent all the cruel
mortifications to which she was subjected; but this hint she withheld! If
conduct so reprehensible is too gross, even for a romping miss, in pursuit of
fun, how must it detract from the character of a pupil of the venerable
Villars? Surely, Evelina should not have been astonished, (considering the
propensities of Madame Duval) at the slap which she received in her face -- and
the unrestrained violence of the old lady's disposition, is, upon this
occasion, rather too conciliatory. An air of ridicule is thrown over this
doleful narrative by Evelina, who, giving it in the manner of the poor
sufferer, intersperses it with such sentences as this -- " I am sure, I dare
say, I am out of joint all over, etc." Evelina is a silent observer of the
mirth of the servants, and confesses that she was, herself, almost compelled to
laugh at the pity-moving recital!! For a conduct so unequal to every other
instance of her blameless life, there can be but one reason, the fear of
offending a sea monster, on whom she in no sort depended, and from whom she
could, in any moment, escape to that sanctuary, which had, for so many years,
continued the asylum of her innocence. But, if the fear of giving offense is an
apology for Evelina, can it be considered as such for the venerable Villars, to
whom every circumstance is related, and from whom she receives not the smallest
reproof? It is impossible to inculcate upon the mind of young people too high a
respect for years; age is ever entitled to veneration, and we should regard the
feelings of persons in advanced life with the utmost deference. It is true,
that Madame Duval had been implacable to the mother of Evelina; but it does not
appear, that the young lady had embraced a vindictive plan; and it is also
true, that the mother of Evelina had imprudently confided in a libertine! Nor
can we otherwise account for this rashness, considering that she too had passed
eighteen years of her life with the respectable Villars, than by supposing she
inherited a portion of the imbecility so strongly marked in the conduct of her
parents. The agonies of Madame Duval, on the death of lady Belmont, should, to
erring mortals, have palliated her offense; and it ought always to have been
remembered, whatever were her faults, or foibles, that she was still the
grand-parent of Evelina.

At a transaction so enormous as the unprovoked attack upon Madame Duval, we
conceive additional disgust, from the consideration that it was perpetrated by
persons taking rank in a circle, which, we are induced to suppose, was the seat
of elegance. But, for the honor of human nature, I trust, no one of its
fraternity ever sat for the picture of a Captain Mirvin. I know not what the
British sailors may be, but I have had an opportunity of making many
observations upon various characters among that class of people in this
country, and I have never yet met with a resemblance to this extravagant
caricature! Do but recur to his capital enormities, plotting so unwarrantably
against a female, who was countenanced as a visitor to the respectable Lady
Howard; and, in the close of the third volume, throwing the whole company,
consisting of genteel, well bred persons, into consternation, alarming the
ladies, and distressing every individual! Are you not ready to ask, could
exploits of this nature have been submitted to in any civilized country under
heaven? The general terror excited upon that singular occasion, (it is
unnecessary to observe that I refer to the introduction of the monkey) with the
blood streaming from the ear of poor Lovel, would have drawn upon the
malevolent plotter of the outrage, the vindictive resentment and consequent
chastisement of a horde of savages.

Yet this invader of the rights of hospitality and betrayer of the peace of
society, is first announced to the reader, by the penetrating, refined and
sentimental Lady Howard, as the man of her daughter's heart, and as a
personage, whose unexpected return had given birth to joyful surprise.

It is difficult to conceive how a lady of Mrs. Mirvin's refined sensibility,
could ever unite herself to such a man* but, having thus done, the propriety of
her subsequent conduct will not admit a doubt.

I cannot say I am pleased with those descriptions, which attribute to humanity
a greater degree of deformity than consists with experience. It is a sufficient
apology for the exaggerated delineation of an exalted character, that it may
have its use. It frequently (...) a spirit of emulation; and, although we may
not reach the goal of perfection, yet every advance we make thereto, is a very
valuable point gained, and certainly an ample compensation for our most arduous
efforts. But vice and folly are sufficiently odious, when exhibited in their
own native colors; and, while I can see no benefit in heightening the
imbecility and atrocious depravity of the species, I am fearful that the
transgressor, when called to the observation of hues still blacker than the
turpitude of his own enormities have ever yet assumed, may thence conclude his
offenses comparatively venial.

The trivial scenes interspersed through the pages of Evelina and Cecilia, are,
it is said, too frequent and too prolix; but I am not convinced of the justice
of this remark; and I have to say, that whatever may be the defects (and no
human performance is without its blemish) of those inestimable productions,
their beauties are of the first order. And I repeat, that their right to rank
with compositions of the first class, in their line, is indisputable.

The character of Lord Orville is indeed highly finished; it is enriched with
every virtue of which our nature, in its present state of degradation, is
susceptible. Nor do I find it difficult to conceive of a sensible, discreet
young man, whose mind has been early occupied by sentiments of propriety,
acting, upon every occasion, precisely as did Lord Orville. The venerable
Villars may also be regarded at nearly faultless. The most beautiful passages
in Evelina are to be found in his letters. How tenderly affecting is his
address to Lady Howard, by his Evelina! It can hardly be read too often.

Do you not think, my Margaretta, that I too, make my applications? But every
heart must be interested in such a character; and after having, in idea,
followed with him his orphan child to the ordeal over which she victoriously
triumphed, we listen, with inexpressible pleasure, to his concluding address.

I adopt the language of this venerable man as a period to this letter. These
wounds, which the former severity of fortune has inflicted, are healed by the
ultimate consolation of pouring forth my dying words in blessings on my child!
Closing these joy-streaming eyes in her presence, and breathing my last saint
sighs in her loved arms! Grieve not, Oh child of my care! grieve not at the
inevitable moment; but may thy own end be equally propitious! Oh may thou,
when full of days, and full of honor, sink down as gently to rest -- be loved
as kindly, watched as tenderly as thy happy mother! and may (...), when thy
glass (...) run, be sweetly, but not bitterly, (...) by some remaining darling
of thy affections, some yet surviving Margaretta. These, my love, are also the
breathings, the real wishes of thy affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLIV.
Pursuits, commencing in this present scene*
Where clouds obscure, and sorrows intervene --
Born of the mind -- by sacred truth confessed,
In future worlds are with completion blessed;
For there the intellect new vigor gains,
And all its heavenly energies attains.
Knowledge but dawns upon this dusky shore,
In heaven its full meridian we explore.

To MARGARETTA.
I DO not blame your tears, my dear; the loss of your young friend is a serious
calamity, and it is natural to weep over our misfortunes. Horatio was a
promising youth; his demise has overwhelmed with distress a worthy family, and
the well grounded hopes of tender and judicious parents are thus laid in the
dust. But, my dear Margaretta, while I allow you to regret the removal of
Horatio, I cannot justify your impassioned exclamation -- "To what purpose was
he so good, so wise, so learned, and so every way accomplished?" Does not my
daughter know that virtue, transplanted to a celestial soil, will flourish with
immortal beauty? The faculties, while embodied in this clay-built tenement, are
literally muffled by the dense and heavy materials, in which they are
enveloped. The mind is only in its dawn of being; but the valuable acquirements
which it attains while here, are not, upon its emancipation, lost; far
otherwise -- they are rather introductory to that career, which is to be
continued and perfected in future worlds.

The student of history becomes acquainted with all those characters that have
borne conspicuous parts upon the vast theater of this globe. The philosopher,
devoted to the study of nature, attaining those blissful regions, shall pursue,
with abundant advantage, his delightful employ. The astronomer will behold,
with astonishment, where other systems rise! Suns, which have not even
theoretically darted a single ray on his inquiring mind, will then burst in
resplendent luster to his enraptured gaze. The laws of attraction, of
gravitation, the centrifugal and centripetal force of bodies; these will be
fully understood. Causes, as well as effects, will stand confessed; and
knowledge, combining complacency, will accumulate in sublime progression. Every
laudable investigation, which may be ranked under the head, of intellectual
contemplations, will probably be resumed with augmenting energy, while the
virtues, attaining their native skies, will flourish with immortal beauty.

Thus the young Horatio may be considered as an amiable novitiate, who
obtaining, while here, the rudiments of science, is now removed to a superior
seminary, where every acquirement worth preserving will receive the highest
finishing of which it is susceptible. This reflection is a source of infinite
consolation, and often have I experienced its soothing efficacy. I was once
tenderly attached to a youth, beautiful, virtuous and informed as Horatio. His
understanding unfolded with uncommon brilliancy; an insatiable thirst for
knowledge gave him to pursue, with eagerness, those branches of literature
which were proposed to his consideration, and he acquired in his little span, a
vast stock of erudition, for which, alas! he had no use in time! From this
youth I received even filial attention; but he was ^ut off in the bloom of
life, and melancholy hours were written for me.

On my b^nded knees, with every rising day, I offer up my orisons of devout
thankfulness to that God, who has given my Margaretta to fill up the void in
my bosom, which the demise of a youth so beloved had left therein; and I will,
ere long, put into your hands a collection of my letters in manuscript,
addressed to this son of my affection, while he was a student at the academy of
--, including a concise view of persons and events; and, in the mean time, as
you have already made considerable proficiency in the study of biography and
history, I request you, as an exercise from which will result obvious
advantages, to answer me unreservedly, according to the dictates of your
deliberate judgment, to the following questions.

First, To which of the heroes, whose actions are recorded by Plutarch, you
give the preference?

Secondly, Whom you esteem most of all the monarchs who have swayed the British
scepter, from the year eight hundred and twenty-seven, which united the
kingdoms of the heptarchy, under Egbert, when he was solemnly crowned king of
England, unto the accession of George III. to that throne?

Thirdly, What were your sensations as you read, and what are your sentiments
of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, Henry IV. of France, Charles I. of England, and
Peter the Great, Czar of Russia?

And, fourthly and lastly, although I do not enjoin you to weigh with accuracy
the murders of a Cortez, although I expect you will pass rapidly over the pages
in which a Montezuma bled, and in which are registered the massacre of an
innocent and defenseless people; yet, my dear, I am solicitous to know whom you
characterize as the most amiable of all those adventurers, who, quitting the
chalky cliffs of your native land, crossed the broad Atlantic, to obtain
establishments in North America?

It is by the careful investigation of proper, great and virtuous actions, as
performed by others, that the glow of emulation is enkindled in our bosoms. We
gaze at each transcendent excellence, until our minds acquire n^w energy; they
are nerved by fortitude, and we are rendered equal, as far as opportunity calls
us forth, to the most consistent and uniform exertions.

The time we devote to the reading of history, or to the perusal of the lives
of eminent persons, who have really acted a part upon this globe, is indeed
well spent. It put^ us in possession of a fund of knowledge; for a narration of
facts is, decidedly, information; while the page^ of the novelist can, at best,
bestow only the lighter or more trivial embellishments; they originate in
fiction, and the pleasures in their gift are as evanescent as the passing
breeze; they may amuse for the moment, but they constitute no valuable part of
erudition. An ignorance in geography or history, supposing the means of
instruction have been furnished, is a just cause of reproach; but I should not
blush to acknowledge my daughter wholly unacquainted with a large proportion of
those novels, which are daily issuing from the fertile resources of
imagination. That my lovely charge may, by every possible means, gain that
improvement which will render her a valuable member of society, and a truly
amiable woman, is the unceasing wish of her maternal friend,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


To my honored MOTHER.
THANK you, my mamma, for permitting me to weep for Horatio; you are in all
things indulgent; and I cannot but blush for an expression of sorrow, which is,
indeed, unbecoming in a young creature, who has been privileged by receiving
your instructions, and observing your example. I will no more regret the
virtues of Horatio; but I will endeavor to obtain those acquirements which
shall render me a fit companion for him in that world whither he has flown.

You, my mamma, have often been afflicted, and yet you are cheerful and happy!
It will be my pride to tread in your steps, and for two very good reasons;
first, I shall thus become amiable and virtuous; and, secondly, I shall give
joy to your maternal bosom. To be called your daughter, and to merit, in any
degree, that distinction, is my highest ambition; and while I am thought worthy
to succeed the beloved child whom you mourn, I shall indeed be the happy
Margaretta. The letters which you are to give me, are a new instance of your
goodness; my treasures are daily augmenting, and my gratitude ought to be
proportioned.

I have again carefully looked over the volumes of biography and history, which
I have so lately read in your presence; and, although they are all fresh in my
memory, yet I can hardly tell how to give an opinion respecting them, and, but
in obedience to the wishes of my Mother, I should not presume to express my
sentiments.

Plutarch has recorded so many great actions, that I am almost lost in
astonishment while I read his pages; but, after hesitating who, of all his
heroes, to name upon this occasion, I have thought that as Aristides so
generally obtained the appellation just, he must have possessed superior
excellence; and, upon attentively examining his deeds of worth, I cannot say
that he did not deserve the title which he received. I am ready to ask, Was not
Aristides a perfect character? and, since you have put me upon the comparison,
I have taken the liberty to conceive, that there are not many of the English
kings worthy to be compared with him.

If Edward VI. had lived, as he was so early remarkable for virtue and for
learning, he might have exceeded all who went before; and I should not then
have hesitated in my answer to the second question of my dear mamma. The reply
of the son of Henry VI. upon being interrogated by the prince whom he deemed a
usurper, relative to his appearance in England, betokened an intrepid mind: But
this youth was barbarously murdered. Henry VII. was a good king; he is said to
have rendered his subjects powerful and happy, and to have wrought a great
change in the manners of the people. Henry V. is a celebrated and victorious
warrior. The Black Prince is rendered illustrious by many virtues. Goldsmith
tells us, that he left behind him a character without a single blemish -- that
time could scarcely alleviate the sorrows occasioned by his death -- that his
affability, clemency, and liberal disposition, is extolled by many historians;
and that, although he was born in an age in which military virtues alone were
held in esteem, he cultivated the arts of peace, and seemed ever more happy in
deserving praise, than in obtaining it -- But he was not a monarch. Thomson's
Edward and Eleonara, has prepossessed my mind in favor of that monarch. Shall
I, my mamma, greatly err, if I give the preference to the hero of the poet?
Suffer me to point out a few instances wherein I have been charmed with the
character of that sovereign.

At an early period, when Prince of Wales, he appears fighting the battles of
his father, whose rebellious subjects had taken arms against him. Fired by the
insults offered to his royal parents, he pursues and takes vengeance upon them;
he submits, with calm resignation, to the hardships imposed upon him, and
becomes a voluntary hostage for his father: he extricates himself with great
dexterity from the difficulties in which he was involved; he escapes from the
ambitious Leicester, and suddenly appearing the brave leader of his armies, his
presence insures success; he hastes, with filial eagerness, to snatch his
father from the threatened danger; he overcomes, in single combat, the rebel
Gordon, a veteran trained to arms, and skilled in combat! He does more; for,
good as he is brave, he obtains his pardon, reinstates him in the king's
favor, and restores him to his family and estates! He mourned for his father
with true filial sorrow. When he came to the throne, he might have been
despotic; but he contented himself with limited power. In the midst of danger
he discovered great intrepidity; no circumstance could diminish his valor; he
was never vindictive but when he conceived the exigencies of the State required
it. We are informed, that he added much to the real emolument of his subjects;
that he was solicitous for the tranquillity of the people, and was seldom
arbitrary but with a view to their interest. He was devout, fond of justice,
essayed to distribute it indiscriminately, and confirmed the rights of the
people. Such is the character of Edward I. and yet, methinks, many of his
actions were deeply tinged with severity.

To read the life of the Queen of Scots without tears, appears to me
impossible. I prefer Doctor Stuart to Doctor Robinson, and I view Mary as the
most injured of women. I cannot regard her as a murderer -- I am distressed if
she is accused -- I am fond of considering her as blameless. I do not love
Elizabeth -- I am astonished to find her at any time the object of admiration;
and I feel disappointed, that no remarkable calamity overtook her as a
punishment for her cruelty to a woman so unfortunate and so meritorious! The
Earl of Murray I detest, nor did I part with a single tear at his assassination.

Henry IV. of France (excuse the arrogance of your girl) was, I conceive,
inferior to the Duke of Sully. I have been ready to think he owed his
greatness, in many instances, to his minister; he is often extricated by him
from his difficulties, and saved from the most dishonorable connexions; yet
the king is frequently angry with the duke without a cause. Besides, the king
was an apostate; and the duke of Sully, although importuned by his sovereign,
who enforced his arguments by the most splendid offers, preserved his religion
inviolate. The duke is tenderly attached to his family, while the king very
soon enters into habits of intimacy with persons who were supposed to have
procured the death of his mother! nor does he pay much attention to the
feelings of his sister! And indeed I am ready to ask, Was not the duke of
Sully, as well as Aristides, without a fault? The action of Ravaillac was
horrid, and, methought, I felt the wound which pierced the side of the king.

The fate of king Charles has cost me unnumbered sighs and tears. Surely, had
the advances which he condescended to make, been accepted, he would have become
the father of his people. The heroism of Lady Fairfax, at the trial of the
unfortunate monarch, excites my gratitude and my admiration. When the royal
sufferer takes leave of his children, and when, for the last time, he presses
his in^ant son to his bosom, I can scarce control the anguish of my spirit; a
sickness comes over my heart, and I feel as if I were about to part with the
dearest of my friends. I follow Charles to the scaffold -- I attend to the good
bishop -- I behold the venerable sufferer -- I listen to his emphatic
"REMEMBER" -- I see his head extended on the block, his hands outstretched!
and I shudder at the fatal blow! -- I turn from the bleeding trophy of
rebellion! -- I execrate the enemies of the martyred monarch! -- I join in the
lamentations of the deeply affected spectators; and, I think, I would not be
Elizabeth of England, nor Oliver Cromwell, although I might thus be raised to
the empire of the whole world.

I take pleasure in traveling with the Czar Peter; I admire him while in
Holland and England. He was called great -- but I had rather he had been less
rigorous to his son.

You have taught me, Madam, to venerate the characters of those matchless men,
who, quitting their native country, and those commodious habitations where they
enjoyed the elegancies of life, crossed the wide Atlantic, and took up their
residence in a wilderness, where even the articles necessary to their existence
were with difficulty obtained; thus encountering various hardships, for the
sole purpose of obtaining liberty to worship God agreeably to the dictates of
their consciences; and I attend, with superior satisfaction, to the actions of
persons, who were thus distinguished for patience, fortitude and piety.

But, when I am required to say which I admire most, I again feel as when
making a choice among Plutarch's Greeks and Romans; and I am ready to conceive,
that the naming one would render me guilty of disrespect to the rest; yet my
mother would not put a question to her girl unbecoming for her to answer, and I
cannot but feel a pleasure in accommodating myself to her requests. Mr.
Johnson, of Clipsham, seems to have exercised himself in acts of kindness
toward America; he was an upright and pious man; after his death, the people
of Massachusetts evinced the estimation in which they held him, by directing
their bodies, as they departed out of time, to be interred around him. But the
perusal of the life of Governor Winthrop has given me inexpressible
satisfaction; he was early distinguished in Suffolk, and his being appointed a
justice of peace at the age of eighteen, is a striking proof that he was
supposed to possess superior virtue. He enjoyed an estate of many hundreds a
year; but he hesitated not in parting with every thing which was eligible in
his prospects, when they were set in competition with his integrity and his
religion. Placed, by general consent, at the head of the new formed colony, he
was eleven times chosen its governor, and it appears that he conducted with
prudence and justice. The death of Governor Winthrop, who was styled, the
Father of the infant State, caused a general lamentation throughout the colony;
and his virtues, it is said, were many, while his errors were few -- perhaps he
had no superior.

Thus, my dear mamma, have I endeavored to obey you. Often attending to
conversations passing between my papa and you, on interesting points in
history, I have expressed myself with the greater confidence. I know you will
have the goodness to point out my mistakes, and tell me how I ought to think of
persons and things, and I request you to write me a separate letter upon each
of the subjects you have proposed, and thus add to the number of those pleasing
obligations, which you have long been in the habit of conferring upon your ever
duteous and affectionate

MARGARETTA MELWORTH.


No. XLV.
Though frequent crimes deform the Grecian page,
And Roman annals often blush in gore,
Yet let me contemplate the virtuous sage,
The patriot's beamy steps untir'd explore.
I Would rather count the stars that gem the sky,
Or in the azure path, or milky way,
Than follow where tremendous whirlwinds fly,
Volcanoes burst, or plagues in embryo lay.

To MARGARETTA.
YOU have, my love, fully answered my expectations, and I pronounce decisively,
(a liberty which you know I seldom allow myself to take) that few young women
have made better improvement of their time and advantages than my Margaretta;
and, as I am in the habit of gratifying all your reasonable wishes, I shall,
according to your desire, address you in separate letters upon the principal
points to which I have required your attention.

I did not calculate on precision of comparison from my daughter. Plutarch,
after carefully collecting the materials for the lives which he has written;
after weighing every circumstance, and digesting them with that admirable
regularity in which they are handed down to us, is often at a loss to estimate
the comparative excellence of his heroes. He narrates particulars, places them
in a parallel view, and seems rather to leave the decision to his readers. My
purpose, in the exercise which I have exacted, was to insure your accurate
attention; well knowing, that the disquisition of a subject, a conference on
its merits, and, more especially, those researches which are requisite to the
making up of an opinion that we are to commit to writing, is the most probable
means of impressing the mind. Besides, we cannot too often contemplate virtuous
actions. Stimulated by the approbation that will, indisputably, sooner or
later, attend on rectitude, we become enamoured thereof, and, aiming at those
excellencies which may entitle us thereto, we seek to implant in our bosoms
every good and proper principle.

The heroes of antiquity, grouped together, may be considered as a splendid
constellation, illumining those tremendous periods, which, fraught with blood
and murder, unveiled scenes that seemed to threaten the universal wreck of
nature! Lycurgus, the Lacedemonian legislator, evinced his integrity in the
most arduous actions of his life; no difficulties were too great for his
enterprizing spirit. Zealous for his country's weal, he endured every hardship;
visiting the learned men in various cities, that he might, by their collected
wisdom, become qualified to consult the general good. His valor was equal to
his love of information. In early life he was proof against the assault of
perfidious beauty; he cheerfully resigned royalty; and, although some of his
regulations, apparently at variance with nature, may be deemed rigorous and
cruel, yet we cannot call in question his probity, nor the light in which he
himself regarded his institutions, when we find him voluntarily yielding up his
life, in the hope of insuring their perpetual operation.

Solon, the Athenian lawgiver, united wisdom and clemency; his philanthropy
was demonstrated by his remission of debts, and his exempting the body from
seizure in cases of insolvency. He abrogated the bloody laws of Draco, and
equity was the basis of his proceedings: He ordained, also, that no one should
speak evil of the dead. Thespis, the immortal father of the drama, was
cotemporary with Solon.

Numa Pompilius was a virtuous prince. He seemed born to humanize the ferocity
of the Romans; he cultivated the arts of peace; and his supposed intercourse
with the goddess Egeria, giving him the ascendency over the minds of the
people, he became indeed a sovereign, and he employed his power for the
emolument of his subjects. His acceptance of the royal dignity was in
conformity to their persevering importunity, and he justified their utmost
confidence. His institutions were descriptive of wisdom; he erected public
edifices; he shut up the temple of Janus; and, although he exercised
sovereignty for the space of forty-three years, this temple was never again
opened during his reign. Numa exhibited an example of justice, clemency and
goodness; and the benign virtues of humanity prevailed throughout his
dominions. The sources of contention were cut off; the gentle breezes of
complacency were abroad; the healthful and tranquillizing occupations of
agriculture were diligently pursued; the authority of religion was established;
the people saw good days; festivity gladdened their hearts; and amusements,
under the auspices of virtue, were established. Italy assumed a face of
confidence and contentment; an amicable intercourse succeeded those hostilities
which had distracted the land; a persuasion of security obtained, and commerce
revived.

Valerius became illustrious by his virtues. He was the friend of the people;
his condescension to their feelings obtained for him the surname of Publicola.
He demolished, without hesitation, the superb mansion which gave them offense;
he inverted the insignia of authority as he approached their assemblies; thus
inferring his reverence for their sentiments, and his acknowledgment of their
sovereignty. By these judicious concessions he cut asunder the sinews of envy,
and established himself in the hearts of the many. He was the first Roman
consul that ever mounted a triumphal chariot; and the oration which he
delivered at the funeral of Brutus, is said to have originated that custom
among the Romans. Publicola enacted wise and equitable laws, and he
communicated to his administration the requisite energy. He gave liberty to
offenders, condemned by the consuls, to appeal to the people. No person could
legally exercise any office, who had not been elected by the free suffrages of
the people; and he exempted the poor from any custom, or impost of any
description! He ordained questors; he exercised himself in acts of liberality;
and he was industrious in establishing all that equality which is consistent
with the regular administration of government. He was an intrepid warrior; he
was victorious over the enemies of his country; he was frequently elected
consul; his triumphs were repeated; and he died, honored and regretted. The
Roman ladies, to demonstrate their high sense of the merit of this illustrious
citizen, appeared in black one whole year after his decease. If Solon's
definition of happiness is admitted, Publicola was happy, for he was virtuous;
he served his country honorably as a legislator and a general, and his
services were gratefully compensated. He died amid the continued victories of
the republic, which had attained respectability under his auspices; and to him
is referred the splendour and ancestry of the noble houses of the Publicoloe,
the Messalloe and Valerii.

Marcus Furius Camillus bore many honorable offices under the Roman
commonwealth. Perhaps, if we except the Decii and the Regulii of the Roman
history, it records few, if any lives, that exhibited more uniform and glowing
patriotism. He was five times chosen dictator; and his deeds of worth rendered
the family of Furia illustrious. The authority which devolved singly upon
himself, he judiciously communicated; and when he was associated with others,
the elevation of his understanding, giving him to originate every seasonable
and important regulation, rendered his superiority apparent. It is remarked of
him, that he commanded without envy, and that his contemporaries cheerfully
yielded him the preference. It was during a contest relative to Camillus, that
the Roman ladies evinced their patriotism by parting with their jewels; in
consideration of which, a decree passed the senate, that orations should be
pronounced at the funeral of meritorious women. The indignation with which
Camillus received the infamous pedagogue who betrayed the Falerian youth,
basely conducting the students committed to his care into the Roman camp, and
his equitable decision relative to the traitor, demonstrates the wisdom and
integrity of his character; while his remarks, on that memorable occasion, are
descriptive of magnanimity, heroism and rectitude. War, said he, is of itself a
sufficient evil; oppression, cruelty and bloodshed are in its train:
Nevertheless, the man of probity will still square his actions by the rule of
right; he will not accept a victory obtained by perfidy; but he will trust to
his own valor to procure for him that decision, which the justice of his cause
may authorize him to expect. Virtue, as it often happens, was, in this case,
its own reward. The unexpected restoration of the Falerian children, with the
marks of ignominy bestowed upon the perfidious preceptor, were circumstances
which enkindled in the bosoms of the well near distracted parents, the most
ardent veneration for the Roman character; and while their emancipated sons
extolled Camillus as their father, their god and their deliverer, ambassadors
were immediately dispatched to the Romans, and an advantageous and a bloodless
peace was obtained.

Yet Camillus, at a period when he was involved in the deepest domestic
calamity, when the cheek of the warrior was wet with the tears which fell over
the early grave of the son of his bosom, became the victim of ingratitude!
Arraigned by the ill-founded malice of the people, he anticipated judgment, and
only escaped an ignominious sentence, by submitting to voluntary banishment.
But, unlike Coriolanus, during his exile, his good genius still hovered round
the city of Rome, and, as her guardian angel, he watched over her for good. The
Gauls attacked and destroyed the city, massacreing the senators in their robes
of dignity; but the exiled hero was fruitful in resources, and his most arduous
efforts were embodied for the relief of his desolated country. As a private
soldier, associating with a veteran band, he obtained a signal victory over the
common enemy; and, so sacred did he hold the authority legally appointed, that
he refused the command which he was solicited to assume, until the
representatives of the State, then besieged in the capitol, should elect him to
that office! The heroism of an individual procured the necessary investiture;
and, thus armed with regular powers, his actions proclaimed the patriot, the
hero and the warrior! He led an army against Brennus; disappointed the
mercenary views of that Gaul; set the battle in array; obtained a decisive
victory; extricated his native city; entered Rome amid the acclamations of the
citizens, and was received with every possible demonstration of joy! Camillus
rebuilt the city of Rome, and was honored by the appellation of its second
founder. He enjoyed, for the fourth time, that triumph which he had so well
deserved! In short, he attained the highest summit of human glory.

Cincinnatus is enrolled in the brightest annals of fame! His magnanimity, his
abilities and his moderation merit the sublimest eulogy. Departing from the
rural haunts of peaceful virtue, he saved Rome, obtained a triumph, and
returned to that retirement, where he had so successfully reared to maturity
that noble patriotism, which, in the hour of danger, had nerved his arm, and
led him forth to victory!

Cimon, the Athenian, it is said, " possessed all those qualities that dignify
the soul." He was zealous for his country's weal; his politics were upright; he
was an accomplished general; modest, when raised to the highest employments and
most distinguished honors, liberal and beneficent, simple, and averse to
ostentation. He had the glory of curbing the vanity of his countrymen, and
dissuading them from acting tyrannically; and he uniformly inveighed against
that propensity, which taught them to sacrifice virtue to profit, and honor to
power.

Philopoemen, produced in the old age of Greece, is characterized as the last
of her sons. He was an undaunted warrior; he trained his countrymen to arms,
and led them forth to victory: Many were his valorous deeds; and he continued,
through a long life, the determined enemy of tyrants. The integrity of
Philopoemen was not to be corrupted; and such were the impressions of his
rectitude, that no Lacedemonian dared to offer him a bribe. The citizens of
Sparta wished to tender him the sums, accruing from the sale of those valuable
articles, which had been the property of the tyrant whom he had subdued by his
valor: But they were aware that much address was requisite, and they committed
the business to Timolaus; who, after undertaking it, upon observing the wisdom,
justice, temperance and moderation of Philopoemen, despairing of succeeding,
pronounced him superior to seduction, and returned to his employers without
executing his commission! A second attempt was alike ineffectual; a third
trial, however, enabled him to produce the gratuity; when Philopoemen,
rejecting the largess, calmly observed to the Spartans, that it would be
economical to reserve their gold for those unprincipled men, whose nefarious
purposes might else accomplish the public ruin.

Philopoemen was the eighth time appointed general of the Achaeans, after he
had completed the seventieth year of his age! What mortal could achieve he
greatly wrought: But misfortunes overtook the winter of his days. He was
imprisoned by Dinocrates; and when the impoisoned chalice was placed in his
hands, he questioned the messenger of death relative to the horsemen who were
in his train, and upon being informed they had escaped, he replied with a
smile, " It is well -- we are not every way unfortunate;" and, swallowing the
fatal draught, uttered not another sentence! The Achaeans revenged his death.
The body of the hero was placed upon the funeral pile -- the consecrated urn
received the ashes, and it was adorned with garlands of flowers. Polybius, the
historian, conveyed it to his native city. The whole army, drawn up in solemn
procession, attended the venerable remains. People, of all ranks and
conditions, flocked from the towns and villages, to meet the sad retinue;
pressing, with tears and lamentations, to touch and embrace that sacred urn, in
which was deposited all that was mortal of him, who had so often delivered them
from impending evil. He was interred with every demonstration of respect; and
statues arose to his memory in all the principal cities of Greece.

But Plutarch pronounces decisively, that neither Philopoemen, nor any other
warrior, can be compared to Titus Quintius Flaminius, in regard to benefits
conferred upon the Grecian States. Titus combined gentleness of manners and
piety with his valor. He was steady in his friendships; and his clemency to a
conquered foe was exemplified in many instances. He was judicious in his
arrangements: deliberation preceded his actions; and his bravery was tempered
by wisdom. Being victorious over Philip of Macedon, he left him in the
possession of his realm and crown; and he manifested great tenderness to the
Etolians.

I pity the reader who is not elevated to a tone of extacy, when, borne on the
wings of imagination, he presents himself amid the assembled Grecians, and
listens to the proclamation of the Roman herald.

Greece had been torn by intestine dissensions, and alternately the prey of
contending nations. At length, subdued by the Romans, she looked for despotism
and bondage. The Macedonians were expelled; they were totally dispossessed of
all their conquests in Greece, and their garrisons were, by consequence,
removed.

They were without a remedy, wholly at the mercy of the victor. That the Romans
would relinquish the cities they had conquered, was improbable; the very idea
was infinitely absurd and romantic. Solacing themselves, however, with the
prospect of that repose which peace might confer, they prepare to celebrate the
Isthmian games. A vast concourse of people are assembled -- every heart is
replete with expectation -- persons of the highest rank mingle in the crowd --
a decree is to be promulgated; a decree of their conquerors; and their fate
hangs upon the lips of those who have obtained the power of decision. Hope and
fear alternately prevail; but the most sanguine expectancy could only calculate
upon being indulged with a mild system of government. See how the agony of
suspense is impressed upon every deeply interesting countenance! Hark! the
trumpet sounds -- silence is proclaimed -- the herald advances into the center
of the ARENA -- he is about to speak -- What will he say? -- Hush, hush, let
not a breath interrupt.

The senate and people of Rome, and Titus Quintius Flaminius the proconsul,
having overcome Philip and the Macedonians, declare the Corinthians, the
Phocians, the Locrians, the Euboeans, the Magnesians, the Thessalians, the
Perroebi, the Achoeans, and Phthiots, FREE FROM ALL KIND OF SERVITUDE. ALL
THESE NATIONS SHALL LIVE IN AN INDEPENDENT STATE, AND BE GOVERNED BY THEIR OWN
LAWS!!!

The herald is but imperfectly heard -- the multitude is exceeding great -- the
sudden burst of joy has intercepted and split asunder his sentences -- Let him
speak once more -- a profound silence obtains -- Again, with a loud voice, he
proclaims, " The senate and people of Rome," etc. etc. etc. -- Not a syllable
is lost -- not a doubt remains -- Gracious God! is it possible? -- but they are
fully assured of their happiness, and their raised hands and streaming eyes
express the unutterable transport of their bosoms! A universal shout of joy
succeeds! -- a shout, which is resounded by the far distant shore -- their
united acclamations split the surrounding atmosphere -- and, Plutarch informs
us, impeded, in their aerial passage, the feathered tenants of the sky!

The Isthmian games are neglected -- more elevated and important attentions
engross their minds -- they crowd around the Roman chief -- But description,
how insufficient! how totally inadequate as a vestment, to enrobe those
exquisite sensations, which this scene embodies and sublimes! Surely, the
genius of humanity must lament that Rome ever deviated from a mode of conduct,
at once so upright and so splendid.

Leonidas defending the straits of Thermopylae -- Epaminondas, the brave victim
of heroic patriotism -- Pelopidas, his magnanimous friend -- Agis, struggling
in the cause of virtue, and submitting to death with heroic constancy --
Socrates, expiring beneath the stroke of factious bigotry -- (you see, my dear,
I have not paid much attention to chronology; let your next exercise place
these names in their proper order) -- the virtuous Phocion, greatly superior, I
had almost said, to error -- But, my love, it is not my design to give a list
of all those illustrious men, who are justly considered as the ornaments of
humanity. I only aim at exciting your curiosity, and stimulating your
researches. Tomorrow I will give an answer to your question, " Is not
Aristides a perfect character?"

Your papa intends a little jaunt this afternoon; we are to accompany him; we
shall take an early dinner, and it will be well for you to order your dress
accordingly. Hasten, as soon as possible, to your affectionate

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLVI.
Alas! humanity, to error prone!
Unblemished rectitude has rarely known;
Around the lapsed nature, shades collect,
And the dun hues a lengthening gloom reflect.

To MARGARETTA.
" IS not the character of Aristides perfect?" This is the present question.
Let us, my love, proceed to a careful investigation thereof, and our answer
will follow of course. It appears that Aristides was, indeed, eminently
virtuous; and, that although highly capable of friendship, his attachments
could never render him unjust. His decisions, when sitting in the seat of
judgment, were not influenced by a sense of personal injuries. " Friend," said
he, to a plaintiff who sought to bias him in favor of his suit, by
representing the aggressor as the adversary of Aristides; Friend, tell me only
what injuries he has done to thee; for it is thy cause, and not mine, which I
set to judge. He was modest, and averse from ostentation, nor was he ambitious
of the pageantry of office.

He was highly patriotic; the public good was the prime object of his pursuit;
and, to a consideration so important, he cheerfully prostrated his individual
glory; yet, in fact, he thus rendered himself truly illustrious. I regard the
action, by which Aristides relinquished his authority to Miltiades, among the
most splendid of his life; the consequences were happy; he thus exterminated
the noxious seeds of jealousy and contention, which, taking root, gave
indications of a plentiful growth; and he taught the Grecian warriors the
advantage of being led to battle by a veteran, experienced in the toils and
arts of war; nor could inferior chiefs, thenceforward, refuse to follow an
example so evidently productive of general utility. Justice is said to be the
most prominent virtue which Aristides possessed; it raised him from the humble
walks of life to the highest honors his country could confer; and the
ascendency with which it invested him, giving a color to the plea, that the
liberties of Athens were in danger, became the foundation of that verdict of
the ostracism, by which he was banished. "Has Aristides ever injured you?"
said the hero, to an illiterate stranger, who, ignorant to whom he applied,
requested him to inscribe the devoted name upon the shell. "Not in the least,"
replied the cynic, "neither do I so much as know him; but I am weary of hearing
every where of Aristides the just."

His prayer, at departing from Athens, breathed the true spirit of that kind of
philanthropy, which is nearly allied to Deity; and his conduct during his
banishment, together with his coalition with Themistocles, taking measures,
from devotion to the public good, to advance to the highest eminence, the
reputation of an inveterate foe, gives him an incontrovertible right to that
splendid immortality, which is entitled to deathless praise. Who can set bounds
to their admiration, when they behold the enterprising hero, bidding defiance
to every danger -- forcing his way, at the extremest peril, through the enemy's
fleet, and suddenly presenting himself in the tent of Themistocles, not with
the language of reproach, but in a tone that announced the friend of his
country, glowing with unabating zeal for her interest, and ready to devote
himself to her service?

The virtues of Aristides seem, on this occasion, to have attained the highest
pitch of which humanity is susceptible; the intrigues of Themistocles had
procured his banishment, and the invidious calumniator was then invested with
that authority, to which the services and transcendent merit of the illustrious
exile had given him an indisputable title! Yet he is superior to resentment --
he takes no retrospect of injuries. The state of Athens is in danger, and he
utters not a recriminating sentence! In one word, he approximates to divinity.
The concentrated riches of the universe, in the estimation of Aristides, would
not have been held as an equivalent for the liberties of Greece; and had he
still sojourned in mortality, he would have waged war with her enemies, so long
as the sun and the moon endured.

His benign efforts were industriously employed to mollify the enkindling
resentments of chiefs, engaging in the common cause; and he gained every thing
by his pacific interposition.

His address relative to the disaffected Grecians, cannot be too much
applauded; nor do I conceive, that, in this instance, he sacrificed justice,
since the two delinquents, against whom he proceeded, were confessedly the most
culpable, and the rest were referred to the battle, as an ordeal, by which they
might silence the clamours of accusation, and produce a conviction that they
had never imagined any thing prejudicial to the welfare of Greece. Aristides
exemplified both his policy and his justice, by the decree which declared the
victorious citizens alike eligible to the offices of government, and which
authorized an impartial election of the (...) the great body of the people.

We find Aristides repeatedly opposing himself to the treacherous policy of
Themistocles, and it appears that the Athenians at length knew how to
appreciate properly, the abilities and the virtues of those two warriors. I
have conceived a design, said Themistocles, which will be of vast advantage to
the State, but its success depends upon its continuing a profound secret.
Communicate your design to Aristides, cried the Athenians, and we will abide by
his decision. The project was, to burn the combined navy of Greece, which
conflagration would have invested Athens with sovereignty. But one judgment can
be formed of this scheme -- it was infamously perfidious. " Nothing," said
Aristides, as he gave in his report to the assembly -- " could be more
advantageous, and nothing could be more unjust." We conceive a high idea of the
integrity of the Athenians, and of their unbounded confidence in Aristides,
when we hear them, without waiting to investigate, command Themistocles to
relinquish his purpose.

The dignified condescension of Aristides induced the confederated forces to
solicit his acceptance of the general command of their united army; and his
matchless integrity constrained the Lacedaemonians to supplicate the Athenians,
that he might have leave of absence, while he examined, in person, the
complicated revenues, and assigned to every citizen their due proportion of the
expenses accruing from the general burden of the war. Yet this personage,
rendered illustrious by an assemblage of virtues, led a life of poverty, and
daily practiced a close observance of the most rigid frugality. His candor and
moderation were frequently apparent. Themistocles continued the determined foe
of his virtues; yet he " refused to join in the prosecution of that citizen,"
when his practices being unveiled, he was finally accused of capital crimes,
and he possessed too much real dignity of mind, to insult him in his
misfortunes.

My Margaretta repeats her question, " Is not the character of Aristides
perfect?" I answer -- we have hitherto only attended to the fair side of his
conduct. Perhaps Aristides attained to as much rectitude of life, as has ever
yet fallen to the share of a being who is subject to the assaults of passion,
who is the sport of contingencies, and who too frequently finds himself
involved in a labyrinth of error. But neither Aristides nor any other mere
mortal, since the defection of him who was placed in the garden of Eden, has
ever yet been, strictly speaking, wholly exempted from the effects of that
imbecility, which, from the abovementioned period, has, more or less, pervaded
human nature. But Plutarch says, " that he was firm and steady in his
behavior, immovable in every thing that appeared just, and incapable of using
the least falsehood, flattery, disguise, or deceit, so much as in jest." True,
he does so, and this very assertion is another proof of the imperfection of
poor human nature. Plutarch is highly respectable as an historian, and yet his
life of Aristides expressly contradicts this summary which he has given us of
his character; for, besides that, he seems to adopt the opinion, that the
enmity of Aristides and Themistocles originated in an unwarrantable attachment,
which they had mutually conceived to a beautiful individual. He represents
Aristides the just as strenuously combating a measure of great importance and
advantage, merely because it had been proposed by Themistocles! I confess, on
this occasion, he acted in contradiction to the general rectitude of his mind;
but he did act, and a consciousness of the impropriety of his conduct, extorted
from him a confession, "that the Athenians would never be safe, till they threw
Themistocles and himself into the Barathrum."

I am aware that his matured judgment amply corrected this error; but neither
were his riper years entirely free from blame. As a treasurer, he discharged
his trust with that integrity which made so essential a part of his character;
but upon surrendering up his accounts, being accused by Themistocles, and other
nefarious incendiaries, of embezzling the public moneys, although he was
honorably acquitted by the chief and best men of the city, and continued in
his office, he affected, during the course of a complete year, an utter
dereliction of his former probity; he courted the approbation of those who
robbed the public, and passed their accounts, without that equitable
investigation and detection of treachery, to which he had been accustomed. It
is true, that upon his second re-election, he thus obtained the privilege of
rebuking the Athenians, by the following address: When I discharged my office
faithfully and honorably, I was reviled and disgraced: but now, when I have
suffered your treasury to be robbed by these public plunderers, I am admired
and applauded at the best of citizens. It is also true, that this plan might be
politic. Athens, thus warned, probably reaped the benefit in her subsequent
regulations and appointments; but surely it is a circumstance which destroys
the assertion of his biographer, for he appears during the transactions of a
year, capable of "using falsehood and deceit." Thus, if we would not be missed,
the necessity of an accurate investigation of even the best authors, becomes
obvious.

But having adjusted our first point, we proceed to the second. You have very
naturally accounted for your predilection in favor of Edward I.; but your
favorite poet has enriched the drama, by rendering another English monarch the
hero of his production. Alfred the Great was surely not inferior even to
Aristides. I will confess to you, my daughter, that I have never read the
history of this prince without the most animated and pleasurable sensations. I
may be an enthusiast in my admiration of his virtues; but he appears to me to
have united in himself every excellence which can dignify or adorn humanity;
and I experience a degree of elevation, in the consideration that this
magnanimous monarch was of that order of beings, in which nature has conferred
on me, also, the gift of existence.

Let us, my good girl, take a cursory view of the splendid actions which
rendered illustrious one of the most distinguished lives that is to be found in
the annals of human nature. The favorite son of a father, who, from misjudging
fondness, neglected his education; we find him, at the age of twelve years,
ignorant of the lowest rudiments of literature; but the productions of the
^ard, recounting the valorous deeds of heroes, are rehearsed in his presence,
and his noble faculties are roused to action; an ardent thirst of knowledge,
and desire of virtue, pervades his bosom, and his maternal parent cherishes the
princely emulation, which is thus happily originated. The elevated and
penetrating genius of Alfred was superior to every impediment. Both English and
Latin were soon attained, and his progress in every useful and ornamental study
was astonishing. The death of his father placed his brother Ethelred upon the
throne, by whom he was deprived of his patrimony; yet, relinquishing at the
shrine of public safety, his sense of individual wrongs, he bravely fought the
battles of his brother. Providence at length invested him with the sovereign
authority; but his dominions were previously reduced to the very brink of
destruction, and his prospects were indeed truly lamentable. The progress of
the Danes was fearfully rapid. Agriculture was arrested in its most essential
operations -- the grounds remained uncultivated -- the sacred temples were laid
in ashes -- every resource seemed cut off, and despair, with tremendous aspect,
stalked through the desolated land! yet virtue, valor and wisdom united in the
person of Alfred -- the trio was august -- it was equal to the most astonishing
achievements -- the clouds gradually dispersed -- every evil was redressed --
and confidence, regularity and felicity were restored!

ALFRED, justly receiving the epithet GREAT, was anointed by Heaven, the
deliverer, restorer and protector of his prostrate country; and although his
first onsets were unsuccessful, and the Danes still continued their barbarous
ravages, yet no misfortune could repress his heroic ardour; but yielding, for a
season, to those melancholy necessities, imposed by an enemy, rendered powerful
by successive victories, whose perfidy no treaty could bind, and constrained
also by the superstitious fears of those few followers who remained, he
relinquished the ensigns of royalty, dismissed his attendants, and, clad in a
shepherd's garb, he took his way to the cottage of a herdsman, to whom his rank
was unknown; where, in this disguise, he continued, impatiently expecting the
hour, when he might advantageously present himself, and reduce to practice
those preconcerted plans, which were to emancipate his bleeding country. Equal
to every situation in life, he supported himself with propriety during this
reverse of fortune. Music constituted the prime source of his amusement, and
hope illumined his hours. Thomson lays the scene of the most interesting of his
dramatic productions, in this rural abode of royalty. The Masque of Alfred
opens with a dialogue of the shepherd and his wife, respecting the stranger who
resided in their cottage. It commences in the following beautiful manner: Emma.
Shepherd, it is he. Beneath yon aged oak, all on the flowery turf he lays him
down.


Corin. Soft! let us not disturb him, gentle Emma. Poor though he be;
unfriended and unknown; my pity waits with reverence on his fortune. Modest of
carriage, and of speech most gracious. As if some saint or angel in disguise
had graced our lowly cottage with his presence -- he steals, I know not how,
into the heart, and makes it pant to serve him. Trust me, Emma, he is no common
man.


Emma. Some lord, perhaps, or valiant chief, that from our deadly foe, the
haughty, cruel, unbelieving Dane, seeks shelter here.


Corin. And shelter he shall find. Who loves his country, is my friend and
brother. Behold him well. Fair virtue in his aspect, even through the homely
russet that conceals him, shines forth, and proves him noble. See thou, Emma,
you western clouds? The sun they strive to bide, yet darts his beams around.




The succeeding scene between Alfred and the Earl of Devon, is deeply
interesting; but as your father intends reading for us this evening Thomson's
Alfred, I forbear a continuation of my extracts.

The auspicious era at length dawned, and the dispersed Saxons once more
rallied round the standard of their prince. But a hazardous enterprise
remained; a knowledge of the numbers and situation of the foe was absolutely
indispensable; and Alfred, at a loss to whom to confide an undertaking so
important, devoted himself to the perilous investigation! In his rustic
habiliments, with his harp in his hand, he passed the Danish lines -- amused
the soldiers -- addressed in the most soothing strains, the admiring officers;
and thus procuring an introduction to the Danish prince, continued with him
many days; until, obtaining the requisite information, he departed to that
retreat from whence he issued those commands which placed him at the head of an
army, resolutely determined to make for their lives and their liberties a
vigorous stand! The consequence was glorious. The Danes, astonished to behold
again in the field, a power which they had considered as totally annihilated,
gave way on every, side; a decisive victory was obtained; and, although those
who escaped, again entrenched themselves, yet speedily surrendering at
discretion, they experienced the clemency of the conqueror. From this period
Alfred continued victorious; a series of brilliant successes utterly expelled
the treacherous invaders, while the fleet which he appointed, destroyed their
vessels, and defended the English coast. It was now that he attained the
extreme acme of human glory. His territories were extended far beyond the
domain of his predecessors. The Welsh monarchs acknowledged his superiority;
the Northumbrians accepted the sovereign whom he appointed; no enemy remained;
and general peace was restored.

Twelve years of profound tranquillity ensued, and Alfred appropriated this
interval to the originating, restoring and establishing whatever could be
considered as contributing to the welfare of his subjects, whom he regarded as
his children. The cities ravaged by the Danes, were rebuilt; a regular militia,
well ordered and equipped, was embodied. He numbered and registered the people,
and, placing weapons in their hands, he taught them to defend themselves. He
divided the kingdom into classes, assigning to each a respective routine of
duty; thus the lands were cultivated, while well appointed and duly regulated
bands held themselves in readiness to repel an invading foe. The navy, also,
obtained a due share of his fostering care; an able and completely furnished
fleet, consisting of one hundred and twenty ships of war, were stationed along
the Albion coast; and the English, in this reign, became expert in sailing and
in naval engagements; and thus were succeeding incursions advantageously
repulsed.

He next turned his attention to the embellishment of the kingdom which he had
thus delivered and protected; he enacted laws, and established the most
judicious regulations. The wisdom of his civil institutions is highly
celebrated. The trial by jury, that grand palladium of justice, is ascribed to
him; and to such perfection had he conducted the system which he originated,
and so well did the morals of his subjects harmonize therewith, that he is said
to have ordered bracelets of gold to be hung up in the highway, as a challenge
to robbers, which bracelets remained in perfect security. He was the uniform
friend and patron of literature; this necessarily ameliorated the manners, and
humanized the habits of the people. He mounted the throne at a period when his
subjects were enveloped in the most profound ignorance. The character of the
age was ferocious; and the fluctuating state of the English government,
together with the depredation of the Danes more especially, impressed upon that
nation the features of barbarism. The Latin tongue was almost wholly unknown in
England; and Alfred took measures to allure to his dominions the most learned
men of Christendom. He renovated the University of Oxford, and conferred on
that seminary many privileges. He was truly economical of his own time,
regulating his hours to the best advantage, and appropriating them most
judiciously: Grammar, rhetoric, philosophy, architecture, and geometry,
constituted a part of his studies. He is celebrated as an historian; his
knowledge in music is said to have been respectable; and his poetical talents
were in high esteem. He was fond of allegory; he translated from the Greek, the
fables of AEsop; and many of his productions are handed down to the present
day! Thus did the example of the sovereign furnish a powerful incentive to
application and improvement. He also liberally encouraged the mechanical arts.
His palaces were constructed of brick, and his example was properly
influential. He patronized manufactures of every description; and every useful
invention, was, by the munificence of the prince, suitably rewarded. Commerce
and navigation, which he invariably cherished, furnished him with the
elegancies of life; and England was at length taught how to appreciate the
value of justice, tranquillity and industry.

"It was," says a respectable historian, after a glorious reign of twenty-nine
years thus spent in the advancement of his subjects' happiness, that he died in
the vigor of his age, and the full enjoyment of his faculties; an example to
princes, and an ornament to human nature. To give a character of this prince,
would only be to sum up those qualities which constitute perfection. Even
virtues seemingly opposite, were happily blended in his disposition;
persevering, yet flexible; moderate, yet enterprising; just, yet merciful;
stern in command, yet gentle in conversation. Nature, also, as if desirous that
such admirable qualities of mind should be set off to the greatest advantage,
had bestowed on him all bodily accomplishments -- vigor, dignity, and an
engaging open countenance. In short, writers have taken such delight in
describing the hero, that they have totally omitted the mention of his smaller
errors, which doubtless he must have had, in consequence of his humanity.

I am sufficiently acquainted with the mind of my daughter, to feel a
conviction that her sentiments of ALFRED the GREAT, will be perfectly in unison
with those of her tenderly affectionate

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLVII.
Who but must mourn, when vice the ascendent gains,
And in the heaven-born mind triumphant reigns;
When the fair life admits the deep'ning stain,
Which must through time indelible remain --
A stain for which no action can atone,
Though in the richest hues of fancy shown.
Splendid humanity we love to view,
And, with regret, the spot deforming show.

To MARGARETTA.
THE lively imagination which you, my dear, possess, together with your
exquisite sensibilities, so properly balanced by reason and by judgment,
cannot, I think, but be productive of the most pleasing consequences. Your
strong emotions as you read, will serve to impress on your mind the events you
contemplate, and thus you will treasure up a fund, which will, through life,
constitute a source of emolument and pleasure.

Your sentiments of Elizabeth are such as her conduct to Mary very naturally
originate; and it is certain, that her cruelty to that princess would have
stamped, even upon the life of an angel, impressions of guilt, never to be
effaced; and yet it cannot be denied that Elizabeth was capable of dignified
actions. I approve your preference of Stuart. The historian engaged in
exonerating from reproach the memory of the dead, is, I conceive, entitled to
praise; and I can more easily forgive the writer, who multiplies or exaggerates
the virtues of deceased persons, than he who imputes to them crimes which,
while living, they detested! The violence done to Dido, in this respect,
cannot, I have imagined, be justified, even by the license which is allowed to
poets. The best authors concur in representing Eliza, or Dido, as a most
intrepid and magnanimous princess. Deprived, by the hand of a barbarous
brother, of the husband of her youth, to whom it appears she was fondly
attached, and attended by her sister and a few faithful followers, she fled
from her native realm; when, encountering with heroic fortitude, the hardships
inseparable from her enterprise, she founded, or established, the city of
Carthage; she enlarged and beautified it; she enclosed it by a strong wall, and
erected in it a citadel; her subjects rapidly increased; she laid the
foundation of a flourishing commerce; and her administration combined justice,
wisdom and prudence. Her institutions, and the form of government which she
introduced, are pronounced by Aristotle, the most perfect that had ever been
known in the world; and Polybius informs us, that monarchy, aristocracy and
democracy, all concentred therein.

Her attachment to the memory of her murdered husband continued inviolable.
Agreeably to the idolatrous custom of the times, she ordered divine honors to
be paid to him; and while she was indefatigable in her endeavors to promote
the advancement of her subjects, she remained wedded to his memory; thus
exhibiting a pattern of female delicacy, propriety and faithfulness. A
consciousness of the happiness which she communicated tranquillized her bosom,
and her life would have closed serenely, but for the interested proposals of
^^^bas, a neighboring prince, who sought her in marriage. The Carthaginians,
fearful of offending their sovereign by an explicit communication of the
overture, practiced that kind of punic subtilty, for which they were afterward
so remarkable; and the unsuspecting Dido, ensnared by their address, found
herself in a situation, which, of all others, she most deprecated. With
streaming eyes she appealed to her deceased lord, and, continuing firm to her
plighted vows, laying her hand upon her breast, with dignified resignation she
pronounced. " Give me three months for deliberation, and I will go where my own
fate and that of my people calls me." In this interval the funeral pile ^rose,
which ascending precisely at the stipulated moment, she voluntarily
relinquished a life, which she could no longer, consistent with the public
weal, preserve free from a second hymenial engagement.

This is the Dido of the historian, and authors ascribe to her uncommon
attractions and an unconquerable chastity. Yet she is precipitated from the
sublime height upon which her achievements and her merit has placed her, and
described in an immortal poem, which has been, and will be read by thousands
who never look into history, as a lascivious wanton! The slave of imbecility,
sacrificing the prime honor of womanhood, and finally becoming the victim of
an illicit passion! Strange as this (I had almost said sacrilegious) violation
appears, our astonishment is heightened, when we learn that some writers deny
that Dido was even a cotemporary with AEneas! Surely this licentious
degradation of a character, eminent for virtue and abilities, was unworthy the
rare talents and acknowledged benevolence of the Mantuan bard.

You will see, my love, as my prime object in these letters is, to engage you
in the study of history, that this exordium is not altogether digressive.

Doctor Stuart proposes himself as the historian, and not as the panegyrist of
Mary; and as his means of information were probably as direct and infallible as
those of any other writer, I yield him my cheerful and grateful credence. Mary,
as delineated by Stuart, descends to posterity, an interesting and deeply
injured princess. Deprived of her father in the early bud of infancy, the
complexion of the times rendered it expedient, that, passing from the care of
her mother, she should receive her education in France. The opening powers of
her mind authorized the fairest expectations; her disposition was amiably mild,
and her understanding was even splendid; she was a proficient in elegant needle
work; she obtained an accurate knowledge of the Latin tongue; she could
converse with propriety and fluency in French, Italian, and Spanish; she
attained a high degree of excellence in painting, poetry and music; her dancing
was inimitable, and her movements combined a grace irresistibly enchanting.
Many writers have expatiated on the beauty and elegance of her exterior; and
her personal and mental attractions, rendered her charming beyond any woman of
the age in which she lived. Her early years passed under the happiest auspices,
and her marriage with the Dauphin, opened her way to the highest regal dignity.
Mounting the throne of France, she was placed in a sphere which she was well
calculated to fill, and her talents and her virtues became properly conspicuous.

But alas! how momentary was the bliss! -- the evanescent vision soon fled, and
the youthful queen was arrayed in the melancholy garb of widowhood! From this
moment she seems marked the daughter of sorrow. The death of her mother
rendered her return to Scotland indispensable; and, with an aching heart, she
prepared to obey the dictates of duty. Is there, who shudders not, as she
receives, while yet in France, the homage of the contending parties? Gladly
would we remove her from the toils and tumults of a turbulent administration,
and shelter her amid those social haunts which she would dignify and adorn.
Yet, conscious of integrity, and with a heart glowing with the benevolent
purpose of appeasing conflicting passions, destroying animosities, and healing
every breach, she prepared for her voyage to her hereditary dominions.

Although zealously attached to the religion in which she had been educated,
and which was the election of her ^^per years, yielding, nevertheless, to the
popular current, she judiciously placed her confidence in those lords, who were
avowedly in the Protestant interest; and it appears that all her plans were
conciliatory. What a vast accession of care instantly devolved upon her, and
what a fearful conflict awaited!!!

Elizabeth -- the powerful Elizabeth, nearly allied to her in blood, but the
determined foe of her virtues and her pretensions, was irreconcileably offended
by the early declaration which had been made of her right to the crown of
England; and her inveteracy was apparent in almost every action; but the
firmness and penetration of Mary was fully equal to every open and avowed
attack; and it was only to the studied artifice of dissimulation, that she
became a victim. Her answer to Throgmorton, while she continued in Paris,
relative to the treaty, binding her to abstain forever from assuming the title
and arms of England, was at once descriptive of her wisdom and her address, and
confirmed the favorable ideas which were entertained of her character.

Elizabeth commenced hostilities by denying Mary a safe conduct to her
dominions; and the remarks of the Scottish princess on this occasion were
spirited and proper. Taking leave of the royal family of France, at St.
Germains, she proceeded to Calais, where she embarked for Scotland. And,
connecting the deplorable circumstances of her life with its tragical
catastrophe, our sensibilities are roused almost to agony, as we witness her
departure from a scene which had naturally engaged her fondest partialities.
The infantile joys, the soft indulgence, and fostering care, which hovered
round her morn of life, the felicity and dignity of her wedded days, passed in
review before her, and her regrets were proportioned to the pleasures she had
experienced -- we acknowledge their propriety -- we mark the deepening anguish
impressed upon every feature -- we hear her exclaim, as the Gallic shores
recede from her gaze, " Farewell, France! Farewell, delightful country! I leave
thee, never to return!" We listen to the tender iteration; her perturbed sighs
vibrate upon our ears; the intervening shades of night officiously obtrude;
and, with the lovely mourner, we watch the returning dawn; eagerly we catch a
parting look, and we seem to inmingle our streaming tears with those of the
royal sufferer. Yet we bless the enveloping mist which sheltered her from the
emissaries of the inhospitable Elizabeth; and when we behold her in her native
dominions, amid the acclamations of her gratulating subjects, we become
solicitous to deceive ourselves, and we would fain disperse, in these happy
presagements, the deep gloom which a knowledge of succeeding events has thrown
about the heart.

For a time, the tenderest considerations gave to the beauteous queen, in the
bosom of manhood, an affecting interest! Introduced into being during the
calamities of her country -- a sovereign in her cradle -- exposed to dangers
while yet unconscious of suffering -- crossing the ocean to receive that
shelter her native realm could not afford -- now mounting buoyant upon the
wings of prosperity, and anon plunged from the highest elevation, and immersed
in all the anguish attendant upon the entire wreck of those hopes which reason
had authorized! These circumstances endeared her to the bosom of sympathy;
while her youth, her figure, her natural and acquired abilities, and the
beneficent mildness of her disposition prepossessed almost every heart in her
favo^^^. The commencement of her administration demonstrated a depth of
understanding and a maturity of reflection, rarely to be found in the bosom of
youth, beauty and royal birth. To the establishment of the Protestant faith she
explicitly agreed, reserving only to herself that mode of worship to which she
was conscientiously attached. Could the most uniform discretion have decided
more judiciously? Justice would have awarded the stipulation, and loyalty would
have evinced its gratitude by the most cheerful and exact observance. Yet, a
fearful storm began to gather; the queen was affronted in the exercise of her
religion, and the renewed declaration of her pacific wishes was ineffectual, as
a barrier, to the impetuous torrent of ferocious zeal, which was bursting upon
her. She proceeded, however, in her tranquillizing plan; and an attempt at
innovation in the established religion was made death! But still the brutal
spirit of the times relented not: Knox proceeded in his inflammatory harangues,
and his sovereign was disturbed and insulted! Nature pointed out the Lord James
Stuart (one of the leaders of the reformed religion) as a proper object of the
queen's confidence; and she accordingly bestowed upon that nobleman strong
marks of her attachment: But alas! he was a wretch, who was seeking to elevate
himself upon the ruin of her from whom he derived his importance. Elizabeth,
too, cherished the most malignant passions, suffering her hatred to her rival
to reach the extreme of rancorous malevolence! But Mary, although surrounded by
inveterate foes, who were variously interested in her destruction, borne
forward on the stream of innocence, and fanned by the gales of conscious
rectitude, pursued her steady and equal course. Strange, that to a conduct not
only unexceptionable, but highly meritorious, the professors of the mild and
peaceable doctrines of christianity should unnaturally oppose themselves,
inconsistently taking rank with the most determined of the queen's enemies!
Open, generous, inexperienced and confiding, she embarked against ignorance,
bigotry, perfidy and the most ferocious cruelty; and, in a contest so unequal,
it cannot be matter of astonishment, that she ultimately became the sacrifice.

Many sources of inquietude combined; parties were daily more and more
exasperated; the age was infinitely profligate; and events, truly distressing,
which human efforts could neither foresee nor prevent, were almost hourly
succeeding. The queen, superior to partiality, referred offenders to a court of
law, and only interfered by extending her royal clemency, as often as the
safety of her subjects and her personal security would admit. The animosities
of the disaffected nobles filled her with the deepest regret; whatever party
prevailed, joy was a stranger to her bosom; the sympathies which she
experienced for the sufferers, barred the entrance of pleasure; and her mind,
accustomed to the refinements of science and of reason, the abode of the
virtues and the graces, was now, by stern necessity, surrendered up a prey to
anxiety, perturbation, and a host of fearful apprehensions. In a situation thus
cruelly embarrassed, she became still more solicitous to secure the amity of
the English queen. Negociations for an interview were opened, and on her part,
every advance, consistent with regal dignity, was cheerfully and sincerely
made. But hatred is a deadly poison, and no emollients can arrest its progress.
The nefarious duplicity of Elizabeth was triumphant; and after the place and
time of their meeting was appointed, she had the address to delay, and finally
entirely to set aside this desirable event!

Without a friend -- destitute of a protector -- no guardian hand to point the
better way, we spontaneously lament the fate of a woman so young, and so
environed by danger. The daring attempt of Chatelard was a specimen of the
evils to which she was subjected; but his succeeding punishment should entirely
free her from the shadow of suspicion. Proposals of marriage were made her by
many crowned heads: while the clashing interests of contending parties, and
their consequent intrigues, seemed an insuperable bar to a conjugal engagement.
Elizabeth, opposed in every possible situation to the advancement of Mary, even
exceeded herself in adroitness of finesse, relative to her marriage. She was
indefatigable in raising obstacles thereto; and she dictated, remonstrated and
objected, in a style so imperious, that if the Queen of Scots had not possessed
unequalled discretion, would have procured an utter dereliction of her
conciliatory views; but her reversionary expectations, relative to the crown of
England, still kept her true to her system.

At this crisis of affairs, the feminine heart will confess a high degree of
exultation, at the view of Mary taking her seat in the great council of the
nation. See! she looks, she moves a queen. She is solicitous to imprint upon
the public mind the most favorable impressions: All the dignity of majesty is
blended with the most benign demonstrations of complacency. She enters the
senate house -- the insignias of royalty are displayed -- she is richly habited
-- she is beautiful as the daughters of paradise -- she ascends the throne --
she addresses the three estates -- persuasion dwells upon her lips -- and her
words are replete wish affection, wisdom and prudence. Lovely woman! how savage
and how unrelenting was that premeditated and determined cruelty which decreed
thy ruin!

It was at this juncture that the Protestant preachers renewed their clamours;
the improvements originating with the queen, were made to assume the hue of
criminality; and even the ornaments of her person became the subject of their
inflammatory declamations. With that severe reformer, Knox, Mary condescended
to expostulate: He had labored to procure the condemnation of the adherents of
the mass! What detestable insolence! How cruelly inconsistent would he have
rendered the administration of his sovereign! and how insulting were the
importunities which directed her to execute persons for those religious
observances, which she herself practiced, and from which she derived her most
solid enjoyments! Mary represented to Knox the inclemency of intoleration, and
the horrid barbarity of devoting men to death, merely for an opinion. It is
difficult to conceive of words or ideas more shockingly gross, than those which
constituted his indecent replies. Samuel hewing Agag to pieces; Jezebel's false
prophets, and Baal's priests -- these were brutally held up to view, until
Mary, fall of astonishment at the boundless audacity of the man, and too
sensible of the insulting freedom of his speech, burst into tears! But the
zealot persisted to justify his conduct, and she commanded him to depart from
her presence. Viewing the Queen of Sco^^ as conscientiously attached to the
religion of her ancestors, we cannot but admire the continued moderation with
which she replied to those rude requisitions, that finally insisted on an utter
abjuration of her hereditary faith! Yet her firmness remained unquestionable;
and she equitably determined not to deprive of life, tranquillity, nor estate,
merely on account of religious sentiments.

The queen endeavored to excite the officers, in their different departments,
to a performance of their respective duties, by an augmentation of salaries.
She presided in person in the courts of law, exciting emulation, and
accelerating the course of justice; thus demonstrating her early seize,
and her right to the utmost respectability of character. She was solicitous to
establish herself in the hearts of her people; and she was laudably ambitious
of fame. May the blessing of Heaven rest upon that historian, who has, at this
late period, renewed those laurels, which, plucked by the rude hand of
prejudice and superstition, might else no more have wreathed the brow of so
meritorious a candidate for excellence.

The revolt of the Earl of Murray was attended with circumstances of aggravated
atrocity; but was nevertheless excited and abetted by Elizabeth.

Mary at length effectuated her marriage with Lord Darnley. The exterior of
this nobleman was prepossessing, his address captivating, and the queen was
tenderly attached to him. It was not a connection calculated to excite the
jealousy of Elizabeth; it was primarily concerted by herself; yet it consisted
with her insidious policy to affect displeasure; and, possibly, the few halcyon
days allowed to Mary, might be to Elizabeth a subject of serious regret.

At this period, the majority of the Scotch preserved their loyalty, and the
people in general entertained proper sentiments of the dissimulation and
intrigues of Elizabeth. The festivity, consequent upon the royal nuptials, gave
place to hostile preparations! The queen, at the head of a formidable army,
appeared in the field; the Earl of Murray and his adherents were put to flight,
and immediately took refuge in England; while Elizabeth, with her accustomed
duplicity, secretly patronized, and ostensibly condemned them. Mary, having
thus conducted to an honorable issue an insurrection sufficiently alarming,
might have tasted the sweets of domestic peace and tender amity, had she not
been written in the book of fate, irreversibly unfortunate.

Darnley possessed a mind incapable of a refined attachment. His capacity was
below a mediocrity! Those superficial accomplishments, which captivate at first
sight, soon lose their effect; and Darnley, alas! could not command esteem! He
was arrogant, haughty and jealous; no entreaties could subdue his obstinacy;
and he was at once inconstant and inflexible, rude and contemptible. In short,
the queen too late discovered a melancholy truth; and painful experience
convinced her that she had made a most unworthy election! But although love,
spreading its downy pinions, fled from the bosom of Mary, (and it is too
certain that its place was not supplied by esteem) yet virtue, regent in her
breast, continued the bulwark of her honor. A sense of duty took the lead, and
kept her steady in the path of rectitude. It is true, she wept the precipitancy
of that step which had decided her fate; but, notwithstanding Lord Darnley's
coldness, and unmerited neglect, although incontestible proofs of his
infidelity were frequently furnished, yet she still remembered that he was her
husband, and failed not to consider what was due to her own character, as a
wife and a queen.

The supposition that Mary was improperly attached to Rizzio, could only have
originated in the dark bosom of prejudice, heated by bigotry, and stimulated by
the extremest rancour. Rizzio was old, ugly and misshapen -- and "it is a wild
absurdity to imagine that the queen would submit to the caresses of deformity
and old age." His assassination in her presence, at a time when her interesting
situation ought to have engaged the utmost tenderness of her husband,
(especially when her high dignity and superior accomplishments are remembered)
was indeed a barbarous outrage, and must shock even the most phlegmatic
feelings of humanity. The subsequent treatment of the queen; the drawn dagger,
pointed at her bosom; the tremendous threats which were sounded in her ears;
her imprisonment, and the audacious reproaches to which she was subjected; the
attempt to infix upon her unsullied honor an indelible stain; and all these
atrocities passing under the eye, and sanctioned by the man on whom she had
conferred the highest honors, and even raised to a throne -- these aggravating
circumstances rank this black transaction, when considered in all its parts,
among the most horrid and enormous crimes which were perpetrated in those days
of turpitude and murder. Yet even these deep transgressions, a disposition
superior to malignity, enabled the queen to forgive -- she consented to a
reconciliation with the king -- she approbated an act of amnesty -- she
remitted the offenses of the delinquent Murray, who again sought his own
emolument in a restoration to her favor -- and observing, with an air of
dignity, that she utterly detested every species of inhumanity, she nobly
sanctioned the act of oblivion.

While the barbed shafts of misfortune were thus piercing the bosom of the
Queen of Scots, a white moment was however at hand; and when she ushered into
being her firstborn son, she in that instant forgot all those sorrows which,
with such accumulating weight, had pressed upon her. The birth of the royal
infant was celebrated in Scotland by every possible demonstration of joy --
while Elizabeth mourned this event, as a serious calamity! Alas! alas! how do
the virtues fade in that bosom, into which the deforming fiends, jealousy and
envy, have made their desolating entrance!

At this period, we are again constrained to regret the uniform unworthiness of
the king, and his total deficiency in all those qualities inherent in a noble
mind. But his haughtiness was still unsubdued! Yet, through all the deepening
glooms which he so injudiciously assumed, through all his ungrateful returns to
the tenderness of the queen, even to the hour of his melancholy exit, we trace,
on her part, a uniform exemplification of prudence and virtue; and we repeat,
that the precepts of religion, together with an exquisite sense of the delicacy
of her situation, and the consideration she owed to virtue and to herself, was,
in her bosom, an effectual substitute for that affection which the demerits of
the king had banished from thence! -- Tomorrow, my dear, we will pursue this
interesting subject.

Your epistle of this morning (...) ^eautifully written; it drew tears of
rapture from the eyes of your affectionate

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLVIII.
Untir'd, the mournful pages we pursue,
And weep those scenes which pass in sad review.

To MARGARETTA.
MARY, utterly averse to the departure of the king, opposed it by every proper
method; and her condescension, upon this occasion, was truly amiable, truly
feminine. But his peevishness and his obstinacy remained invincible, and it was
in those interesting moments that he conceived the ungrateful design of
divesting Mary of that sovereignty to which she was born -- of placing the
crown upon the head of his infant son, and of assuming, as his father, that
authority he was so ill qualified to maintain. Yet the queen, although apprized
of these proceedings, persevered in the mild system she had adopted; and, while
her hours of retirement were devoted to sorrow, she continued in public, to
disguise her grief by an assumed gaiety; and her elegance, urbanity and native
dignity, prepossessed in her favor all those with whom she associated.

The perturbed situation of her mind brought on, however, a dangerous illness:
It was apprehended her last moments were at hand: and she yielded herself, with
holy resignation, to her fate. The king continued unmoved, nor deigned, even at
the moment when her death was pronounced inevitable, to make her a single
visit. But she was restored to health; and in the succeeding indisposition of
the king, she exhibited a reverse of conduct, which reflects the highest honor
upon her principles and her humanity. Uninfluenced by the remonstrances of
those who eagerly solicited her to procure a divorce, her husband's danger
awakened the tenderest sympathies of her generous bosom, and she ceased, in the
calamity of the moment, to remember her manifold injuries! Days and months had
revolved, and their lenient influence had blunted her keen sense of the wrongs
she had received. She was by nature placable; her anger resembled the passing
cloud, which, for an instant, intercepts the mildly beaming radiance of day;
and while her streaming eyes evinced her grief, no vindictive passion harbored
in her bosom! Her tender melancholy paved the way to the renewal of her
affection, and every sense of disobligation, every idea of his inferiority,
like the vision of some dark and comfortless night, instantly vanished away.
The king too, placed, in his own apprehension, on the verge of dissolution,
experienced the salutary sensations of remorse; and he reproached himself, in
the bitterest terms, for his ingratitude to the queen. The news of his
relenting was expeditiously conveyed to her; and all that impassioned
tenderness he had originated in her bosom, rushed upon her memory -- the
felicities of wedded amity -- the hour, which in the bloom of youth, and the
full perfection of her personal charms, devoted her to Darnley -- the lovely
infant whom she hourly pressed to her bosom -- these interesting considerations
obtained in her mind their due weight; and, quitting her palace in the depth of
he wintry months, she hastened to attend him; with affectionate assiduity she
hovered round his bed of languishment, and her presence, and her endearments
operated as the sweetest solace; the mind of the king became tranquil, and
health again glowed in his veins. He accompanied the queen to Edinburgh, and
her demonstrations of fond solicitude were unwearied.

It was at this juncture, that the nobles, who, by an aggravated representation
of the king's offenses, had cherished the resentments of the queen,
apprehensive that the consequences of the reconciliation between the royal pair
would be destructive to themselves, contrived and perpetrated the murder of the
king! The supposition that Mary was accessory, consenting, or even privy
thereto, is devoid even of the shadow of probability; It was forged in the dark
haunts of ignorance and credulity; and it is confuted by a circumstantial
series of well attested facts -- by the mildness, moderation, tender sympathy,
and genuine piety, which were conspicuous traits in the character of the queen
-- by the testimony of many who endured the extremest torture -- by the dying
asseverations of all those who were executed for this crime -- and by the
declaration of Bothwell, who, having dragged out a number of years in close
imprisonment, in his last moments made a complete confession of his own guilt
and her innocence. The anguish, horror and consternation of the queen* at the
fatal intelligence, were equal to the enormity of the crime which had been
perpetrated; and she affirmed, that if her kingdom and her life were the
forfeit, all those who had procured a catastrophe so shocking, should be
prosecuted to the death. She called on her assembled nobles to assist her in
her just purpose, of delivering up to condign punishment, offenders so
atrocious; and, with streaming eyes and heart-affecting earnestness, she
conjured them to leave no means unessayed, which might involve the remotest
probability of a surrender so important. She pathetically lamented, that in a
moment, when the sunny beams of hope had revisited her bosom, when the clouds,
which gathered round her prospects, had began to disperse, and the serene
pleasures of domestic life were opening to her view, she should thus fatally,
by the audacious hand of guilt, be overwhelmed in sorrow, and consigned over,
the hapless victim of a transaction, dark, unequalled, and tremendous!

The circumstances attendant upon the king's death, were sufficient to enkindle
in the bosom of humanity the keenest regret: and to this cause the extreme
dejection of Mary is to be attributed. The most affectionate and meritorious of
men could not have been lamented with more unequivocal demonstrations of grief.
Immured in the deep recesses of her castle, she resigned herself to the most
lively sorrow: her apartments were hung with black; the light of the sun was
excluded; and the faintly burning taper but served to mark the glooms which
hovered round her.

But emerging at length, from this extreme of grief, she adopted the most
vigorous measures for apprehending the regicides. Many circumstances produced
in her mind a persuasion, that the conspirators had aimed at involving her in
the king's death, and her orders for the prosecution were unequivocal and
absolute. The sum of two thousand pounds, together with an annuity for life,
was tendered to any individual who should give information of the perpetrators
of this horrid transaction; and this largess, with the addition of a free
amnesty, was proffered to the conspirator, who should make an unreserved
disclosure of his own guilt and that of his accomplices. In consequence of this
proclamation, placards were affixed in various public places, accusing the Earl
of Bothwell, and others, as the murderers; but as those papers and placards
insinuated, that the queen herself had been a party concerned, she very justly
estimated their innocence by her own. Bothwell, solemnly attesting his
integrity, loudly demanded a trial, and he inveighed bitterly against his
calumniators; no positive proofs were adduced of his guilt; the Earl of Lennox
alone appeared against him, and not a single witness to corroborate the charge
was produced. The queen's council affected to consider Bothwell as the subject
of rancorous malice; the principal nobility warmly espoused his cause, and they
charged the Earl of Lennox with acting under the influence of the most ignoble
passions. The queen had frequently remarked that Lennox was suspicious,
revengeful and passionate. The defamation, in such general circulation, might
probably result from his arrangements; and besides, the impression that the
assassin was armed against her own life also, being indelibly infixed upon her
mind, a design so atrocious, with respect to her, could not consist with the
unbroken fealty, and uniform homage, which the conduct of the Earl of Bothwell
had invariably exemplified. Bothwell was, however, brought to a public trial,
and the jury acquitted him of all share in the king's murder! I^ this judgment
is an evidence of their criminality; if it is viewed as a mockery of law and
justice, however ignominious (...) may be deemed, it cannot arraign the conduct
of the queen; nor can she, by any rational construction, be involved in its
guilt. Circumstances, relative to the criminality of Bothwell, which have since
transpired, were then enveloped in mystery; yet, that there existed presumptive
proofs, sufficient to justify the strongest suspicions, cannot be denied; and,
moreover, his licentious habits forcibly pointed the public odium.

The queen remained in entire ignorance of the designs formed upon her by
Bothwell; his behavior indicated, in her apprehension, nothing more than that
respectful attachment which was due to his sovereign; she was grateful for his
zealous exertions to promote her interest; she regarded him as a man of
talents; and she allowed him that consideration, which she conceived due to his
abilities. Her unprincipled nobles, however, industriously seeking her ruin,
agreed, amid the tumultuous riot of a banquet, to point out this man of crimes
as a proper person to become the husband of their sovereign! and they ratified
a deed, in which they extolled the integrity of Bothwell, the antiquity of his
lineage, and the essential services he had rendered the state. They expatiated
upon his trial for the murder of the king, upon his subsequent offer to meet
his accuser in single combat, affirming them to amount to a perfect
justification of his innocence; and they declared themselves fully convinced of
his integrity.

Bothwell was now in the precise situation at which his audacious wishes had
long pointed. His subsequent seizure of the queen was the finishing stroke, and
fully completed his nefarious climax of villainy. Mary's infinite astonishment
at so daring an act of premeditated violence, from a man whose submissive
manners had given her the highest idea of his respectful fidelity, and the
bitterness and indignation which she expressed, corresponded exactly with the
whole tenor of her preceding life. Her resentment was the resentment of
outraged virtue, and her reproaches characterized the queen and the woman,
offended in a manner too atrocious to be forgiven.

Hitherto we have contemplated Mary as an ornament to humanity. She has
struggled with many evils -- she has frequently been deeply injured -- but she
has passed the ordeal brightened by calamity. Her discretion, her fortitude
and her perseverance have given her to emerge from every cloud; and from the
hour of her birth, to the era now under contemplation, while there has been an
ample field for commendation, there has been little to extenuate. Would that
we could blot from the history of Mary, the name of Bothwell. Over a connection
so fatal we would drop the curtain. Surely, surely, it ought never to have
taken place -- it was, in every view, improper! Delicacy, virtue, and all those
considerations which are peculiarly sexual, receive, by this transaction, from
the most lovely and deserving of women, a fatal stab! and the tearful eye of
humanity weeps over the many woes to which it was introductory. If Mary
possessed no means of escaping from the captivity, in which she was held by
Bothwell, she should have repelled, to the utmost of her power, every act of
personal violence; and those injuries which she could not avoid, would neither
have contaminated her mind, nor infixed a stain upon her honor. The reception
of the unprincipled offender, as her husband, sanctioned his guilt; and, in
this instance, effectually prostrated her own character! Mary should have died,
rather than have taken this step! The bond, obtained from the nobles, may, and
undoubtedly does, greatly palliate the business; but a high degree of
culpability remains. Alas! alas! this is an indelible stain, nor can any
process, however ingenious, remove from a character, which impels both our love
and admiration, a spot which female dignity will not cease to deplore! We
cannot, in this particular, agree with the elegant historian of Mary; nor can
we acknowledge, that " recent terror" (especially if those terrors are produced
by the nefarious practices of an audacious offender) the more readily disposes
the mind to give admittance, in favor of the violator, to the softer passions.

But we dwell with pain on this part of the career of our heroine. The sun, we
know, admits of spots; and no human being, we have already concluded, is exempt
from error. The calamities which, from this period, in rapid succession
overtook, and finally whelmed beneath their combined pressure, this interesting
unfortunate, if they cannot obliterate, do, nevertheless, abundantly expiate;
and it should ever be remembered, that she was encompassed about by subtle and
designing adversaries, who sought their own exaltation in her destruction! who,
notwithstanding the solemn instrument with which they had armed her seducer,
delayed not to embody their adherents; and after taking every method to blacken
the reputation of their sovereign, thereby exciting against her the public
odium, made haste to appear in arms, for the purpose of opposing her authority!
It was not enough that they had confederated to strip her of fame and
tranquillity; she must also be despoiled of her crown and scepter, and abridged
of that liberty, which is the natural right of every human being! With humid
eyes we have attended to the forlorn sufferer! we have marked her perturbation,
her distress, and the humiliating insults which she received from him, who had
become her husband! his rude, indecent and brutal behavior has excited our
utmost indignation; we have beheld those reiterated indignities and calamities,
arming the hand of the despairing queen against her own life! and we have
unhesitatingly exclaimed -- Surely, there is no species of suffering to which
she is not subjected! Her separation from the finished villain, who had so
treacherously betrayed her, and her voluntary surrender to the confederated
nobles, furnished a temporary relief; while their respectful reception of, and
flattering address to their sovereign, soothes, for a moment, our fondest
wishes for her restoration. Had the least spark of humanity or integrity
remained among them, the queen had been saved. But it was a dissolute age; the
reign of perfidy had commenced; black clouds gathered; and the storm advanced,
tremendously terrific!

We follow the queen to her imprisonment; we behold, with glowing resentment,
the fresh insults to which she is subjected; we mingle our tears with the
sympathetic multitude, who lament the degraded majesty of their sovereign! we
listen to her sorrows; our attachment to the beauteous mourner is augmented,
and we are ardently solicitous to snatch her from impending danger! The renewed
duplicity of the nobles fills us with detestation and horror; yet we can
scarcely forbear to do homage to that credulity and " beautiful humanity,"
which characterized her, even in the most melancholy situations of her life. By
the machinations of her enemies she was now completely environed -- letters
from her to her seducer were forged -- and she was, alas! irretrievably undone.
See! she is stripped of her robes of royalty! -- she is meanly attired! -- she
is closely immured within the walls of a prison! -- and she is committed to the
custody of a person, who from powerful motives is predisposed to heap upon her
every species of the bitterest mortification. The triumph of Elizabeth was at
length complete! -- her insidious practices had procured the downfall of her
meritorious rival, and a detail of the real or supposed errors of Mary,
vibrated upon the ear of the English queen, as the sweetest music.

By a series of enormous cruelties, matchless rudeness, terrifying threats, and
various species of barbarity, the Queen of Scots was compelled to sign deeds,
which contained a resignation of her authority, and the perturbed anguish of
her spirit, while affixing her name to instruments, which she deigned not to
read, is beyond the power of description. The visit of the Earl of Murray to
the royal prisoner, opens a scene of art, perfidy and cruelty too black for
contemplation! Accomplished villain! thy ingratitude, and thy crimes to thy
sovereign, must render thee a subject of detestation to the latest posterity!
-- Horrid traitor! how is the honest mind agonized by the feelings to which thy
transgressions give birth; and how effectually have thou secured thine own
infamy, by laboring to traduce the source from whence thou derivest thy
exaltation! Was not Mary thy sister, as well as thy sovereign? Did thou not
know, notwithstanding that solemn robe of sanctity in which thou wrapped
thyself about, that thy nefarious ambition and enormous practices would bring
down upon thy devoted head a fearful ruin? Could thou suppose that those
lascivious expressions, of a coarse, irregular and illicit passion, which thou
inserted in those execrable letters, so atrociously forged for thy sister and
thy queen, could be passed upon the world as the production of that elegant,
informed and polished mind which inhabited the bosom of the injured sufferer?
Could prudence, chastity, and every virtue, which can give dignity to our sex,
so suddenly become lost to honor, play the wanton, and utter the most
profligate sentiments in a language only adopted by beings grown old in vice,
and attaining the last stages in the career of infamy? These considerations are
of themselves sufficient to fasten upon thee, the guilt of forgery, in those
vile scrawls, with which thou attempted to affix upon thy royal mistress
imputations of the darkest hue; but, separate from these, the proofs now
standing upon the page of history, while they establish (in the apprehension of
the impartial investigator) beyond all controversy, the innocence of the queen,
stamp the strongest conviction of thy infamy and thy ingratitude.

" Those letters," says the able historian, are in direct contradiction to the
tenor of the queen's life, and to the testimony of undoubted monuments of
history. The friendship of the nobles for Bothwell; his murder of the king; his
eagerness for a trial; their protection of him; his acquittal; their bond,
inculcating his innocence, and pressing the queen to take him for her husband;
her conveyance to Dunbar; her seduction; her marriage; their rupture with him;
their permission of his flight; their accusation of him in his absence; their
attempt to involve her in his wickedness; their rebellion; the indignities with
which they treated her; her imprisonment; her forced resignation of the crown;
the elevation of Murray to the regency; and, in fine, the project of the
letters, as the apology of their own proceedings, and the evidence of her guilt
-- These transactions, so particular, so united, and so concurring, are all the
parts of a system which carries in its bosom the full conviction of their deep
deceit, their unprincipled profligacy, and their intrepid and sanguinary
ambition. They were now to achieve the last act of their drama; and by the
death or utter humiliation of the queen, to secure their future tranquillity.

The execution of Bothwell's servants, who, notwithstanding the attempts to
render them accusers of the queen, departed protesting her innocence, and
declaring, in the presence of Almighty God and his attendant angels, that they
conceived the Earls of Morton and Murray, the procurers, through Bothwell's
instrumentality, of the king's murder -- furnish, if it were wanting, abundant
confirmation of her integrity and of the guilt of her adversaries.

Mary's escape from Lochlevin, and from her malignant blood-thirsty soes,
diffuses over the tragical page a momentary gleam. We bless the sensibility of
the youthful Douglas -- we hail the emancipated queen, and we would gladly
dwell upon the narration of her short-lived triumph! -- The act of amnesty,
which, with such unparalleled clemency, she tendered to transgressors of so
deep a die, was exactly conformable to that divine benevolence, which gave a
luster to all her actions. But nothing less than her utter ruin could complete
the sanguinary views of her virulent adversaries. The queen, urged by the
impetuosity of her council, submitted her cause to the issue of a battle. An
event judging world has condemned this procedure, as injudicious -- her
faithful adherents were defeated -- and the victory obtained by the regent, was
completely decisive!!! Our sensibilities are infinitely agonized, while we take
a view of the desolate sufferer, who beheld from a rising ground the flight and
slaughter of her friends; and no words can delineate the sorrows by which she
was overwhelmed. Hope, that had so recently dawned in her bosom, now bid her a
pangful adieu! Despair assumed the regency, and fearful apprehensions surprised
her soul.

Arriving, by hasty and perturbed movements, at Dundrenan, under the pressure
of unequalled grief, she commenced her melancholy deliberations! In this
forlorn condition, whither could the lovely wanderer direct her way? This was
the pathetically interesting question. To abide in Scotland, was, in her idea,
certain death! -- To retire to France, which had witnessed her days of
splendour, in her present state of humiliation, the thought was replete with
anguish. Application had been made to Elizabeth, who had practiced her wonted
finesse -- she had soothed Mary during her captivity -- she had solicited her
to seek the means of escaping from imprisonment, and to accept an asylum in her
dominions -- she had promised her she would meet her on her way -- that she
would receive her with all those demonstrations of amity due to their
consanguinity, and to that affection she professed to entertain -- and she had
presented her, as a memento of her amity, a ring of great value.

Mary, naturally confiding and gentle, was yet more softened by affliction: She
regarded Elizabeth as a friend in adversity; and the impressions made by acts
of kindness, at such a period, are efficacious and permanent. She estimated the
mind of Elizabeth by that transcendent generosity and genuine benevolence which
was ever glowing in her own bosom; and she hasted to make the perilous
experiment! The Lord Herries and the Archbishop of St. Andrews, on their knees
remonstrated against her resolution to depart for England -- but they
remonstrated in vain. Embarking, in a fatal hour, she crossed the stream, and
appeared suddenly in the dominions of a queen, who had, for many succeeding
years, been assiduous in her efforts to embarrass and distract her councils --
who was the confirmed enemy of her fame and person, and who had invariably
received and succored her most deadly foes!!!!

What, my love, can we say? We can only console ourselves by the reflection,
that events are at the disposal of an unerring Being -- that we cannot reverse
his decrees -- that our God is still our Guide -- that baleful passions will
finally be eradicated from humanity -- while " one unclouded day encircles all."

Do not, my dear Margaretta, forget that you are this afternoon to compare your
chronological arrangement with Miss Clifford's, and that the most accurate
computor is to have the privilege of presenting to the good Annette, the
garment of which she stands so greatly in need.

I am, my dear, your affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. XLIX.
Fond to exonerate Eliza's name,
The clust'ring virtues round her pathway bend;
Waiting to (...) own her with immortal fame --
Her devious steps they anxiously attend.

To MARGARETTA.
HUMANITY, my dear girl, must lament Elizabeth's depraved politics, as they
related to the Queen of Scots. Whatever question involved the interests of
Mary, seemed to possess the power of rousing to action the most nefarious
propensities -- of narrowing her views, and of yielding her up to the dominion
of envy, jealousy and every ignoble passion! When the Queen of Scots, soothed
by the recent expressions of commiseration which had been transmitted her by
Elizabeth; and allured by the tender appellation, sister, confided in that
sympathy which is constantly prompting the efforts of delicacy, and originating
those acts of kindness that are calculated to succor and restore the children
of adversity -- when, notwithstanding the mystery which too often enveloped the
conduct of Elizabeth, Mary evinced her noble and unsuspecting nature, by
seeking shelter in her kingdom; by electing her the arbitress of her fate, and
committing her dearest interests to her decision -- Elizabeth was then
furnished with a most desirable opportunity of erasing from the annals of her
administration, every deforming trait; of removing the odium which rested upon
her transactions relative to her royal kinswoman; and of insuring to herself
the unbounded applause and veneration of posterity. Her unfortunate rival was
sufficiently humbled; and by the indissoluble ties of love and gratitude, she
might have bound the gentle and affectionate Mary forever to her bosom.

Elizabeth, in her own dominions, was nearly despotic; she maintained an
ascendency in the Scottish councils: It would have been easy for her to
reinstate the Queen of Scots upon her throne; and such a procedure would have
been princely, it would have been great, and nobly worthy the combined claims
of sex, of kindred, of misfortune, and of Queenship! It would have been an
action suited to the majesty of the sovereign of a powerful and gallant nation.
But if Elizabeth could not soar so high, had she marked the arrival of Mary by
those tender offices of friendship which are the balm of life -- had she
received her as her guest, yielding her those honors which were due to her
rank -- had she exercised her authority and influence to render her situation
eligible -- had she indulged the lovely mourner with those intercourses of
amity, which in every period of her life were so completely in unison with her
feelings -- the sorrows of her heart had been assuaged; we should have regarded
Elizabeth with complacency, and sought for the motives of her limited kindness,
in that policy, to the observance of which, the exigencies of state may
frequently condemn the philanthropic mind.

But the conduct of Elizabeth was unsexual, unjust, and infinitely cruel. The
desolate queen, rudely denied admission to her presence, was condemned to
perpetual imprisonment; and Elizabeth, while she was ingenious in devices to
hold her suffering captive in the most agonizing suspense, assayed to justify
her inhospitable rigor, by pleading those crimes with which she stood charged
by her audacious subjects! Yet the queen of England had caressed the Scottish
nobles, when deformed by ingratitude, and recent from the haunts of rebellion!
whose hands were imbrued in blood, and on whose lives were infixed the
deepening stain of guilt!

Mary, in the anguish of her spirit, solicited for an interview -- conscious of
her innocence, she only wished to be heard; but, alas! no sympathy pervaded the
bosom of Elizabeth -- she triumphed in the misfortunes which she was
assiduously employed in accumulating; and that dignified arrangement which
would have restored an outraged and an afflicted queen to the ample and
unalienated possession of her hereditary honors and prerogatives, found no
place in her deliberations! Pity she could not have known that by acting the
part of a sister and a queen, she might have enwreathed her brow with a
garland, the perfume of which would have been immortal; but she chose to
proceed in the crooked path she had so perversely entered.

The Earl of Murray was encouraged to accuse his sovereign before the English
queen, while Mary stood astonished at the presumption of that princess, who
interpreted her wish to narrate in a personal interview her misfortunes, and to
exculpate herself from the calumnies of her rancorous foes, into a desire of a
public trial, and a submission to her jurisdiction! What heart but bleeds at
the perusal of a letter addressed by the Scottish princess to the malevolent
Elizabeth.

I came into your dominions to ask your assistance, and not to save my life.
Scotland and the world have not renounced me. I was conscious of innocence -- I
was disposed to lay all my transactions before you; and I was willing to do you
honor, by making you the restorer of a queen. But you have afforded me no aid
and no consolation. You even deny me admittance to your presence. I escaped
from a prison, and I am again a captive. Can it expose you to censure to hear
the complaints of the unfortunate? You received my brother when he was in open
rebellion. I am a princess, and your equal, and you refuse me the indulgence.
Permit me then to leave your dominions. Your severity encourages my enemies,
intimidates my friends, and is most cruelly destructive to my interests. You
keep me in fetters, and allow my enemies to conquer my realm. I am defenseless,
and they enjoy my authority, possess themselves of my revenues, and hold out to
me the point of their swords. In the miserable condition to which I am reduced,
you invite them to accuse me. Is it too small a misfortune for me to lose my
kingdom? Must I also be robbed of my integrity and my reputation? Excuse me if
I speak without dissimulation. In your dominions I will not answer to their
calumnies and criminations. To you, in a personal conference, I shall at all
times be ready to vindicate my conduct; but to sink myself into a level with my
rebellious subjects, and to be a party in a suit or trial with them, is an
indignity to which I can never submit. I can die, but I cannot meet dishonor.
Consult, I conjure you, what is right and proper, and entitle yourself to my
warmest gratitude; or if you are inclined not to know me as a sister, and to
withhold your kindness, abstain at least from rigor and injustice; be neither
my enemy nor my friend; preserve yourself in the coldness of neutrality; and
let me be indebted to other princes for my establishment in my kingdom.

How pathetically interesting, how modestly dignified, and how characteristic
of the amiable writer. But Elizabeth remained unmoved; the enemies of Mary were
inspirited, sanctioned and patronized, while the interposition of her friends
was wholly disregarded. Commissioners for the trial were appointed, and they
were directed by Elizabeth to proceed in such a manner, as to infix upon the
reputation of the Queen of Scots an indelible stain! Yet in the course of their
investigation, incontestible proofs of her honor pressed upon them, and they
could not but commiserate a princess so unfortunate. The deputies of Mary
insisted that she should be heard, but their remonstrances were disregarded. "
An accusation," said they, " is given; the person accused is anxious to defend
herself; this privilege is denied to her, and yet a demand is to be made for
the vouchers of her guilt! What is this but an open violation of justice?" Thus
was every measure cruelly calculated to deepen the distress of the Scottish
queen. Tremendous was the crisis she had obtained -- ^^ick darkness
overshadowed her -- of crimes of the deepest dye she was accused, and pretended
proofs were on the point of being produced! Had she been conscious of guilt,
she would have shrunk from the ordeal, but she implored and demanded permission
to confront her adversaries; and this privilege, this important request, this
right, was barbarously denied her! The artifice and duplicity of Elizabeth
succeeded but too well; for although no formal decree was obtained, yet upon
the credit of papers proved (by internal conviction, and a series of
incontestible facts,) atrocious forgeries, an attempt was made to stamp upon
the public mind a lasting impression of Mary's guilt. Mary insisted that the
determination of a cause which had obtained such general attention, ought to be
a verdict of guilt or innocence; and with agonized earnestness she still
pressed to be heard; nor can her unyielding, intrepid, and proper
remonstrances, be understood in any other view than as corroborating proofs of
her integrity.

Elizabeth's final determination not to admit the pleadings of Mary, is
agreeable to the whole tenor of her behavior to her royal prisoner; and having
banished all compunction from her bosom, she dreaded to appear before that
innocence she had consigned to destruction. She was sensible of the eloquence,
the high spirit, and the address of Mary; and while she trembled to oppose
herself to these, she apprehended, as more terrible in so illustrious an
assembly, the interest of distress, the dignity of unmerited misfortunes, and
the pride of injured integrity. She was alarmed with guilty terrors; the image
of a hated rival in the moment of victory haunted her; and her disturbed
imagination painted the lofty demeanor of the Queen of Scots -- her indignant
emotions, and the lightning of her eye. She could not think of consenting to a
measure, where she had every thing to lose, and nothing to gain; and she was
too wise to exhibit herself an open and detestable monument of spleen,
disappointment, perfidiousness, rivalship, jealousy and anger.

Thus did Elizabeth sacrifice true glory to her passions. Had the Queen of
Scots been less beautiful, less accomplished, and less meritorious, she had not
become the victim of hatred and perfidy. When it is remembered that the
ingrates who appeared to accuse their sovereign, absolutely stood charged by
the Earls Huntley and Argyle, as the abettors of the king's death, and that the
expectation of the formal presentment of the protestation of the two Lords,
accelerated the dismission of the murderers from the court of Elizabeth, it
will excite equally our astonishment and our indignation; and humanity will
blush at a transaction, which perhaps has not a parallel in the annals of
history!

In the midst of those dark clouds in which Elizabeth was seeking to envelope
the Scottish princess, her beauty and various accomplishments made upon the
duke of Norfolk an indelible impression; and, convinced of her innocence and
her integrity, he sought with impassioned ardour to obtain her hand in
marriage; but to indulge Mary with the soothings of amity, would have been a
mitigation of her fate, that came not within the plans of Elizabeth; and at the
moment when the mutual esteem of this illustrious and amiable pair had
ameliorated into the tenderest love, the attachment of the duke of Norfolk
proved his ruin, and he lost his life upon the scaffold, while the innocent
object of his preference was subjected to fresh indignities! At this period, to
pronounce in the presence of Elizabeth, the name of the Queen of Scots, was
sufficient to distort her countenance by all the frenzy of passion; and the
Earl of Huntington, interested in procuring the death of Mary, was associated
with her more humane keeper! he was ferocious, and unfeeling, and his
commission authorized his inhuman severities! her distresses were to Huntington
matter of exultation -- her favorite domestics were torn from her -- the
number of her servants were curtailed -- the most scrutinizing watch was set
upon her conduct -- orders were issued for intercepting and conveying to the
queen of England, letters written in the confidence of tender friendship; and
if her prison should be surrounded with a force adequate to her rescue,
Huntington had directions to assassinate her!!

The Earl of Murray renewed and continued his traitorous practices. He had
covenanted with Elizabeth to surrender to her the son of Mary, whom she was
solicitous to involve in the ruin of his mother, and to receive from her the
Queen of Scots, with full liberty to inflict upon her whatever indignities
might suit his wishes -- when he was arrested by the dart of death. Nor do I
wonder that my Margaretta shed no tears at his exit. His talents, though
exercised in the most criminal practices, were great; and these, with a
prepossessing exterior, opened his way to that dignity, of which he was
eminently unworthy. Yet a^ his death, Mary, pious and affectionate, lamented a
brother, whom she considered as launched into eternity under the pressure of
unparalleled guilt.

The enormities of which the English queen had been guilty to the Scottish
princess, enkindled in the bosoms of foreign princes the deepest resentments;
but their remonstrances served only to call into action the address and
perfidious dissimulation of Elizabeth! The death of Mary was only wanting to
fill up the measure of her wrongs; and although even her enemies, who witnessed
her behavior, declared that the candor, sincerity, and moderation, which she
displayed, were full assurances to them that on her part there was no occasion
to apprehend any improper policy or art; yet pretenses to effectuate her ruin
were industriously sought and embraced. Mary, in the midst of her misfortunes,
still remembered that she was a queen; no improper concessions escaped her; the
severities exercised toward her, produced no undue humiliation; her mind
retained its native magnanimity; and she pitied the tyrant who could add
contumely to oppression, and deny her even the comforts of a prison. Elizabeth,
and her courtiers were daily affecting to discover plots, and machinations;
every nefarious purpose was imputed to Mary; and the English queen was
indefatigable in her endeavors, to impress upon the public mind, a persuasion
that her existence, and the prosperity of the realm, were incompatible with the
emancipation of the Queen of Scots. Mary had flattered herself that when years
should permit her son to assume the reins of government, and to act decisively,
her sorrows, through his intervention, would know a period; and this maternal
hope operated upon her grief worn mind, as the sweetest solace. But Elizabeth
had been careful to implant in the mind of the prince the seeds of distrust and
animosity against his royal parent; and while she excited and countenanced the
rebellion of his subjects, she directed and awed his councils, and through her
influence the embroidered garment which his mother, in the dreary solitude of
her prison had finished for him, together with the jewels which she had
intended as a memento of her affection, were returned, with indecent marks of
disrespect!!

Elizabeth was pursuing with the son the same track which had produced the ruin
of the mother; and forged letters were employed by her ambassador, Randolph,
for the purpose of depriving him of the confidant whom he loved. Under such
accumulated evils it is not matter of astonishment that the health of the
captive queen was rapidly declining; yet, although the most pressing
representations on this subject were made to Elizabeth, they were ineffectual
to procure her the smallest abatement of the rigours of her confinement! She
was unfeelingly denied the presence of the friends who would have soothed her
sorrows! and she was even refused the means of taking that air and exercise, on
which her existence seemed to depend!

My next will conclude my remarks on this illustrious victim of jealousy; and
that you may, from every delineation, deduce a salutary lesson, is the ardent
wish of your affectionate

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. L.
Bitter the chalice ruthless fate prepared --

To MARGARETTA.
THE intelligence of the seizure and imprisonment of her son to which the
intrigues of Elizabeth had largely contributed, was a fresh stab to the
unfortunate queen; and from her letter to Elizabeth, produced by this event, I
cannot forbear a few extracts. I am informed from undoubted authority, that my
son has been surprised by rebels; and I am tortured with apprehension, lest he
should be reduced to the peculiar infelicities of that situation under which I
have suffered so long. After some expressions descriptive of her just
indignation, she adds -- since equity and right must stoop to the tyranny of
your scepter, I shall carry my appeal to the eternal God, whose dominion is
over all the princes of the earth. To him with whom there is no craft or fraud,
I lift up my voice, beseeching him to deal with us both at the last judgment
according to our deserts. Secure in my innocence, I fear not to rest solemnly
my fate upon this impartial trial. Her enumeration of the injuries which she
had received from Elizabeth is pointed by truth; and the succeeding questions
which she puts to that princess with her subsequent recital, must have been
barbed by conviction. After that I had escaped from Lochlevin, and was about to
give battle to my rebellious subjects, I dispatched to you, by express, the
diamond which you sent me, as a token of your love; and I craved your aid. I
thought that what I had received as a pledge of your affections, would awaken
them; and, when you bestowed it, I was not only flattered with large promises
of your assistance, but you even bound yourself by your royal word, that if I
should betake myself to your dominions, you would advance to your frontiers and
meet me in person. I fondly relied upon your honor; and, in my adversity, I
took the resolution to throw myself into your arms, and to commit to your
protection my diadem and my person. But I was rudely stopped upon my journey,
encompassed with guards, and confined in strong places; and, from the first
moment of my captivity, to the present hour, I have endured afflictions more
bitter and grievous than death itself. Twelve tedious months have passed since
all communication between my son and me, either by letter or messengers, has
been interrupted. You are studious to tear asunder the nearest and the
kindliest ties of nature, and to separate and divide a mother and a son! Is it
fair or reasonable that I, who am a mother, should be restrained not only from
giving council to my son, but that the distresses of his condition should be
artfully concealed from me? Let me beseech you by the cross and the passion of
Christ our Redeemer, that you will bind to yourself him and me, in everlasting
gratitude, by permitting me to refresh my decayed body somewhere out of
England, after the languors of so long and painful, a confinement. For me, this
world has lost its greatness; and if a prison is still to be my lot, if I am to
know no joy on earth, do not interrupt and oppose me in my hopes of heaven. Let
me have a Catholic priest to direct me in the road to another life, and to
perform to me the offices of that religion in which, I have lived, and in which
I am to die. Reassume the natural kindness of your disposition; soften your
displeasure to a princess who is so nearly related to you in blood; attend at
length to my just complaints; let a tender reconciliation take place between
us; let not the groans and sighs of my afflicted soul ascend any longer unto
God; and let me depart in peace from this scene of sorrow.

James would gladly have associated with his mother in the government of
Scotland; but Elizabeth nefariously opposed plans for the establishment of
Mary, which she herself, to answer a then present purpose, had originated. The
rebels of Scotland boldly urged their claims upon Elizabeth, by affirming that
they had lost the confidence of their sovereign, and their patrimonial
inheritance in consequence of their combinations in her favor! That Mary was
eager to emancipate herself from the tyranny and cruelty of Elizabeth, is
beyond a doubt. A queen, detained in prison, and barbarously treated, while her
virulent adversaries are permitted to ravage her native realm -- A mother,
separated, during twenty revolving years, from a son, whose opening mind she
had wished to form, embraces with ardour, every proposition by which she may
hope to return to her dominions, be restored to the exercise of her royal
prerogatives and to her maternal duties -- These were the crimes of which Mary,
during her captivity, was assuredly guilty; and upon this foundation was raised
the superstructure of that process, which, procuring her death, terminated
gloriously for herself, and blasted with eternal infamy her malignant
adversary. The cruelties exercised toward Mary in her prison, is an outrage to
humanity; any instance of benevolence or pity, exhibited to the Scottish queen,
was construed into a breach of fidelity to Elizabeth, and her flatterers became
emulous in acts of cruelty; while a hope was entertained that the aggravated
calamities to which the royal prisoner was subjected, would precipitate her
upon some rash action, by which she would become in reality a criminal. But her
integrity remained inflexible; and her upright mind, nerved by conscious
innocence, engaged with ardour in the habits of piety; and, supported by the
consolatory truths of religion, continued greatly superior to the detestable
plots fabricated for her destruction. Her adversaries were enraged at the
inefficacy of their diabolical arrangements; and, frustrated in their most
sanguine purposes, Leicester, prime minion to Elizabeth, dispatched assassins
to seize, in the gloomy recesses of the prison, that life which had been
subjected to such a series of calamities!

But here, even the virtues of those hard-hearted savages, Paulet and Drury,
made a stand! They spurned the emissaries of Leicester, and felt the
degradation to which they were subjected. Yet, notwithstanding they stopped
short of death, they were in the exercise of the utmost rigor. Her apartments,
but two in number, were poorly furnished; neither were they sufficient to
shield her from the inclemencies of the weather; and, that they might inflict
on her every species of indignity, they rendered her prison a receptacle for
common offenders; confining in her view, a young man, whom, after much
persecution, they deprived of life, without judge or jury! They were
industrious in cutting off every avenue, which could possibly become an inlet
of pleasure to the unoffending victim of their rigor. Through the medium of a
servant, she had indulged the benevolence of her nature, by a regular
distribution of charity among the sons and daughters of want, who abode in the
vicinity of Tutbury Castle! And who but must execrate that unequalled
inhumanity, which, having discovered, sternly denied even this soothing,
alleviation of her unparalleled woes?

But Elizabeth had not yet attained the summit of her wishes; and, persevering
in her atrocious career, her obsequious parliament gratified her by an
unprecedented statute, which made a sovereign and independent princess
answerable for her conduct to the subjects of another potentate! Thus was the
way open for the accomplishment of that tragical catastrophe, at which the
sanguinary views of the English queen had so long pointed; and it only remained
to involve the Scottish princess in real or suppositious guilt. To ensnare and
betray the injured sufferer, arts the most exquisitely iniquitous were
employed; nor was any temptation left unessayed, which might allure her into
practices against the dignity and life of Elizabeth. Babington's conspiracy
presented a favorable occasion, and every probable measure was embraced to
engage her therein; but her virtue and her discretion remaining inaccessible,
was proof against every assault; and forgery became once more the dernier
resort of her implacable foes! Letters were written for her, to which she was
an utter stranger; and upon those letters were founded her trial and subsequent
execution!! Her closet was rudely broken open, without her previous expectation
of such an event, and her cabinets, borne to Elizabeth, were examined in her
presence; yet, amid the multiplicity of papers they contained, to the no small
regret of her enemies, a criminating syllable was not to be found! The
magnanimity and genuine dignity, with which Mary replied to the commissioners
appointed to proceed against her, astonished and confounded even her most
determined foes. "It is," said she, with admirable composure, a matter
altogether uncommon, that Elizabeth should command me to submit to a trial, as
if I were her subject. I am an independent sovereign, and will not tarnish, by
any meanness, my high birth, the princes my predecessors, and my son. To speak
to me of commissioners, is a vain mockery of my rank. Kings alone can be my
peers. The laws of England are unknown to me, and I have no counselors, to
whose wisdom I can apply for instruction. My papers and commentaries have been
taken from me; and no person can have the perilous courage to appear as my
advocate.

The desolate captive persisted in denying the authority of the commissioners,
yet she was aware that they would, notwithstanding, proceed to her trial; and a
sweet hope of obtaining that triumph, to which her integrity entitled her,
induced this truly interesting sufferer to wave for a moment her hereditary
queenship, and to appear before the tribunal of those usurpers, who were
predetermined to condemn her. Dignity, modesty, majesty and innocence, were
strongly pourtrayed in the matter and manner of her defense; and an attention
thereto must wring sympathy from the coldest heart that ever beat in a human
bosom. "The accusation," said she, preferred to my prejudice, is a most
detestable calumny. I was not engaged with Babington in his conspiracy; and I
am altogether innocent of having plotted the death of Elizabeth. After having
produced irrefragable proofs of her integrity, she adds -- I will confess that
I have yielded to the strong impulses of nature; and that like a human
creature, encompassed with dangers, I have exerted myself to recover my
greatness and my liberty. The efforts I have made can excite no blushes in me,
for the voice of mankind must applaud them. Religion, in her sternest moments
of severity, cannot look to them with reproach; and to consider them as crimes,
is to despise the sanctimonious reverence of humanity, and to give way to the
suspicious wretchedness of despotism. But the attainment of my kingdom, the
recovering of my liberty, and the advancement of that religion which I love,
could not induce me to stain myself with the crimes which are objected to me. I
would disdain to purchase a crown by the assassination of the meanest of the
human race. To accuse me of scheming the death of the queen, my sister, is to
brand me with the infamy which I abhor most. It is my nature to employ the
devotion of Esther, and not the sword of Judith. But amidst the inclement and
unprincipled pretensions, which my adversaries are pleased to invent, to
overwhelm me with calamities and anguish, I can trace and discover the real
cause of their hostility and prosecution. My crimes are, my birth, the injuries
I have been compelled to endure, and my religion. I am proud of the first, I
can forgive the second, and the third is a source to me of such comfort and
hope, that for its glory I will be contented that my blood shall flow upon the
scaffold.

The soul-affecting pleader evinced her exquisite sensibility and deep sense of
gratitude, when, during her trial, reference being made to the Earl of Arundel,
with streaming eyes she pathetically uttered the memorable exclamation, which
has been so often cited: Alas! alas! how much has the illustrious house of
Howard endured for me! Beauteous and deeply wronged mourner! never was calamity
more dignified, never was sorrow more ennobled! In vain did she solicit
permission to justify herself before the British parliament, or Elizabeth and
her privy council. Her enemies continued deaf to her solicitations, and with
unprincipled effrontery, under the sanction of a legal process, in which the
greatest outrage was done to justice, sentence of death was passed upon the
Queen of Scots! nor was the execution of this unprecedented sentence long
delayed!!

Measures were taken to procure the consent of James to this violation of
hospitality, decency, and nature! But the proposal filled him with
astonishment, grief, indignation and remorse. He spurned, with filial
detestation, every suggestion upon this head, and hastened to dispatch to
Elizabeth the most spirited and resentful representations, upon the enormous
violence of her proceedings. Foreign princes also, struck with the utmost
consternation, and infinitely shocked at the imperious presumption of
Elizabeth, presented her, upon this melancholy occasion, the most pressing
remonstrances; but nothing short of the death of Mary could satisfy those
baleful passions, which had obtained a tremendous ascendency in her bosom. Mary
received her sentence with uncommon satisfaction, and even triumph! She however
regretted, that she could not obtain the attendance of a clergyman of her own
persuasion! But submitting to necessity, she still preserved her equanimity;
and when her keepers poorly deprived her of those tokens and insignia of
royalty, by which she had till then been distinguished, she calmly said, In
despite of your sovereign, I will die a queen -- my royal character is
indel^^le; and I will surrender it with my spirit, to the Almighty God from
whom I received it, and to whom my honor and my innocence are fully known. She
disdained to supplicate for life; and her last letter to Elizabeth is
descriptive of piety, resignation, heroism, and the utmost elevation of mind.

I am happy, Madam, that I am arrived at the last stage of my long and
lamentable pilgrimage. My fate, though altogether unmerited, I shall encounter
with cheerfulness. There are now a few circumstances only which attract my
attention; and for those it is proper that I apply directly to yourself. In
England, which has departed from the true religion, I cannot hope to be
interred with the kings, our progenitors, according to the ceremonies of the
Catholic church. In Scotland, the sepulchers of my ancestors have been profaned
and violated. When my enemies, therefore, have glutted themselves with my
blood, I entreat, that my remains may be carried by my domestics to France,
where the bones of my mother are deposited. There, my body, which never knew
any quiet while my soul was united to it, will rest in peace. As my second
request, I beg that I may not be abandoned to the secret tyranny of my
adversaries. They may consume me with lingering torments; or, what I dread
more, they may sully my fame with foul slanders. Let my execution be public,
that there may be undoubted witnesses, who may bear testimony to my firmness in
my religion, and make an honest report of my dying agonies. It is my third
request, that my servants may depart out of your dominions without molestation,
and that you will permit them to enjoy the legacies which I am to bequeath them
in my testament. These favors I implore you to grant, in the name of Jesus
Christ; by our consanguinity; by the soul of Henry VII. our common progenitor;
by our royal dignity; and, by the respect which you bear to our sex! It will
please me to receive an answer from you: Nor accuse me of presumption, that,
while I am leaving this scene of things, I take the liberty to remind you, that
you are not to live forever; and that there is a tribunal, before which you
must appear, to render an account of your proceedings against me.

The silence of Elizabeth to these requests, and the comfortless and alarming
suspense in which that silence involved Mary, would, had the unprecedented
cruelty of the English queen admitted an aggravation, have given the finishing
touches to her system of barbarity! Mary, however, continued to possess an
astonishing measure of internal tranquillity; and her firm affiance in Jehovah
remained a never failing source of consolation. Elizabeth, with an air of
levity, signed the death-warrant of the Queen of Scots; yet, fearful of the
consequences, she sought, by renewed application to the dagger of the assassin,
to remove from herself the public odium. Through the instrumentality of
Davidson and Walsingham, she recommended it to the keepers of Mary, to shed
privately the blood of their royal prisoner! Though a sovereign princess, and
entrusted with the cares of a great nation, she blushed not to give it in
charge (...) her ministers, to enjoin a murder! and this murder was connected
with every circumstance that could make it most frightful and horrid. The
victim for whose blood she thirsted, was a woman, a queen, a relation! who was
splendid with beauty, eminent in abilities, magnanimous under misfortunes, and
smiling with innocence!

The manner in which Mary, on her bed of languishment, received the
annunciation, that the ensuing morning was appointed for her execution -- her
characteristic remark thereon -- her dignified composure amid the rude and
unfeeling insults to which she was subjected -- the elevated strains in which
she assayed to comfort her weeping domestics! -- her serenity at supper! -- the
tender leave which she took of her servants! -- her amiable condescension and
pious counsel -- her letters to her friends -- her adjustment of her testament
-- her solemn devotions -- her peaceful and saint-like slumbers -- the serenity
of her morning preparation -- her distribution of her wardrobe and jewels --
her reception of the eucharist -- the fervor of her kneeling devotions -- her
raised eyes, clasped hands, and soul-affecting attitude -- the holy confidence
with which she poured into the ear of Deity, her sufferings and her wishes --
the heavenly serenity with which she presented herself to the high sheriff --
her address, when coming forth, to Melvin, who had for many days been
prohibited her presence; Lament not, honest Melvin; but rather exult that thou
shall see Mary Stuart delivered from all her woes. The world, my good Melvin,
is but vanity; and an ocean of tears would not suffice to bewail its sorrows.
-- The enviable composure and self-command with which she deported herself,
while subjected to the shocking insolence of the Earl of Kent -- the graceful
dignity with which she advanced to the scaffold! -- her majestic carriage --
the mingling emotions of commiseration, reverence and admiration, which
pervaded the bosoms of the attending spectators -- the fortitude with which she
ascended the scaffold, surveying, with inimitable benignity and heart-piercing
tranquillity, the block, the axe, and the executioners! -- the streaming eyes
of surrounding witnesses, exhibiting a contrast to her unexampled heroism --
her gentle mildness, amid the shameful indignities and unbecoming insults,
which were heaped upon her by the Dean of Petersborough -- the augmenting
lamentations of her men and women servants, and the impressive manner in which
she urged their silent submission -- her recommendation of queen Elizabeth to
the protection of the Almighty! -- her maternal recollection of her son -- her
energetic address to the Redeemer of the world! -- her last adieu -- the
astonishing serenity with which she placed her neck upon the block! -- All, and
every of these circumstances, form a climax, which is greatly worthy of the
life to which they constitute so magnanimous a close!

Elizabeth, ere she struck a blow so fatal to her own reputation, should have
recollected, that the atrocious deed could not be consigned to oblivion; that
it would descend to posterity in all its horrors! that, at the tribunal of
succeeding generations, her exquisite dissimulation would avail her little; and
that, stripped of the false colors, in which she attempted to evade the public
odium of this black transaction, the murder which she contrived to perpetrate,
would be considered in all its deformity! The perturbed sensations, sighs,
groans, and deep anguish, which marked the concluding hours of Elizabeth, and
which operated so forcibly as to extend her, for the ten succeeding days and
nights immediately preceding her exit, upon the floor of her apartment, exhibit
a striking contrast to that serenity which illumined the parting moments of the
Queen of Scots, and forcibly point the difference between the sensations of
that mind, which, stained with guilt, becomes the abode of remorse, and the
calm reflections of the bosom which has cherished the propensities of
integrity, and in which white-robed innocence has delighted to dwell.

It is worthy of remark, that Elizabeth resigned with her life, all pretensions
to that crown, of the titles and succession of which she was so tenacious; that
the son of Mary mounted the English throne; that a princess, lineally descended
from her, in the fourth generation, had the glory of uniting and consolidating
the realms of England and Scotland, under one general government; and that, if
we except the usurpation of Oliver Cromwell, the British scepter has, from the
death of Elizabeth, been continually swayed by the posterity of the Queen of
Scots.

Desirous, my dear Margaretta, to delineate to you my sentiments, together with
the reasons on which they are grounded, I have engaged in a more copious detail
than I had designed; yet it may lead you to an accurate study of an interesting
piece of history; and I shall not dilate so largely upon our remaining
subjects. I am charmed with the elegance of your translation from Madame
Dacier. Your Achilles seems to weep his Patroclus dead, in all the dignity of
grief; and your improvements give complete satisfaction to the bosom of your
truly affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. LI.
When valor in the patriot's bosom glows,
And virtue all her energies bestows --
The intrepid chief becomes his country's boast,
His plans consistent, and his arm an host.

To MARGARETTA.
AS it is of importance to form just ideas of persons and things, I advise you,
my dear, to give Sully's Memoirs a second perusal; and, that you may do this
both with profit and pleasure, I proceed in my cursory remarks.

You ought, my love, to consider that the Duke of Sully was, comparatively, a
private man. Henry was born for a nation, and the duke was born for the king.
Henry undoubtedly possessed the talents of a great warrior and a great monarch
-- Sully was an able minister of incorruptible fidelity and uncommon
disinterestedness. But while we do justice to this illustrious statesman, we
cannot, however, regard him as a faultless character; we think the treachery
and dissimulation by which he obtained from the Count of Soissons, and the
Princess Catharine, their marriage contract, was highly reprehensible; nor are
we quite satisfied with the duke of Sully for so frequently holding up to
public view the dissensions of the royal pair. He too often unveils his hero;
he dwells too circumstantially upon that part of his character in which alone
he was vulnerable. It is true the importance of the minister is thus augmented,
but this does not diminish our disgust at the recital; and when he relates so
much, and with an affectation of delicacy, pretends to conceal a great deal,
lest it should obscure the luster of his master's glory, the imposition becomes
grossly palpable; we lose sight of the uniformly faithful servant, and behold
only the ungenerous and absurd egotist.

Sully, it must be confessed was always at hand to extricate, but he is not
therefore invested with a general superiority of character. The mind
impassioned, and debilitated by any particular circumstance, becomes, in the
moment of imbecility, unequal to cool deliberation; and, amid the hurricane of
the passions, it is incumbent upon the man of reason to point the better way,
If Henry's displeasure at his minister was frequently without a cause, his
resentments appeared to him just; and when investigation discovered his error,
his frank acknowledgments were worthy his character; and the noble
condescension with which he invariably sought a reconciliation, was an abundant
compensation for any vehemence of passion to which his ardent nature subjected
him. Constantly the first to condemn himself for every intemperate act or
expression, he delayed not the reparation, which was always as ample and
explicit as language could render it; and he declared that consequent on every
amicable eclaircissement his slumbers were more sweet, and he esteemed the
adjustment of these grievances as an addition to his felicity. We cannot deny,
that if the value and importance of the minister was thus demonstrated, a most
enchanting idea of the frankness and candor of the monarch is also given.
Henry was aware of the natural vehemence of his disposition, and his good sense
was constantly arming him against the inroads of passion. He was fully sensible
of the errors into which the angry man is often precipitated; but virtue nerved
his bosom, and he successfully opposed the assaults of impetuous rage. A series
of calamities, together with his innate sensibility, invested him with self
command. Reason took the lead, and every resentful impression submitted to her
dictates; he became mild by habit, and reflection rendered him uniformly just.

Generosity was inherent in his soul; and his innate consciousness of
superiority, while it was far removed from the debasing effects of self
partiality, invariably taught him to disdain a malicious or ignoble action.
Sully observes, that Henry never forgot to reward any additional trouble by
some new instance of his bounty, and that every proof of kindness made upon his
mind an indelible impression; and indeed his liberality was on all occasions
truly princely.

No, my dear -- Sully was not the principal artificer of Henry's glory; nature
had early marked upon the mind of the youthful prince the features of heroism;
his face was an index of his mind, and an elevation of expression and a
prepossessing frankness formed its general contour. His manners were
insinuating and full of vivacity; and even in the commencement of his career,
his virtues and his talents extorted the approbation of all who knew him; while
his bravery and his military abilities rendered him the soul of his party.
Henry cannot be justly charged with a want of tenderness, because Sully's
memoirs preserve no record of his regrets on account of the death of his
mother. It should be remembered that at the demise of the queen of Navarre,
Rosny did not occupy that place in the king's bosom, to which his merit
afterward introduced him. Catharine de Medicis was ^^stress of sufficient
address to garb her treacherous and bloody politics in the alluring habiliments
of respectful kindness; the Queen of Navarre, her family and adherents, were
effectually deceived; nor did the wisdom, experience and remarkable penetration
of the Admiral de Coliquy, escape the snares which had been laid with such
exquisite dissimulation.

The massacre of St. Bartholomew, which may be principally charged to Catharine
de Medicis, will always stand prominent in the list of bloody transactions.
Neither high birth, riches, virtue nor talents, were a protection from the fury
of those licensed murderers, who were inhumanly let loose upon an unsuspecting
multitude! Peaceable and unarmed, the defenseless inhabitants imagined
themselves in the utmost security, when, in one tremendous moment, the horrible
destruction commenced. More than ten thousand persons, with circumstances of
aggravated and unparalleled cruelty, were barbarously butchered! and so
comprehensive was the infernal mandate which authorized this shocking carnage,
that it extended even to infants at the breast. The streets ran with blood;
and, " kill, kill, massacre, the Huguenots," was the watchword of the
furiously zealous Catholics! That Henry, in a catastrophe so deeply tragical,
should feel his individual griefs absorbed in the national infamy, in the
national calamity, is a circumstance which evinces the patriotism of his
character; and it became him also to oppose, to the unprincipled and insidious
designs of Catharine de Medicis, a plan which might serve as a barrier to those
mischiefs she still contemplated. Henry was in no instance deficient in
sensibility. His sister had made an unworthy choice, and it became him, as her
sovereign and her brother, to direct and point her confidence; nor can his
fraternal attachment with propriety be questioned.

Henry's first reception of Rosny does honor to his feelings, to his
gratitude, and to his liberality; and if he was blessed with an able minister,
his minister also was amply recompensed. The confidence which the king reposed
in Sully, was a proof of his wisdom and penetration; for it was the regularity
and economy of the youthful candidate for his favor, which first advanced him
in the esteem of his sovereign; and this election, in a monarch, young, brave,
impassioned, and in some instances devoted to pleasure, fully evinced the
solidity of his understanding. But a fondness for order seemed inherent in the
bosom of Henry -- He was born with the virtues and method of economy, and
therefore practiced them without constraint. He distinguished judiciously; and,
discriminating characters with the utmost precision, while he divested
falsehood of its glare, he seemed to possess a kind of intuitive knowledge of
truth.

His martial genius, intrepid bravery, and full possession of military talents,
in all their splendid variety, was evinced by his remarks, while yet a child,
upon the terrors of the veteran soldier; by the ardour which the relation of
battles enkindled in his youthful bosom; by his undaunted heroism and just
observations at the battle of Moncontour, when he had hardly attained his
sixteenth year; by his address and bravery, in quelling the mutineers in the
city of Eause, while his remission of their offenses gave those indications of
his clemency, which his succeeding life abundantly confirmed; by his admirable
conduct at Nerac, extricating himself by his valor from imminent danger; by
the order of his march to, and his attack of, Cahors; by the hardships which,
for five succeeding days and nights, he endured before that city; and by his
undaunted and memorable reply to those who counseled a retreat -- It Is Heaven
which dictates what I ought to do upon this occasion. Remember then, that my
retreat out of this city, shall be the retreat of my soul from my body. My
honor requires this of me; speak therefore to me of nothing but fighting,
conquest, or death. Henry's resources in the midst of difficulties, and the
splendour with which he emerged from the most desperate circumstances, with the
facility with which he accommodated himself to the most laborious occupations
in the military department, conducting the miners in person, and animating the
workmen by every proper exertion, together with his capability of enduring
fatigue, cannot but excite our astonishment! His victory at Contras -- his
commiseration for the children of adversity, and the veneration in which he
held the meritorious soldier -- his generous aid of Henry III. -- his
arrangements upon the death of that prince -- the invincible resolution with
which he surmounted difficulties sufficiently powerful to overcome a host of
warriors -- his astonishing intrepidity in opposing himself, with only three
thousand followers, to an army of thirty thousand men, alternately keeping
guard in person, directing the trenches, snatching his hasty sustenance in the
ditch, and denying himself a moment's respite from his unparalleled fatigues --
are so many splendid claims upon our admiration! His success, in a combat so
unequal in point of numbers, as was the battle of Argues, assumes a miraculous
aspect; nor can we withhold our veneration, while listening to his reply to the
Count de Belin, who expressed his surprise at the inadequate number of his
troops -- You see not all, my friend; for you reckon not God and my claim, who
fight for me. The action of Argues would singly have secured the immortality of
Henry; but his arduous struggles and uniform bravery multiplied his exploits,
and gave them a brilliancy worthy of the finished chief which nature had
designed.

The military hero unites conduct with courage; he coolly deliberates; and,
what he theoretically resolves, he practically pursues. Henry IV. exhibited
this completion of character in a very eminent degree; and Sully observes, that
he never suffered his ardour in battle to hinder him from following the calmer
dictates of wisdom. At the battle of Ivry the Gallic hero gathered fresh
laurels: The excellent disposition of the several divisions, the valor with
which he fought, and the victory obtained over numbers so greatly
disproportioned to his own, covered him with glory. On the evening preceding
this action, and in his subsequent conduct, he gave striking proofs of a
virtuous as well as a great mind; and his tenderness for Sully, who had been
wounded in the battle, is strongly evincive of that sensibility, in which you
suppose him deficient. Henry, considered as a warrior, in pursuit of glory and
of a crown, (his right to which was incontestible) gave a remarkable proof of
the transcendent goodness and exquisite compassion of his heart, by raising the
siege of Paris, at a moment when its conquest was within his grasp, merely to
prevent that carnage which he had discovered his soldiers meditated, in revenge
for the massacre of St. Bartholomew; and his permitting the besieged those
supplies which it was in his power to cut off, was a fresh triumph of humanity.
I am not surprised, said Henry, that the Spaniards and the chiefs of the league
have no compassion upon these poor people; they are only tyrants: For me, I am
their father and their king, and cannot bear the recital of their calamities,
without being pierced to the soul, and ardently desiring to bring them relief.

The enemies of Henry bore testimony to his rare qualities, particularly to his
intrepid bravery. By heavens, said they, this prince deserves a thousand crowns
for his valor! The ardour with which the king exposed his person on many
occasions, and the vehemence with which he yielded to his insatiable thirst for
glory, triumphed, in some instances, over that prudence which was generally a
balance to his undaunted courage. Among those daring exploits, which were
strongly tinctured with rashness, may be reckoned the action of Aumale; where
he opposed himself, at the head of one hundred soldiers, to the Prince of
Parma, whose army consisted of thirty thousand effective men! But the valor
and conduct of his retreat is perhaps unrivalled in history. The reply of Henry
to the remonstrances of his friend, is the best apology which can be given for
these deviations from his generally wise and prudent movements -- I cannot do
otherwise; and, since it is for my glory and crown that I fight, my life and
every thing else ought to be of no consideration with me.

An instance of the king's humanity occurs at Dreux; where, in the moment of
victory, arresting the progress of death, he distributed sums, proportioned to
their necessities, among those who, thus doubly conquered by his prowess and by
his munificent clemency, could hardly help taking rank among the most faithful
of his subjects.

Victory attached itself to the person of Henry wherever he commanded; and it
was universally acknowledged, that to his own bravery and excellent
arrangements, he was indebted for the splendour of his arms. At the campaign in
Burgundy, and the battle of Fontaine Francois, he even surpassed himself. The
enemy with whom he fought were two-thirds superior in number; but the Gallic
hero was abundantly adequate to the most arduous achievements; and his exploits
during that action appear almost miraculous: Every thing, he was sensible,
depended upon his own exertions; and, at the head of one hundred and fifty
horse, he arrested the flight of that division of his army which had been
routed; he opposed himself bare-headed to the impetuosity of the victors; and,
completely defeating the enemy, snatched from them a triumph of which they
seemed already secure; and this admirable and well-timed exertion of valor,
happily saved his followers from that general carnage which would inevitably
have ensued. But I do not aim at enumerating all the battles and sieges in
which this monarch was engaged. I only glance cursorily over the actions of a
hero, who was neither elated by prosperity, nor depressed by adversity. He
communicated a portion of his ardour to those among his followers who were the
least ambitious of glory. He was equal to every military duty; and his
invincible bravery and indefatigable application excited that noble emulation,
which is the parent of great actions.

But it is not as a military hero, EXCLUSIVELY, that Henry is entitled to
applause -- he was a patriot king. His subjects shared equally his regards,
while merit was sure to obtain his patronage. His entrance into Paris strongly
marked his benignity, and his paternal attachment to his people. His soldiers,
exactly disciplined, exhibited a degree of regularity that would have done
honor to a well ordered family; and, taking possession of the squares and
streets, in military array, the populace sustained not the smallest injury. His
enemies experienced his clemency; and in that triumphant moment when he might
have taken ample vengeance, a general amnesty was proclaimed, and all those who
had borne arms against him were fully and freely pardoned. On the petition of
the injured towns and villages, which, from the tremendous devastation made by
the overflowing of the Loire, were stripped of all their possessions, Henry
thus directs his minister: God has given me subjects that I may preserve them
as my children: Let them meet with tenderness and charity from my council. Alms
are always highly acceptable to God, and in cases of public misery more
especially so. It would be heavy on my conscience, if I neglected to do every
thing I can for their relief. Thus, in word and in deed, did Henry consult the
public weal. He considered himself as placed at the head of a numerous family,
whose happiness it was his duty to consult; nor did he hesitate in
relinquishing his most favorite pursuits, if he might thereby contribute to
the felicity or emolument of his kingdom.

Henry's clemency to delinquents was descriptive of the utmost lenity and
tenderness of disposition. He preserved his serenity and cheerfulness, even
when suffering from the stroke of the assassin, who had aimed an ineffectual
blow at his life. He labored to preserve Marshall Byron and other
conspirators; and he magnanimously passed by every offense, as far as was
consistent with the safety of his person and kingdom. The noble frankness with
which he received all those, who, from whatever motive, had joined the league
against him, greatly augments the splendour of his renown. His way to the throne
of France had been strewed with difficulties and misfortunes, of a nature which
required all his bravery and fortitude to surmount; but, having attained his
hereditary right, he proved himself greatly worthy the royal authority with
which he was clothed. His reception of Admiral Villars, who had thrown himself
at his feet, whom he hastily raised, observing, that such submission was due
only to God -- of the Duke of Maienne, whom he tenderly embraced, and of many
others, was truly magnanimous, and serves to evince the inborn grandeur of his
soul. The cheerfulness of his disposition endeared him to his friends and the
nation at large. The lineaments of his face, says Sully, had that agreeable
liveliness which forms a sweet and happy physiognomy, and perfectly suited that
engaging easiness of manners, which, though sometimes mixed with majesty, never
lost the graceful affability and easy gaiety, so natural to him.

The veracity of Henry was numbered among his prominent virtues. He pronounced
an inviolable adherence to truth, the first requisite in a man of genuine
bravery and worth; and, when dictating the articles of capitulation at a siege,
the sacred regard he was known to pay to his word, rendered it to the besieged
as acceptable a pledge, as the strongest bonds which suspicion could invent.
Henry's feelings, as a father, has not been surpassed: As a husband, if he was
not ^uxorious, he was at least manly and polite; and when it is remembered,
that his matrimonial connection was only the superstructure of policy, candor
will confess, that this was the utmost which ought to have been expected from a
prince superior to dissimulation. If Mary de Medicis had been blessed with
discretion, and possessed of those attractions, address, and feminine delicacy,
which have distinguished some ladies, she might, perhaps, have rendered Henry
affectionate. It is to be lamented, that Margaret of Valois was not to his
taste. I have always been particularly affected by the history of this
princess; her merit appears to me incontestible: Her dignified resignation of
the king; her unremitted attention to the person who succeeded her, and the
rational attachment she continued to evince for the royal pair, are
circumstances which announce her truly noble, and place her, in my opinion,
with the first of women.

Henry evinced his love of literature, by his patronage of learned men; and it
is with regret we proceed to say, that virtue must deplore the deep shade, too
often thrown over the shining qualities of the Gallic hero. His illicit
attachments frequently enveloped in clouds the noble endowments of a mind,
capable of exhibiting a finished model of transcendent excellence. Yet, while
we lament a deviation so capital, it is with pleasure we repeat a fact, which
must be considered as an essential palliation of this single error. Henry never
suffered a pursuit of pleasure, of whatever description, to arrest those
valuable purposes which marked the magnanimity and heroism of his soul.

But, you observe, that Henry was an apostate, while the Duke of Sully
preserved his religion. I am, my dear, pleased with your warmth upon this
occasion; and yet it is true, that actions, proper and becoming to an
individual, are not always suitable to the head and representative of a
numerous and enlightened people. From a monarch, youthful, ardent, and devoted
to military fame, we are not to expect an unyielding system of divinity. Henry
was bred a Calvinist; and perhaps this is the only reason which produced him,
in the commencement of his career, a Protestant. The interests of humanity
loudly demanded a sacrifice of his particular mode of worship; and it is surely
highly derogatory to our holy religion, to suppose it calls upon us to immolate
the lives of thousands, merely for the establishment of a tenet, which cannot
rationally be regarded as affecting the present interest or future felicity of
the creature. Perhaps the zeal of religion has betrayed many upright minds, and
it may have enkindled false fires in the bosom of the persecuted, as well as
the persecutor.

France bled at every pore; she was torn by intestine divisions; and her
extensive provinces were on the eve of being deluged in blood! -- Ought Henry
to have perpetuated the misery of millions, merely for the sake of ideas,
which, strictly speaking, cannot be said to constitute the fundamental articles
of religion? Henry was a patriot king -- Must he exhaust those talents which
were calculated to establish the happiness of a nation, in destroying a people
he was born to protect? Henry was a meritorious prince; he was entitled to
felicity -- Must he devote himself to the calamities attendant upon endless
hostilities? If the king embraced the Catholic faith, he thereby became a
minister of peace; he might lull to sleep, or utterly exterminate the fiery
zeal of persecution; the gentle spirit of tolerance might be cherished and
invigorated; it would be in his power to arrest and remedy the progress of
those disorders which had desolated France; and a happy or tragical catastrophe
was apparently involved in his decision. The beneficent influence of a
philanthropic example, recommended by, and originating from, the throne, would
disseminate the mild principles of peace, love, and general fraternity. France
demanded of. Henry a restoration of her internal quiet. Tranquillity, affluence
and safety were in his gift. Lacerated, and almost expiring, while she well
near despaired of relief, she yet forcibly and energetically pronounced, that
Henry's abjuration of Calvinism would be a balm for every wound; that
hostilities would then cease; and peace, with its attendant train of
felicities, would once more bless her wide domain! And what was the concession
which Henry was required to make? Not a dereliction of his God, either in the
character of Creator, Redeemer, or Preserver; and the liberality of his
sentiments induced a persuasion, that the Architect of all worlds was equally
served by the sincere Catholic as by the Protestant. The observation of a few
ceremonies was the supernumerary he was called upon to embrace; and,
considering the forfeiture embosomed in his rejection, reason will heartily
acquit him. Besides, the king being a Protestant only in name, had never
investigated the peculiar tenets of his sect; and the Catholic priests, called
upon at this juncture to defend their sentiments, produced in the royal
presence their most specious arguments; while their Calvinistic opponents,
convinced of the necessity of the king's conversion, veiled before them; either
declining to defend themselves, or purposely employing weapons which they knew
to be unequal to the combat! Sully insists, that internal conviction was thus,
in fact, forced upon the mind of the monarch; and, as the inmost recesses of
Henry's heart were ever open to Sully, the above representation extorts our
full assent to the opinion of that minister.

"But Sully preserved his religion inviolate." It appears, my dear, that the
Duke of Sully had thoroughly examined his faith, and that it had become the
deliberate election of his riper years. Neither was he involved in the same
necessity with his master; his individual aggrandizement would have been his
only inducement to the relinquishment of his religious sentiments; and a motive
so decidedly interested ought never to gain the ascendency in a noble mind. It
should also be remembered, that Henry's abjuration was strongly enforced and
accelerated by the advice of Sully.

The truth is, Henry was a philanthropist; and those beneficent plans which, at
an early period, occupied his mind, not confined to France, included the whole
Christian world. Indeed it is from those general arrangements, which,
calculated upon a large scale, embraced all Europe, that he is more
particularly entitled to the appellation great; and, the probability is, that
had he accomplished his vast purposes, his wishes would only have been bounded
by the universe. Henry was well qualified for the completion of his magnanimous
design; he possessed an accurate knowledge of the state and various interests
of all those countries, the general emolument of which he contemplated; and his
intrepidity, profound wisdom, and rare abilities, had become a universal theme.
If I understand the vast project which Henry had conceived, its object was to
fashion all christendom into one great family, or extensive republic, which
republic was to be equitably parcelled out into hereditary and elective
monarchies and sovereign republics; amenable, however, in some leading
arrangements to a general council; and the division was to be made in such a
manner as to remove every occasion of jealousy or apprehension; thus arresting
the progress of the devouring sword, and putting a stop to that effusion of
blood, and those perpetual hostilities, which are an outrage to humanity. The
members of this august union were to be regulated and governed by one general
plan; their presiding head, or chief magistrate, was to be elected from the
several potentates by the free suffrages of the whole; and the affairs of this
complex commonwealth, were to be adjusted by general and inferior assemblies,
consisting of deputies from the individual States of this Christian republic;
men were to be protected in the free exercise of their religion; toleration was
to be established, and the rights of conscience held inviolate.

Henry, in the contemplation of this splendid achievement, magnanimously
determined to reject all compensation for the expense and hazard of the
enterprise. The boundaries which he affixed to the several powers, effectually
barred France from all acquisition of territory; and he only reserved to
himself the glory of disseminating over the face of Europe the rich blessings
of harmony and peace. That Henry should have been capable of conceiving this
plan, at a period when France was reduced by intestine divisions to the verge
of destruction, and when he himself was nearly overwhelmed by misfortunes, is
truly astonishing! and that when thus struggling with calamity, he was able to
originate and organize the most ardent and beneficial undertaking that could
occupy the mind of man, is a circumstance which must remain an incontestible
proof of the grandeur of his intellect. This prodigious and stupendous design,
was, at first, utterly rejected by Sully; and he ingenuously confesses that his
rejection proceeded from a temper naturally cold, cautious and unenterprizing.
But upon examining the project in all its parts, he ardently adopted it; and,
as delineated in his memoirs, it appears not only practicable, but highly
rational.

It is remarkable that Queen Elizabeth had projected an enterprise, which
answered in all its parts, feature by feature, to that of the Gallic hero, and
this previous to the commencement of their correspondence upon this grand
subject, and long before it had a being in the mind of Henry. It is to the
honor of Elizabeth that she was solicitous to effectuate a revolution so
importantly beneficial, without having recourse to arms. Sully suggests an
idea, that Henry, after the conference at Dover, was indebted to the English
Queen for the perfecting of some parts of his scheme. But the Gallic monarch,
and his minister, were enthusiastic admirers of Elizabeth; they were filled
with astonishment at her political abilities; they declare they cannot bestow
praises upon her adequate to her merit; they conceive that in respect of
wisdom, penetration, and all the other perfections of the mind, she was not
inferior to any king, the must truly deserving of that title. Henry conceived
she merited immortal praise; and he lamented for her, at her death, " as for a
second self;" and indeed Elizabeth's capability of conceiving, adjusting and
cherishing a plan so magnanimous, together with her whole connection with Henry,
reflects a luster on her character, that greatly adds to the fervor of those
wishes, which would endow her with consistent magnanimity; it cannot but redeem
for her a moiety of our esteem; and we would gladly impute her whole
transactions with the Queen of Scots to the influence of some infernal
instigator, who, throwing a veil over her better genius, impelled her to deeds
truly diabolical.

At length, every thing was prepared for the commencement of those operations
which were to terminate in the establishment of peace and equality, throughout
the christian territory. The treasury of Henry was amply replenished, his
resources were prodigious, his army was embodied, his arrangements were made,
allies were engaged, and contingencies were provided for, when the death of the
Duke of Cleves, with the consequent disputes relative to the succession to his
dignities and possessions, opened the way to, and gave the signal of, onset.

But alas! the days of Henry were numbered! and this august prince became the
victim of that dark and inhuman zeal, whose bigoted policy has frequently
been stained by the blood of the most excellent among mankind. It was, indeed,
a fearful moment, and muffled in clouds, dark and portentous -- the
superintending genius of France, and of Europe, relinquished its guardianship
-- the fiends of murder assumed the regency -- and, when we reflect upon the
sudden dissolution of the splendid prospects, which rose so fair, and promised
such vast emolument, around the dagger of the fell assassin, ten thousand
augmenting horrors gather?

Voltaire's Henriade I have never seen. I am told it is translated into
English; but I intend purchasing the original, and giving it to you, as an
exercise for your talents as a translator. This employment will, I conceive, be
calculated to polish both your French and English. Your geographical
description of Scotland, is, I think, accurate; but you have made a little
mistake in the relative situation of France. Your continued improvement in
every useful and ornamental branch of study, is the ardent wish of your
affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. LII.
Soft tears of pity trickling from the eye,
The cheek of youth, with added charms supply;
The pearly dew the yielding heart refines,
While every thought, benevolence entwines.

To MARGARETTA.
I DO not, my dear, regret the tears you shed over the meritorious sufferer --
Compassion ameliorates the bosom; rouses the virtues, and prepares us for the
exercise of all those kindly offices, which our relative or social duties may
require.

In the history of Charles I. of England, the impartialist will lament a
virtuous and amiable prince, misled by education, rendered unhappy by a
combination of causes, and finally betrayed to death by a treacherous and
hypocritical miscreant, who, in effect, usurped his offices and dignity. The
endearing benignity and sweetness of disposition, which Charles so eminently
possessed, had, previous to his accession to the regal dignity, enthroned him
in the hearts of the people. Nature had implanted in his bosom all the
qualities which go to the composition of a patriot king -- but strong
impressions of the sacred, irrevocable, and heaven descended prerogative of
majesty, had been deeply made upon his infant mind. His father had spared no
effort to endow his son with sentiments, which he himself had been unable to
defend in any other way than by his pen; and Charles, conceiving himself under
obligations to transmit, undiminished, to posterity, those divine rights,
delegated to him as a sacred deposit, esteemed every encroachment as a criminal
invasion of those privileges, for which he had become responsible.

With plans, originating in views receiving from paternal influence and
authority the stamp of rectitude, he mounted the English throne; and his
measures were by consequence very inclement to that ardent love of liberty,
which then began to animate the public mind, and to induce a conviction that
the descendants of one common Parent must have inherited, from nature, an
inherent and equal right to the transcendent felicities, attendant upon
rational FREEDOM. Yet Charles, taught by experience, would have become the
father of his people; but the unbending spirit of the times, once roused to
action, and aided by unprincipled, interested, and hell-born ambition, laid low
a monarch, who, however widely he had mistaken the path, was, nevertheless,
anxiously solicitous to promote the happiness of his people.

The marriage of Charles with a princess of the Roman Catholic persuasion; his
attachment to the Duke of Buckingham; the war, in which he engaged, in
consequence of that attachment; the unconstitutional demands which his
necessities impelled; his unwarrantable extension of authority, in levying ship
money; the frequent dissolution of parliament; illegal taxes; arbitrary
imprisonment; billeting soldiers; martial laws; the severe and ill-judged zeal
of Laud; the attempt to establish Episcopacy in Scotland; the prosecution of
the citizens of London, in the star chamber; the despotic proceedings of that
court, and the repetition of extorted loans -- were among the leading causes,
which procured the ruin of a prince, calculated to give dignity to, and reflect
honor on, any situation in life, in which he might have been placed. The noble
stand, made by the people of England in defense of civil liberty, and their
arduous struggles for those rights and privileges, which ought, indeed, to be
considered as unalienable, can never be too much admired; they are entitled to
the esteem and veneration of mankind; and the manly and undaunted firmness,
with which the Hampdens of that eventful day, opposed themselves to the
encroachments of arbitrary power, will continue, to the latest posterity, to
command the esteem, and excite the emulation of every bosom, capable of that
fervid and animating glow, which a love of freedom will invariably inspire.
But, when the amiable monarch, convicted of those errors, which, originating in
education, had been cherished and confirmed by intemperate councils, acceded to
every demand which freedom, organized by reason, and submitting to the
necessary regulations of government, could suggest -- when his rebellious
subjects, in defiance of every amicable overture, audaciously continued their
practices against the dignity, the government, the peace, and even the life of
their sovereign -- every indignant feeling takes the alarm, and we hesitate not
in pronouncing their proceedings truly unwarrantable, and highly atrocious. A
combination in favor of the Magna Charta of Nature must ever ensure
approbation; but an attempt to seize those prescriptive rights of the
executive, which the experience of all ages has pronounced requisite to the due
administration of order, and the support of that subordination, which embosoms
the general weal, is a crime, the fearful consequences of which, no human
foresight can calculate.

Charles, mild and peaceable, and attached with even paternal tenderness to his
subjects, entered with the utmost reluctance into those sanguinary measures
that were deemed necessary to the preservation of regal authority. Vigorous
exertions, at the commencement of the civil war, might have arrested that
torrent of misfortunes by which he was afterward overwhelmed. But the clemency
of the monarch suffered the moment to pass, in which, by proper and decisive
movements, he might have obtained his own terms.

It does not appear that the design was simply to remove obstructions, nor to
repair a decaying fabric; a project abundantly more comprehensive than that of
curtailing the obnoxious privileges of the crown, while its beneficial powers
were extended, was formed. Every baleful passion was abroad --
misrepresentations and malignant aggravations were countenanced. Animosities
obtained, with every passing moment, an astonishing augmentation of inveteracy;
and the daring purpose was conceived and systematized, of utterly destroying
the venerable structure of government, and of abolishing forever that power,
which had been, for a succession of ages, regarded as the foundation or chief
pillar in the English constitution!

Deplorable was the state of the monarch! Surrounded by difficulties beyond the
reach of human wisdom to surmount, or even to control! And as if these were not
sufficient, an attempt was made to fasten upon him the odium of those very
calamities which pierced his bosom with the deepest sorrow! nor did the finger
of malevolence fail of pointing him out as the author of that horrible massacre
in Ireland, of the rise and conduct of which he was entirely ignorant, and
which every principle of his soul detested. In the struggle between the king
and the parliament, many brave men lost their lives. Upon the virtues of the
Falklands and the Hampdens of that distressful period, every reader will
pronounce a panegyric. Their magnanimity, patriotism, undaunted bravery, and
various accomplishments, although opposed in arms, will ensure them the
undivided admiration of every succeeding generation. In the chalice prepared
for the king, every bitter ingredient was to be infused; and the parliament,
apprized of his conjugal tenderness and fidelity, contrived to stab him in the
tenderest part, by preferring an impeachment against the queen! Nor indeed was
any species of contumely spared; the private papers of the royal pair were
seized and published by the command of parliament, who took a vulgar and brutal
satisfaction in ridiculing all those tender effusions which were never drawn up
for the public eye! It is impossible to attend, without the extreme of grief
and indignation, to the supplicating monarch! to the contemptuous silence of
parliament! to the several stages of his degradation! to that surrender which
his imperious necessities impelled! to the subsequent ingratitude of the Scots!
to the rude and barbarous zeal of the clergy! to the indecent transfer of the
king's person, and the variety of indignities which he suffered in the various
stages of his imprisonment! to his seizure by Joyce! to his being led about at
the pleasure of the prevailing party! now a prisoner with the army, and anon
with the parliament, while he is on all sides the victim of perfidy and
unwarrantable ambition! -- These accumulated calamities, I say, wound the soul
of sensibility, and are an outrage upon every sense of humanity and propriety.

Imagination presents the interesting and highly injured prince. We behold his
venerable head, prematurely bleached by misfortune! his beard is neglected, and
even his apparel, worn and decaying, evinces his desolate situation! one
decrepit servant only attends him! he is forsaken and solitary! he exhibits an
affecting example of the instability of human grandeur! Over this melancholy
figure of a deeply oppressed sovereign, we cannot but weep -- every sentiment
of commiseration is embodied -- and we spontaneously reverence the royal
captive!

In the fate of Charles, and Mary, Queen of Scots, who was his immediate
grand-parent, there is, in many instances, a striking resemblance. Like here is,
his troubles in a great measure originated in religious dissensions. The same
spirit, which in the days of Mary persecuted Popery, now manifested equal
acrimony against Episcopacy; and the same vehemence was in exercise against the
use of the liturgy, as had been heretofore opposed to the mass. Both those
sovereigns had the grief to meet in hostile fields their rebellious subjects,
and both were compelled to fly for shelter to an implacable foe; both were
betrayed, and in both instances a special edict was procured, on which to
ground the process that aimed at the lives of those illustrious sufferers! They
were alike stripped of the externals of royalty, and they ineffectually
preferred their ardent solicitations to be heard in their own defense in the
presence of the two houses of parliament! while, by a usurpation of authority,
and under the regency of diabolical passions, they were alike produced upon the
scaffold. The fortitude and noble serenity of Charles was as exemplary as that
of his royal ancestor; but although his own misfortunes wrung no tears from his
eyes, or degrading complaints from his lips, his very soul was pierced for the
calamities of his friends! Yes, it consists with the testimony of history to
assert, that no consideration of his sufferings, as an individual, could
destroy his equanimity of temper; and although separated from the beloved
companion of his bosom, and dethroned by those rebellious subjects who were
hourly aggravating their crimes, by heaping upon degraded majesty every species
of indignity! Although cruelly maligned, and bitterly inveighed against,
imprisoned by his most obdurate foes, and infamously treated! yet, strange to
tell, the benignity of his countenance, and the equality of his deportment
continued uniform and unbroken, while every movement seemed to say -- In
defiance of those accumulated evils, which have combined for my destruction, I
am still a sovereign; and, supported by conscious rectitude, the sublimity of
virtue confers upon me that kind of elevation of which no earthly power can
despoil me.

The soul-affecting meetings between Charles and his children, having moistened
with the temporary tear of remorse and commiseration, even the eye of the
obdurate Cromwell, must in truth be beyond the power of description! Charles
supported, through his mock trial, an admirable presence of mind; and his
intrepid fortitude and heroic firmness, while encountering those various and
brutal indignities to which he was subjected, evinced that true magnanimity,
which could only have belonged to a mind radically virtuous. The noble
independence of lady Fairfax, and that undaunted heroism with which she bore
her personal testimony, even in the presence of the murderers of the king,
against those sanguinary proceedings avowedly aimed at the life of her
sovereign, will reflect eternal honor upon her memory!

To arrest the progress of measures so atrocious, it was in vain that foreign
princes interposed their good offices; the pressing remonstrances of the
relenting Scots were disregarded, and the pathetic supplications of the weeping
Henrietta were ineffectual! The Falklands and the Hampdens of that day, were,
alas! no more! The affrighted virtues had either fled the Albion shore, or were
sequestered in the bosom of a few upright persons, whom the turpitude of the
times had deprived of all power! Yet amid this general dereliction of humanity,
and prevalence of profligacy, we hail, with glowing admiration, the names of
the Duke of Richmond, the Earls of Hertford, Southhampton, and Lindsay, who
greatly solicited permission to relinquish their lives, if they might thereby
redeem from death their highly injured and virtuous sovereign! Nor can even the
frozen bosom of apathy refuse, to this attempt to extricate the unfortunate
prince, those unequivocal expressions of applause, that transcendent worth must
ever extort! The manly demeanor and heavenly composure, which Charles
exhibited, during the interval between his sentence and his martyrdom, his
exemplary piety, the ardour of his devotion, the cheerfulness with which he
marked the approaching hour of emancipation, adverting to the closing scene as
a " great and joyful solemnity," and his address to the sorrowful clergyman who
attended him in his last moments, are so many finishing strokes of a character
in which we involuntarily take an interest, and to which we feel ourselves
unalterably attached. What must have been the rectitude of that life, a
retrospect of which could furnish no other subject of remorse, than that
extorted consent which he yielded to the death of the virtuous Strafford!
Especially when it is remembered, that the Earl himself nobly insisted on being
made the sacrifice of a reconciliation between the king and the people, and
that the withholding the royal sanction would not, upon that occasion, have
preserved the generous nobleman. This transaction, however, pressed hard upon
the mind of the monarch, and he mentioned it with regret upon the scaffold.

Charles possessed the virtues of the heart in an uncommon degree, and his
talents were undoubtedly great. Historians delineate him as a man of superior
worth, and uniform probity. They describe him as the most finished gentleman,
the most ardent and faithful friend, the most humane and compassionate master,
the tenderest parent, the most affectionate husband, and exemplary Christian,
that the times in which he lived produced. Nor can we wonder at the sighs,
tears, and lamentations, which we are told marked his exit!!

Peter the Great is our next subject; and this monarch, in regard to many
circumstances, stands, as far as I have known, upon the page of history without
a parallel. A cloud gathered round the morning of his days, and his education
was little attended to; but genius surmounts every difficulty; rich in native
splendors, it is self illumined; it is superior to every envelopement, and no
barriers can confine its progress. The youthful Czar early discovered an
insatiable thirst for knowledge; his first arrangements were descriptive of
military ardor and talents; and enlisting in the lowest grade, in those
regiments which he instituted, organized and established, he became a candidate
for preferment; nor would he accept promotion, until his abilities had rendered
his right thereto incontestible. When we behold the Czar of Russia engaged as a
labourer in the ship-yards of Holland and England, we hesitate not in
conferring upon him the surname of Great! And we are at a loss which to admire
most, the singularity or the independence of that mind, which, in defiance of
custom, and those enervating indulgencies in the gift of royalty, embraced such
unparalleled measures for the benefit of a community, which his predecessors
had been accustomed to consider as created for their individual emolument.

Peter was laudably ambitious of acquiring every useful attainment, and his
information was various and respectable. With an eye of the closest
investigation he visited the artificer, and his knowledge in the mechanism of
those arts, to which he attended, was proportioned to his indefatigable
diligence. In Istia, and in the academy of sciences in Petersburg, they still
exhibit those bars of iron, which Peter himself, without the aid of an
assistant, shaped at the forge of Muller, affixing thereon his own mark. He
demanded of Muller the wages which he allowed to other workmen, and he
purchased therewith a pair of shoes, which he was particularly fond of
displaying, always observing, I have earned them well by the sweat of my brow,
with hammer and anvil. Peter drew from every circumstance all possible
information; and, fond of considering himself as the pupil of contingencies, he
was solicitous to make the greatest proficiency. His talents as a soldier were
far above a mediocrity; and although he was sometimes unsuccessful, yet being
taught the art of war by Charles XII. of Sweden, his military fame became
considerable.

The Swedish monarch ascended the throne of his ancestors, at a period when the
nation, (whose scepter he swayed) had attained the summit of prosperity; but,
seized with a kind of military frenzy, he abandoned his native dominions,
fought with prodigious intrepidity a number of battles, and achieved such
astonishing exploits, as plunged his subjects into a train of evils, which well
near accomplished their ruin!

It was from this hero that Peter learned the art of war; yet the better genius
of the Czar finally prevailed over his master; and, after obtaining some
important advantages, the decisive victory of Pultowa established his
celebrity, and he had the glory of reinstating the deposed Augustus upon the
throne of Poland.

The Czarina Catharine, ranks among the most extraordinary women of whom
history records an account. The child of misfortune, she was reared by the
beneficent interposition of pious charity; but, elevated by her beauty and her
talents, to the throne of Russia, she proved herself abundantly worthy of the
confidence reposed in her. She was the constant companion of the Czar in all
those enterprises which he undertook both by land and sea; and she was, it is
said, both an able counselor, and a brave general. By her wisdom and her
presence of mind, Peter was repeatedly extricated from the verge of
destruction, particularly when he was encompassed on every side at the battle
of Pruth, and in the naval engagement with the Swedes, in the gulf of Finland.
The order of St. Catharine was instituted by Peter, in honor of this Empress;
and the investiture of the candidates were in her gift. Peter appointed this
illustrious woman to succeed him in the empire; and her arrangements upon his
death were descriptive of consummate prudence. The academy of sciences, at
Petersburg, was established by her; she augmented the navy, and prosecuted the
project of discovering a north-east passage to China.

Russia is indebted to Peter the Great for her civilization; he endowed her
with power, respectability and dignity. He distributed her ennobled citizens in
several parts of Europe, that they might thus acquire and bring home those
improvements so necessary for the public weal; and large gratuities were
tendered to foreigners of ability, who should consent to become denizens of
Russia. His institutions and establishments, were numerous; his armies were
organized and disciplined after the most approved models; his fleets thronged
those seas which wash the Russian shores; he erected fortresses, and multiplied
commodious harbors; and, allured by a patronage so powerful, the arts and
sciences, in the reign of Peter the Great, first sound an asylum in Russia. As
a legislator, he was respectable. Petersburg hails him as its founder; and many
other cities which he reared, and canals which he trained, bear witness to his
industry, and to the wisdom of his administration. He is said to have been a
munificent prince; and his punishments are described as the superstructure of
justice. He is characterized as upright, assiduous and modest; and we are also
informed that he had sufficient self-command to deny himself the intemperate
use of ardent spirits, of which he was immoderately fond.

Yet many vices are attributed to Peter, who certainly, in some instances, was
not great; and even my Margaretta complains of his rigor to his son. But, my
love, Alexei was stained with many crimes, beside that of rebellion; and you
will recollect that much praise has been ascribed to the rigid virtue of the
elder Brutus, who unrelentingly consented to the death of his offending
children.

It is now, my dear, late at night; you are fast locked in the arms of sleep;
and may your slumbers be peaceful. This letter, which I am to place on your
toilette, will meet your early attention in the morning; and if you arise in
perfect health, and in the full exercise of all your sweet and amiable virtues,
tranquillity will be continued to your affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


No. LIII.
The rights of conscience to enjoy secure,
Truth, liberty and honor to insure --
To plant religion on a foreign shore,
Mid nature's wilds a refuge to explore --
For this our father's crossed the billowy main,
While many a virtue mingled in their train.

To MARGARETTA.
I REPEAT, my dear, that I am charmed with the glowing energy and sympathetic
ardour of your youthful bosom. The earnestness with which you personate the
identical character traced by the historian, (which so completely divests you
of every other consciousness, producing a temporary oblivion of yourself, and
giving you eagerly to embrace the joys and sorrows of the virtuous hero or
heroine) is my security for your improvement; and I think it can scarcely
happen, that the studies you pursue should not endow you with a fund of useful
information.

In your selection from the worthies who first planted the virtues of
civilization in this younger world, you have evinced much judgment. The private
and political character of Governor Winthrop is perhaps without a blemish --
his civism was the growth of reason -- and he entertained principles which, as
I conceive, are the essence of all those governments that are the
superstructure of rectitude, or, in other words, that comprise the well-being
of both the governor and the governed. If there was a tinge of error in the
sentiments or administration of this time honored sage, it resulted from that
spirit of religious intolerance, which in his parting moments he feelingly
regretted.

In tracing the eventful life of William Penn, the celebrated founder of
Pennsylvania, my mind is impressed with an uncommon glow of admiration. It has
been observed, that the persecuted man becomes, in his turn, an inexorable
persecutor: But Penn is an illustrious exception to this general rule. He seems
to have possessed, from nature, a mind firm and dignified, and it was
apparently imbued with every virtue that can sublime or adorn humanity. His
uniform adherence to the religion of his election; the patient firmness with
which he endured the displeasure of a beloved and revered parent; his close
conformity to the dictates of conscience; and the noble independence with which
he surrendered himself to observances that subjected him to the censure of the
grave and the ridicule of the gay, are unquestionable instances of the
superiority of his mind, and commandingly demonstrate a genius rendered
luminous by its own inborn splendors, and cultivated by studious application.
Even his enthusiastic zeal, as it was never tinctured by cruelty, is amiable
and endearing; and we bless the fervid imagination, which, however pertinacious
in its tenets, in no moment yields to the dark and murderous hues of prejudice.

Penn's religious sentiments early involved him in many inconveniences; we find
him while a student at the university of Oxford, subjected to the penalties
annexed to nonconformity; the resentments of his father were grievous and
durable! He was frequently imprisoned; but he appeared equal to every calamity;
and the elevation of his spirit was not to be subdued! He disdained, with
honest warmth, that emancipation from his bonds which was to be the purchase of
an abjuration of his principles; and his captivity was employed in literary
pursuits. It appears that he exhibited a complete example of rectitude; and had
he been long held in durance, it would have confirmed the odium of those
measures by which he had been so arbitrarily detained: But, acquitted by the
verdict of a legal process, his prison doors were thrown open; and the
indignation of his father giving place to the splendid virtues of a son, who
reflected the highest honor upon his name and lineage, an act of amnesty
succeeded, and the demise of the old gentleman put him in possession of a
handsome patrimonial inheritance. His opulence, however, in no degree
diminishing his devout and unalterable attachment to Quakerism, he still
continued obnoxious to an intolerant government. He was again imprisoned in the
tower of London, whence he was transferred to Newgate, from which place, (after
malice and tyranny had made an ineffectual discovery of their malignant
inveteracy) he was at length released.

Penn visited many parts of Europe, and he was always industriously employed,
both by preaching and writing, in disseminating those sentiments which he
regarded as the offspring of truth: He conferred the highest luster upon the
sect to which he adhered; indeed his probity, philanthropy, mildness of
disposition, talents, literature, and great goodness of heart, must be
considered as conferring respectability upon human nature at large; and it was
a most beneficent arrangement in the economy of paternal Providence, which made
Penn a proprietor in this new world. His abilities as a legislator have been
extensively celebrated; and many of his regulations have been adopted by the
wisdom and experience of later days. We bless the propitious events and
favorable gales which wafted him across the broad Atlantic; and we mark with
complacent veneration his judicious system of government, and the mildness of
his administration. His upright conduct relative to the aborigines of this
country, so calculated to secure their affectionate confidence, was descriptive
even of parental kindness, and was attended with the most beneficial effects.
His sacred regard to the rights of conscience, induced him to establish,
without reserve, that kind of toleration which admits the free exercise of all
those religious sentiments that originate in an acknowledgment of the great
First Cause, and produce the individual amenable to the laws of society: And
thus was Pennsylvania rendered an asylum for the persecuted of every
persuasion; while this circumstance, says an elegant and judicious writer, "
contributed more than any thing else to its prosperity," Penn, in fact,
effectuated his philanthropic purpose -- He supported power in reverence with
the people; and he secured the people from the abuse of power; and we are
almost ready to pronounce the term of his administration, a renovation of the
lapsed nature. Indian ferocity was ameliorated by the uniform exercise of
probity and tenderness: Mild equality assumed her most captivating aspect; and
the colony is said to have exhibited a striking resemblance to a father and his
family; the latter united by interest and affection; the former revered for the
wisdom of his institutions, and the indulgent use of his authority. Those who
were ambitious of repose found it in Pennsylvania. The community were the same
equal face -- no one aspired, no one was oppressed: Industry was sure of
profit, knowledge of esteem, and virtue of veneration. But the patriot
legislator, stimulated by the strongest incentives, departed for his native
land, and clouds gathered round the infant government. Yet humanity cannot
consider the philanthropic chief as in any degree reprehensible. The English
prisons were filled with his persecuted and suffering brethren; and his
powerful interposition, on his return to the Albion shore, procured the
enlargement of no less than thirteen hundred of his friends, who were held in
durance.

The plan of the city of Philadelphia, which is decidedly the metropolis of
America, and which attracts the attention and extorts the admiration of
strangers of every description, was completed under the auspices of Penn; and
it may be a question, whether, in proportion as succeeding proprietors have
departed therefrom, they have not diminished the beauty, elegance and
convenience of the city.

A superficial observer may be ready to ask -- Since Penn was so nearly
exempted from the depravity which adheres to the individuals of humanity, how
are we to account for the calamities which encompassed him, for his frequent
imprisonments, and for the misfortunes which seemed to attend the evening of
his days? But reflection will suggest the ineffable consolations attendant upon
a course of virtue; and reason will not fail to point to that refulgent day,
which, dawning in worlds beyond the sky, will assuredly succeed the long, dark
and heavy night of mortality.

The volume of manuscripts, so lately put into your hands, which contains many
letters upon history, renders it unnecessary to continue my remarks in this
line. My future subjects will be circumscribed within more narrow bounds; and I
have, perhaps, said enough to stimulate your researches. I break off abruptly,
to enclose the landscape which you have so accurately pencilled, to our good
friend, Mrs. W --. The post sets off in less than an hour; and I only add, that
you are, at this moment, every thing I wish. I am your affectionate mother,

MARY VIGILLIUS.


POSSIBLY, the number of letters, which my solicitude to comply with the wishes
of Mrs. Aimwell has engaged me to furnish, may not have been in unison with
the feelings of the generality of my readers. I am aware, that when a husband
and a father sit in judgment upon the productions of a beloved wife and
daughter, an impartial decision can hardly be expected. If, however, I am
considered as reprehensible, apologies will but augment my error; and
therefore, after addressing a few lines to my young friend, Miss Aimwell, I put
a period to those efforts, which have had their origin in a tender anxiety for
the improvement and felicity of the young proficient.

To Miss SOPNIA AIMWELL.
MY GOOD YOUNG LADY,
BLUSH not at receiving a letter from an old man, who is a sincere admirer of
your sex, and who cannot see an amiable and deserving young girl, but he
immediately becomes interested in her movements, and anxious relative to her
destination. Borne on the wings of imagination, he pierces the envelopement of
futurity, he contemplates her, established a useful and important member of
society, at the head of a well regulated family, or performing a subordinate
part with that propriety, in which consists the prime excellence and value of
existence. If he reverses these agreeable expectations, he beholds her adding
to the circle of frivolity, seeking to fill up time by pursuits unworthy the
attention of a rational being, and turning with disdain from those
qualifications, which are justly reckoned among the first acquirements in
female life. Surely, the affected idler, who boasts an utter detestation of
family attentions, and a total ignorance of domestic duties; who, absorbed in
the multifarious enchantments of cards, scandal and fashion, becomes ardently
ambitious of being considered as elevated to the very summit of insignificancy,
is truly and disgustingly ridiculous.

I will own to you, young lady, that in proportion as I conceive the charming
maid is about, by her blameless and praiseworthy conduct, to add to the
respectability and dignity of human nature, or to increase the number of
useless triflers, who wear away their hours without plan, object, or even
motive, I feel inclined to bestow my benediction, or otherwise, to yield to the
impulse of contempt; and I will further confess, that I generally make my
admeasurement of the destined progress of the interesting adventurer, by the
commencement of her career.

Your mamma intimates that you love my Margaretta, and that you will be
influenced by the Gleaner. This information points the ardour of my wishes as
they relate to you, and renders me doubly solicitous respecting those
occurrences, the effects of which, in a great measure, depend upon the use you
make of your present hours. A young lady has taken a capital step, and obtained
an admirable basis for the superstructure of improvement, when she learns
properly to appreciate the value of time. Those important moments in which you
may secure a fund, that will serve as the resource of revolving years, are
rapidly passing off; and it should be your care, to mark them by such
seize as may endear you to your friends, and render you acceptable to
society at large.

Your predilection for me will induce you to read attentively the letters of
Margaretta and her mother, which have been produced to public view principally
for your emolument: But do not, my dear, accept their sketches of persons,
writings and events, merely upon trust. With the best intentions in the world
they may have erred; and I recommend it to you, to turn to the several authors
they have occasionally mentioned, and after a careful perusal of the volumes
from whence they deduce their conclusions, compare your ideas with their's; let
me know the result; and thus give me an opportunity of tracing the coincidence,
which I persuade myself will appear in the sentiments of elegant and informed
minds. If Miss Aimwell accommodates herself to my wishes, determining to grant
a request, which is made with even paternal fervor, I am mistaken if her mamma
will again have reason to complain of her want of attachment to her book.

But, trust me, dear Miss Sophia, it is hardly possible to possess any thing
valuable, without a due attention to method. If you slumber away a large
proportion of the twenty-four hours, and apply yourself to the pursuits of the
day as chance or necessity directs, your life is a scene of confusion; what may
be the work of any hour, is too often the work of no hour; and in the mean time
you are squandering that which the wealth of both the Indies can never redeem.
Summon, my lovely young friend, that resolution which is now, it may be,
dormant in your bosom; indecision and indolence are alike enemies to the
proficiency of industrious virtue. Resolve to appropriate your hours, and let
their regular return present your needle, your book, your pen, or your pencil.
Happily, yours is the age of flexibility, and a little perseverance will
establish those habits, which will transform your exercises into the most
essential requisites of your felicity. I can hardly conceive it possible to
insist too frequently or too importunately upon the incalculable value of
order. It seems to me to be the stamen of every important attainment; it may be
denominated the central orb of virtue; and it influences, invigorates and
beautifies, both the aggregate and the minutiae of life.

Reflect a little -- You are summoned to make one in a party of pleasure;
music, dancing, and all those social enjoyments that distinguish the convivial
circle, it is expected will constitute the amusement of a scene, at which
discretion is to preside. But as the occasion will require a more than ordinary
attention to your dress, as alterations are to be made, and ornaments are to be
procured, much time must be devoted to preparation; and as these particulars
naturally come under the direction of your mamma, she engages to devote herself
to the business. But the question is, when will she commence her employment?
ten days are to elapse previous to the promised period, and there is surely
time enough. Tomorrow the robe shall be made; the next day the head dress --
and so on. Tomorrow arrives, and the appropriated hours are still deferred;
day after day revolves, and the necessary arrangements are yet at a stand!
Mamma busies herself as chance directs, and she is occupied by her
miscellaneous avocations agreeably to the caprice of the moment. The important
day at length presents, and nothing is done; what a scene of bustle and
confusion succeeds; you must absolutely either tarry at home, or make your
appearance very ill dressed.

Should your house-maid be suffered to neglect or to perform the business of
her station without a due respect to order, your apartments would exhibit a
scene of anarchy, and you might chance to repose upon a bed badly prepared, or
perhaps not made at all. Your cook, thrown from her accustomed routine of duty,
would serve your table with spoiled viands; and you are to congratulate
yourself that your mamma possesses that spirit of government, which assigns to
proper persons and hours the business of the day; thus producing that uniform
regularity so essential to domestic tranquillity. But you are not only to
admire, but also to imitate. If industry and method are so essential in the
inferior occupations of life, they are more indispensably requisite in the
important business of forming and maturing the talents, pointing the virtues,
and educating that intellect, upon which depends the future conduct of the
youthful voyager.

Excuse, my good young lady, these hints, and continue to cherish in your
gentle bosom that flattering prepossession, which you have hitherto
acknowledged for your sincerely attached friend,

THE GLEANER.


No. LIVE.
Rich is the fragrance well-earn'd praise bestows;
Its spicy gales with genial fervor blows;
T^^ ^^^d of worth immortal verdure wears;
Even blighting time its vivid coloring spares.

PERHAPS there is not, in the gift of art, a more prevailing incentive to
propriety of conduct, than the hope of reward. To look for a recompense, is
very consistent with the dependent state of humanity; and it belongs only to
the Father of Intelligence, to move essentially and independently upon the
great square of rectitude.

Reason no sooner begins to bud, than the child is stimulated to act rightly,
by the hope of a sugar-plum, a gingerbread toy, or that more honorable
inducement, a mother's approbating smile. The student calls into action every
effort, allured by the prospect of a new book, the eulogy of the preceptor, or
an accelerated holiday; and the man of letters, while he indulgeth
contemplations congenial with his nature, is rendered more indefatigable in his
researches, by the honest hope of a splendid name. As the love of fame is more
or less influential on every mind, it may be properly characterized a universal
passion; and we conceive, that the expectation of an honorary, if not of a
lucrative compensation, frequently bestows the motive, and furnishes the
prevalent excitement, to good and proper actions.

Under this persuasion we are induced to wish, that in every commonwealth, town
and village, some particular guerdon was assigned, to be annually bestowed on
such persons as had attained, in pursuits confessedly useful, a superior degree
of excellence. I recollect, some years since, perusing a volume written by
Madame de Genlis, which contained a circumstantial account of an institution,
that would, if I mistake not, could I transcribe it accurately, exactly
illustrate my meaning. Unfortunately, Madame de Genlis is not in my library;
and a sketch, drawn from a memory not remarkable for its tenacity, will be
necessarily imperfect. However, without aiming at the method or language of
this admired lady, it may be sufficient for my present purpose, if I am able to
preserve the most prominent features of a narration that gave me much pleasure
at the time, and indelibly impressed on my mind a high sense of the utility of
an expressly specified public recompense for eminent or singular virtue.

The institution, which is beautifully and elegantly commemorated in the pages
referred to, received its establishment at a very early period after the
commencement of the Christian era; It was the growth of Salency, a village in
Piccardy, and owed its being to a St. Medard, who was a native of that peaceful
hamlet, and sole proprietor of the territory. Surely, the mind of this St.
Medard must have been chaste, elegant, and highly susceptible of every virtue.
But those amateurs of excellence, who have not traced the Festival of the Rose
in the highly embellished writings of the French authoress, are here presented
with an opportunity of judging for themselves.

The institution is called, the Festival of the Rose: The prize contended for,
is annually furnished -- this prize is a hat, fancifully decorated with roses
-- and the elevation it confers, enhances its value far beyond all price. The
candidates for this expressive emblem are females -- it is always the reward of
indisputable superiority -- all claims but those of virtue, are inadmissible --
the distinctions which originate in the gifts of fortune, beauty of person, or
grandeur of descent, involve not the smallest pretensions to this honorary meed
-- and it is invariably adjudged by the voice of impartiality. The ceremonies
attendant on the investiture, are said to be the most ancient which are now
extant. Many centuries have witnessed its influence, and have reaped from its
excitements the most substantial benefits. Three village maidens are proclaimed
candidates for the ensuing year; and the ancestors of these girls must be, for
many preceding generations, persons of irreproachable lives and unimpeached
manners. What an irresistible motive is thus furnished for the observance of
every rule of right! The desire of descending with honor to posterity, and of
surviving even the icy darts of death in our offspring, is, I presume, inherent
in every mind; and the knowledge, that a scrutinizing investigation of our
actions would annually succeed, even after we had ceased to be visible upon
this globe, would indubitably insure a more general and exact circumspection of
conduct.

The claims of the three lovely competitors, when established by meritorious
ancestry and personal worth, are formally presented to the Lord of Salency,
whose office it is, to elect from this trio, the candidate whose conduct, on a
strict investigation, he shall regard as the most faultless. Every considerable
action is brought to view; the best possible information is sought; witnesses
are heard; circumstances are compared; the most upright conclusions are formed;
and the Lord of Salency proceeds to proclaim the beauteous paragon, queen of
the approaching year. Nor is his task invidious; for emulation, in the bosom of
females, whose minds are properly turned, and who are educated with such
splendid expectations, never degenerates into envy -- they are sensible that an
election must be made -- they are within the circle of excellence -- it is
glorious to be considered as a candidate -- to make one of such a trio, they
have stood upon the verge of perfection -- another year may witness a
confirmation of their claim -- they have only to commence anew their efforts --
those efforts which the corrosive murmurs of discontent would forever blast --
and they hesitate not to join the acclamations, which responsive hail the
lovely competitor. Many days previous to the ceremony attendant on a bestowment
of the prize, the name of the successful candidate is publicly announced, and
the sacred aisles reverberate her praises; a certain day in the year is
appropriated to the celebration of this festival; its revolution is rendered
important, by the reward it confers on virtue, and it is graced, by every
effort of rural taste. It is selected from the vernal season -- its pleasures
are long anticipated, and its dawn is marked by all the fervor of youthful
expectancy, sanctioned by the matured complacency of lengthening years. To the
sequestered haunts of virtue, the Lord of Salency shapes his path, and he
enters, with a kind of veneration, a cottage which has reared to maturity such
transcendent excellence; he receives the hand of the daughter of worth, and he
conducts her, who is arrayed in all the charms of triumphant modesty, to
receive the reward, deliberately and righteously adjudged to merit.

The rays of royalty have sought to cast over this institution, additional
luster. A monarch of France, persuaded of its beneficial effects, and charmed
with its simplicity, dispatched a favorite nobleman, who was commissioned to
present to the matchless maid a ring of value, with a ribbon of expressive
blue; and from this epoch the crown of roses is adorned by a blue ribbon, which
flows therefrom in graceful streamers; while amid the time honored wreath, a
ring obtains a conspicuous situation; and the chosen maidens, who are selected
to make up the train of the queen, wear on their shoulders a blue ribbon in the
manner of a scarf; thus carefully preserving the memory of an attention, which
they naturally regard as truly dignifying. The queen, on the day of her
coronation, is distinguished by every possible mark of elevation; the
procession is interestingly and pleasingly affecting; the new elected sovereign
is attended by twelve young girls, arrayed in white garments, and decorated by
blue ribbons fancifully disposed; twelve youths, who likewise wear the uniform
peculiar to the day, form her escort. She is preceded by bands of vocal and
instrumental music; and the commencement of the procession is announced by the
martial, deep toned, and animating sound of the drum. The streets of the happy
village are lined by long and thick ranges of admiring spectators, who are
collected for the purpose of rendering to merit the voluntary homage of the
heart. Through these ranks the dignified maiden passes along -- every tongue
joins to applaud, and spontaneous benedictions mark her footsteps. On the lips
of the surrounding matrons dwells the eulogy of discretion -- assembled fathers
hail the auspicious era; they recount the meritorious maidens whom they have
seen thus triumphantly conducted to the fane of virtue, they compare the
present with the past, and, divested of every particle of misanthropic rancour,
they mingle in the mirthful train.

In the center of the temple, a consecrated seat is converted into a kind of
temporary throne, which, adorned with more than regal splendour, receives the
elevated nymph. Religious rites succeed, which having performed, the venerable
clergy lead the van, and the Lord of Salency, taking the hand of the elected
lady, is joined by her appropriated train, and followed by the populace, who in
goodly numbers throng the streets, while loud and continued acclamations are
heard, until they reach the chapel of St. Medard, when a sudden and affecting
silence pervades the whole of this promiscuous multitude. The officiating
clergyman then holding in his hand the emblematically decorated hat, with a
solemn and affecting tone of voice, pronounces thereon a blessing. He
expatiates with devout energy on the ways of wisdom, they are indeed strewed
with flowers. Behold how bending thousands prostrate at the shrine of virtue;
see how well, even in this life, her votaries are rewarded; observe how lovely
is her appearance; she is captivating as the morning of life, beautiful as
heaven, and graceful as the daughters of paradise. Thus proceeds the man of
God, still holding the crown of roses, while the enchanting maiden kneels at
his feet. What an elevating and truly interesting scene! how deep must be the
impressions of such a moment! what noble incentives to rectitude are hereby
furnished (...) the spectators are universally affected; the humid drop
glitters in every eye; while not a heart but melted by the sweet and persuasive
voice of truth, seems to experience on the spot, the intuitive glow of
virtue. Religion appears enrobed in loveliness; a kind of pious awe is
conspicuous in every countenance; while the priest, having in a dignified,
animated, and solemn tone of voice, completed his pathetic eulogium, places
upon the meritorious head, that crown which in the estimation of reason, is of
more intrinsic value than all those splendid gems that ever yet encircled the
brow of royalty. The solemn act of coronation thus decently and properly
performed, a Te Deum commences, in the course of which, the procession is again
formed; and the blooming sovereign, attended as at the first, and distinguished
by her well earned crown, enters once more the church; and, proceeding to the
middle of the choir, takes her stand as before, exhibiting, until the
conclusion of the service, an example of modest and genuine devotion.

The rites of public worship being concluded, our young queen has next to
receive the renewed homage of an affectionately attached and crowded audience,
who attend her to a consecrated spot, fitted up by the hand of rural elegance,
in which beautiful recess, this daughter of excellence, and queen of innocence,
is met by duteous and expecting subjects, who approach her with those simple
gifts that make up the riches of the village swain, and which she receives as
the voluntary tribute of well disposed loyalty. She is then escorted with the
same demonstrations of respect, to her usual place of residence, where it is at
her option to spread for her noble conductor and his retinue, the feast of
innocence. This feast consists of all those rural delicacies which are in the
gift of elegant simplicity; and the healthful viands, disposed by the hand of
taste, constitutes a^ repast, becoming the hilarity of virtue, and well suited
to the guests, who are summoned to partake thereof. If I mistake not, Madame de
Genlis informs us, that there have been instances, where the crown of roses has
been, for many successive years, decreed to the same individual candidate,
until, perhaps, (for the diminution of virtue so illustrious, could not but be
marked with exquisite regret) the lovely model had sunk the claims of
maidenhood, in those more complicated duties, which are involved in the
dignified character of a matron.

If it should be imagined that our fair authoress in the recital, from which
the foregoing particulars are recollected, is leading us over the enchanting
grounds of fiction, it is still capable of improvement; and the scheme,
although the offspring of imagination, may, nevertheless, when made the subject
of legislative consideration, suggest hints, and be productive of plans,
friendly to the cause of every species of excellence. From conspicuous rewards
of merit, the female world seem injudiciously excluded. To man, the road of
preferment is thrown open -- glory crowns the military hero -- the bar, the
pulpit, the medical career, the husbandman, the merchant, the statesman, these
all have their points of eminence; and virtue, blended with first rate
abilities, may conduct their possessor even to the Presidential Chair of the
United States. But the sex, agreeably to existing regulations, can enjoy but
secondary or reflected fame; and he, who shall be happy enough to add a new
motive, to those virtues which are natal in the female bosom, will,
undoubtedly, deserve well of mankind.

On this subject I am reminded of an observation I lately heard from the lips
of one of the most valuable of our countrymen. In our hostile fields he
continued a long tried and well approved veteran; and his victorious arm, since
the completion of the revolution, has been employed in quelling an audacious
insurrection. In the bosom of peace he is a respectable and illustrious
citizen, actively engaged for the promotion of the general weal; his leisure
hours are, nevertheless, devoted to literary pursuits; and his well written
manuscripts, will, I pleasingly believe, enrich this younger world with a
number of truly elegant and useful productions. This Christianized sage
observed, -- He had often thought that in proportion as the female proficient
advanced in the career of excellence, in exact such proportion she regained her
superiority in the scale of being. "It is evident," said he, " that the woman
was originally the head of the man, for thus the sacred text pronounces -- The
consequence of thy transgression shall be, that thy husband shall rule over
thee," from whence he inferred, that, previous to her declension, she was
invested with sovereignty; otherwise, her supposed punishment must have been
considered as an unmeaning parade of words.

Perhaps the desire of sway attributed to females, may invest this idea with a
powerful stimulus to propriety of conduct; and yet I should question the
stability of a superstructure erected upon such a foundation. But I am,
nevertheless, free to own, that if I cannot implant intrinsic worth, I have
imagined, that even the semblance thereof bestows upon society a fairer polish,
and is attended by more salutary consequences, than a total neglect of
appearances. For if the conduct, from whatever motive, is irreproachable, and
the turpitude of the heart is confined therein; it is the individual alone who
can be considered as the sufferer.

No. LV.
Fortune to arduous efforts sometimes yields,
And in her arms the bold adventurer shields;
An enterprising genius fond to bless,
Her gilded domes she gives it to possess.

HAD indulgent Heaven entrusted me with the care of a young family, I should
have been solicitous to have implanted in their opening minds, as early as
possible, a fervid wish for as great a share of independence, as might have
consisted with that subordination, in which they were designed to move. He,
whose principal funds of enjoyment are securely laid up in his own breast, can
draw his bills without the encumbrance of formalities; and, as he will be in
little danger of making false calculations, he will rarely ever find them
protested. A spirit of independence naturally involves an attempt to call into
action those efforts, from which the respectable establishment at which we aim,
must generally result; and he, who possesses ability to shape his own fortune,
provided integrity is the main spring of his movements, will assuredly find the
justice of his claims upon the esteem of mankind fully acknowledged.

I should not be so anxious respecting the particular employments of my
children, if their avocations were reputable, as that their talents and
qualifications might be such, as would give them to fill their stations with
advantage to those with whom they were connected, and with honor to
themselves. An attempt to bias the mind of a child, can hardly be justified by
reason: Nature should make her choice; and the parent, with all those aids he
may be able to command, should implicitly follow her direction. Yet, while I
acknowledge the propriety of such a procedure, I am free to own, that ambition,
irresistibly operating in my bosom, would spontaneously point my views to the
learned professions; and was the suffrage of my wishes decisive, I should
certainly qualify my son to take upon him the duties of an able lawyer. I am
aware that it is commonly supposed such an election is unfriendly to the
morality of the individual thus appropriated; but, I am very far from adopting
this prejudice; it is unquestionably rational to conclude that he who is
constantly occupied in the contemplation of right and wrong, in weighing the
merits of the various pretensions which may come under his observation, will
find his understanding enlarged and informed -- will learn properly to
appreciate; and if his mind is rightly turned, he will naturally become
enamoured with the beauties of virtue, and evince an utter dereliction of vice.
Some of the first characters which America has to boast, are selected from the
bar; and at the head of those distinguished luminaries who have deserved the
eternal gratitude of their country, figures that truly illustrious patriot, It
is perhaps unnecessary to observe, that this Essay was written previous to the
accession of th^^ illustrious personage to the presidential chair.
John Adams, Esquire. Vice President of the Union; a man who is not only the pride
and ornament of Columbia, but who is also rendered, by his rare abilities,
highly eminent amid those celebrated nations of the elder world, where science,
virtue and patriotism invariably command the meed of well-earned applause.

I once knew a lawyer, (but he is now dead to me) nature had stamped upon his
breast her most exquisite sensibilities. Integrity, too, was the prime source
of his actions; he would never accept an exorbitant fee; he uniformly refused
to cloud the pure atmosphere of his understanding, by those pleas which are
condensed in defense of a bad action; and as he was constantly the advocate of
virtue, if he ever lost a cause, the odium rested either with the jury, or with
those honorable Judges, to whose special verdict the decision was referred.
About the skirts of his heart no chicanery ever hung; and while he possessed an
infinitude of ready wit, in the most intricate pleadings which he was ever
necessitated to deliver, he uttered no sentence which originated in sophism, or
which would not bear the closest investigation of reason.

Quickness of perception, brilliancy of imagination, fluency of expression, and
pointed wit -- these are among the qualifications which he ought to possess,
who would assume this important profession; nor can the young novitiate attain
to any considerable degree of eminence, however fervid his pleadings may be, if
those requisites are not, in some measure, inherent in his nature. But when
these are all embodied, led on by judgment, and retained in defense of truth,
what can resist their progress? An action may be sometimes so intricate, as to
require the best informed judgment to develope its complexure; and yet it is
true that a sudden thought may turn the whole course of the pleadings, which,
from apparent necessity, had almost extorted a manifestly cruel, or, perhaps,
in effect, unrighteous verdict.

Doubtless, my readers have frequently admired the pleadings of the ingenious
Portia, in the Merchant of Venice. Suffering the terrors of apprehension for
the worthy Antonia, we are ready, in his favor, to break the staff of justice,
and to violate those laws by which the sacred bands of government are closely
bound, and all its salutary and essential rights protected. We listen with
eagerness to the newly announced advocate; and we experience a degree of horror
while we hear him pronounce, that the Venetian law cannot deny the forfeit:
that there is no power in Venice can alter a decree, etc. etc. Yet we are
soothed by his beautiful expostulation -- The quality of mercy is not strained;
it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven, upon the place beneath. It is twice
blessed; it blesses him that gives and him that takes. But the sentence is
passed! -- Antonia must prepare his bosom for the knife! and we are ready to
wish ourselves possessed of the power of the basilisk, that so we might dash
from existence the inhuman Shylock, who stuns us by his vociferations. A Daniel
come to judgment; yea, a Daniel. O wise young judge, how I do honor thee, etc.
But if our indignant feelings are wrought up to the highest pitch, how
exquisitely gratifying is the instantaneous transition; and how do we echo
those applauses bestowed on the disguised Portia, when she emphatically
proceeds to say, Take thou thy pound of flesh; but in the cutting, if thou do
shed one drop of Christian blood, thy lands and good, are, by the laws of
Venice, confiscate, etc. Thus, upon a single thought, obvious when conceived,
the scene of death is changed; justice preserves her sacred rights, and mercy
beams triumphant.

Every reflecting mind must have remarked how frequently the concatenation of
ideas associates remote resemblances, and under this influence, the
developement produced by Portia, brings to my recollection a little narrative
that I received from a person of intelligence and observation. It is not,
either in its process or object, so sanguinary as the tale arranged by
Shakespeare; yet, as in lieu of the enchantments of fiction, it connects the
credentials of truth, it may, in that view, as well as from the circumstances
it involves, arrest the attention of the reader.

A gentleman residing in one of the small towns in the neighborhood of the
city of Dublin, and possessing a genteel competency, not only supported the
reputation of an ancient family, but even added additional luster to those
claims his ancestors had possessed upon the esteem of mankind. He knew the full
value of the independence he enjoyed; and, although genuine hospitality, that
true Hibernian trait, sustained no diminution in his individual character (his
style of living being in fact munificent) he was yet well aware that the
observation of a regular system of economy was the surest foundation for the
continued exercise of that liberality which was inherent in his nature. Having
no offspring of his own, he had taken into his house a favorite nephew, who
naturally became the object of all those tender feelings and various emotions
that succeed each other in the bosom of a parent. His education was on the most
liberal plan; and every incitement to improvement was generously furnished. The
judicious arrangements which had been adopted, were crowned by success, and the
young gentleman attaining his twenty-first year, possessed a mind well
informed, admirably intelligent, and extensively accomplished. It was a
received opinion that he would succeed to his uncle's estates, and the youth
himself had imbibed, as a matter of course, these reversionary expectations.
The old gentleman was sensible of this consequence of his indulgent patronage,
and it became to him a source of anxiety. He saw it probable that his nephew,
entertaining an idea that a respectable establishment was already secured to
him, would aim at no meritorious achievement -- that he would devote himself to
a life of imbecile inactivity, supinely passing those hours which should be
marked by application, diligence and usefulness; and, solicitous to teach him
properly to estimate his own value; to rouse to action the energies of his
soul, and to open his views to those resources which depended entirely upon
himself -- he deliberated long, fondly struggling with that ardent affection
which nature had authorized, and habit confirmed. At length, however, he had
recourse to an expedient that was, perhaps, as singular as it proved
propitious; and on the evening of a serene day, devoted to literary ease, our
good old gentleman summoned his nephew to his closet, addressing him to this
effect:

"I think, Sir, it is now some months since you have written Man, and from your
first dawn of being, I have still supported you. Nature has furnished you with
solidity of understanding, and she has connected therewith great brilliancy of
imagination; nor have the aids of education been wanting. Perhaps my plans have
been too extensive; but the event will either furnish my acquittal, or fasten
upon my mind a conviction of error. I have hitherto discharged to you, Sir, the
part of a parent; you have been in all respects distinguished as though you had
been in fact my son; yet you are not my son; you are only my brother's son. You
possessed no legal claims upon me, but I have qualified you to shape your own
fortune, and that too in a reputable and genteel line of life: You know, Sir,
that the necessary steps have been taken to furnish you with credentials for
your appearance at the bar -- those credentials you now possess; and your
future eminence rests wholly on your own efforts. But you are yet to learn that
from this night you are to look for no further aid from me! I have provided two
excellent horses, and an honest man to attend you in quality of a servant. With
tomorrow's sun you must depart for Dublin, there to take such steps for your
reputable establishment as your deliberate and best informed judgment shall
dictate. Here are twenty guineas -- they will serve you till you come to some
decision. I sincerely wish you success; but whatever may be your circumstances
or exigencies, expect no further favor from me, nor ever reckon on another
shilling of my fortune. This is the last time I will ever meet you until you
are invested with that property and respectability which shall give you a right
to the independence that abilities like yours ought ever to command. Neither
will I, until that period shall arrive, hold with you the smallest intercourse.
This hour I draw the separating veil; and I am, with regard to you, to all
intents and purposes, as if I had ceased to exist! Farewell, young man! May God
go with you, and may the blessings of virtuous industry rest upon your head."

The careful, the paternal friend, having thus uttered himself, (to conceal
emotions which he had till that moment governed) rushed instantly from the
closet, and sought shelter in the retirement of his bedchamber; while the
young man, sinking under a thousand mingling sensations, and almost petrified
by astonishment, passed the night in a manner which may be better imagined than
delineated. He, however, knew his uncle too well to remonstrate; and, actuated
by disappointment, tender regret, and perhaps a tinge of resentment, with the
early dawn he bid adieu to that native village, and to those sweetly rural
haunts, which, from his infantile days, had been to him an Eden of delight;
where he had imaged all that he conceived of bliss, and sketched such years of
happiness, as never yet revolved since paradise was forfeited by man's
transgression.

The reader who is sufficiently interested to pass on to the next Essay, may
attend to the sequel.

No. LVI.
Fortune may flutter on a ready thought,
And be, by one attempt, forever caught.

DEJECTED, forlorn, and almost despairing, our young adventurer reached Dublin.
A spacious inn afforded him shelter; but, ah! how dissimilar to that paternal
mansion he had perforce relinquished! He wished for a retired apartment, and he
requested to see the landlord. The host entered; and the eye of our sorrowful
youth immediately marked a fixed melancholy which seemed to brood in every
feature of his face. Softened by what he then conceived the most dreadful of
misfortunes, his sympathetic feelings were easily arrested, and he
spontaneously questioned -- "What is the matter, landlord?" The landlord,
unlike to other landlords, was not disposed to be communicative; he returned an
ungracious answer, and as if to avoid further interrogation, abruptly quitted
the apartment. " This poor man," said our young proficient in the school of
adversity -- " this poor man is afflicted; affliction is fond of society; I
will court his confidence, nor will I yield the pursuit until I have extorted
the secret of his sufferings." Again he rang, and again summoned the landlord,
who, with the sam^ wo-begone countenance, made his second appearance. "Suffer
me, Sir, to repeat my inquiries; I am not actuated by idle curiosity, but
calamity seeks companionship; I, too, am a son of sorrow, and we may possibly
aid each other." " No, Sir," returned the landlord, "aid is out of the
question; but my story is easily told, and it is too notorious for me either to
expect or with concealment.

"This inn, Sir, with all that it contains, was once mine. The traveller, each
day, contributed to augment my honest gains, and I deemed myself beyond the
reach of indigence. But, alas! on one fatal evening, three gentlemen,
apparently possessing integrity, and abounding in affluence, took apartments
under this roof: They were engaged in a lawsuit, and they had claims to
establish, which required time to investigate. They deposited in my hands a
large bag of gold, to an immense amount, obtaining my promise that I would not
deliver it, except the where party united to demand it. Some weeks had
succeeded this transaction, when, going abroad in the morning, as I imagined to
prosecute their business, one of the associates returned in great agitation,
conjuring me to produce the gold, affirming that their cause was brought on,
that they should obtain a verdict on that day, and, if they were not possessed
of the immediate means of gratifying their advocates, it would be lost for want
of the necessary efforts in their favor. In a moment of weak credulity, I
yielded up the deposit, nor was apprized by a single foreboding of the ruinous
consequences, until the return of evening brought the other two coadjutors. I
met them with a face of congratulation, concluding they had obtained a
fortunate decision; but judge of my surprise when I learned that many days
would probably elapse, before they could be gratified by a hearing, and that
they had not yet made their arrangements. My astonishment was beyond
expression; yet I was not apprehensive of the consequences to myself. Conscious
of my own integrity, I simply related the truth, and asked them what steps they
would take? With abundance of sang-froid, they replied, they had no steps to
take -- they had delivered a sum of money to my care, obtaining my promise that
it should continue as a deposit, not to be relinquished but at the united
demand of the parties concerned; and that, of course, they should assuredly
require it at my hands! Nothing could exceed my consternation; they delayed not
to make their requisition, and they took care it should be attended by the
legal formalities. Neither my abilities nor my inclination admitted of a
reimbursement so unjust. I made application to council, and was flattered by a
certainty of a favorable issue. An action was speedily commenced. Pleadings
have been heard, and lawyers' fees, together with many etceteras have exhausted
my resources. I have been barbarously pillaged -- tomorrow is the day
appointed for a final hearing -- ruin stares me in the face; and if I escape
imprisonment for life, both myself and family must be turned out houseless
wanderers, commencing in the evening of our days, the sad progress of indigence
and beggary!"

"You are then positive that judgment will go against you," replied the young
novitiate. "O, most undoubtedly," cried the landlord, "the law, I am told,
cannot be wrested in my favor." "Permit me," returned our adventurer, "to
obtain your confidence; you behold, in me, a person qualified to take upon him
the part of an advocate for the oppressed; and, if you will join me to your
council, I feel assured that your affair will terminate happily." "What, Sir,"
exclaimed the landlord, "are you seeking the gleanings of those hard earned
gains, which your wealthy brethren have so rapaciously plundered? No, Sir, I
have no more pieces to squander; and I should not be sorry, if I knew I should
never more behold the face of one of your mercenary profession."

The young man, allowing for the petulancy of a person, who apprehended himself
on the eve of becoming the victim of misfortune, pointed by injustice, mildly
returned -- "It is necessary, landlord, in order to your being considered as my
client, that I receive a retaining fee. I have, in my own mind, no doubt of
obtaining a successful issue to your business; one guinea, however, will be
sufficient; and if I do not procure a verdict in your favor, I pledge my
honor that I will return it." The landlord drew up a heavy sigh -- " You look
like an honest man -- you may be an honest man -- God forbid that I should ever
suspect an honest man. Here, take it -- it is my last piece, and may it redeem
its master's property."

Matters thus adjusted, the eventful morning at length dawned; the court was
assembled, and the advocates for the plaintiffs and defendant prepared to call
into action their most energetic abilities; while a respectable jury, arranged
in due form, stood fixed in mute and solemn attention. The council for the
plaintiffs urged, that the deposit had absolutely been made, and a promise
obtained that it should remain as a sacred trust -- they expatiated eloquently
and learnedly on these facts; and they concluded with a solemn appeal to the
jury, praying for a grant of that restitution, which they so justly demanded.
The council for the defendant endeavored to invalidate those affirmations,
insisting on the expediency of stronger proofs. It was their plan to perplex,
by cross examination, and at any rate, to procure a suspension of the final
determination. In short, it became evident that law, and apparent justice, were
for once constrained to appear in opposition to a decision, which the unbiassed
equity of every mind would have unhesitatingly pronounced; and no hope for the
poor, despoiled, and betrayed landlord seemed to remain.

Just at this juncture our young gentleman produced himself at the bar. It was
his first pleading, and his mien and gestures were marked by a graceful and
prepossessing diffidence. His diploma was unquestionable, and he was announced
as an advocate for the defendant. A confused murmur pervaded the court; and the
council, on both sides, betrayed unequivocal marks of disapprobation. It being,
however, beyond their power to contest his credentials, he was permitted to
proceed; and, with a modest assurance, he concisely delivered his sentiments.

"My lords, and gentlemen of the jury -- I stand up as council for the
defendant; and to avoid giving this honorable court, and this respectable
jury, any further trouble, we divest ourselves of every subterfuge -- we
acknowledge the justice of the pleadings of the council for the plaintiffs --
we freely acknowledge the deposit, and the conditions on which said deposit was
made; which conditions were, that no part of the property should be returned,
without the presence of the parties severally interested; and whenever the
three individuals, from whom we received the trust, shall all unite to make the
demand, precisely conformable to the letter of the obligation, into which we
entered, we are ready to deliver up the whole of the deposit, with which we
were charged."

Astonishment immediately molded the features of the court; the extricating
expedient was so simple, so obvious, so exactly conformable to the letter, as
well as spirit of equity, and in the same moment so replete with protection to
the upright but too credulous landlord, that it was wonderful it had not before
occurred. But it is hardly possible to give an idea of the unbounded joy of an
Irish populace, assembled upon such an occasion. Their sympathetic feelings had
irresistibly engaged them on the side of the suffering host, who it seems had
uniformly sustained the character of an honest man. Loud and affecting
applauses reverberated from every quarter -- they embraced the young advocate
in their arms -- they would have borne him to his lodging upon their shoulders,
and they could hardly be prevailed on to remit these clamorous testimonials of
their approbation. The landlord -- but agreeably to my usual custom, on every
of these occasions, I very freely bequeath the delineation of his transports,
and his gratitude, as an exercise for the imagination of the susceptible reader.

To our young adventurer, the high road to fame and fortune was now thrown
open; handsome gratifications were poured in from every quarter -- he ascended
with rapid steps the hill of eminence, and he soon became enriched beyond his
most sanguine expectations. The whole of the judicious plan, laid by his
venerable, his paternal friend, now became obvious to his understanding; he
sighed to embrace once more the hand of him, who, having endowed him with
capability, had compelled him to those movements, from which originated his
splendid fortunes; and ordering, upon a remarkable fine morning, a superb
equipage, he took his way to his native village, attended by every vestige of
that independence, which his uncle had made the condition of their future
intercourse. The shades of evening brought him to those well known haunts,
where he found the good old man, reclining in an arbor, which formed a fit
recess for age and contemplation. With expressions of grateful, duteous and
unbounded affection, he instantly prostrated himself at the feet of this
venerable parent, (whom he properly and pathetically hailed as his guardian
genius) and his reception exceeded his fondest hopes.

The old gentleman evinced his wonted firmness and dignity of character; but
these prominent traits were, however, blended with all a father's tenderness.
Having raised his nephew, he clasped him to his bosom -- "You are welcome, my
son -- right welcome to these aged arms, and to this, your rightful heritage --
Think not you have any information to give me -- the faithful being, whom I
bestowed on you as a servant, has been my constant correspondent; and, in
consequence of my instructions, he has proved a close observer of your actions.
No movement has been concealed from me: and my emotions almost deny me
utterance, while I pronounce that I know, and I approve."

This respectably venerable sage continued, to life's extreme, a complacent
witness of the elevation and confirmed celebrity of his nephew; and ere he
closed the scene of mortality, his last rational act pronounced this son of his
adoption the sole heir of all his possessions. Those of my readers who are
acquainted with the private history of the celebrated Mr. Delany, one of the
most able and eminent law practitioners in the city of Dublin, will readily
recognize these outlines.

No. LVII.
Perhaps he never saw the kindred line --

I PITY, from my soul, every candidate for literary fame! If they are warm in
the pursuit, and engaged with ardour in the profession of their election -- if
they are industrious in their application, and unoffending in their subjects,
diligently laboring to endow them with every valuable property, of which they
are susceptible -- if the precepts they inculcate are enforced by the example
of their own lives -- if they do and are all this, they certainly have much
merit, and are entitled to no stinted share of that applause, for which they
are probably solicitous. But alas! how are their steps environed with peril!
their family, their education, their persons, their characters -- these all
become standing subjects of conversation! while their matter, and their manner,
are regarded as free plunder, and the invidious critic is deaf to the voice of
candor!

What author but trembles at the critic's lash! and how many are deterred from
the eventful path, by the apprehension of the lion in the way! And was real
merit soothed and encouraged, were faults detected and pointed out with
mildness, was strict impartiality observed, and justice always the aim, I, for
my part, should bid the lion roar on, wishing, very sincerely, that his terrors
might become properly influential.

It is the opinion of some persons of sound judgment and great abilities, that
nothing more is left for a modern writer, than to give a new dress to old
ideas; but great men are not infallible, and possibly this conclusion may be
rather hastily drawn. Solomon said " there was nothing new under the sun;" but
since the days of Solomon, what profound discoveries have been made; how
momentous, how honorary, and how useful! How have the arts and sciences
improved, and how has knowledge increased in the world. The use of the
loadstone -- printing, that capital vehicle of information -- the art of war,
meliorated by the composition and use of gunpowder, etc. etc. while hardly a
day passes, on the which novelty peeps not out.

It is, perhaps, true, that the heaviest charge preferred against literary
adventurers, is that of plagiarism: After an original thought, a hue and cry is
raised -- it is traced from author to author -- the cheek of innocence is
tinged with the indignant blush, excited by suspicions of fraud; and a group of
respectable characters are supposed to stand convicted of the high crime of
knowingly and wittingly purloining their neighbors goods.

To condemn, upon presumptive evidence, is both treacherous and cruel, and it
is a procedure which finds no place in the decisions of equity. I do not
contend that plagiarism is never practiced -- far from it; I believe it
constitutes the essence of many a volume, and that it is a kind of depredation,
which is too often the dernier resort of the scribbler; but I insist, and I can
produce proof positive of my assertion, that the charge of plagiarism is
frequently unfounded, and consequently unjust. Originality is undoubtedly rare,
and it is probable it will become still more so. A writer finds many subjects
touched, and retouched, if not wholly exhausted; and, should his abilities
embrace a new object, or even a novel arangement, he is condemned, ere he can
establish his hypothesis, however self evident it may be, to combat the giant
prejudice, to wage war with a host of cavillers, to oppose himself to the
burnished shafts of criticism, and to withstand the secret machinations of
envy. But, every discouragement notwithstanding, I humbly conceive there is
much more originality in the world, at this present time, than is commonly
imagined.

What, I would ask, constitutes originality? or, in other words, cannot an
original thought be twice conceived? Let not the critic sneer, before he
permits me to explain myself. An idea is expressed in conversation, and a
stander-by declares -- " I had this moment the same thought, Sir." Query: In
whose bosom was the idea original? Suppose, that in the days of Homer, there
had arisen, in the wilds of America, or in any other remote part of the globe,
a genius, who had delineated every idea of that immortal bard, who had painted
the charms of another Helen, arming monarchs and heroes in the licentious cause
of a perfidious woman! whose fertile brain had teemed with other Hectors,
skilfully opposing them to that Achillean arm, which was nerved for their
destruction; suppose his sentiments, his similies and expressions had been
nearly similar; and, (since nature, liberal in her operations, might have
produced a second prodigy, the suggestion cannot be justly said to wear the
features of impossibility) suppose proof irrefragable had been furnished, that
not the smallest intercourse had subsisted between these children of indulgent
munificence, and that they had not even a knowledge of each other's existence;
should we not, in such an arrangement, have characterized both bards, as
possessing original excellence?

For my own part, I am so far from regarding it as wonderful, that a similarity
of talents should exhibit a similarity of ideas, and even of expressions, that
I am really astonished such similarity is not more frequently demonstrable. Let
us reflect for a moment -- Two beings, endowed with strong understandings and
clear perceptions, are educated in different and far distant parts of our
world; but their language, their government, and particularly their religion is
the same; from the same decalogue their precepts are drawn; virtue is the goal
to which they are pointed, and from one source every excitement to virtue is
educed. Maturity is at length attained; and, setting down to contemplate a
given subject, ought they to be accused of plagiarism, although their
productions receive a kindred stamp?

The good divine, whose mind has been early imbued from that identical fount
at which his cotemporaries have quaffed, receives a like education, and like
academical honors; and with religious sentiments exactly corresponding with
his brethren, he mounts the pulpit, and opens the sacred book, ordained at once
a standard of his testimony, and the origin from whence he is to deduce those
momentous truths, on which he is to expatiate. His text cannot vary, and he may
be a stranger to the flagitious crime of stealing, although the branches
growing upon one root, should resemble each other.

A writer may, without being a just subject of reprehension, enrich his page
with the most brilliant thoughts of another; he may himself be deceived; from
extensive and miscellaneous reading, scattered ideas, sentiments, and sometimes
sentences, are collected. The volume of memory contains many pages; and from
childhood to ripening and declining years, what multifarious images are
inscribed thereon. From this reservatory we naturally draw, and, it may
sometimes happen, that ideas deduced from thence, may be mistaken for original
productions of the mind.

I once had a friend -- were I at liberty to name him, every individual,
acquainted with his uncommon worth, would bow to his superior merit: Ah! how
have his fine qualities and gigantic talents been obscured by a train of
adverse circumstances, all pointed and brought home to his bosom, by a natural
propensity to melancholy. Unfortunate son of genius! I drop a tear over thy
present misfortunes, while I recollect, with unabating admiration, the radiant
commencement of thy career. I know it, dear Sir, this apostrophe is nothing to
the present purpose; and I sit corrected.

This poet (for a genuine poet he verily was) possessed a strong understanding,
with a correct judgment, and a glowing fancy; and, what is not commonly an
appendage to these advantages, his memory, also, was astonishingly retentive;
and he was as far removed from the practice as he was from the necessity of
plagiarism. Our bard, thus highly qualified, employed himself one morning in
penning a poetical epistle to a friend, whose abilities were respectable. The
epistle finished, forwarded and received, was perused with much surprise; for,
strange to tell, it contained a number of lines that were found verbatim in a
favorite author, with whose productions the person addressed had recently
furnished his library! and said lines bore on their margin no quotation marks!
It is the part of a sincere friend to point out a fault, and our poet was
questioned on the subject; he detested plagiarism, and positively (...) his
entire property in the problematic essay; but, (...) and to (...) -- the book
was produced, and the poet eagerly seizing it, cast his eyes on the title page,
which he no sooner traced, than instantly recognizing, he clasped it to his
bosom with all that strong enthusiasm and (...) which ever marked his
character. The volume proved an old acquaintance, which had been the delight of
his boyish days, and of which he had long been in pursuit; and it appeared,
that writing in a similar manner, and on the same topic, he had drawn those
lines from the storehouse of memory, where they had been many years safely
lodged, unconscious that the well adapted fugitives were not the true born
offspring of his own brain. Now this, gentle reader, is a kind of plagiarism,
if such it can be called, which cannot come under the description of fraud; and
whatever may be the effect of its operation, it is indisputably guiltless in
its source.

But, while I pledge my veracity for the authenticity of the foregoing
anecdote, I readily grant that circumstances seldom concur to produce events of
this complexion; and, conceding thus far, I expect that every person accustomed
to reflection, will unhesitatingly acknowledge the propriety of what I have
advanced, (viz.) that similarity of ideas and expressions, when the subject is
the same, may often originate in different minds, evidently obtaining in those
bosoms, where inborn integrity and conscious propriety had implanted so strong
a sense of right and wrong, as to create a just and spontaneous abhorrence to
whatever could, in the remotest degree, be denominated plagiarism. I had lately
an opportunity of conversing on this subject, with a female, to whom I am
naturally attached -- she has for many years been a scribbler, and she
feelingly lamented that she had repeatedly seen ideas, and complete sentences,
issue from the press, which had long been contained in her manuscripts, and
which she had flattered herself with the privilege of presenting, as original
thoughts! This, however, happened more frequent in her prosaic, than in her
poetical productions; yet, even in the last, she adduced some instances of
considerable similarity; from which, by way of illustration, and for the
amusement of the reader, I take the liberty to select two. On the 28th of
January, 1784, this penwoman wrote some lines on a particularly interesting
occasion, which lines contain the following simile: As the fond matron, while
the flame ascends,
Which her whole interest in one ruin blends,
Wildly exclaims -- Give me my infant train;
Possessed of them, the strokes of fate were vain:
'Scap'd from the wreck, she sees her girls and boys,
And one short moment perfect peace enjoys.


Early in the year 1784, copies of the whole of this poem were put into the
hands of several gentlemen, who may perhaps recollect it; but still it is only
a manuscript; and it is not until within a few months, that she has met with
that beautiful production, entitled, the Botanic Garden, the offspring of an
elegant European pen, first published in the year 1793; in which she observed,
in the following highly finished lines, the same thought.

" The illumined mother seeks with footsteps fleet,
" Where hangs the safe balcony over the street;
" Wrapped in her sheet, her youngest hope suspends,
" And panting, lowers it to her tip-toe friends:
" Again she hurries on affliction's wings,
" And now a third, and now a fourth she brings;
" Safe all her babes, she smooths her horrent brow,
" And bursts through bickering flames, unscorch'd, below."
Now it is demonstrably certain, that neither of these writers borrowed, or,
more plainly speaking, purloined from each other. Producing, therefore, the
foregoing lines as a proof in point, I proceed to the second instance. Previous
to her perusal of the Botanic Garden, she had been requested to write an ode on
a very affecting occasion: This ode was to be publicly chaunted, for the
benefit of a worthy young man; and it was an address to the benevolence of the
audience. It is not my design to give the ode entire; I only transcribe the
part which is necessary to introduce the lines that she imagined similar --
thus they are expressed: YE spirits bland, from heaven descend,
Around this hallowed temple bend,
With aspect all benign:
Philanthropy, firstborn of truth,
Of paradise the fairest growth,
Replete with powers divine.
Hovering around, we feel you press,
This consecrated fane to bless,
Its pious rites to guard:
Benevolence, religion twines
With blessed munificence designs,
And is its own reward.
Benevolence, whose genial sway
Commissioned has the newborn day,
And burst the pris'ner's chains --
Its progress can arrest despair,
Can smooth the furrowed brow of care,
While mild compassion reigns.
Thus, when enwrapt in Howard's guise,
To mortals lent from yonder skies,
And borne on mercy's wing;
The depth of human woe he sought,
With lenient balm assuaging fraught,
Returning light to bring -- etc. etc.


The ode was published; and the writer was some time afterward attracted by a
resemblance in the following energetic lines, found also in the Botanic Garden:
The spirits of the good, who bend from high
Wide over these earthly scenes their partial eye,
When first arrayed in virtue's purest robe,
They saw her Howard traversing the globe;
Saw on his brow her sun-like glory blaze,
In arrowy circles of unwearied rays.


Many are the instances, which, from my own individual experience, I could
record; and my volumes of manuscripts, that I was positive were enriched with
many original thoughts, from my delay to publish, have now, alas! been
generally forestalled. My plans, my ideas, my metaphors, ah, well-a-day! in
almost every thing I have been anticipated; and whenever my lucubrations are
presented, innocent as I am, the probability is, that I shall find myself
indicted in the high court of literature for the debasing crime of plagiarism!
Yet these Essays, although the offspring of many a careful hour, deducing very
possibly their highest charm from novelty, have now lost, even in my own
estimation, much of their power to interest and to please; and I do not, I am
free to own, very deeply lament their fate.

But a recent discovery having stripped of originality this my youngest born,
my pet, that I have cherished with such unremitted tenderness, culling for it
the fairest flowers, gleaning every sweet, and adorning it up to my best
abilities; and now to find, that after all, I have been rearing the bantling of
another! It is really almost too much for my philosophy to bear; nor can my
atmost equanimity prevent the hag vexation from adding another score to those
furrows, which time and disappointment have already so deeply indented!!!

No, I can never part with it -- still it is the child of my adoption, and I
must ever remain its protecting father. Sympathizing reader, I will tell thee
the story. Thou know how much I have prided myself upon the title of these
numbers: It was ample enough for my purpose; it was unassuming; yea, as humble
as the smallest particles which fall from the granary of the opulent dealer;
and yet by the wonderful force of its elastic power, it could extend itself
over the vast fields of science, wandering upon the superficies of the grounds,
and snatching those gems which are sometimes the reward of industrious
mediocrity.

It was, I have a thousand times said, a complete shield from every accusation
of literary theft. It was -- in short, it was abundantly commensurate with my
most sanguine wishes; and what, in my estimation, inexpressibly enhanced its
value, was, that I imagined it had never before been thus appropriated. Judge
then, what were my sensations, when, two days since, turning over a volume
written by Voltaire, I observed, among his account of literary publications,
the following paragraph, which, by way of exciting thy commiseration, I shall
transcribe, verbatim.

Miserable pamphlets! -- the Gleaner! -- the Faultfinder, etc. -- Wretched
productions! inspired by hunger, and dictated by stupidity and a disposition to
lying! etc. etc.

To find my boasted title thus unexpectedly flashed in my face; and to meet it,
too, coupled with infamy!!! -- But my feelings may be better imagined than
described; and the candid reader, while he acquits me of an instance of
plagiarism, so impolitic and so absurd, will not fail to sympathize with, and
to vindicate

The mortified GLEANER.

No. LVIII.
It Is not in wealth, or grandeur -- these have wings --
Earth's garish scenes no solid pleasure brings;
The giddy whirl, where dissipation treads,
Its magic spells around the flutterer spreads;
But sorrow waits, its victims sure to seize,
When mirth cannot assuage, nor folly please.

MANKIND are too prone to consider opulence and grandeur as synonimous with the
first enjoyments this world has to bestow; and every effort is made for the
purpose of assuming that style of living, which may produce us candidates for a
rank in assemblies that are frequented by persons who are pronounced the first
people in a village, a town, or a city. Alas! alas! how erroneous is this
calculation! Under the smiling countenance, which, to the superficial observer,
appears the seat of contentment, what woes, what clustering evils may rankle!
The broad laugh, descriptive of such extravagant marks of glee, why it may be
the frantic expression of despair; while those contemplative features, where
pensive reflection sits enthroned, may be the index of a mind attaining
tranquillity by viewing persons and things precisely in that arrangement which
ensureth complacency. Appearances, it is undeniably true, are not to be
trusted; and the experience of every day evinceth, that a superb house, rich
furniture, and splendid equipages, are not always infallible marks of the
affluence of their possessor.

My friend, Pelatiah Carewell, was returning homeward, after a wearisome
journey, taken for the disposal of some articles of traffic, for which his
frugality induced him to imagine he could not afford to pay the commissions
consequent on committing their sale to other hands. Nearly exhausted by
fatigue, he had hardly strength sufficient to urge forward his horse, who
seemed equally as dispirited as his master. He was in an open sleigh, on a very
rough road; it was in the inclement month of January, and the rude winds
buffetted those locks which time had plentifully sprinkled with venerable gray.
Thus was Carewell circumstanced, when a superb carriage, finished in the
highest taste, passed rapidly by him; the horses, richly caparisoned, were in a
foam; the curtains in the front of the carriage were closely drawn; it was
attended by two servants, whose livery was perfectly well known to Carewell;
and by a glance catched at the side glasses, he discovered a gentleman who was
the companion of his boyish years. They were natives of the same little hamlet,
were bred at one school, and began business with similar prospects. But
Claudius had left the rural seat of his ancestors, and for many years had
figured on a very large scale in the metropolis. He had been a noted
speculator, had dipped deeply in navigation, and had accounts open with every
capital house in and about the city. Carewell imagined the present expedition
of Claudius had for its object a visit of state to his aged parents, who still
continued at the village; and he reflected on the elevated situation to which
fortune had raised his quondam school-fellow, with sensations tinged with the
deepening hues of envy.

How partial, thought he, are the dispositions of what we term Providence; from
the hour in which I could write man, I have observed a uniform system of
economy; the beloved woman, who did me the honor to accept my hand at the
altar, has exemplified, through her whole life, a perfect model of discretion.
Frugality has been the order of our house: every unnecessary expense has been
absolutely precluded, and yet my circumstances are very moderate; and if I
would not leave pennyless those whom I have introduced into being, I am, in
advanced life, necessitated to continue those exertions, and that rigid
observance, which has attended me through my commercial career.

Claudius, on the contrary, entered on the privileges of manhood with marked
avidity; he plunged headlong into the stream of pleasure; he has never been
known to deny himself a single indulgence; his buildings are magnificent, his
furniture is in the highest style, his town and country houses are crowded with
servants, his dress is that of a nobleman, his equipages are multiplied and
splendid, and both himself and family are in the first line at every place of
public and private amusement. What, in the name of wonder, is the source of his
prosperity? and to what cause am I to trace my own comparative depression?

Such were the murmurings of Carewell; he drew up a heavy sigh, and gloomy
discontent pervaded his bosom. It was just at this juncture that the high
sheriff of the county passed him, as it seemed, in full chase! This was a
phenomenon that arrested the whole attention of Carewell; for an officer of
justice had never before been known to visit the peaceful hamlet of B --. His
curiosity urged him forward, and he had no sooner reached his own dwelling,
than he learned that Claudius had been taken into custody, just as he was
entering the door of that cottage in which he drew his first breath! that his
fine estates were all attached, and that it was supposed, upon an equitable
distribution of those possessions which Claudius had so nefariously obtained,
his numerous creditors would not receive a single shilling on the pound!!

Carewell dropped a tear over the errors and the misfortunes of Claudius. He
entered his little parlour -- neatness presided, the blazing hearth had
received the polish of industry, the kettle boiled for tea, the elbow chair was
placed in order, and Amanda, with open arms, and a smile of rapture, welcomed
his return. His children, too, crowded around him; and a little spruce waiting
maid, under pretense of arranging the tea apparatus, catched a peep; while a
domestic, who had grown gray in his service, took the opportunity of
replenishing the fire, to hail once more the benign countenance of his master.
Carewell seated himself -- his eyes and hands were raised to heaven, and
exclamations the most extatic burst spontaneously from his lips.

"This decent and completely finished tenement is my own; my income, combined
with my regular exertions, bestows on me the blessings of competency; every
thing about me is elegant: Amanda is the most amiable and tender of women: my
children come forward with dispositions that authorize the most pleasing
expectations; no man can advance a demand which I cannot immediately discharge.
What is show, pomp, and all the retinue of fashionable pleasures? real
happiness dwells not with them. Gaudy apparel, cards, plays, assemblies --
henceforth I spend no sigh on such frivolities. Contentment shall meet me in
the bosom of my family, and gratitude, eternal gratitude, shall raise her
altars in my breast."

Carewell and Claudius are contrasts which are strongly marked; but the
intervening shades are many, and from their example more than one useful lesson
may be deduced; the fallacy of appearances are strikingly exemplified, and we
learn to estimate the value of economy. We have said that profusion is not
generosity; and the propriety of this observation must be sufficiently obvious.
Many a time has the humane and well designing Eugenio been called to lament
that his extravagant benefactions to prostitutes, vagabonds, and parasites,
have prevented his bestowing small sums, that would have furnished honest
industry with the means of obtaining a livelihood. Society is not benefited by
the shilling I squander on him, who, depositing it in the next whisky or rum
shop, will issue thence a disgrace to his species, and probably in a state of
inebriety, which, rendering him incapable of attending to himself, may produce
him, with dislocated or broken limbs, a burden on the next parish. But how
clear are his claims on my property, who sues for the means of equipping
himself with the implements of agriculture, manufacture, commerce or
navigation. The truth is, the necessity of discriminating, must be apparent to
every sober observer. Principle, plan, regularity, economy, charity -- a wise
man will embody every of these requisites, and to their combined administration
he will constantly submit his movements.

Stories seem naturally to produce or grow out of each other; and a little
narration, although perhaps not exactly analagous to the foregoing
observations, floats, notwithstanding, amid the visions selected by fancy.

Flauntinetta was educated by the hand of discretion; but it is not always that
education can overstep nature, and Flauntinetta continued vain, silly, and
consequently devoted to all the vagaries of folly. She lost her father in her
infancy, who, reposing perfect confidence in the good understanding, integrity,
and tenderness of her mother, had left the whole of a very decent property at
her absolute and sole disposal; and committing also her daughter to her
direction, he had resigned into her hands the authority with which nature had
invested him. Flauntinetta was soon capable of calculating her mother's income;
she knew she was in easy circumstances, and her warm imagination represented
her funds as sufficient for every thing, which vanity and ambition had taught
her to consider but as reasonable appendages to a young lady of her figure and
rank, and who was, besides, an only child. Honoria had educated her daughter on
the most liberal plan; and, laboring to implant in her opening mind a
persuasion that the mere exteriors of pomp were beneath her attention, no day
past, in which she was not solicitous to instill some elevating principle or
meliorating truth. Flauntinetta, however, continued refractory; she sickened
for the haunts of dissipation; was never happy but when visiting or receiving
visits; and those public entertainments, which she was not permitted to
partake, were viewed with the deepest regret. Silks of the richest kind, laces
of the highest price, jewels, etc. etc. these all made a part of her
reprehensible wishes; and every maternal check produced an altercation, during
which she tacitly accused Honoria of mercenary motives, of undue severity, and
want of affection.

Honoria, while she assiduously endeavored to tu^^ her views into a right
channel, and to erect those cautionary guards, which her tenderness and her
anxiety convinced her were necessary, firmly persevered in prohibiting every
improper indulgence. She was a discreet as well as a fond mother; and her
affection was chastened by judgment. The circles in which she permitted her
daughter to mingle, passed individually under her judicious inspection; and
instead of the richly covered brocade or golden tissue, the genteel person of
Flauntinetta was habited in a neat, plain lutestring; her laces were chiefly
English rather than Brussels; and whenever her muslins were wrought, the
flowers were the result of her own industry. She was sometimes seen at a public
assembly, but more frequently at a play; and these amusements, with private
dancing parties, occasional visiting, and some rural excursions, during the
fine weather, constituted the routine of her diversions.

But these economical regulations were a constant source of vexation to
Flauntinetta. " See, mamma," she would exclaim, " how richly yonder lady is
habited; she looks divinely enchanting, and absolutely moves a goddess." "And
see, my dear," returned Honoria, "yon beauteous nymph, how exactly that plain
muslin is fitted to her elegant form; she is a lovely young woman; her
countenance is an index of serenity, and I could almost venture to pronounce,
that friendship, truth and honor, with every feminine virtue, are the
residents of her bosom." Still, however, Flauntinetta entirely disapproved her
mother's conduct; and she determined, whenever fortune should put it in her
power, to make herself large amends for the penurious discipline to which she
was, for the present, constrained to submit.

Thus rolled on the hours and days, which at length ushered in the destined
morn, equally dreaded by Honoria, and wished by Flauntinetta. It was the
morning that was to witness her espousals to a man of merit, and of handsome
property. The beauty of Flauntinetta had procured her an establishment, that,
had her mind corresponded with her person, would have been fully commensurate
with those fine qualities she would then have possessed. And Honoria, ere she
resigned that power over her daughter, with which nature and the confirming
arrangements of her husband had invested her, enforced with increasing ardour
all those excellent precepts she had so often inculcated; but Flauntinetta
heard her with alarming coldness, secretly resolving to disobey her in every
particular! and she was no sooner a housekeeper, than, rushing into the stream
of dissipation, she mingled with the most inconsiderate of its votaries, freely
indulging in amusements which reason and discretion refused to warrant. Over
the mind of her husband she obtained an entire ascendency, who was ready to
exclaim with Milton's Adam, That what she wills to do or say, seems wisest,
virtuousest, discreetest, best; all other knowledge in her presence falls
degraded.

Honoria still hovered round her, and like the matron bird would have pointed
out the danger; but the prudent regency of Honoria was no more; and
Flauntinetta, who had ever regarded her mother in a false point of view, now
triumphed in her liberty, constantly receiving the admonitions of her anxious
parent with an averted face, and such freezing expressions as would have thrown
the icy darts of death at any affection less than maternal. A period of five
years, however, terminated the career of vanity, and the catastrophe was truly
deplorable! Sickness followed in the train of poverty, and a melancholy and
premature death brought up the rear!

Flauntinetta, the long incorrigible Flauntinetta, became a widow; and both
herself and children were totally destitute!! It was in the moment of her
calamity, that the eyes of her understanding being opened, she consequently
beheld the revered guardian of her youth, adorned with every virtue which can
dignify humanity; and, once more sheltered under the maternal wing, she has,
at length, learned to estimate the value of rational tranquillity.

To Honoria she feels the weight of her obligations; but even delicacy
hesitates not to cherish and to avow the most unbounded gratitude to the source
from whence existence is derived; and she is frequent and fervid in her
acknowledgments, that she is indebted to the discretion and economy, which she
so often and so madly profaned; that her children have yet a parental dwelling;
that they are indulged with the means of education, and of making decent
figures in those circles, in which their birth and their expectations give them
a right to mingle.

No. LIX.
Virtue, however obscured, dwells in the mind;
The latent gem the richest polish takes;
When skilful hands the hidden treasure find,
On the glad eye its native splendour breaks,
Events as lapidaries often prove,
Displacing the extraneous earthy crust;
The blazing furnace can the dross remove,
While from the flames the stealing ingots burst.

TO develop the various avenues to the human mind, extensive knowledge of men,
as well as books, is necessary. Virtuous principles are sometimes so completely
muffled by vice, as not to emit even the most attenuated ray by which to
ascertain their existence; and it should be the business of those who are
skilled in the complicated windings of the heart, to make every effort to
reclaim its wanderings. Mild persuasion often procures the best effect; and
malignant passions are frequently mollified and duly attempered by acts of
kindness: Yet it is a melancholy truth, that there are individuals who are
proof against the interference of tenderness; and it is beyond a doubt, that in
such instances coercive measures become absolutely indispensable. Adversity
sometimes proves a powerful operator; it throws down the barriers reared by the
impious hand of atrocity; it breaks in pieces the nefarious purpose; it
assuages the tumult, and smooths the asperities of the soul; and it brings to
light and establishes those sentiments of virtue, which were prostrate in the
bosom. A well authenticated illustration of this truth is strikingly presented
in the records of a family, who have long been respectable dwellers in the
State of New Hampshire.

Mercator, an opulent gentleman, in the interior part of that division of our
country, beheld the wealth he possessed, and all the independence it conferred,
as the fruits of his own industry; and having in early life ate the bread of
carefulness, he knew how to appreciate the harvest, consequent on his laudable
exertions. He had laid in her grave the affectionate companion of his youth;
but he continued wedded to her memory, and two boys, the only surviving pledges
of their mutual love, shared equally the affections of his bosom. Their
education was precisely the same; but nature, true to herself, asserted her own
prerogative; and, in defiance of every rule of art, produced them perfect
contrasts to each other.

Acetus, the eldest, was a prodigy of vice! Depraved, to the utmost degree of
which humanity is capable, he seemed to know no joy but in the most daring acts
of atrocity; and it was wonderful that he stopped short of an ignominious
death. Yet, although highly criminal, he, however, possessed the most
insinuating address; and having the art to throw over his enormities the
transient veil of concealment, he had obtained, while on an excursion at a
distance from his native village, the heart of a truly amiable woman, whom he
wedded; and it was hoped that a virtuous connection would produce his
reformation. But ill habits are not easily corrected. The libertine too soon
threw off the mask; and the misfortunes of the ill-fated Matilda, with her two
beautiful children, were pronounced irremediable!

Adrastus, the younger son of Mercator, was industrious, frugal and discreet;
and with the exercise of generosity and every ennobling virtue, he was
familiar. To Acetus, as his eldest born, Mercator had appropriated the better
half of his possessions; and he pursued every method which involved the least
probability of rendering him worthy his name and family: Alternately he
remonstrated, soothed and threatened; but Acetus was inaccessible to every mode
of attack; and large sums, conferred by the indulgence of his father, instead
of being converted to the aid of an injured wife and her helpless innocents,
were devoted to the bottle, squandered at a gaming table, or lavished on
prostitutes! Mercator had but one step more to take: He assured Acetus, that
his succeeding to any part of his estates rested wholly on his total change of
conduct. Acetus smiled at the unmeaning threat. That Mercator should disinherit
him, he conceived, an event not contained in the chapter of possibilities; and,
confiding in the severely tried affection of his father, he disregarded this,
as he had every other previous measure, and persevered in the path of ruin!

Months rolled on. Mercator drew near the close of life; and, being in the full
exercise of his reason, he deliberately proceeded, in the most solemn manner,
to the constituting that testament, which, bequeathing to Adrastus, his
youngest son, his vast possessions, proclaimed that young man his sole heir,
and legally cut off all the prior pretensions and natural expectations of
Acetus! A few succeeding weeks placed Mercator upon his deathbed; and his
dissolution, accelerated, possibly, by the atrocious irregularities of his
enormously offending son, was speedy and unexpected!

The hopes of Acetus now utterly extinguished, all the energies of his soul
took the alarm; and despair, in his bosom, became the parent of the most
astonishing exertions! With a kind of sullen indignation, he strode from the
mansion of his late father, and making sale of the few movables which remained
to him, in a tenement constituting a part of the paternal estate, and now
devolving to his brother, he pathetically addressed the innocent victim of his
unwarrantable irregularities: "Go, my Matilda," in a tone of despondency he
exclaimed, "go -- return to the scene of thy better days -- I bless God that
thou have yet a father to shelter (...) -- Take these cherub children; bear
them to the author of thy being -- he will receive them -- he is indeed a
father -- Acetus has no more a dwelling -- I disdain the little moment that I
breathe under this roof! Leave me, my Matilda, sole object of my love and of my
commiseration -- leave, to his unparalleled miseries, thy wretched husband.
Acetus has not now the ability to provide for Matilda, or to succor her
infants." Through all the devious paths of vice, in which Acetus had so
daringly strayed, Matilda had never wholly lost that ascendency, which a mildly
virtuous woman so naturally maintains, even in the bosom of culpability; yet,
on this occasion, her tears and her remonstrances were ineffectual! On her
bended knees she supplicated him still to continue her the partner of the
woe-fraught scene -- but she supplicated in vain; and, well near sinking under
the mighty pressure of her calamities, she returned to that abode, which had
witnessed her early hopes and fears, and from whence, on the wings of
high-plumed expectation, she had so lately flown. But, to receive the hapless
wanderer and her lovely children, a father's wide extended arms, and still more
ample heart, were tenderly expanded; and she continued with this revered and
natural protector, a melancholy and beautiful model of sweet propriety.

Acetus, penetrating very far into the interior part of the country, laid out
what he had raised from the sale of his goods in uncultivated lands, which he
purchased at a low rate; and he immediately applied himself, with unremitted
diligence, to the felling trees, and all those preliminary arrangements, so
necessary upon new grounds. To all his bad habits, in one decisive moment, he
bid an eternal adieu; and suddenly he became that very Acetus, which the good
Mercator had, through a long succession of years, labored to produce. His
efforts were prodigious; what man, industriously intent upon emolument, could
accomplish, he assuredly did: But still he was alone; and having expended every
shilling he could command in his original purchase, he had not the means of
procuring laborers, nor could he obtain those additional grounds which were
highly necessary to the completion of his estate. It was at this juncture, that
the difficulties of his situation appeared to him in their most glaring
colors, when a blank cover supplied him with bills to the amount of one
thousand pounds! It was to no purpose that he diligently sought to investigate
the source of this opportune relief; and, in a manner equally mysterious, sums,
answerable to his real exigencies, were from time to time furnished.

At the expiration of a few years, Acetus saw himself enriched beyond his most
sanguine expectations. His grounds were extensive, remarkably productive, and
uncommonly well stocked. His buildings were multiplied, many of them elegant,
and all of them in excellent repair. Heaven smiled propitious on the reclaimed
prodigal, and all his enterprises were crowned by success.

In an elegant carriage, constructed for the occasion, Acetus appeared before
the paternal dwelling which had sheltered his Matilda. The tender mourner had
continued ignorant of the fate of her husband! Acetus was to be in all things
eccentric! Mechanically she approached the window -- she raised her humid eyes
-- Acetus issued from the carriage! -- "Gracious Heaven!" she exclaimed,
"continue my reason -- my Acetus approaches. My children, behold your father!"
In a moment she was in the arms of her husband! -- Acetus was restored to her
-- this circumstance was of itself calculated to render her, beyond expression,
happy -- But he was restored to virtue too -- and was become worthy, not only
of the tenderness of an affectionate wife, but of the approbation of reason,
and the esteem of every good person.

Acetus, accompanied by the father of Matilda, speedily removed his family to
his own ample and commodious seat. Arrangements, prescribed by discretion, and
sanctioned by reason, now took place. Matilda was the charming directress, and
happiness became the order of their lives. It was just one month after Matilda
was reinstated in all those privileges and immunities, to which she was in
every view entitled, that Acetus received the subjoined letter from his brother.

ADRASTUS to ACETUS.
NEVER, my Acetus, did a mere mortal experience more extatic feelings than I,
at this moment, luxuriantly enjoy. The night of mystery is passed, and the
morning of elucidation breaks upon us -- Acetus shall no more continue
estranged from his Adrastus -- I am emancipated from my bonds -- events are
fulfilled, and concealment is at an end. Enclosed, you have the last solemn act
of our honored father, with all those papers which should be its
accompaniments. You will see it is written by his own hand -- that it is duly
witnessed and perfectly accurate. You will see, that conferring upon you a
legal claim to one half of all his possessions, it indisputably confirms your
natural right; and, you will also observe, that it is dated ten days later than
the instrument, under which I inherit. Being a spectator of the strong emotions
of his soul, while penning this last writing, a high sense of his paternal
goodness, and of his unalterable attachment to his Acetus, is indelibly
impressed on my bosom. Having completed the instrument, he enclosed it in an
address to me, which, with all imaginable solemnity, he put into my hands. I
transcribe it for your perusal: When we meet, the original shall be subjected
to your inspection.

"My son, my dear Adrastus, preserve this writing, and, as you value my
blessing, let no eye trace its contents, nor ear hear its purport, until the
full time shall arrive, which I have assigned for its operation; and, Adrastus,
observe me well, in proportion as you are faithful to me, and my poor
unfortunate wanderer, may the benediction of our God rest upon you. I doubt you
not, Adrastus; but a business of such importance demands all your integrity,
and the strongest energies of filial and fraternal affection. On my demise, let
the testament first ordained, which constitutes you my sole heir, come into
immediate operation -- let it not be suspected that there exists any other
disposition of my property; and, I charge you, Adrastus, be unto your brother
as his guardian angel -- observe, carefully, the effect which my supposed
severity will produce; if, as I flatter myself, it should rouse to action those
energies now dormant in his soul -- if it should blow to a flame the latent
spark of virtuous industry, follow him with such assistance as his wants and
his exigencies may require -- Permit a momentary struggle, but O! let it not be
unnecessarily severe, nor too long continued; and, above all things, keep him
in ignorance of the source, from whence he receives the benefits which you are
to confer. Every thing, my Adrastus, is entrusted to your discretion -- let it
not fail you in this, the most arduous transaction of your life! When years
have rolled on, and your brother shall be confirmed in habits of rectitude --
(and, at this moment, a holy confidence in the common Father of our spirits,
assures me that this period will eventually succeed) when he shall learn to do
justice to the virtuous Matilda -- when he shall have passed one irreproachable
month with that lovely and incomparable woman -- then -- and, by the sacred
authority of a father, I command you, not till then, let my last will be put
into his hands; let it be accompanied with a regular account of the interest,
which may have accrued on those possessions, which, but for his continued
irregularities, should have devolved to him at the period of my death; and,
after reimbursing yourself for the sums you may, from time to time advance, let
the full arrearages be delivered up.

"Thus, my Adrastus, while the sigh of anxiety swells my bosom, I repeat that I
have constituted you the guardian, during the continuance of his insanity, of
your unfortunate brother. My sons are equally dear to me. Acetus has wandered
in oblique paths; but Heaven will restore him, and the transporting event, even
in the region of blessedness, shall augment the enjoyments of your tenderly
attached father."

Well, my brother, you have read, and your feelings doubtless correspond with
the occasion; the bounty of our honored father has still followed you; his
paternal goodness has been the continued source of your emolument; his revered
memory is now exonerated from every reproach; and I deliver up the trust
reposed in me with more gladness of heart, than I should experience in the
succession to a princely inheritance. Adrastus shall no longer be banished from
the dwelling of his Acetus. Family harmony will again triumph, and my utmost
wishes will be fully gratified. With tomorrow's sun I will embrace my brother,
and the ever lovely Matilda. Do me the favor to speak of me to your children;
my introduction will be less formal, and I am impatient to clasp the youthful
strangers to my bosom. Accept the fraternal salutations of your unalterably
attached

ADRASTUS.


No. LX.
Customs, time honored, let us still revere;
Stamped by antiquity, they have their worth,
When in the train of wisdom they appear,
And are of truth and gratitude the growth.

IT is a common practice to arraign the despotism of custom; and, lovers of
liberty, we revolt from every thing which would begirt us with the lines of
necessity. The truth is, depraved nature spurns at government of every
description; and since the fatal era which engendered pride in heaven, and
plunged a third part of its denizens into the abyss of guilty disobedience, a
spirit of disorganization has prevailed; and it is only in proportion as the
disorders in the mental world are rectified, and the mind informed, that we
become solicitous for the general good, and are confirmed proselytes to the
beauty and propriety of order. It is undeniably true, that customs, injurious
to the well being of society, have sometimes obtained undue influence; against
these, to set ourselves in array, is laudable; but still, those rules which
have obtained the sanction of revolving ages, should not, it appears to me, be
discarded for trivial inconvenience.

My reflections have been thrown into this train by a little incident, and a
simple tale, which perhaps I cannot do better than narrate, as the subject of
this Essay. It was on the evening immediately preceding our last annual
Thanksgiving Day, that a worthy tradesman, seated in my parlour in a
contemplative attitude, with folded arms, and eyes fixed on the cheerful
hearth, as if he was preparing to pronounce a panegyric upon the beauties of my
fire side, very gravely remarked: This Thanksgiving Day is really an imposition
on the free citizens of this State. It has absolutely swept away more of my
running cash, than would have supported my family decently for a full month. I
declare I should rejoice greatly to see the observance of a period, which
originates so much extravagance, erased from our catalogue of old fashion
customs, and I would very readily sign its death-warrant. There is some reason
in your complaint, said I; and if it has nothing to recommend it but barely
custom, I also would freely consign said day to oblivion. It is true, it may be
urged, that it is rational and pious to devote a particular day to offer up our
joint praises, and to manifest our united gratitude to that omnipotent and
all-gracious Being, who gives us so richly to enjoy; but to this it will be
replied, that our orisons and thanksgiving ought to ascend with every returning
day, that God is not now honored by the blood of those innocents, which are
the usual victims of a Thanksgiving Day; that luxury enervates both bodily and
intellectual health; and, that my friend, the tradesman above cited, is not the
only sufferer from the extravagant profusion of a Thanksgiving Day.

All this is pointed by conviction; but my mind, fond of investigating, does
not easily yield its assent to a disputed hypothesis; and in the course of the
week which contained our last annual gala, I terminated a sentimental ramble,
during which I had seriously reflected on the subject, by a visit to a valuable
woman, whom I have long known; and observing, that in her accustomed manner she
had distinguished the era by distributing to the necessitous, I could not
forbear remarking on that benevolence which was eminently prevalent in her
bosom; while, on her part, that she might effectually arrest words which were
issuing in a panegyric on her virtues, she immediately drew my attention to an
unfortunate female, with whom she had just parted. This female was born in a
rank of life generally exempted from servile dependence; for he who derives his
support from the real or imaginary exigencies of the opulent, admitting he is
industrious and frugal, almost necessarily commands respectability; and the
young Ursula was cradled in the tranquil recesses of competency; she was
nourished, cultured, and reared to maturity by parental tenderness; and the
peaceful morning of her days was protected by a father's love. But Heaven
deprived her of her maternal parent, whose place was soon filled by a
stepmother; and a train of those evils succeeded, which too commonly result
from second marriages, when children were the offspring of the first.

Ursula was marked the daughter of sufferance; but a short interval succeeded
her father's ill judged connection, ere she was reduced to the necessity of
providing for herself; various misfortunes have attended her solitary steps;
and, mortified and dispirited by the prostration of her early hopes, the
disposition of her mind has acquired a gloomy kind of acrimony; she has
passed through life without forming a particular connection, a prey to regret,
dissatisfied with herself, and with a world to which she is so little indebted.
She is now far advanced in years, and she is struggling with infirmities. A
scirrhus, from the progress of which she at times suffers exquisite pain, is
gradually poisoning the springs of life; yet she may still live long; and
although her exertions to obtain the means of living have been marked with
unremitted industry, she has, notwithstanding, been frequently reduced to the
last extremity. Of pecuniary inconvenience, however, she has seldom been heard
to complain. She has almost invariably preserved a decent kind of pride, which
has imposed upon her lips, in this respect, the seal of silence.

But on the day immediately preceding our last Thanksgiving, comparing,
doubtless, the aspect of this returning festival to those which had formerly
met her view, her fortitude forsook her; and, pale, emaciated and desponding,
she sought the parlour of my philanthropic friend. The children of misfortune
know where to apply; and the road to the dwelling of the beneficent matron was
pointed by a thousand good actions.

" What shall I do, Madam?" said Ursula, as she entered the apartment, I fear,
alas! I fear that I must at length submit to the rigor of my fate. Tomorrow
will be Thanksgiving Day, and I have not enough in the world to purchase a
single basket of coal! "Pray what is the price of a basket of coal?" Probably
the fifth part of a dollar, more or less, according to the caprice or mercenary
disposition of the vender. Not enough to purchase you a basket of coal!
Astonishing! but cheer up, Ursula, you shall spend your Thanksgiving Day with
me; and I would advise you to recollect that He who commanded you into being,
has all hearts at his disposal; that he is the friend of the destitute; and
that the calamities to which we are subjected, are the dispensations of
paternal wisdom, of paternal love. Ursula bowed in silence; she was too full to
speak; but an affecting kind of patient resignation seemed gradually to pervade
her grief-worn countenance.

Just at this period, a gentleman entered the apartment: He had occasionally
seen Ursula, and he was a man of humanity. Ursula, afflicted, and much
oppressed, would have modestly retired; but our philanthropic gentleman
detained her. How are you, Ursula? "Well, I thank you, Sir," returned the poor
unfortunate. "You do not look well, Ursula -- tomorrow will be Thanksgiving
Day -- I would have every heart glad on that day" -- and he gave Ursula a
handsome benefaction. Excellent memento! we will record this circumstance in
favor of Thanksgiving Day; and, if it is found, that the custom of
administering to the necessities of our fellow-mortals, is coeval with this
festival, we will, without hesitation, pronounce its eulogy.

Ursula courtesied, burst into tears, and withdrew. A ray of hope once more
illumined the bosom of the cheerless traveller; she was animated to new
exertions, and again resuming her plans of industry, she immediately sat out
for the purpose of securing some work, which a fear she should not be able to
accomplish, had induced her to relinquish. On her way, she looked in on a
person, whom she had been regularly in the habit of assisting, for the
reimbursement of a debt, incurred in order to provide herself with a small bed,
on which to repose her weary limbs. Ursula possessed great rectitude and
integrity of soul; and the reflections occasioned by a recollection of
engagements she might possibly never be able to fulfill, had frequently tortured
her bosom; but she now met her creditor with an invigorated prospect of being
one day able to discharge the last farthing.

Lucinda was her creditor; she is a young and amiable woman; she is an orphan
too, and altogether dependent on her own efforts for her support: But, while
ingenuity is her handmaid, competency hovers round her; and those females, whom
she so largely contributes to adorn, must experience genuine complacency, while
they contemplate so fair a model for those of the sex, to whom niggard fortune
has been parsimonious of her favors. Admirable young woman! upon thy decent
features, elegance and becoming modesty sits enthroned; propriety mingles in
thy train; and, while I admire thy virtues, I will daily pray, that thy love of
independence may be crowned by success.

"Ursula," said Lucinda, you are indebted to me just fourteen shillings --
tomorrow will be Thanksgiving Day -- Were it in my power, I would prepare for
this day, by an action which should calm every perturbed mind, wipe the tear
from the cheek of sorrow, and hush to peace the sigh of anguish; but, however
limited my abilities, what I can, I will -- From henceforth, that is, from
Thanksgiving Day, you are free; and remember, that for your future work you are
entitled to full and prompt payment. This was not the first time Lucinda had
tasted the luxury of doing good; for never had she sent a bundle of work to
Ursula, in which she did not convey a half-worn gown, cap, skirt, etc. etc.
Yet, let me repeat, Lucinda cannot command a single penny, but what she
receives as a compensation for her ingenious and persevering efforts at her
needle. She is single and unprotected -- but consistent virtue still remains
an invulnerable shield! Do you wish to know what spot contains this wonderful
paragon? Go then, and do homage to a little milliner, not a hundred miles from
Cornhill!

Ursula blessed her youthful benefactress, and returned to communicate her good
fortune to my benevolent and sympathizing friend. It seemed, upon that day,
that the genius of benignity had been busily employed in favor of Ursula. By a
removal, to which she had been suddenly and unexpectedly necessitated, she was
lost to some well disposed persons, who had frequently assisted her; neither
was her place of refuge within the knowledge of those officers of the church,
with whom she communicated, who had been entrusted with the distribution of
benefactions, collected for the use of the indigent children of sorrow; a kind
hearted man had interposed in her behalf, and her proportion of the charitable
appropriation awaited her, at her humble abode.

Thanksgiving Day arrived -- it was whispered that Ursula had said she had not
sufficient in the world to purchase a basket of coal -- one and another, on
that day, contributed more or less liberally; and a cheering ray of competency,
diffusing its genial influence over the declining life of poor Ursula, her
heart was made glad.

Thanksgiving Day is, in our country, a munificent festival. It has, in every
view, its beauty and its propriety -- all orders, and every description of
people, assemble, to offer up their general acknowledgments, and devout orisons
to the Parent of the universe. The week, on which this jubilee is appointed, is
devoted to the most benevolent purposes -- to the recognition of the claims of
the unfortunate, to the implanting, in the bosom of the orphan, the bud of
hope, and to the making the widow's heart sing for joy. See the thronged
streets -- crowds of destitute persons assert their accustomed prerogative --
they pass on to the dwellings of affluence -- the season, habit, and the
feelings, consequent thereon, conspire to render liberality still more liberal.
Every present want is supplied, generosity is constituted almoner, a face of
hilarity displaces that anxiety, which naturally clouds the brow of suffering
poverty; they return to their now joyful retreats -- they smile over the sudden
plenty -- their hearts overflow with gratitude -- their spirits are attuned to
praise -- their dispositions are in unison with their fellow-citizens -- they
chant the song of thanksgiving -- they join in grateful prostrations to the God
of their life; and, the expectation of this Thanksgiving Day frequently serves
to mitigate the calamities, and to soften the penury, of the intervening year.

Let me, therefore, leaving my honest friend, the thrifty tradesman, to lament
for his " running cash," frankly acknowledge myself a confirmed advocate for
THANKSGIVING DAY. May the wisdom of our legislators continue to recommend, and
may our well disposed and orderly citizens cheerfully obey -- may they honor
this festival in their accustomed manner -- may it still be distinguished as
the poor man's holiday -- and may it be the coeval of this Columbian world.
Yes, I will own, that I am enthusiastically fond of following, as far as may
consist with rectitude, the example of my ancestors. I bow with reverence, to
the holidays which they have consecrated as sacred; and, above all, I am
extravagantly -- yea, passionately, fond of Thanksgiving Day.

No. LXI.
Why is Patronius always in the right?
Is he endowed with supernatural light?
Certainly not -- but reason points his way,
And in his breast her powerful dictates sway.

THE great secret of deciding with accuracy, abides in the breast of
deliberation; hasty conclusions must ever be hazardous, and a rational man will
never submit that to chance, which patient and attentive investigation may
reduce to certainty. I have for many years had the felicity of ranking
Patronius among my intimate friends; we have lived in the most unreserved
confidence; and I do not recollect a single instance, wherein he has ever been
necessitated to retract an opinion which had received publicity from his
adoption.

He is never assuming; his sentiments are always advanced with modesty, and by
consequence the blush of error never tinges his cheek. I am aware that this is
a high panegyric, but an analytical examination of the system of Patronius,
will, if I mistake not, evince the practicability of a wise man, whatever may
be his internal perceptions, appearing to observers always in the right.

It is one of the first principles of Patronius, to listen to the sentiments of
those with whom he associates, before he hazards even a conjecture of his own;
and as he has an aversion from controversy, he never ventures upon a subject,
except with a view of giving or receiving information. He is, on no occasion,
the noisy disputant; he will not contradict peremptorily, nor assert
dogmatically; he does not presume that a thing is, or is not, precisely as it
happens on a cursory view to strike his perception. He is a close reasoner, but
then he is a reasoner; his disquisitions are marked with calmness; and he would
prefer remaining silently attentive during the most interesting conversation,
to the uttering a single syllable in favor of an hypothesis which he conceived
false and untenable. Hence, it will be concluded, that he is much more
frequently a hearer than a speaker, and this, indeed, of necessity happens; yet
persuasion dwells upon his lips, and his opinions are rarely ever ascertained,
that they are not instantaneously adopted. His character is marked by firmness;
he is known to be consistently virtuous; and his movements, rather than his
language, are decisive. He is an accurate definer; and when he speaks, silence,
in rapt attention, bends to hear. He proposes his subject at large; marks, with
precision, its general contour; expresses those ideas suggested by an aggregate
view thereof; and methodically proceeds to individual observations, from whence
he deduces his comprehensive and self-evident conclusions.

Truth is the great object of his pursuit; and his research after this
inestimable gem is uniformly conducted with moderation. He is a pupil of the
Socratic school; and, by a regular series of questions put to his opponent, the
invidious task of refutation is softened, and his tenets are established
without involving those rancorous feelings which are too commonly the
appendages of disputation. By this mild mode of convincing, Patronius is sure
never to offend. Persons are imperceptibly informed; they admire his
understanding, without envying its brilliancy; and I have frequently seen the
brow of this accomplished victor adorned by the cheerful voices and ready hands
of the grateful vanquished, with the fairest laurels that ever grew in the
aromatic haunts of animating praise! From interrogatory arguments, Patronius
derives an obvious, advantage; he is spared the arrogance of assertion;
conviction is gradually produced; and every one is ready to join issue in
opinions which become self-evident, which they have helped to elucidate, and
which, with a pleasing persuasion of their authenticity, pervade the mind. Thus
are the feelings of complacency invigorated; prejudice imperceptibly
undermined; and that pertinacious adherence to a favorite sentiment, so
natural to human pride, when attacked with less judgment, skilfully divested of
its imposing power. Patronius generally leaves it to his little audience, to
furnish with the garb of words, the conclusion which he has irrefragably
demonstrated; and hence, should his reasoning undesignedly have connected a
latent error, he is spared those unpleasant sensations which would have
attended the necessity of yielding his hypothesis, had he proposed or defended
it with obstinacy: Thus he is a stranger to the culpability of error; and my
eulogium is, strictly speaking, a sober fact -- its conscious blushes never
ting^ his cheek. I grant that Patronius has been rarely equalled; and that he
is placed in our world, a luminary of the first magnitude; and yet, I humbly
conceive, I may propose him as a model for imitation; for although we may never
reach the summit he has attained, emulation may nevertheless produce its
effect; and every advance we make toward the point of rectitude, will be
honorable to ourselves, and beneficial to society.

Patronius has the felicity to combine those qualities which have been supposed
heterogeneous; and, while his movements are the result of cool deliberation and
noble firmness; while his conduct is under the guidance of prudence and
propriety, the fervor and constancy of his regards amount to the enchanting
and amiable enthusiasm, inseparable from sublime and holy friendship. Patronius
evinceth that a strong and well regulated mind is susceptible of every
excellence; and his actions may, in the same moment, be considered as the
spontaneous growth of nature, and the result of educated wisdom -- they are
rich and abundantly productive; they are luxuriant as the wild and
indiscriminating impulses of unsystematized liberality: But a nice investigator
will observe them carefully pruned by reason, and circumscribed by the
enclosure of discreet munificence.

I do homage to the active mind of Patronius. Intellect, it is said, will
always command respect; and, from full conviction, I receive this sentiment
into my treasury of incontrovertible facts. Will a weight of years destroy the
energy of talents so conspicuously eminent? If it will, we could almost breathe
a wish to arrest the progress of time; and with a little variation we apply and
devoutly aspirate the Homeric petition in favor of Nestor; "What now thou art,
Oh! ever may thou be; and age the lot of any sage but thee." But the uniform
temperance of Patronius, will entitle him to an old age of health; while his
mind will continue cheerful and active, pursuing uninterruptedly a course of
usefulness to the latest period of his mortal existence; thus finishing his
career with those meliorated splendors that in the morning of his days shining
with strong effulgence, emitted the fairest hopes of meridian excellence. While
he lives he will possess the applause of his fellow men; and posterity will
learn to venerate his memory.

"The applause of his fellow men!" cries Apathy; "And pray, good Mr. Gleaner,
of what use will this be to Patronius? Please to inform us to what the applause
of his fellow men will amount? Fame is a wind blown vagabond; she delights
not in durable habitations. Virtue, in the person of WASHINGTON, has
endeavored to render her stationary; but the flood of light with which she
has encompassed the hero, has at length become insufferable; it has struck
blind a number of well meaning individuals; and it has so far excited the
rancour of the screech-owls of our day, that, if the guardian chief should not
suddenly escape to his native skies, it will be wonderful if they do not for
the time being; envelop him in that dense atmosphere which circumscribes their
own ideas; it will be astonishing, if, encircling him by the murky clouds of
envy, they do not despoil him of the vagrant fame. Yet, lured by the charms of
a conduct irreproachable, should fame continue to enwreath the honored brows
of Washington, as worth so rare is seldom the growth of mortality, pretensions
more equivocal must submit to the veil of obscurity, or consent to become the
sport of alternate censure and applause. Praise is an airy commodity; a breath
bestows it, and a breath retracts; it soothes for a moment, but it soon
evaporates; it enervates the mind, insinuating a persuasion, that, having
reached the ne plus ultra of intellectual seize, every future effort is
superfluous, and it renders us impatient under the most gentle and necessary
reproofs. For my part, although I may admire your Patronius, I nevertheless
throw my gauntlet, and positively assert the inutility of every species of
commendation; being fully able to prove its inability to confer happiness, and
its inefficacy on the morals of mankind. He who expects his peace from the
eulogizing voice of fame, is making his couch on the pointed thorns of caprice
-- is building a superstructure on the fluctuating waves of opinion, than which
nothing is more futile and unstable. I trust not then the treachery of
sentiment, the bubble fame is not an object of my pursuit; and I am regardless
of the opinion of the world."

Stop, stop, Mr. Apathy -- attend a moment, if you please. The world is a vast,
an ample theater, and its inhabitants are an audience to each other -- we are
alternately actors and spectators; and, if we hold in contempt the opinion of
those who are assembled as our judges, the probability is, we shall soon view
with indifference those virtues, the attainment and practice of which, is the
purchase of their esteem; and it is to be feared we shall ultimately become
unworthy of the good we have learned to despise. I should tremble for a son or
daughter who regarded with indifference the sacred interests of reputation. To
what purpose are we diligently employed in embellishing our persons, or in
polishing our manners? these adventitious graces make no essential part of
inborn integrity, or of a solid understanding; yet, they are pleasing
exteriors, which render us acceptable to those with whom we associate. But, was
there no individual whom we wished to impress -- was there no heart, on whose
fair tablets we were anxious to stamp ideas of our merit, these external
ornaments would, perhaps, be but little studied; nay, in defiance of custom
itself, the probability is, they would gradually be totally laid aside.

Sir, I say again, I regard not the opinion of the world; my period of
emancipation has arrived, and I, at length, feel myself superior to its
censures or its applauses.

Alas! alas! Mr. Apathy, you have then lost an admirable incentive to
consistent rectitude, and you have but one step further to go -- you have only
to throw off those feelings of restraint, which have hitherto influenced you,
in regard to that all-pervading Being, who created the world and those
intelligencies whom you now so heroically despise -- you have only to leap this
barrier, and you rank with the four-footed tenants of the soil! your fears and
your expectations are, like theirs, bounded by the gratification of the moment.
To the duration of communicable good, you are a stranger; for you cannot
participate the enjoyments of those, whom you contemplate with such unfeigned
and systematic contempt.

But, as I would hope this globe, in its extensive round, contains not the
human being, who is, in his heart, at all times, and upon every occasion, an
unwavering Atheist; so I pleasingly believe, that there exists not a rationally
intelligent man, or woman, who is not ambitious of that fair fame, which is,
sooner or later, the accompaniment of virtuous deeds.

The Gleaner, solicitous to cultivate the good and amiable qualities of his
readers, would endow them with that delicacy which trembles at the voice of
accusation, and which, enwrapping itself in the mantle of propriety, is
sedulously careful to avoid even the shadow of suspicion. He would endow them
with that kind of sensibility, or exquisite perception, which should produce
them primarily desirous of rendering themselves well pleasing to Deity; and,
thus insuring the approbation of their own hearts, he would next implant the
ardent wish to conciliate the esteem, affection, and judiciously distinguishing
applause of worthy persons of every description; nor could he, it is humbly
conceived, present his friends, the younger part of them particularly, with a
more powerful stimulus to, or truly efficacious talisman of, CONSISTENT VIRTUE.

No. LXII.
I love to trace the independent mind;
Her beamy path, and radiant way to find:
I love to mark her where disrobed she stands,
While with new life each faculty expands:
I love the reasoning which new proofs supplies,
That I shall soar to worlds beyond the skies;
The sage who tells me, spirit ever lives,
New motives to a life of virtue gives.
Blessed immortality! -- ennobling thought!
With reason, truth and honor, richly fraught --
Rise to my view -- thy sweet incentives bring,
And round my haunts thy deathless perfumes fling;
Glow in my breast -- my purposes create,
And to each proper action stimulate.

AS there is no idea, by which I am so exquisitely tortured, as that of
annihilation, I naturally turn, with disgust and horror, from the reasonings of
him, who, laying impious hands on that principle of animation which originates
in Deity, would confound it with the common mass of matter; and who, with grub
like industry, having enveloped himself in his earthy cone, entertains as
little expectation of breaking his sepulchral enclosure, as the reptile who
thus mechanically encrusts itself.

"Mamma," said my little granddaughter to Margaretta, "Mamma, where do
butterflies go?" I repeat, that a child may ask a question which would puzzle a
Sir Isaac Newton to resolve. But although neither the wise nor the untaught may
be able to descant learnedly on the destination of butterflies, yet do we take
inexpressible pleasure in tracing their various and surprising transmutations,
and in dwelling with eager attention on their eventful career, until, borne on
the gentle zephyr, they become tenants of the aerial world.

May not the butterfly be considered as a humble figure of the creature Man? In
its reptile state it seems fastened to the earth; it is indefatigable in its
attempts to obtain that subsistence it will need but a little while. At length
it is evidently on the decay; it sets about preparing for its departure; it
makes ready the filaments in which it enwrappeth itself; it enfolds and
contracts them; gradually they become a sepulchral crust, in which securely
enveloped, the deceased insect apparently bids a final adieu to the busy scenes
in which it has taken so laborious a part. But mark the astonishing change:
These habiliments of death are thrown off -- the hideously disgusting form is
no more -- its newly acquired wings are expanded -- they assume a variety of
hues, and look as if designed in the gayest moments of a fertile and brilliant
imagination. Hardly will the little flutterer deign to rest on the bosom of
that earth, to which it formerly so closely adhered; and, perched on some
beauteously fragrant flower, and indulging in all the rich variety of ambrosial
food, it sips the embosomed sweets. With what astonishing celerity its
movements are performed -- lightly it pursues its elevated path, and we gaze
with admiration upon its wonderful improvements. Was not the whole process
submitted to our observation, we should call in question its reality; and cold
philosophy would teach us, first, to reason -- secondly, to doubt -- and,
finally, to embrace the creed of infidelity.

Man, in his present state of being, moves heavily on this opaque globe -- he
is principally solicitous, respecting matters which appertain wholly to this
life -- he is often anxiously oppressed, while every accession to that property
he is carefully seeking to augment, does but increase his burdens. But whatever
impediments may seem to bar his way, he, however, advances onward -- he attains
the period when his quick sense of earth-born joys is no more -- he verges on
the days on which he can say he has no pleasure -- for a little moment he
abides, and his open grave is prepared -- he is enclosed in the narrow house,
and the green turf clothes, with undistinguishing verdure, the hallowed spot
where he reposes. Do we say that we have bid him an eternal adieu? we do not
speak correctly; for, in the morning of the resurrection, he shall burst the
barriers of the grave -- he shall issue from the chambers of the tomb. Behold
how mortality has put on immortality -- he is beautiful as the inhabitants of
the celestial world -- he has become as a winged seraph -- he mounts, he soars
on high -- he pursues his trackless way -- he attains the heaven of heavens,
and he mingles with the angels who surround the throne of Deity.

Is my figure exceptionable? -- I shall not contend -- I did not expect it
would answer in all its parts. I think, however, some of its features will be
acknowledged striking; and I could as easily, had I not ocular demonstration,
believe the resurrection of the body, enclosed in yonder tomb, as I could lend
my credence to the egg, the worm, the cone, the aurelia, and the butterfly.

Yet, I do not vehemently insist on the resuscitation of this time-worn
tenement. In the bloom of youth, and vigor of my days, my reluctance to a
final separation from organs so incomparably well adapted to my exigencies, was
extreme; but a length of years have revolved -- the fine machine is going to
decay -- I begin to detect its inconveniences -- it is a heavy clog upon my
purposes -- and, when I am bounding forward with all the celerity of thought, I
am retarded and pulled back by its unwieldy properties. I naturally wish for a
vehicle more agile; and imagination, darting into futurity, anticipates
accommodations more consonant with my wishes. Hardly a day passes, in which I
do not discover, in my present residence, new instances to prove that the
building is greatly impaired; nor is this a circumstance of regret. My glass
informs me, that time has furrowed my face; that my eyes no longer sparkle
with the vivacity of youth; that the glossy ornaments of my head are rapidly
giving place; that my form is bent; that I hobble in my gait, etc. etc. No
matter -- my attachment to this earthly residence is also on the decline, and I
will support, with fortitude, the sufferings which may be necessary to its
dissolution. Whether my all-wise and omnific Father will raise it again on a
nobler principle, is a question that cannot greatly agitate my mind, since I
know that his paternal goodness will ordain for me, precisely that habitation,
which shall be the best calculated for the full enjoyment of all my faculties.
If I -- if my best self can escape from this wreck of nature, I am then sure to
be as " blessed as I can hear;" and, the superiority and inferred durability of
spirit, is beyond a doubt.

"Certainly not," cries the opposer, for the mental faculties decay with the
corporeal; thus evincing the truth of the hypothesis, which describes them as
both perishing together.

But against such a comfortless and derogatory sentiment I enter my protest.
The immortal principle of life, retaining, in this debilitated body, its
pristine vigor, glows indignant at the humiliating idea; and, notwithstanding
the decaying organs by which it operates, it still asserts its own inherent
fervours. Age cannot, in reality, curtail the inborn powers of the soul; their
elasticity, for want of use, may be abridged, but their native energies can
never depreciate. From the moment in which the immortal mind becomes a
sojourner in mortality, certain organs, by which it is to operate, are assigned
to the celestial resident, and these organs become the medium of its
manifestations. In infancy the mental faculties are under a necessity of
awaiting the acquirements of that progressing machine, in which they are
enveloped; and the reason is obvious; the most skilful artist must be furnished
with instruments proper to his occupation. In the vigor of manhood the soul
still finds many a laudable wish ungratified -- its habitation is not in every
respect accommodated to its views -- it would move with all the rapidity of
motion -- it would take the wings of the morning, and compass the globe in a
day -- it would design and execute in one and the same moment -- and the
restless anxiety it experienceth is a presumptive proof, that it is appointed
to a higher and more perfect state. Old age arrives -- and the bodily organs,
ordained for dissolution, experienceth the imbecility that marked the state of
childhood -- the imprisoned spirit assays to quicken the sluggish stream -- it
endeavors to rouse the torpid pulse -- it would render flexile the stiffening
sinews -- with tremulous anxiety it searches every compartment, throws its
inquiring glance through each avenue, and would act upon the complicated
machine as in those days when it appeared so much under its command -- but it
will not be -- and it is in vain to struggle against a statute which has
passed the great seal of Heaven. The retiring immortal at length becomes
conscious that it is on the eve of its departure; it collects its scattered
faculties, and, submitting to that state which bears a strong resemblance to
inactivity, and which is imposed by necessity, it awaits, with more or less
resignation, the approaching moment of its final emancipation. But shall we for
this expatiate on its diminished luster, strip it of its immortality, prepare
its funeral dirge, and consign it to the gulf of oblivion? Strange perversion
of ideas! most illogical conclusion! and truly unworthy sacrifice of all those
commanding incentives to virtue and splendid hopes, that originate in an
expectation of future existence.

That it is highly irrational to characterize the immortal mind, from the
demonstration it makes of its faculties by the medium of decaying bodily
organs, is apparent from a variety of considerations. An illustrative figure
this moment presents. I take my seat in the midst of a respectable company -- a
musician is introduced -- I have heard much of this performer -- he is very
eminent, understands every branch of music, is unequalled in the line of his
profession, and particularly excels upon the piano-forte -- the instrument is
opened, and he commences his efforts with a favorite piece of music. But what
a futile attempt! -- sounds the most discordant issue from the piano -- not a
single note is in unison -- the flats and sharps are confounded -- he is out of
time -- a child, practicing his lesson, would have produced better tones. O
horrid! I exclaim; surely, the artist is either grossly deficient, or he has
lost those exquisite powers of execution, for which he has been so highly
celebrated; his faculties, probably, are on the decay.

"Mistaken man," replies the master of the house, "your conjecture is
erroneous; nothing can be further from the truth. The instrument, my good Sir,
is out of tune; nay, more, an accident has despoiled it of its principal keys;
the complicated machinery is obstructed in its most capital parts; in short, it
is worn out by time, disastrous removals, and unskilful usage." Ought I not to
feel conscious of my injurious estimation of the musician? Does not the
circumstance of the decayed instrument restore my high raised ideas of his
abilities? and will it not be proper, that I henceforward render him the homage
which must ever be due to superior acquirements?

I confess, I take a superior pleasure in tracing, improving and cherishing,
every idea which establishes the pre-eminence, independence and immortality of
the mind; and, in the multifarious reflections I have anxiously made on this
subject, I have derived much consolation, from recurring to the surprising
activity the spirit often evinces, when the bodily organs are fast locked in
the embraces of the image of death. I have thought, that the action of the
spirit is in no moment entirely suspended; and although I have passed many
nights without a consciousness of having dreamed, yet it does not therefore
follow, that the mental faculties have been unemployed. The most pleasing
visions have sometimes gathered round my sleeping hours; method and propriety
have been in full exercise; but when the re-action of the corporeal organs has
re-called the vagrant spirit, only disjointed images have remained, and it has
been beyond my power to recover a single connected idea. Again, I have only
been able to recollect that I have dreamed, without the vestige of an
impression, by which I could trace the nature of the vision. From these facts I
gather, that I may dream without being at all conscious, after the shadows of
the night have fled, that my mind has been thus occupied. It appears to me of
consequence, to establish the constant activity of the soul; for, if it can,
for a single moment, be divested of its consciousness and the appendages of
animation; if it can slumber with the body, it may slumber for ages, it may
lose its identity, it may sink into oblivion; and we are, by consequence,
conducted to the comfortless verge of materialism! But having expressed myself
freely on this subject in an Essay, which may in future be submitted to the
public eye, I wave it for the present.

I know that dreams are whimsical, perplexing and fallacious; yet we do not
always understand their origin or tendency; and, I conceive, there may be
analogies in nature, of which we are entirely ignorant. One thing appears to me
certain, that dreams furnish no inconsiderable evidence of that pre-eminence,
independence and immortality, which I am solicitous to confirm. A person far
advanced in years, and entering on the winter of life, every day accumulates
infirmities. Suffering under a severe paroxysm of the gout, after a succession
of hours marked by anguish, nature, quite exhausted, forgets itself in the arms
of sleep; to the couch of misery the pain-worn body is still confined; but the
gladdened spirit, as if felicitating itself on its momentary exemption,
indulges the full career of fancy. The scene is instantly changed -- a
surprising revolution succeeds -- youth again blooms on the cheek -- the nerves
are new strung -- the sinews resume their wonted agility -- the blood flows
briskly through the veins -- health braces the frame -- hope glows in the bosom
-- the heart leaps for joy -- all is enchantment, the enchantment of the
morning of life -- he contemplates the tenderest attachment -- he forms new
connexions -- he becomes impassioned -- and he feels over again the ardours of
youth. But alas! the fleeting vision is on the wing -- a creaking door -- an
impertinent footstep -- the charm is broken -- and the mind is again embodied
by age, infirmity, and consequent suffering. Yet, I ask, has it not thus
produced a proof of its pre-eminence and independence; and may not its
immortality be fairly inferred?

But it is said, that we vainly deduce a proof of the immortality of the soul
from dreams, since there are existing many strong reasons to suppose, that dogs
and several other animals dream. And let them dream -- they have my cheerful
permission; nor have I any objection to those faithful creatures bearing me
company in my native sky. I should be charmed with a treatise which should
prove, beyond the shadow of a doubt, the future and immortal existence of every
animated being. I should be right happy to witness the era predicted by the
prophet Isaiah, who tells us, that the lion and the lamb shall lie down
together; and should they be led by the hand of blooming innocence, the scene
would be still more highly wrought. In one word, could I answer my little
Margaretta's question, " Where do butterflies go?" it would become to me a new
source of pleasure.

No. LXIII.
When Genius, rich in intellectual stores,
With inborn force the path of light explores,
Nature pursuing with untutored gaze,
Refulgent, shining in unborrow'd rays --
Then native splendours gild the beamy way,
And its own orb bestows perennial day.

PERHAPS there is no individual, who is impressed with a higher idea of the
advantages resulting from extensive literature, than myself. I cheerfully do
homage to science; a conviction of its excellence necessitates me to place it
among the first of blessings; and I would enjoin persons of all descriptions to
seize with avidity every opportunity of accumulating knowledge. He who has
neglected to store his mind with ideas, to invigorate the intellectual powers,
and to habituate himself to reasoning, comparing, investigating, and
concluding, has not only forgotten to constitute a fund on which he might
occasionally draw, but has also defrauded society of that assistance which
mankind had a right to reckon on from his abilities; and thus committed a crime
against his species, for which, alas! it is beyond his power to atone.

But while I deliberately render all possible respect to those acquirements, so
indispensably requisite to him who would run with honor the career of life, I
cannot forbear confessing my superior admiration of those fortuitous candidates
for applause, who, in a great measure unassisted by the schools, have reached
the highest eminence to which a human being can aspire; nor does this diminish
the odium so justly affixed upon him, who, inattentive to the means of
information with which he has been furnished, produces himself upon the world
an unlettered blank, waiting the casual impressions of every interested
compositor, whom chance may direct to fill up the vacant pages.

But circumstances may have combined to deny the means of instruction; and the
proprietor of genius may pass those years when he should have been entered and
continued the pupil of science, without receiving those adventitious aids,
which, with lapidarian influence, would have given to acknowledged merit the
most brilliant polish; and if under a predicament unquestionably
disadvantageous, he attains to eminence, if although unfashioned by the
cultivating hand of a preceptor, he bursts through those intercepting clouds in
which a variety of unpropitious arrangements had enveloped the morning of his
days, and, rich in native resources, blazes forth in meridian luster, we surely
cannot hesitate to subscribe to the justice of that decision, which, eternizing
his name, invests him with immortality. It is true he will not combine the
learning of a Johnson; his diction may be neither elegant nor correct; he will
be in the situation of a man who has to shape his materials, as well as to
construct his pile of building; but he may strike out some bold originalities,
his superstructure may possibly create a new order in literature, and he may
form very just pretensions to rank with those venerable ancients who have,
through a long succession of ages, possessed the admiration of mankind.
Grammaticaster may undoubtedly convict him of a false use of nouns and
pronouns, of confounding modes, tenses, verbs and adverbs, and of the heinous
crime of mistaking a colon for a full stop; but the judicious critic will not
expect to find the child of nature miraculously impressed with an accurate
knowledge of the refinements of diction, nor intuitively familiar with those
rules which originated in convenience, and are the production of the combining
efforts and continued improvements of succeeding centuries. The candid
investigator will be occupied, while perusing the compositions of uncultivated
abilities, in searching for those natural beauties that are the offspring of
genius; these he will point out to public view, while he will take a sublime
pleasure in imagining the summit his author would have attained, had he been
assisted by education.

Had Grammaticaster lived in the days of Shakespeare, he would undoubtedly have
attacked, with true Zoiluan rancour, the splendid Bard of Nature. The two
Witches solus, which Shakespeare is said to have introduced, would have excited
his most splenetic indignation; and he would have sought out, with
indefatigable avidity and wonderful ingenuity, those bagatelle, denominated
defects, thence decisively pronouncing the divine poet of Avon wholly destitute
of merit of every description. Poor Grammaticaster, how his soul is wrung by
envy! See where, with fiend-like aspect, he hovers over the flowery haunts of
genius; malignantly industrious, he is busy in collecting the deforming weeds,
which, amid a garden so richly furnished, have perchance sprung up; these, with
invidious cunning, he combines; he eyes them with all a murderer's savage
exultation; he grins over them a ghastly smile; and, after passing them through
his pericranium, he produces them from the magic process as high crimes in the
court of literature!

The conduct of the admirer of Shakesperian worth, or, in other words, of him
who is capable of viewing with a steady eye the luminous path of genius, is the
reverse of this. He traces the embodied prodigy to his morn of life; he beholds
him the son of care; imperious circumstances deny his continuance even at a
free school; he is accustomed to the most rigid economy, and he is initiated
into all the penury of traffic; he is early bound by the ties of matrimony, and
to a life of labor he is apparently destined. An accident, however, of a dark
and unwarrantable hue, appears to be the procuring cause which unexpectedly
engages him in the most arduous pursuits; and these preceding facts will
augment the astonishment and admiration of all those who heartily reflect upon
his subsequent achievements, and upon the unequalled elevation to which he
soared; they will operate as a sponge, which will, in effect, erase from his
pages all those peccadillos, that in an author receiving a regular education
would have been unpardonable. Far from impeding his eagle flight, they seem to
point more forcibly his inimitable seize; they are foils, which like
spots in the sun, strikingly contrast his original luster, and irresistibly
enforce the vigor of an understanding, that has proved a rich and
inexhaustible source, from which many a lesser light has borrowed its
effulgence.

Miss Hannah Moore, (the celebrity of whose character might almost sanction
error) writing to Mrs. Montague in favor of the milk woman of Clifton, and
speaking of Shakespeare, elegantly embodies those ideas which I am solicitous to
enrobe. But Voltaire characterizes this prodigious and incomparable genius, as
a barbarous poet! Milton also is ranked in the same class by this civilized
writer! yet it will not be within the compass even of a Voltaire, to diminish
those splendours necessarily attached to luminaries of the first magnitude in
the literary hemisphere.

As the satellite of Miss Moore, the milk woman must still be considered; and,
if it is true that an adverse cloud has for a time intercepted the beneficent
rays of that resplendent orb, preventing the continuance of their genial
influence on the humble daughter of genius, the innate refulgence of an
intellect, both elevated and informed, will undoubtedly consume every opaque
impediment which has officiously obtruded; and she will once more receive to
favor the gentle female whom she has presented to observation, and whom she
so kindly sheltered.

Woodhouse, the Crispian bard, extorts our pity and our admiration: Like the
milk woman, common reading and writing comprised the whole of his education;
and, from an application to even these useful branches of study, he was taken
when he was only seven years of age. Perhaps Miss Moore's account of Mrs.
Yearsley, might be strictly applied to Woodhouse; but, be this as it may, he
was, however, bred a shoemaker, at which business, he was no more than a
journeyman, and condemned to labor with indefatigable industry, for the
support of a beloved wife, and an infant progeny. We cannot but venerate both
his genius and application; while we view him seated at his depressing employ,
the pen and ink are at his elbow; he arrests the couplets as they present, and,
penning them down for future revision, he again pursues the duties of his
occupation. Of his thirst for knowledge, we receive a very high idea, when we
contemplate him after a day passed in earning the scanty pittance adjudged the
price of his labor, appropriating those hours usually devoted to the
restorative slumbers of the night, to the obtaining that intellectual food,
fortunately so amply supplied by books, with which the indulgence of his patron
at length furnished him; and we yield him our full commiseration, when we hear
him in his poem, entitled Spring, pensively complain, not indeed so much for
himself, as for the beauteous fair one whose fate was entwined with his. The
circumstances and scanty advantages of the poet, induces us to allow to his
lays their full merit; and the invidious attempt to point out a blemish, would
seem to connect a degree of criminality. Thus thought the elegant bard of the
Leasowes, when, with the utmost tenderness, and a benevolence truly
characteristic, he commended, sanctioned and patronized; while his dignified
condescension was only equalled by the gratitude of Crispin, who was ambitious
of elevating almost every poetical essay, by the admired name of Shenstone.

Imagination, when tracing the progress of genius, unassisted by education,
necessarily stops to drop a tear of regret over the misfortunes, and to render
the tribute of applause, indisputably due to the merit and sublime genius of
Chatterton. Uncommon youth! with what facility did he arrest and annex whatever
could enrich and embellish; and how wonderful was the progress of this
untutored bard! Excellent young man! defrauded, whilst thou sojourned among
mortals, of whatever could soothe, invigorate, or sustain; thy existence became
the forfeit! and naught, alas! remains for posterity, but to raise a monument
to thy memory, which shall endure as long as the smallest vestige of
intellectual worth shall continue.

But the efforts of genius, unassisted by education, are alike entitled to
superior panegyric, whatever track it may pursue. To the natural powers of a
Brindley, the celebrated projector of navigable canals we do reverence; and,
while we envy the felicity of the Duke of Bridgewater, who first called into
action talents, so inherently energetic, we unhesitatingly confess that the
total ignorance of art which Mr. Brindley evinced, while submitting to the
investigating interrogations of the House of Commons, renders still more
conspicuous the magnitude of his understanding.

The contemplation of the powers of nature, is, undoubtedly, a delightful
employ: Native talent invests with independent luster; and every instance of
unaided excellence, stamps an idea of the inherent value of intellect. Mankind
are proportionably dignified, as the inborn worth of that celestial emanation,
which animates them to action, is acknowledged and established; and, impressed
with this sentiment, I am free to own, that I trace with singular satisfaction,
the brilliant efforts of untaught abilities, warmed to admiration and
stimulated to exertion by the unborrowed rays which they emit; I love to bask
beneath the genial beam; and I hoard, with all a miser's industry, the golden
treasure.

KULIBIA, a Russian peasant, commemorated in Cox's travels, is a rich instance
of the wonderful powers of nature; he will ever be grouped with examples of
extraordinary genius; and the bridge, thrown over the river Neva, which he
projected, with many other achievements of his untutored abilities, will
continue to bear testimony to the sublimity of his intellect.

The consideration of neglected education has been the ground, on which the
superstructure of female abilities has been reared; it has invested women of
elevated understanding with an indisputable claim to superior estimation; for
when successfully struggling with those discouragements which are peculiarly
sexual; depressed by a situation necessarily humiliating; and checked by the
invidious sneer of the supercilious and pedantic critic; when, in defiance of
every impediment, with talents almost wholly uncultivated, they boldly seize
the palm of merit, we are unavoidably compelled to yield them that respectful
veneration due only to mind, and which intellectual excellence must ever
extort. But the apology for female deficiencies, furnished by want of
education, will not, in future, be acknowledged as valid; the partial
distribution of advantages which has too long obtained, is, in this enlightened
age, rapidly giving place to a more uniform system of information; and the
frequently contested question, respecting the intellectual pretensions of the
sexes, may one day be discussed on fair and equal ground.

In the family of Alexy Michaelovitch, Czar of Russia, a striking instance is
recorded where superiority of understanding shone forth with decided brilliancy
in the female line. Feodor and Ivan, sons of the Czar, evinced in every
particular a marked inferiority of intellect, while their sister, the Princess
Sophia, was endowed by nature with all those shining talents, and that solidity
of understanding in which her brothers were so remarkably deficient. Eminently
qualified for her high station; although a woman of uncommon beauty of person,
she combined therewith first rate abilities. She possessed an extraordinary
knowledge in the theory of government; and she knew how to reduce to practice
its true spirit. Of persons of genius and learning she was the avowed and
liberal patroness; and the introduction of polite literature into Europe, was
encouraged and sanctioned by her example. At an era when the lowest species of
composition both assumed and disgraced the name of morality, this elegant
princess occupied her leisure hours in translating the Medicin Malgrelui of
Moliere. She also composed a tragedy, supposed to be the first extant in the
Russian language; and a circumstance which adds essentially to the merit of
this essay, is, that it was the production of a period when the most dangerous
intrigues were excited and fomented against her administration; when the spirit
of rebellion was abroad; and, when, (...) consequence, every faculty of her
mind seemed totally engrossed by the most momentous affairs.

No. LXIV.
With native dignity and graceful ease,
Mild condescension, ever sure to please,
And affability, with polish true,
Will worth intrinsic, as its shade pursue;
Grandeur of soul, in rectitude arrayed,
Is never to haughty arrogance betrayed.

IF all those persons, who are ambitious of taking rank in what is called the
first grade of society, would be careful to adopt those manners which are
descriptive of the real gentleman, of the real lady, if they would be
solicitous to attain those virtues inherent in the bosom of the truly noble, we
should not so often be called to observe the indignant blush pervading the
cheek of modesty, we should not so frequently lament depressed worth, nor
witness the meritorious claims of the truly deserving crushed by the
overbearing arrogance of those, whose only pretensions to distinction are
grounded upon opulence.

A sensation of painful and insurmountable disgust has sometimes arrested my
perception, when I have made one in the drawing room of an imperious woman,
whose awkward efforts to assume that dignity which is never annexed to
affectation, have rendered her truly ridiculous. The approach of timid
excellence is announced; it enters in the person of a female, whose unassuming
manners and retiring sweetness instantly call up to recollection Mary
Woolstoncraft's beautiful apostrophe to modesty. She is adorned with all the
graces which designate the milder virtues; she might be considered as
originating the paragraph adverted to; and at her appearance the most
prepossessing sensations rush upon the mind. The lady of the drawing room
advances a few steps, then recedes back, stands erect, courtesies formally,
looks forbidding, and assumes, as she supposes, airs of importance; while, in
the estimation of reason, she is only giving an exhibition of insufferable
haughtiness. In the mean time, the lovely maiden (perhaps in some way a
dependant) is abashed at a reception so little correspondent with her wishes.
Of her want of consequence, and the invidious triumph of the lady, there are
many witnesses; she is covered with blushes; she seems to shrink into herself;
confused and discomposed, she hastens to a seat; and, divested of that innate
complacency which true politeness is solicitous to cherish, she listens in
silence during the continuance of her ill-fated visit, to a redundance of
nonsense, dissertations on fashion, and refinements on scandal.

True politeness is but another name for benevolence. It is studious to
contribute to the ease and happiness of those with whom it is connected -- it
delights to give consequence to timid worth -- it seeks to elevate the
humble mind, and it disdaineth to affect ignorance of those characters and
persons whose claim to attention is indubitable, and whom it hesitates not to
caress in its private parties. Nature, when she produces her offspring, invests
them with equal claims; and death reduces them to one common level -- but
various are the paths which intersect the passage from the cradle to the grave:
Subordination is undoubtedly necessary to the well-being of society; and,
without seeking to sap the foundation of institutions which involve the public
weal, we only contend for that affability which is proper to every condition,
and well calculated to ameliorate those mortifying circumstances attached to
humble life.

The celebrated Mrs. Wright, introduced by her uncommon talents to a personal
knowledge of the nobility and gentry of the kingdom of England, had, during her
residence in that country, an opportunity of making many characteristic
observations; and, in one of her letters, she humorously contrasts the manners
of the woman well educated, and possessing habitual and real superiority, with
those of a female, conducted by a variety of fortuitous events to move in a
sphere for which neither her natural nor acquired abilities had qualified her.
Mrs. Wright devoted a fine winter morning to calling en passent on several of
her patrons; and among the number of those whom she attended, and who were
ambitious of obtaining celebrity, by inserting in their list of acquaintance
the votaries of genius, was the lady of a baronet, who had been raised from
obscurity, to all the privileges annexed to rank and title.

In the superb mansion of this chance created lady, Mrs. Wright, after sending
up her name, was reduced to the necessity of waiting a tedious interval; and,
although the chilly blasts of December were abroad, no genial blaze decorated,
by its cheering flame, the gloomy chimney! It is true the elegant apartment, in
which she waited the convenience of the lady, was ormented in high taste; but
this circumstance did not possess a sufficient interest in the bosom of Mrs.
Wright to charm her sense of suffering; and she regarded the summons, which
admitted her to the presence of the proprietress of the mansion, as an
emancipation from a very unpleasant situation. The reception she obtained, was,
however, not more to her taste. The lady assumed the most petrifying airs of
superiority; and both her language and her manner were cold as the icy breath
of the northern tempest: But Mrs. Wright, having the address to curtail her
visit, hurried away to lady N --, at whose toilette, san ceremony, she was
immediately admitted, and instantly engaged in that pleasing interchange of
civilities, which so frequently marks a female tete-a-tete. Lady N -- chatted
familiarly; soothed the self complacency of our American adventurer, by
eulogizing the art in which she contemplated future eminence; and, after
completing the labors of the toilette, agreeably to a previous appointment,
accompanied her to the royal presence; and the benign condescension of the
British queen, was evinced by still higher demonstrations of affability, than
those which had graced the manners of lady N --.

Mrs. Wright, penetrated with the most lively gratitude, set no bounds to her
joy or her admiration; and, after narrating the particulars of this interview,
she observed, that in exact ratio as she approached the liberal and splendid
source of genuine magnificence, the mild regency of urbanity became more
strikingly apparent.

Thus the orb of day, with regular munificence, diffuseth over the globe its
genial influence; while the glowworm sparkles only for those who take their
station within its narrow limits.

From a gentleman intimately conversant with Mrs. Wright, I have been furnished
with some anecdotes relative to this extraordinary woman, which, as their
authenticity is unquestionable, I shall present, as a biographical sketch, that
I presume will not be altogether uninteresting.

Mrs. Wright was a branch of a family, residing in Crosswicks, in the Jersies,
of obscure extraction, and humble circumstances; but remarkable for the
peculiarities, which distinguished its individuals. Of her father, Mr. Lovel,
many singularities are narrated; but, as it appears that his life was
unoffending, he had a right to the indulgence of his innocent caprices. After
his demise, his eldest son determined to erect for himself a dwelling,
agreeably to the fashion of his own ideas; and he combined with this resolution
the extraordinary ambition of preparing the materials with his own hands. He
not only designed, but executed; and, both the tenement and its furniture were
the production of his ingenious industry, while every article evinced the skill
of a master! He next constructed a spinnet, from which, self taught, he drew
such tones, as are not often surpassed. The violin, too, became subject to the
versatility of his genius; and he both made that pleasing instrument, and
executed thereon the most extensive compositions.

It appears, that either from want of ability or inclination, Mr. Lovel, the
old gentleman, had not been over solicitous respecting the education of his
children. Mrs. Wright was apprenticed to a mantua maker, with whom she
continued, until she was mistress of her business. She formed her matrimonial
connection early in life, which connection was unhappy; and her little family
drew their whole support from her industrious application. But, although her
conduct during this part of her life was truly meritorious, yet, as her
exertions were apparently the result of necessity, they did not pointedly
evince those remarkable talents, which eventually produced her in the first
circles in the metropolis of England; nor did the demise of Mr. Wright produce
an immediate change in her arrangements -- the mantua making business still
afforded her a kind of subsistence -- her week's work procured her week's
support, and her hours revolved in their accustomed routine, until an accident,
rendered important by its consequences, originated a surprising revolution. A
woman, offering wax figures for sale, stopped at her door; when Mrs. Wright,
possessing a large share of that curiosity inseparable from superior abilities,
questioned her relative to the composition of her commodities; and, for a small
consideration, obtained that information which proved to her the source of
uncommon celebrity, and great pecuniary emolument. The celestial spark of
genius, so long dormant, was instantly blown into a flame; and, immediately
throwing up her business, she became the ingenious fabricator of a new and
astonishing creation! Her success was beyond her most sanguine expectations:
from fancy figures, she proceeded to particular resemblances; and from her
fashioning fingers grew the most finished likenesses. General admiration was
excited, and the gratitude of those, who beheld exact transcripts of their
beloved connexions thus multiplied and perpetuated, knew no bounds.

Bordentown, where she had resided during her marriage, soon became too narrow
a field for the display of talents so rare, and she removed to the city of
New York, where she advanced rapidly in the career of fame! She soon furnished
a spacious apartment with her figures, consisting of the most celebrated
personages, in sacred and secular history, associated with respectable moderns,
and beings, copied from her own imagination. By the liberality of her patrons,
she was amply supplied with the necessary dresses, and her rooms became the
resort of the curious, the gay, and the idle. Her next attempt was painting;
and her essays, in this elegant art were by no means destitute of merit. Among
other performances, she painted a miniature of Governor Tryon, which was
esteemed an admirable likeness. Thus, uncommonly qualified by the liberal hand
of nature, the orbit of this younger world being judged a sphere too contracted
for abilities so splendid, she was encouraged to cross the Atlantic; and,
furnished with letters to Doctor Franklin, then resident in England, and many
other respectable characters, she bent her course over the great waters, taking
with her some of her most capital pieces, as specimens of her abilities.
Governor Tryon enclosed, by Mrs. Wright, the miniature she had painted, as a
present to his sister, then maid of honor; this proved a most happy
introduction. The lady, charmed with the accuracy of the similitude, was
proportionably pleased with the instrument; and it is hardly necessary to add,
that her good offices were, from that moment secured. The protection and
assistance of Doctor Franklin was in course, and the nobility and gentry, of
every description, were numbered as her patrons. To her American collection of
illustrious personages, she added, while in England, the most celebrated
characters of that nation. Even their majesty's submitted their heads to the
process of her art, and a just tribute of applause was rendered her, by all
ranks. Lord Chatham was among the foremost of her favorers; he was an admirer
of native genius, and a likeness of this truly patriotic and deserving
nobleman, the production of her ingenuity, now figures among the principal
ornaments of Westminster Abbey.

Thus countenanced, and thus supported, her income, it will be readily
believed, was sufficiently lucrative: She generally averaged nineteen guineas
per week; and, considering the rapid progress she had made to seize so
splendid, considering her origin, and grouping in the same view her established
and unequivocal celebrity, we are ready to suppose her in possession of a
fullness of felicity; but, it is, alas! true, that permanent happiness is not
the growth of humanity.

As Mrs. Wright possessed great depth of understanding, her intellectual powers
were, of course, much exercised, and the calculation of the probable
consequences of events, was to her a continued source of inquietude. She was a
profound politician, and her regrets, on account of the struggles in which her
native country was involved, were immeasurably afflicting. Her attachment to
the soil on which she had drawn her first breath, was natural, if not laudable;
but, it is to be wished that she had forborne to engage in a contest, so
invidious, as that of an ardent disquisition, relative to public men and
measures; especially, as it seems to have put a period to those advances she
was so rapidly making toward a splendid establishment of herself and family. It
has been observed, that, although she was capable of the most solid and
forcible reasoning, yet, her conversation was often so fervid and irregular, as
to originate an idea of a derangement of intellect; this, probably, was the
result of a warm imagination, a deficiency in early instruction, and a want of
the habit of methodizing her ideas; and, from this trait of incoherence in her
observations, and manner of expressing her sentiments, her character, in fact
inoffensive, may possibly have been misunderstood. But, be this as it may, she
experienced unequivocal marks of the decline of public favor; and a conviction
so painful, together with combining circumstances, induced her to pass over
into France, where, under the auspices of Doctor Franklin, she was known,
distinguished, and esteemed. At the close of the war, she, however, returned to
England, thus demonstrating a decided preference to the Albion shore; and she
expressed the warmest wishes for the perfect restoration of amity and
unreserved confidence between the United States and their parent country. This
astonishing woman finished her mortal career in the month of March, 1786.

In the family of Mrs. Wright, genius seems to be hereditary: Her son now takes
rank in the first line of painters in the island of Great Britain; and we
cannot but wish him a double portion of that spirit of emulation, which is ever
stimulating to the highest seize in the gift of fame.

No. LXV.
To taste the sweetness of the vernal air,
Deep scented, mildly zephyr breathing spring,
When every passing gale their treasures bear,
And woodland warblers in the branches sing;
Excursive let my wandering footsteps stray,
Or join the social train -- or silent roam,
Pursue my journey over the distant way,
And bear the harvest of reflection home.

LET me execute the projected excursion in the month of competency; when the
ripened fruits of Autumn, have received their richest finishing, and the life
supporting vegetable, crowned by maturity, invites the reaper's hand. This is
the selection of many a judicious traveller; but besides that the curtailed
days of September and October frequently spread the evening shades, before the
distant tour is performed, I have many other cogent reasons for preferring the
vernal months to a more advanced season.

The morning of the year lifts its young head, and the enthusiasm of
enchantment is in its gift; and although I do not contend for its intrinsic
superiority over the more substantial blessings attendant upon harvest home,
yet, to the pleased eye of contemplation, it is adorned with inimitable charms.
Many and obvious are the advantages it possesses -- its succession is the wish
of every heart -- it displaceth the long dreary nights, which, with gloomy
regency, have pervaded the wintry months -- it unbars the gates of life -- the
snow clad mountains once more lift their green heads -- the howling blasts of
winter are no more -- the tepid airs are abroad -- descending showers succeed
each other -- the mildly beaming sun emits its genial rays -- all nature
assumes an interesting aspect -- and the pleasures of possession are
inseparably blended with those of anticipation. Look where the spreading
branches are loaded with the sweet scented and promise giving blossom. See the
flowery tribes expand their odoriferous leaves -- the surrounding atmosphere is
richly perfumed -- every breeze bears its proportion of the grateful effluvia,
and we bless the salutary gale. The mellow toned warblers of the vernal season
pursue their azure path, or enchantingly carol in the branches. The orient
beams of light smile along the ethereal plain; not a view but is stamped with
the most pleasing impression of which it is susceptible -- but is fraught with
images of rational pleasure; nor can we do less than partake the general joy.

Just returned from a tour of friendship, my heart at this moment glows with
all those complacent sensations inspired by an extensive view of nature, garbed
in her most fascinating charms. My excursion has led me through a delightful
division of the Union, diversified by grove crowned hills, romantic vales,
enamelled meads, and broad meandering streams. My route lay along Connecticut
river, and through that part of the State of Massachusetts, which led me over
Charles river, Malden, Beverly, and Essex Merrimack bridges. Every observer who
has traced this circuit, will readily acknowledge that it takes in a tract
abounding with the sublime and beautiful. The most rapt sensations rushed on my
soul, while the poverty of words necessitated me to remain silent.

The last mentioned bridge pronounces a panegyric on the abilities of the
ingenious Mr. Palmer. It is totally different from the others, and appears to
me to be a complete piece of architecture. It has a single arch which measures
160 feet from base to base, and its elevation in the clear is forty feet above
high water mark. The liberty, granted by the legislature of Massachusetts, for
the erecting this bridge, was, I am told, clogged with conditions of a singular
nature; but the particular stipulation designed to crush it, has given it the
noblest effect; its stability, by a wonderful contrivance, has received an
aerial completion; and, while it exhibits every idea of durability of which its
materials are susceptible, it happily unites what is not always combined with
this fundamental advantage, a light and airy contour; and its finishing ^^truly
elegant. Great commendation is due to the meritorious artist. With much labor
he has since thrown a bridge over that difficult stream, commonly known by the
name of Bloody Point Ferry; and he is now, we are told, employed in the Federal
City, where, we doubt not, his talents and application will receive an adequate
recompense.

Essex Merrimack bridge is useful and productive beyond the most sanguine
expectations of the proprietors. It joins an enchantingly romantic little
island to the main land: Its works are so wholly detached, as to wear the
appearance of two bridges; and the convexity produced by the arches, is
extremely beautiful. A commodious house of entertainment, containing dancing
and dining halls, are frequently the scene of those pleasurable hours which the
gentlemen and ladies of Newbury-Port devote to hilarity: it is distant from
that respectable emporium only three miles, on a fine level tract, ornamented
on either hand with trees of various growth, elegant seats, distant hills, and
verdant plains. From the window of this convivial tenement, we have a view of a
beautiful grove on the right, and the towering bridge on the left; and, I am
inclined to think, our country produces few more captivating scenes than are to
be found upon Merrimack bridge, and its environs.

I have enjoyed some delightful hours in the course of my tour; I have
brightened the chain of amity, and the heart of confidence is invigorated. My
affections expand, they glance comprehensively on the universal family of man;
and I feel that humanity, of whatever description, or wherever found, is
inscribed by the finger of Deity, is in possession of the unalienable rights of
fraternity.

Warmed by the genial heat of a vernal day, the invalid quits the solitude in
which he has been immured; he inhales the salutary breeze, and he becomes
invigorated by the parent beam. The resurrection of the year is also a solace
to old age, and it is frequently regarded as a figure replete with consolation.
"How fares you, Plato?" cried my friend, "I thought this fine season would
bring you along; and I am glad to see you with all my heart."

Plato is a black man, born in Africa, who has numbered, according to the most
accurate calculation which can be obtained, one hundred years; and he was for
sixty years of his life the confidential friend and faithful servant of his
master. The good old gentleman, when dying, evinced his high sense of the merit
of Plato, by bestowing on him his liberty, and bequeathing him a piece of land,
spacious enough to afford him, and a woman whom he had wedded, an ample
support. A neat built cottage was upon the ground, it was suitably and
conveniently furnished, and the legacy comprised the necessary farming
utensils. -- "I am glad to see you with all my heart, Plato," said my friend --
" Tanke, Sir, tanke," replied Plato, "I come one pring more; I do know if I
eber come again; but all winter, when e cold weder and e torms come one after
anoder, I tink I go and see maser's friends soon eber e come pring. I got no
new quaintance, maser's quaintance good enough for Plato; so I go e see them,
and den Plato e go home, make e old woman glad to hear e friends all well."

Happy advantage of years, which thus properly throws down those distinctions
of which we were once so tenacious: which gradually slopes the way to that
equality, reserved for us in the silent tomb; and which may probably, in some
degree, obtain, in the more perfect state of being on which we verge. Plato's
spring was a kind of renewal of his youth; and the anticipated regency of the
vernal months, helped to cheer and buoy up his spirits when the wintry blasts
sounded fearfully in his ear.

A few weeks since, and the trees disrobed of their verdant foliage, bent
beneath their icy burden; the vigor of the season arresting the progress of
the ready boatman, imposed upon his industry its incontrovertible embargo. How
strongly pointed is the captivating reverse -- the jocund swain resumes his
agricultural employ; he carols gratefully as he hastens over the dewy lawn; he
turns the fertile glebe; he strews the promise giving seed; and the golden days
of harvest rise to his imagination. The rosy milk maid passes cheerfully on;
she joins the music of the groves, warbling, as she trips along, the rustic
lay. Aurora, with her purple fingers, has opened the gates of morn; the
heavens are fringed with gold; the sunbeams glitter over the azure vault, and
the children of economy resume their various employments. Again the boatmen ply
their oars; the emancipated river invites their efforts; once more it becomes
the path of commerce, and a little forest floats upon the bosom of the silver
stream.

I love the various excursion; and the different manners and customs,
observable even in neighboring towns, are to me sources of instruction as well
as amusement. Perhaps, were I to characterize my countrymen from my own
experience, I might originate very erroneous ideas; yet the faithful recorder
will register as he observes; and, impelled by truth, I have to say, that as
far as has come under my observation, Columbia has not neglected to
acknowledge the claims of the stranger. Wherever I have wandered, hospitality
has hailed me welcome; and the grateful greetings of civility, when far
distant from my native haunts, has vibrated pleasantly on my ear. With a
contemplative eye I have passed on, and the tracing of resemblances has been
one of my pleasures: many a dignified matron has reminded me of my beloved
Mary; to the sympathizing fair one I have recounted the story of her conjugal
faith, and the loves of my Margaretta and her Hamilton has arrested the
attention and interested the feelings of the beauteous female, who,
unacquainted with their personal attractions, could only be influenced by a
predilection for intrinsic worth.

But I give place to a lady whose tour of pleasure seems not to have
corresponded either with her expectations or her merit, and whose remarks may
serve as a proper supplement to this Essay.

To the GLEANER.
SIR,
AS you have assumed an office, (whether properly qualified or not) the duties
of which point out a cognizance of, and an effort to correct, as well the petty
deviation, as those enormities which essentially involve the peace of society,
I take the liberty to address you on a subject, that, although little attended
to, is frequently productive of real inconvenience. That few people possess the
power of pleasing, the experience of every day incontrovertibly pronounces. I
could make a thousand reflections, all very much to the purpose; but I will
confine myself to a single instance, being fully convinced that it will present
both my design and its illustration.

Embracing the long days of this uncommonly fine season, I determined on a
jaunt, from which I calculated on receiving a prodigious deal of pleasure; but
to my great disappointment, I was so tormented by the civilities with which I
was hourly persecuted, that I was kept in a continual state of vexation. I will
confess to you, Mr. Gleaner, that the necessity of refusing any request,
importunately urged, agonizes me beyond description; and I have frequently done
violence to my most favorite wishes, and broke in upon plans that have been
regularly arranged for a whole year, merely because I had not the firmness to
withstand the solicitations of those, who did not care three brass farthings
what became of me or my views.

But, to begin my journey -- I sat out, escorted by my brother, a modest,
docile young man, altogether as unequal to opposition as myself; we had taken
places in the stage, a front seat in which is generally thought the least
eligible; but as it was my wish to inhale the perfumed breeze, and to indulge
myself with viewing the beauty of the surrounding prospects, I had stipulated
for one of those seats. I was not, however, permitted to occupy it; my
remonstrances were ineffectual; the travelers too well understood what
belonged to politeness, to let me remain in a situation exposed to dust, wind
and sun; and I was compelled to take my quarters in a back seat, where I was
absolutely nearly suffocated in the want of air, and had nothing in view but
the number of very civil persons, who had thus contrived, with a politeness on
which they plumed themselves very highly, to intercept every other prospect.
After many days, during which I was persecuted with a multiplicity of
attentions, all of a nature similar to that which placed me in the rear of the
carriage, we arrived at a village in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, whither
I had been drawn by my desire of visiting a female friend, who had past some
weeks at my father's. My friend is one of the few who is versed in all those
delicate and minute attention, which soothe and assist, while they neither
oppress which soothe; but, alas! by hard necessity she is depend (...) a set of
beings, whose ideas bear no more affinity to here is, than, darkness to light;
and unfortunately she possesses no power to influence their movements.

I am naturally ^^nd of tranquillity, and that I might be indulged in my own
way, I had no sooner reached the abode of my friend, than, avowedly for the
purpose of contributing to my felicity, a numerous family, in all its branches,
was thrown into confusion; a redundancy of apologies poured from every mouth,
and they expressed, in the most moving terms, their regrets that their
abilities were not proportioned to my superabounding merit. The children, too,
were in dishabille -- Mary's slip happened to be the worst she had; Catharine's
holiday shoes were immediately ordered out; and the eldest son, that he might
exhibit his parts to the best advantage, was directed to pin on those ruffles
which were sewed to tape, and carefully reserved to ornament his person on
those gala days, which occasionally occurred in the family; but a new scene of
disorder was thus opened, one of those said ruffles was unfortunately lost, in
search of which the whole house was engaged, and every thing turned topsy
turvy; yet, although each individual largely shared the perplexity produced by
this accident, the search proved ineffectual, and master Johnny was reduced to
the necessity of setting down to supper with only one solitary ruffle! The good
man of the house was thus furnished with an admirable opportunity of
expatiating on female nonsicallities and primosities, and his satirical remarks
were only suspended for the purpose of helping to load my plate. I was
importuned to consider myself at home, and I was accused of a want of
complacency in those viands, which it was evident they had with infinite labor
collected for the sole purpose of gratifying my ladyship.

Supper over, I flattered myself, fatigued as I was, that I should at length be
permitted to make my escape to the chamber of repose; but, ah me! I found to my
inexpressible chagrin, that we were then only beginning the fifth act of the
drama; the whole family were drawn out, and peremptorily ordered to sing for my
amusement; and their tedious chansons, love ditties, and ballads, were chanted
in rotation, encored and repeated in concert, until, at the instance of my
sympathizing friend, I was permitted to retire. On the ensuing day, scorched by
the intense rays of a meridian sun, I was dragged over grounds, that evinced
nothing so much as the ill taste of the owner, and returned to take my seat at
the dinner table, where the incidents which occurred seemed but a continuation
of the scene opened the preceding evening

A round of visits succeeded, all of which were in the same style. I recollect
one afternoon, a timely shower having given a peculiar sweetness to the evening
breeze, being on one of these same visits, I anticipated the pleasure of my
walk homeward, distant about two miles; but this very shower, from which I had
promised myself so much, proved a new source of vexation. The lady of the
house, fearful that I might take cold after the rain, insisted on my accepting
a cloak; it was to no purpose I assured her it would be particularly
inconvenient to me; she was not to be outdone in good breeding; the cloak was
produced -- it was a thick satin, lined, and full trimmed with a rich dark
sable! I glowed spontaneously at its approach! but notwithstanding all my
resistance, I was arrayed in this cloak; and I returned to my temporary home in
a profuse perspiration. I might, Mr. Gleaner, proceed in my narration; but I
have nearly got to the bottom of my paper. If I am properly encouraged, you may
hear from me again; and, in the mean time, I take the liberty to add, that I
have conceived true politeness to consist in making people easy, and in
permitting our connexions to enjoy themselves in their own way. I am, good Mr.
Vigillius, your most obedient humble servant, and constant reader,

HARRIOT B --.


A continuation of the favors of Miss B -- is solicited. We trust her next
excursion will prove more propitious; and we think she would figure with
singular elegance as a panegyrist.

No. LXVI.
Benevolence -- can we too often trace
Those lineaments which mark thy angel face?
Too often admire that philanthropic glow,
Which feels by sympathy each human woe?

ALL the energies of benevolence, responsive sympathy, heavenly commiseration,
a heart to conceive the most extensively munificent plans, a head to fashion,
and perseverance to execute -- All these I have seen contained in the compass
of one little frame; and this frame, invaded by the despoiler, was constantly
struggling to make head against the inroads of an insatiate victor, whose
despotic sway will continue, until the renovating morning, when He, whose
government is universal, shall annihilate the power of a tyrant, who has
hitherto exulted to destroy.

Pleasant were his convivial hours; laughter rejoiced in his presence; but his
mirth was unoffending, and all the sons of humor flocked to his standard.
Amiably tenderhearted man! the stroke which severed thy beneficent spirit from
the debilitated tenement it inhabited, gave death to the high-plumed hopes of
all those, who, calculating on thy capacious benevolence, were in the habit of
expecting from thee emancipation from every difficulty. Thou were hailed as the
friend of the destitute, who experienced, as surely as they made application,
either thy bounty or thy extricating interference. While a single piece
remained, thy purse continued open; and when thy immediate powers of aiding thy
suffering brethren were exhausted, thy access to kindred benevolence,
facilitated by thy uncommon merit, furnished additional supplies; and such were
thy resources, that the means of replenishing thy own funds were still at thy
command. Often have I blessed thy liberal purposes; and well did I know the
goodness of that heart, which, alas! has now ceased to beat!

It can hardly be necessary to name a man, whose general celebrity was so
strongly marked. The sons of sorrow will not forget to revere his memory; the
lisping tongues of the children of gratitude will still chant the praises of
the philanthropist; and the unbounded benevolence of a Joseph Russell may wake
to extacy the yet unborn admirer of transcendent excellence. Doubtless, he was
a branch of the Shandian family; " the milk of human kindness," with a never
ebbing current, flowed in his veins; nor did any Le Fevre languish, within his
knowledge, to whom he did not hasten to administer the oil and wine of
consolation. I recollect an anecdote relative to this benevolent man, not
perhaps generally known; and, as I conceive it will strikingly evince his
affinity to the Shandian stock, I feel impelled to produce it. The circumstance
adverted to, took place in his youth, when his pulse beat high for pleasure,
and the hilarity of his disposition frequently presented him at the shrine of
genuine humor.

A party of young men had determined to devote a morning to shooting. Russell,
the soul of every enjoyment, was solicited to join in the predatory scheme;
and, unskilled in the science of refusal, the tenderness of his disposition was
for once sacrificed to his accommodating temper. The evening preceding the
appointment was spent in preparation for the important enterprise; and, at the
peep of day, accoutred cap-a-pie for the occasion, he joined his depredating
comrades. They marched for a time in a compact line; but judging that so
formidable a body would spread the alarm through the little community, against
whose rights they were plotting, they conceived some maneuvering necessary;
and, departing in separate directions, they prepared to ambush the little
beings, who, alas! possessed neither policy nor defense, sufficient to enshield
either their own lives, o^ that of their beloved nestlings.

Russell placed himself in a cumbent posture on the velvet margin of a limpid
stream, almost surrounded by the tall trees that towered on its banks; his
piece, primed for execution, was by his side, and scarce a breeze interrupted
the peaceful serenity of the scene. The sun was just rising above the horizon,
and its radiant influence, darting through the foliage, spangled every
dew-drop, and glittered over the azure bosom of the slowly winding rivulet. The
birds, at length, fluttering in the branches, began the progress of the day. A
parent robin perched on an extreme bough, impending exactly over the head of
our young adventurer, unconscious of the mischiefs that awaited him,
incautiously kept his airy stand. The ambushed foe presented his piece, took
aim, grasped the trigger, and was on the point of discharging his piece, when
the unwary warbler, apparently in the moment of his fate, poured forth from his
little throat such a stream of melody, as was more than sufficient to arrest
the purpose of a much greater adept in the science of bird-killing. The
fascinating notes vibrated on the ear of Russell with swan-like efficacy; he
dropped his piece, and again reclined perdue; he still listened; but his design
was to ^ear, and not to destroy. The robin was soon joined by numbers of the
feathered choir, who, mingling their matin lays, continued melodiously
chanting; the ambient zephyr echoed the strains; every breath was in unison,
and the music of nature floated around. It was a scene worthy of benevolence,
and the rapt soul of Russell acknowledged its congeniality. "Blessed innocents!"
he cried, go, warble in the ear of the maternal bird, and glad, by your
sweetest carols, the domestic nest; narrate, my little flutterers, how you have
disarmed your enemy, and say, that against lives so unoffending, his hand shall
never more be raised. The birds, as if obedient to his mandate, or, more
strictly speaking, alarmed by the sound of his voice, spreading their
party-colored wings, instantly dispersed; and Russell, shouldering his
firelock, triumphantly left the grove.

To the raillery consequent on the tenderness of his nature, he was fully
equal. His party had, what they termed, a successful morning; and the feathered
victims they produced, evinced the deathful valor of their exploits. Russell,
on that memorable day, feasted on vegetables, in all their maturity of
excellence and rich variety; he consecrated the era sacred from the repast of
blood; and the ripened strawberry, meliorated by refined sugar and a flowing
bowl of cream, crowned his dessert; nor was he ever after known to attempt
aught against the defenseless and tuneful inhabitants of the grove.

I have thought that Russell's robin was a fit companion for Uncle Toby's fly;
and, that the annals of benevolence may no longer record the Shandian
ebullition as a solitary instance, it is here inserted. I contend also, that
the benign feelings which preserved the life of the robin, were original in the
bosom of Russell; for, at that period, his eye had never traveled over the
heterogeneous pages of Tristram Shandy.

The action, however trivial, was indicative of the disposition of the man; and
it may be viewed as a single thread of that web, the texture of which was equal
and consistent. He was, in the most extensive sense, a philanthropist; the poet
has perfectly delineated him. His sympathy and humane exertions primarily
embraced those whose alliance to his blood naturally demanded his aid; but the
rays of his beneficence, diverging from a center so virtuously infixed,
extended their genial influence to his fellow-citizens at large; and the human
being existed not, whose claim to his regard he refused to acknowledge. Nay,
his capacious mind, emanating from the Parent of the universe, encircled, by
its overflowing aspirations, every being of every description. He anticipated
the extermination of evil; and he saw, in imagination, vice, and its
concomitant, sorrow, banished from the wide extensive circle of all
intelligence. No wonder then that earth possessed, in his estimation, superior
charms, and that, viewing it as the production of a supreme and beneficent
Architect, it was dressed for him in smiles. When the severing angel caught
from his embraces hose he best loved, he felt, it is true, a pang; but that
pang was transient; and, wiping from his cheek the natural tear, his elevated
spirit rejoiced in the assurance, that he also was in a state of progression,
and that he should soon rejoin them in a new and improved state of being. Thus
he passed on; and, while he blessed the bounties of Omnipotence, the virtues of
heaven were imaged in his bosom. Spirit of Pope! immortal bard! forgive this
appropriating paraphrase of thy rich and beautiful versification; a description
of the philanthropist must invariably involve thy well selected ideas; and it
suits with thy munificence to bestow, from thy abundance, a portion of that
thou can so well spare.

Benevolence -- philanthropy -- The name and character of Mr. Joseph Russell
has been considered as synonimous with these virtues. Should I attempt to
particularize his deeds of worth, innumerable instances would crowd around.
Thronging fellow-citizens, aided by counsel and by pecuniary gratuities --
bankrupts reinstated -- the little tenement and household goods of the widow
redeemed from the merciless grasp of the unfeeling creditor -- helpless orphans
accommodated with paternal friends -- public measures, tending to the general
good, powerfully supported -- strangers hospitably received, and taught to hail
a second home.

What were the feelings of the amiable, the youthful La Fayette! How swelled
the bosom, and how beat the pulse of his worthy preceptor, when, in the humble
guise of persecuted foreigners, their wandering footsteps first pressed the
threshold of the benevolent Russell! first met, in that celebrated abode of
genial hospitality, a reception so amply suited to their exigencies and their
merits.

But vain in my recital. A virtue so uncommon, and marked by such a multitude
of instances, dazzles by its refulgence; and, although many of his
philanthropic exertions, which should have been recorded by the living fingers
of immortal fame, enveloped by ingratitude, and clouded by a train of
succeeding circumstances, are nearly erased from the tablets of humanity; yet
they are registered in the archives of heaven; from their imagined obscurity
they shall again emerge; and, in the day of retribution, they shall blaze forth
with additional splendour.

But hark! what plaintive sounds are those which vibrate on the ear? The voice
of the pensive Elmira, borne on the stream of imagination, strikes suddenly on
my memory; it breathes the sweet accents of gratitude. Let us listen to its
pathetic strains.

"Forbear, my friend," she exclaims, "Oh! forbear -- close not the page of
panegyric, until I pour thereon my tributary sorrow -- until I recite a simple
tale, and give a list of benefits, which demand of acknowledgment the boldest
note that ever yet has issued from lively gratitude. My days of prosperity
were passed at a distance from the philanthropist; I had heard of him by the
hearing of the ear, but my eyes had never seen him. My morn of life was happy;
cherished in the bosom of parental tenderness, and blessed with every requisite
which my situation demanded, no rational wish remained ungratified. My wedded
days succeeded; and my power of contributing to the felicity of my connexions,
was rendered more various and pleasing. I dreamed not of portending evils,
established, as I conceived, in life; I looked not for the bursting storm.
Suddenly, however, it arose, and it deluged all those fair prospects which had
blessed my youth; surrounded by the waves of adversity, I was nearly overwhelmed
by its billows. Writs of attachment; irritated creditors, and sheriffs'
officers surrounded those doors that were barricaded with a frightful kind of
vigilance. Abridged of liberty, that gem of incalculable value, whose cheering
influence gilds by its own genial rays, even the cottage of freedom, I steeped
the hours in tears; and, at the shrine of comfortless calamity, both my health
and my reason were alike immolated. My name was unknown to the philanthropist,
but my sufferings became its passport; and, unsolicited, the benevolent Russell
had the goodness to plead my cause: Persuasion dwelt on his tongue; there was a
kind of magic in his virtues which generally operated successfully. What mortal
could achieve, he did; and, to mitigate those ills he could not cure, he bent
his utmost efforts. Change of air, exercise, a long journey -- these were
proposed by medical gentlemen for the restoration of my prostrated health and
spirits. I commenced my melancholy excursion; my unknown friend met me on my
way: It was in the beautiful village of D --, that I first saw the
philanthropist; he essayed to chase sorrow from my mind, and to rekindle in my
bosom the pleasures of anticipation. His kind interference followed me to the
end of this tour of necessity; and he mingled with the dearest of my friends to
gratulate my return. Nor did his beneficent efforts cease here; he was
indefatigably persevering in my favor, taking in my fate the deepest interest,
aiding me with genuine delicacy, triumphing in every propitious event, and
warding, as far as he might, every adverse cloud. His acts of goodness to me,
were the coevals of his being, and the last day of his abode in mortality
witnessed his benevolent attentions.

"Cruel was the stroke of death; it prostrated the hopes of the desolate; it
precipitated from the summit of felicity to depths of sorrow the female whom he
judged worthy of his confidence; it blasted the filial expectations of that
incomparable young man, who, it is said, inherits with his father's name his
uncommon virtues; and it clad in mourning the PUBLIC MIND. Benevolent Man!
Matchless Citizen! and now, indeed, Divine Philanthropist! Let the tears that
marked thy exit, proclaim thy value. But reflection arrests the tide of sorrow;
it imposes silence on my lips, and I bow obedient to the behests of THE
ALMIGHTY."

Poor Elmira! -- yet we believe her gratitude has not too far emblazoned; and
we therefore constitute her sketch a true specimen of the benevolent and
uncommonly useful life of the late uniformly philanthropic and virtue honored
JOSEPH RUSSELL.

No. LXVII.
Again a Russell lends the copious theme,
To the same fount we trace the kindred stream;
From God himself the sacred spark was caught,
With philanthropic fervor amply fraught.
I knew him not, save by the voice of fame,
Which dwells enraptured on his splendid name;
Yet, will I sweep for him my humble lyre,
Virtues like his must every heart inspire.
Yea, though contending panegyrists rise,
While worth, exhaustless worth, the page supplies --
Though Reverend THATCHER lifts the voice of praise,
And MORSE the votive tribute joins to raise;
Though WARREN mingles in the pious train,
Moulding the classic, eulogizing strain;
Though countless bards with emulative zeal,
Pour forth the sorrows they so keenly feel --
Though GARDINER's magic verse, attun'd by worth,
Offers sweet incense at the shrine of truth,
Forbears to satirize, and joins the throng,
Mounting the pinions of immortal song --
Though even PH^^^NIA decks the honored bier,
And graceful drops the rich embalming tear,
Twining those peerless lines that shall endure,
From mouldering time and death itself secure --
Yet, unappal'd, I here devote the lay,
Echo applause, and ready homage pay;
The little stream the monarch river swells,
And the small ray a flood of light impels.

WITH the subject of my last number I was intimately acquainted; his virtues
were daily under my observation, and I was familiar with his deeds of worth.
But, to the Honorable Thomas Russell, whose name I am ambitious of inserting in
my list of worthies, I was personally unknown; yet, I have frequently listened
with rapture to the authentic narrator of his meritorious deeds. The record of
his life, is a record of splendid actions -- of actions, which, gemmed by
compassion, and its attendant sympathies, uniformly gave to his character the
highest luster. With admirable propriety has the energetic Divine adapted the
sacred text; and a paraphrase thereon might be entitled, an admeasurement of
the virtues and the usefulness of this universal benefactor.

" When the ear heard me, then it blessed me." Forlorn and disconsolate, the
children of adversity were encompassed about by sorrow; they looked, and there
was no one to help, when suddenly the renovating voice of commiseration
vibrated gratefully on the ear. Cheer up, ye sons and daughters of sorrow,
behold the almoner of your God! Our common Father has entrusted me with a
portion of his property, that I may distribute to the necessities of the
destitute: Come, therefore, my friends, and permit me to bestow that, to which
your claims are indubitable. " When the ear heard me, then it blessed me;" nor
is this strange, since so few people know how to approach the children of
penury, with that consideration which their circumstances demand; no wonder
that the voice of him who was exercised in acts of benevolence, should extort
applause, even from the perception of frigidity.

" When the eye saw me, it gave witness to me." Yea, verily, from the
contemplation of benignity, we derive sensations truly pleasurable; we trace,
with a kind of conscious pride, those actions which confer a dignity on
humanity; and, if sickening envy is composed by the powerful opiates of
self-interest, we give full scope to our admiration; our eyes are suffused by
the tear of rapture; they delight to mark the philanthropist, and they follow,
with ineffable complacency, so illustrious an ornament to humanity. " When the
eye saw me, it gave witness to me" -- the reason is obvious -- " Because I
delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him." Excellent motives of complacency! indisputable testimonies of
transcendent merit! he bent an ear to the lamentations of poverty -- he
presented the means of living, and thus cut asunder the bands of affliction --
he protected the fatherless -- he hailed, with the gentle soothings of paternal
consolation, the bereaved orphan -- he became the guide of his youth -- he
constituted the fund from which he drew an ample support -- in one word, he was
the patron of his life.

" The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me." Do we not see
the desolate stranger? -- he has not where to lay his head -- he is an exile
from the place of his nativity -- his natural connexions are no more -- his
spirit is broken by infirmities -- the sorrows of his heart have invaded the
seat of life -- his brow is furrowed by those cares, which, alas! have proved
ineffectual -- his pallid cheeks are hollowed by the excavating hand of
agonizing woe -- his frame is emaciated -- he trembles on the brink of the
grave -- " he is ready to perish." But Russell was the friend of the friendless
-- " of him that had none to help him." Hark! do we not hear the benedictions
of gratitude? -- they are wafted upon the perfumed gale of fame -- " he who was
ready to perish" now swells high the notes of praise -- existence assumes to
him another aspect -- hope is restored to his bosom -- motives for attachment
to life are suddenly multiplied unto him -- his wants are liberally supplied --
and, upon the head of his munificent benefactor, his tongue invoketh blessings.

" And I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy!" Poor, desolate mourner! at
the period which inhumed in the gloomy mansions of the grave, him in whom her
soul delighted, her widowed spirit calculated on an unbroken succession of
melancholy days; but the heart of the good man still beat compassionately. In
the bosom of Russell dwelt the virtues of commiseration -- pleasant is the
voice of amity, its honied accents sounded grateful on her ear, and her heart
once more " sings for joy." Yes, undoubtedly, the path of Russell was the path
of rectitude; it was pointed by righteousness, and wisdom influenced his
election; for admirable is the judgment of that philanthropist, who becomes "
eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and a father to the poor;" who
investigateth the cause of ^he oppressed; who " searches it out," and arrests
the decision of iniquity; who procures a righteous hearing, and becomes an
advocate for the afflicted. Such actions are indeed " as a robe and a diadem;"
they are productive of general benefit, and they are entitled to universal
applause.

That Mr. Russell richly merited the eulogy of virtue, the unaffected sorrow
with which all ranks of people regarded his exit, fully evinceth. To repeat,
that he well discharged the filial duties, and was the principal prop of a
venerable parent, who still lives to mourn his departure; to celebrate his
attachment to the orphan children of a deceased brother; to dwell on his
delicate and faithful affection to the amiable females who successively became
the partners of his heart; to descant on his paternal goodness to those of
whose existence he was the author; or, to expatiate on his beneficent regards
to the individuals who composed his household, would be but a superfluous
attempt to distinguish and dignify propensities, which are the residents of
almost every bosom; and, had Mr. Russell possessed only these common
attachments of humanity, which are but a refined modification of self-love, he
would have merited no tributary lay, and his panegyrists would have incurred
the charge of adulation. But to the friend of the friendless, to the universal
benefactor, the bard of integrity spontaneously raises the song; and, although
the ear of death is heavy, that it cannot hear, yet we pleasingly believe, that
the immortal spirit sleeps not; nor is it irrational to suppose, that it
sometimes bends from its etherial elevation, listening with complacency to the
effusions of gratitude, to the expressed commendations of those virtuous
children of men, whose approbation it once delighted to merit.

To communicate benefits is truly godlike; and, in proportion as we are made
instrumental in disseminatting happiness to our fellow creatures, exactly in
such proportion we imitate Him who went about doing good. The exercise of
munificence is invariably regarded with a glow of satisfaction; and perhaps
this vestige of an illustrious and divine original, is never totally
obliterated from the heaven-born mind. That Mr. Russell was eminently
conspicuous for the number and value of his beneficent acts, the concurrent
testimonies of those who best knew him unanimously proclaim. Seldom have we
known a character who has so fully united the suffrages of all ranks in this
particular; and it is, we conceive, on this ground, that the splendour and eclat
of his life is chiefly rested.

His integrity and punctuality as a merchant; his extensive commercial
knowledge, with the vast advantages which accrued from his mercantile career,
were but the appendages of sound policy, ingenuity, habit and application. The
easy manners, the gracefully elevated deportment, the freedom of access, and
genuine politeness, attributed to Mr. Russell, but designate the gentleman.
Early introduced to, and making a respectable part of, the most genteel
circles, it would have been rather surprising, if his deportment had not been
that of a man thoroughly well bred. His wealth, and consequent importance,
might possibly place him at the head of those societies, over which he presided
with honor to himself, and advantage to them; and his opulence may be supposed
to have been his passport to many other honorary distinctions. But it has been
presumed, that affectionate sympathy and unreserved sincerity are not generally
the necessary result of an intercourse with what is called high life; and for
these productive virtues, we are inclined to give the deceased philanthropist
full credit; they were unquestionably inherent in his bosom; and hence issued
those fertilizing streams, which made glad the sons and daughters of sorrow;
hence originated that cheerful and equal disposition of mind, and that
frankness of temper, which banished suspicion, and authorized the most
unequivocal confidence; and, to the same source we may likewise trace his
unbounded hospitality, and that manly and grateful welcome, with which he ever
greeted the footsteps of the stranger.

Religion diffused over the excellent qualities of his heart her meliorating
influence; he reverenced her laws, and bent in humble acquiescence and filial
obedience to her dictates. Her ministers possessed his respectful and
distinguishing regards; he constantly lent them his countenance; he was
particularly fond of patronizing men of merit in this line; and the handsome
benefaction which he bestowed on the fund appropriated to the relief of those
among their widows, whose circumstances are embarrassed, is evincive of his
attachment to, and consideration for, this venerable body. Here again we are
brought round to a contemplation of that liberality, on which we have chosen
principally to rear the superstructure of his fame. It is said that Mr. Russell
annually appropriated twelve thousand dollars to private charities! What an
ample relief must this sum, distributed by the hand of economy, have afforded
to those indigent sufferers, who were the pensioners of his bounty! How do the
virtues which give birth to such liberal arrangements command esteem! how do
they endear the man, and exalt the citizen! And who but must painfully regret
the exit of a personage, by whose departure such rich and copious streams are,
alas! suddenly dried up? Who but must supplicate the Fountain of munificence,
that they may again spring forth in the lives of his descendants? who, if they
pursue the path marked out for them by their illustrious ancestors, will
unquestionably insure to themselves the highest possible honors, the esteem,
confidence and approbation of their fellowmen, the peace of their own bosoms,
and the plaudit of their Creator.

But the munificence of Mr. Russell was not exclusively shared by those
claimants, to whom his judgment apportioned occasional gratuities; nor was it
wholly confined to the citizens of Columbia. Mankind in general, according to
their necessities, seemed to be the object of his beneficence, while his
diffusive and equal regards extended their genial influence to the far distant
shore. Instances of his generosity are, questionless, echoed in many a clime;
but a recent example, strikingly in point, may serve as a close to this sketch.

A respectable house in a celebrated European emporium, (the capital of which
was supposed immense) celebrated for punctuality and probity, suddenly stopped
payment, and astonishment pervaded every description of our merchants. This
misfortune was not attributed to ill conduct, but rather to a succession of
adverse accidents; and an arrangement was speedily produced, which enabled one
of the firm to visit America, for the purpose of collecting outstanding debts.
This gentleman arrived in the town of Boston, the metropolis of Massachusetts,
(which place Mr. Russell then dignified by his presence) under the pressure of
very unpleasant circumstances. Both the house and heart of the generously
hospitable Russell were open for his reception. A traveling prince could
scarcely have been received with higher marks of respectful attention; and he
found in the bosom of this worthy family, during his abode there, an elegantly
pleasing asylum. But this was not enough -- the kindness of the American
merchant stopped not here. From the period which announced the failure of the
European house, no commercial negotiation had been entrusted to its firm. Under
such a cloud the wary trader stood aloof; but the bosom of Mr. Russell
possessed a sympathetic chord, which, as surely as his eye glanced on the
children of adversity, uniformly vibrated to pity; he regarded the claims of
misfortune as sacred; and he conceived, that the suffering individual imposed
on him duties which were indispensable. Through the powerful aid and extensive
influence of Mr. Russell, two ships, richly laden with West India productions,
and calculated, with their cargoes, to amount to not less than forty thousand
pounds, were consigned to the prostrate house! The emoluments arising from the
sale of these valuable appropriations, let the arithmetician compute. What an
advantageous re-commencement of business was thus furnished* and what a benign
luster is thereby thrown over the American name! But a further act of
beneficence remains to be recounted.

On the departure of the European, Mr. Russell, with that delicacy which is the
appendage of munificent actions, presented him with bills, for his separate and
sole use, to the amount of five hundred pounds sterling; enclosing, also, like
sums for similar purposes, to the unfortunate gentlemen with whom he stood
connected!!! To throw the veil of silence over virtues thus splendid, would, we
conceive, betray a phlegmatic or an envious mind; and the advantages resulting
from eulogizing the meritorious dead, are too obvious to need enumeration.

The panegyrist of the everlastingly absent, if he levies no tax on survivors,
cannot be accused of interested motives; he has but expressed his admiration of
what he has conceived abstractedly good; he does not do homage to the creature,
for he regards every virtue as emanating from Deity; and he is morally and
religiously certain, that he risks nothing by prostrating before the image of
his Creator, wherever it may consist with the arrangements of Omnipotence to
impress it.

No. LXVIII.
Who can the coming moment designate,
Or to enjoyments give a certain date?
Those scenes that promise most, by fancy wrought,
And with enthusiastic ardour sought,
Full often disgust the fond believing heart,
While disappointment tops her blighting part.
Again -- when wrapped in clouds the view appears,
And on its disk no pleasing promise wears,
When clust'ring joys come not within our plan,
And, to endure it, is the most we can,
Then -- mark the caprice -- tip-toe pleasures spring,
Thick over our path the richest flowers to fling;
The unexpected good we grateful bless,
And all its magic influence confess.

THE experience of every day evinces that humanity is subject to error; those
calculations that we fancy we have made with the greatest accuracy, frequently,
by proving the reverse of truth, betray our total ignorance both of causes and
effects. I have sometimes feasted, by anticipation, for many days, on the
refined and genuine pleasures which I confidently believed would result from
the collection of a select party of sentimentalists, who were, by appointment,
to devote a few hours to the social enjoyments of conversation. My heart has
beat high with expectation, and I have hasted with avidity to the place of
rendezvous; but, in vain have I watched for the moment of sentiment; in vain
sighed for the richly enrobed thought, which I might bear as a trophy from a
scene where I had calculated to partake the feast of reason; for, strange to
tell, the gems of intellect were muffled in the thickest clouds -- not a ray
was elanced -- and the company have separated without a single observation
which could merit an inscription upon the tablets of memory!

But, if I have been necessitated to confess that expectations, originating in
reason, have proved fallacious, my mortification has been amply balanced by
opportunities from which I have reaped a large supply of intellectual
enjoyments, where I have looked for tasteless silence, or noisy mirth.

Considerations of interest, the duties of good neighborhood, or motives of
general civility, have frequently introduced me to parties, that, but for the
obligations thus imposed, I should have avoided. Yet, in these resorts, a rich
repast has awaited me! Nature, unadulterated, and replete with sterling worth,
has stood confessed; silence, impressed by respectful attention, has hung on
the lips of the hearers, and thus endowed with energy even the timid speaker.
Inquiry has produced inquiry; a subject of conversation has obtained the
general ear; individuals have alternately expressed their sentiments; rational
conclusions have been deduced; and I have returned home, informed, complacent
and happy.

" We are to have a pantomimical exhibition at the Theater -- will you go, Mr.
Vigillius?" said an inquirer; No, Sir -- I detest pantomimes. Speech was
bestowed on man as a distinguishing mark of superiority; and it is, methinks, a
strange depravity of taste, which, rejecting this dignifying advantage,
confineth the performer to dumb show: Besides, I have an insuperable aversion
to the degradation of the " human form divine." Man was made in the image of
his Maker, and I regard the debasement of this image, as absolute profanity.
The antic gestures which the pantomimical performer frequently assumes, in my
opinion, do violence to every idea of propriety; and I pity the mind which is
sufficiently vitiated to draw amusement from such fantastical sources.

" I will not dispute the correctness of your taste, Mr. Gleaner," returned the
gentleman, " but the pantomime is to be preceded by Shakespeare's Tempest, or
Enchanted Island." What lover of the drama but feels his bosom glow at the
mention of this immortal bard? I had read the Tempest, but I had never seen it
on the stage; and a friend, whose judgment no votary of science has ever yet
impeached, had informed me its stage effect was wonderful.

Yes, I will go by all means; and, elated by the most sanguine expectations, in
a front box I obtained a front seat. The curtain drew up; and the tempested
ship -- the billowy waves -- the storm of thunder and lightning -- the
affrighted mariners -- the crash of the ^alling mast, all together, obtained
their full effect; and I could scarcely have believed it in the power of
fiction to have raised such a hurricane in my breast. But, from this moment, I
experienced little else but disappointment and disgust. Some of the finest
sentiments were so mangled and mutilated, that it became impossible to reunite
them, or to endow them with that divine energy, thus extinguished by their
dissolution, which was breathed into them by the creative bard, when they first
received the vital principle. Whole speeches were so mouthed and
misrepresented, that we smiled were we should have wept; and were fretting with
vexation, when the genuine wit of the inimitable author should have excited the
most mirthful approbation! Yet the part of Prospero was well supported; he
seemed apprized of the gravity of his character, and he seldom forgot his
dignity. Ariel, also, the spirit Ariel, her sylph like movements would indeed
have become an inhabitant of the blue expanse; she was exactly what we could
have wished her, as near celestial as the habiliments of mortality would
permit; not a soul but blessed the winged vision, and not a hand but was raised
to approbate her emancipating ascension. Her " follow, follow, follow," still
vibrates melodiously on my ear; indeed, even the most phlegmatic must confess
that Miss Harding is a very lovely and a very promising child. With respect to
the other performers, they generally overtopped or undervalued their parts;
and, although Dorinda and Miranda were very engaging women, yet they seemed to
have little idea of that artless simplicity with which the education they were
supposed to receive, should have invested them; and I suspect it will be some
time before they will be qualified for an assumption of Shakespeare's capital
characters.

The play over, I was hurrying away, with the painful reflection that I had
lost an evening; but in the moment of my intended departure, I was arrested by
the observation, that a serious pantomime was to be presented. A serious
pantomime! repeated I. I will stay then, and see of what stuff a serious
pantomime is composed. La Forete Noire, or the Picture Discovered -- this was
the title of the piece; and, to my great astonishment, it possessed every
feature of a well conceived and regular comedy. The plot was evident and
strikingly worked up; it had its Protasis, its Epitasis, and its Catastasis;
and these introduced a most happy catastrophe. Whether the unities are strictly
preserved, I cannot exactly determine; but if they are not, while Shakespeare
abounds with precedents of the utmost latitude in this respect* an inferior
author will hardly become inconsolable for such defects. On the drawing up of
the curtain, Madame G -- was discovered at her toilette; from her work-bag she
drew a parcel of letters, from which, selecting one, she seemed almost to
devour the contents; and while she traced and retraced the lines, we read, in
her agitated countenance, the strongest emotions; Suddenly she arose, and now,
with quick and perturbed steps, anon solemn and slow, she traversed the stage,
evidently struggling to obtain that self-command, which may put her in
possession of some degree of calmness -- her efforts prove ineffectual, and she
hastens to the wainscot, where, touching a secret spring, the panel flies
back, and exhibits a portrait, to which she addresses the most impassioned
aspirations. Every one readily concluded that the picture was the resemblance
of a person whose image was unquestionably engraven on her heart, and whose
letters she had been so fervidly perusing. On the approach of footsteps she
retouched the spring, and the friendly panel again concealed the object to
whom she had been breathing her tributary sighs. A figure, on whose brow the
dignity of manhood sat enthroned, next approached; she hastened to meet him;
and we hesitated not to pronounce him the original of the portrait, the writer
of the letters, and the man of her affections. A tender interview having
succeeded, the almost distracted fair one warned him of approaching danger;
and, so irresistible, so heart affecting were her pleadings, that, yielding to
her energetically enforced wishes, and tearing himself from her embraces, he
reluctantly made his escape from the open casement to which she had conducted
him. Our heroine then approached an apartment, and a particular signal produced
from thence a beautiful boy, whom she embraced with such animated transport, as
induced us to pronounce, without hesitation, that she pressed him to a maternal
bosom: After she had evinced, by a variety of animated gestures the inherent
claim he possessed to her protection, she led him, all agitated and trembling,
to her toilette, and, putting into his hands a letter, the perusal of which
produces in the child the unequivocal expressions of surprise, affection and
filial duty, she has once more recourse to her treasure behind the wainscot;
she points it out to the little cherub, who, in a transport of duteous
attachment, assays to grasp the respected figure, leaps on his feet, throws
abroad his hands, clasps them in a petitioning attitude, as if soliciting a
father's benediction; and, in short, demonstrates, beyond the power of
language, every emotion which could be supposed to triumph in the affectionate
bosom of innocence, on an unexpected discovery of the author of its being. Just
at this juncture, a loud noise interrupted the sweet and amiable effusions of
young attachment; the boy was hurried to his place of concealment, the picture
veiled, and the lady prepared to meet the approaching storm; nor was she long
held in suspense. Her father entered, and, ignorant of the marriage she had
clandestinely procured, he was accompanied by a person, whom from his dress we
conclude to be an ecclesiastic, whom he commands her to receive as her future
husband. The authority of this father was marked by austere severity; he
enjoined with unrelenting sternness, and it was evident that he would admit of
no appeal. The lady entreated, but her supplications were ineffectual; her
tyrannic father continued obdurate. It appears he is one of those gray beards,
against whom Octavian, in the Mountaineers, is so justly exasperated; and of
course he is peremptory and despotic, and his weeping daughter is left to
receive the man in black as her intended lord and master. He, good soul,
appears to possess a comfortable share of sang-froid, and a most ludicrous
scene ensues, to which the lady puts an end by making her escape; when her
would be lover sneaks off in a manner which may be termed mock heroic.

The secreted child then presents himself, who, peeping from his confinement,
and finding no one to cross his path, is compelled, by a very natural
curiosity, to retrace the lines which had given him such surprising
information; he seizes the work-bag, and, skipping with it to the front of the
stage, places himself in a convenient attitude for examination; one letter is
taken out, and another, and another, which, not proving the paper he wished,
are carelessly tossed about, until, with childish impetuosity, he grasps the
whole parcel, and after throwing them promiscuously over the floor,
relinquishing the pursuit, he hastes to catch one more glance at the beloved
portrait, by which he had been so much captivated. With skilful hand he touches
the ready spring, the obedient panel yields to his pressure, and he again
exhibits those testimonies of a duteous heart which are so becoming, and in him
so hazardous. But as the tremendous thunder and the lightning's glare, to him
who had promised himself a serene sky, or as the roar of the hungry lion, to
the traveller who dreamed of security, thus fearfully portentous sounded the
tread of authority in the ear of the poor affrighted victim, who, all trembling
and appalled, flew to his place of shelter, regardless of the letters that
strewed the floor, and utterly forgetting to veil the treasured portrait. The
old gentleman entered, and, starting with astonishment at the lettered floor,
he happened to stumble upon the explanatory paper which the boy had overlooked;
he reads, and a hurricane of the passions succeeds; all is revealed; the
clandestine marriage, the child, his secret residence, the panel -- he raises
his eyes, and the uncovered picture vouches the authenticity of every syllable!
He traverses the stage, stamps, distorts his figure, and acts a part proper for
the madman, which surprise and unrelenting cruelty had rendered him. With
demonstrations of ungovernable rage, he makes his way to the sanctuary of
innocence; and, rudely seizing the little sufferer, he seems about to sacrifice
him to his vengeance; but the uproar producing the entrance of two ill-looking
fellows, the beauteous boy, with expressions of savage barbarity, is committed
to them! In vain the little unfortunate kneels and supplicates; his pleadings
avail him not; and the appearance of his mother, while it heightens the agony
of the scene, procures no relenting in the breast of the grandfather! She
weeps, prostrates and implores; but had she assailed the rude winds, or the
impenetrable rock, her intercessions had been as effectual; driven to
desperation, she seizes the lovely child, and once more presses him to her
maternal bosom; by command of her savage parent, he is torn from her embraces,
and forcibly hurried away by the ruffians to whom he is committed! while the
distressed lady, fainting in the arms of her attendant, is borne off, and the
scene is thus terminated.

We were next introduced to a dreary forest, where we met the little exile, for
whom we were so deeply interested, with the two ruffians, who seem on the point
of imbruing their hands in innocent blood!! By the most heart-affecting
gestures, the little mourner discovers the agony of his soul; but mercy is
denied him, and he trembles on the verge of eternity, when he is suddenly
rescued by the captain of a banditti, who, putting those authorized assassins
to flight, takes the boy under his protection. The robber's design to guard the
child was unequivocally expressed, by his wrapping him in his enormous cloak;
and when the succeeding scene presents the assembled banditti, producing their
various booty, we are prepared to admire their chief, who uncovers the rescued
innocent as the fruits of his expedition. The disgust expressed by the
nefarious fraternity, is the consequent result of their depravity; and we
cannot but tremble for the little wanderer, although apprized that his
protector is at hand, when we find him on the point of being sacrificed to the
turpitude of their feelings. His second rescue by the commander of these
atrocious offenders -- his subsequent pleadings for him whose hand was raised
to take his life -- the appeal of the chief to his subordinates -- his striking
comparison between the unmerited clemency of that infant, and their unmanly and
groundless malice -- with the extorted applause and reconciliation which
ensued, were finely imagined, and a most wonderful piece of acting.

On the dispersion of the robbers, we are called to witness a struggle in the
bosom of the little hero, between his gratitude to his preserver and his filial
affection. He wore on his breast the miniature of his mother; this picture
captivated the robber, and he endeavored to prevail on the boy to relinquish
it. Agitated to an extreme, he entreats permission to retain it -- any thing
else he would part with -- but that picture, clasping it to his heart, that
picture must still remain with him. The robber offers him in exchange an
elegant watch -- this charms him -- he seizes it with avidity, views it over
and over, admires it much, claps it to his ear -- and then, catching the
picture, presses it to his lips, and, with a smile of self-complacency,
delivers up the watch. The robber, (I can hardly prevail on myself so
frequently to bestow on him this detestable epithet) charmed by the strength of
his filial affection, and admiring so much firmness in a mind so young, made
him a present of the watch, and led him off in triumph.

The eventful forest then presents the lady herself, surrounded by the
banditti. Either a voluntary exile from her father's house, or driven thence by
his savage cruelty, she had wandered forth, and, ere she was aware, her
trembling steps had led her to those haunts of horror!! All the energies of
commiseration are now roused to action. A female -- in a thick forest --
surrounded by the most hardened wretches -- no eye to pity, and no hand to
protect. The abandoned villains evidently meditate the worst of purposes --
rudely they grasp her hands -- they seem to confer on a division of their prize
-- and, like savage beasts of prey, they exult over their agonized victim. The
distress of the lady is beyond description -- her fine tresses hang in
disordered ringlets on her well-formed shoulders -- anguish riots in her pallid
countenance -- and succor, alas! is placed beyond all rational hope. At this
moment, the captain of the banditti, accompanied by his little favorite, makes
his appearance -- a transient gleam of joy illumes the grief-worn countenance
of the lady -- she snatches her child to her bosom -- but alas! the chief, more
enchanted by the original than the picture, immediately prefers his ferocious
suit -- he is rejected with spontaneous marks of detestation -- a pointed
poniard seems to be the alternative, to which, presenting her defenseless
bosom, she smiles beneath the expected stroke. The mode of attack was then
changed; and, while her beloved child is held by two of the most hardened of
the banditti, a sword is pointed at his breast, which, it appears, her
continued refusal will pierce with the stroke of death! Is it possible to
imagine a situation more shockingly interesting? Her feelings were wrought up
to a degree of frenzy -- despair nerved her efforts -- and, with more than
mortal courage, she flew, and, snatching the boy, fled with him from her
pursuers! Again, however, she was overtaken; but in the struggle, the general
attention being arrested by the lady, the boy escaped, and she is borne off by
the banditti.

But the pantomime draws toward a close, and hope begins to dawn. We are
presented with the hero of the piece; his figure is commanding, and his
countenance unites the traits of those virtues, which go to the conformation of
the gentleman and the soldier. His company is drawn up on the stage, and he is
in the act of performing the manual exercise, when suddenly a little cherub,
agitated and trembling, rushes forward, and, kneeling at the feet of the
military commander, supplicates his extricating hand; and, to make certain the
assistance which he solicited, he presents the picture of his mother, then a
suffering captive in the hands of the most abandoned of the human race. The
picture was instantly recognized; and astonishment, paternal affection, joy,
grief, love, detestation, pity, indignation, tender apprehension, and
determined bravery, in one pathetically interesting and tumultuous contrast,
were strikingly grouped. But no time was to be lost. Instantly, in a manner
expressive of the hurricane in his breast, catching his son in his arms, and
followed by his soldiers, he pursued his way to that recess of atrocious
villainy, to which his little guide directed. The consequences were precisely
what might have been expected; the robbers were surprised in those haunts which
they had believed secure; a skirmish ensued; firearms were employed; success
declared on the side of rectitude; the banditti were completely defeated; and
the victor, when in the moment of plunging his sword into the bosom of their
chief, finds his arm arrested by his heroic boy, who forcibly representing the
obligations he was under to this generous delinquent, who had repeatedly
rescued him from the stroke of death, induced his father to raise him from the
despairing attitude he had assumed, and to extend unto him the hand of
forgiveness.

The parent of the lady now enters. Sorrow had meliorated his breast, and he
seeks his daughter in that forest whither he supposes she had wandered.
Transports unutterable grew in his soul at this rencountre; reconciliation and
pardon dwelt on every feature and in every expressive gesture; and the piece
concludes with an act of general amnesty, which possesses the power of
conferring happiness upon every worthy individual.

I will not say that I have given an accurate sketch of La Forete Noire. I saw
it only once -- some months have since elapsed, and my memory may have been
treacherous; but, during its presentation, I was interested, alarmed and
soothed, and the finest feelings of my heart were in exercise. From
Shakespeare's Tempest I expected much, but I had the mortification to witness
its murder! Pantomimical mummery I abhored -- yet the pantomime proved a rich
entertainment; and, felicitating myself on the various talents with which
humanity is endowed, I was happy they could be thus called into action; and I
rejoiced in that accommodating pliability which bestowed the power of embodying
the feelings, even without the aid of language.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
THE GLEANER.

A MISCELLANEOUS PRODUCTION.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

BY CONSTANTIA.

Slow to condemn, and seeking to commend,
Good sense will with deliberation scan;
To trivial faults unwilling to descend,
If Virtue gave, and formed the general plan.
VOL. III.

Published according to Act of Congress.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, FAUST's STATUE, No. 45,
Newbury-Street.

FEB. 1798.

CONTENTS of the THIRD VOLUME.
No. LXIX. PROBABLE utility of an amicable combination among the sons and
daughters of literature 5 No. LXX. Philo Americanus's letter to the Gleaner,
requesting the publication of Virtue Triumphant 12 No. LXXI. Continuation of
Virtue Triumphant 19 No. LXXII. Virtue Triumphant, continued 27 No. LXXIII.
Continuation of Virtue Triumphant 44 No. LXXIV. Virtue Triumphant, continued 57
No. LXXV. Virtue Triumphant, concluded 74 No. LXXVI. Predominating traits in
the character of a real hero -- Illustrious example 88 No. LXXVII. Subject
continued 93 No. LXXVIII. Misanthropy sometimes the offspring of a
philanthropic mind -- Story of Octavian 99 No. LXXIX. Comprehensive beauties of
propriety -- Necessity of observing its discriminating rules 109 No. LXXX.
Philo Americanus's second letter to the Gleaner, enclosing the Traveller
Returned 116 No. LXXXI. The Traveller Returned, continued 125 No. LXXXII.
Continuation of the Traveller Returned 135 No. LXXXIII. Further continuation of
the Traveller Returned 145 No. LXXXIV. The Traveller Returned, concluded 152
No. LXXXV. Pleasure of descanting on the virtues of humanity -- Valuable traits
in the character of Captain P --. Facts relative to Major R -- and Captain A --
163 No. LXXXVI. Prevalence and utility of local attachments 172 No. LXXXVII.
The acrimony of party spirit lamented -- written December 1 st, 1796 178 No.
LXXXVIII. Observations on female abilities 188 No. LXXXIX. Observations
continued 196 No. XC. Further continuation 205 No. XCI. Observations concluded
217 No. XCII. Beneficial effects of benevolent examples -- An interesting
narrative, drawn from real life 224 No. XCIII. The calamities of insolvent
debtors 235 No. XCIV. Propriety and excellence of economy -- An illustrative
fact 242 No. XCV. Anecdotes of benevolence -- Letter from Charles Candor 250
No. XCVI. A spirit of national independence recommended -- Observation on the
tragedies of Mrs. Warren -- Anecdote of Mrs. Cowley, and of Mr. Holland 260 No.
XCVII. Miss Harriot B -- 's second letter to the Gleaner 269 No. XCVIII. Story
of an unfortunate stranger -- Last view of Margaretta 279 No. XCIX. Pleasures
and virtues of hospitality -- Letters to the Gleaner -- Sequel of the story of
Miss Seafort 291 No. C. Letters to the Gleaner -- Sequel of the story of
Octavian, and of Alphonso and Lavinia 300 Conclusion -- The Gleaner unmasked
313
THE GLEANER.
No. LXIX.
If the soft bands of amity entwined,
And kindred motives swayed each lettered mind,
The scattered rays of genius to collect,
And all its broad diverging powers connect --
With hues more vivid, science then would glow,
And arts expansive, to perfection grow:
But armed against themselves, their efforts die,
No kindling heat the separate sparks supply;
Corrosive mildews sickening envy spreads,
And desolation marks the path she treads!
Her fatal progress worth innate impedes,
Hope fades appalled, and prostrate science bleeds!

I COULD wish, methinks, that men of letters, and professors of the fine arts,
would, by mutual consent, form themselves into one great and illustrious
commonwealth, appointing their several officers, committees of correspondence,
and persons duly qualified to examine the claims of every candidate, who became
desirous of a situation in their community; and I should, moreover, be
solicitous that the republic, when organized, should be careful to impress on
the minds of their delegates, the necessity of observing, in the investigation
of those pretensions which might come before them, the strictest impartiality.

There are grades in the intellectual as well as the natural world; and he, who
may fill one station with respectability, may be utterly inadequate to the
duties of another. Yet, let not the mental energies be depressed; perseverance
may do much; efforts gather strength by action, and emulation, lending wings to
ambition, becomes an irresistible stimulus. The classic periods of a Belknap
are not the production of every pen, nor is the energy of a Ramsay the growth
of every mind; yet, the story of this new world, and the interesting events of
the revolution, may become the exercise of humbler talents; and, garbed in
simple language, may, for a certain class of readers, possess peculiar charms.
From the lyre of Philenia issues the most captivating strains; correct, and
highly polished, her deathless page may stand without a rival; but, shall the
lowly muse, for this, resign those magic powers, which give luster to the eye
of grief, and sweetly whisper the soothing joys of mild tranquillity? Forbid
it, every rich, ennobling motive, which swells to emulation. No -- rather let
the trembling candidate, marking Philenia as a star of guidance, call into
action every glowing energy, each blessed incitement, which may allure to
eminence, and adventurously assay the radiant path, in which the lovely vision,
with beamy excellence, so splendidly succeeds.

Well directed ambition, is, perhaps, the master spring of every great
achievement, and order should constitute the stamina of a literary republic. I
would have every description of intellect exactly in its proper place; I
contend, only, that the smallest spark of genius, so far from being quenched by
cold neglect, or extinguished by the chilling blasts of criticism, should be
furnished with those incitements, which are calculated to blow it into a flame;
and, was genuine fraternity the broad basis of the commonwealth, which I have
imagined -- was every individual closely united in the bonds of affection, a
reciprocity of good offices would be studiously cultivated, a combination of
efforts procured; and the archives of the corresponding secretary, being
considered as the sacred repository of every ingenious plan, or literary
attempt, the united abilities of the wide extensive republic, thus
concentrated, would become a magazine of rich materials, from which the
beautiful and august temple of arts and sciences would attain a degree of
perfection hitherto unknown.

It has been a general complaint, especially among a particular class of men,
that genius has never, except in the short luminous intervals of one or two
brilliant epochs, been advanced to that elevation, to which its rare qualities
gave it an indisputable claim; and yet, my memory, at this moment, furnishes me
with instances, that render this hypothesis rather problematical. Pindar, we
are told, continued, almost a complete century, one of the brightest luminaries
in the literary hemisphere. Warriors of the first description, and statesmen of
the most elevated rank, contended for his regards. His sacred poesy was
acknowledged by every order of the people -- it filled the temples of the gods;
and his divine odes, songs, and paeans resounded through the Delphian aisles.
The ministers of Apollo, erecting his statue, placed it among the most
conspicuous ornaments of their temple; and the Pythean voice audibly
pronounced, that one half of those early fruit offerings, with which the pious
Religionist, on each returning year, failed not to gratify the consecrated
attendants of the Delphian rites, should be regularly appropriated to him! Thus
was the poet, while enrobed in mortality, invested, by the voluntary
arrangements of gratitude, with a participation of divine honors! and, when he
ascended to the celestial abodes, his remains were distinguished by every
demonstration of the high estimation in which he was held. His fellow-citizens
decreed, as a testimonial of their veneration, the monumental pile; artists
combined their most arduous efforts, and the beauty of the cenotaph which arose
in the hippodrome, and which was consecrated to the memory of Pindar, continued
to extort the admiration of every observer, during six revolving centuries. Nor
was this all -- his uncommon worth and singular abilities became the heritage
of his descendants: In the days of Plutarch, the posterity of the bard received
a portion of the sacred victim. The house which he had inhabited became a
barrier to the vindictive progress of the enraged Spartans; and even the
Macedonian chief did a kind of homage to this dwelling.

It is true, the fate of Homer may be opposed to the splendid fortunes of
Pindar; but every thing relative to that prince of Grecian poesy seems to be
enveloped by the thick folds of obscurity. I remember once to have read a life
of Homer, wherein I was informed that he received the name Homer instead of
Melesigenes, by which he was originally designated, in consequence of his
blindness; and yet, the same writer afterward asserts, not only that seven
cities contended for the honor of his birth, but also, that there were seven
different Homers, who lived at distant periods of time, and whose abilities and
fortunes were various. Query: Were these Homers all blind? Perhaps all that is
certain of the inspired author of the Iliad, is, that his mental powers were
unrivalled; and that his fame, collecting added luster from each revolving age,
has thus evinced its unquestionable right to immortality.

Apelles received for his picture of Alexander, grasping a thunderbolt, the
full sum of four thousand pounds. He stood high in the favor of his sovereign,
who seemed to conceive scarce any gratification too liberal for talents so
conspicuous; even the beautiful Campaspe was not withheld, and Apelles
continued, through life, to enjoy all those honors which his transcendent
abilities richly merited. But antiquity furnishes many proofs of the respect
which was, in the early ages, paid to mind, and the high estimation with which
intellectual superiority was regarded; nor am I willing, hastily, to conclude
that the moderns are wholly deficient in this particular.

The career of Addison was both honorary and lucrative; and, from the fortunate
moment which put a copy of his Latin verses into the hands of Dr. Lancaster, he
seems to be reaping all those marks of applause which were due to his genius
and his application. That noble patron of letters, Sir John Summers, the Macenas
of the court in which he lived, obtained for Addison, from his sovereign, a
pension of L. 300 per annum, to discharge his traveling expenses, subsequent
to which we find him the attendant of prince Eugene. He was rewarded for the
celebrated poem which he entitled the Campaign by Godolphin -- he accompanied
lord Halifax to Andover -- he was repeatedly secretary for the kingdom of
Ireland -- he was created one of the Lords Commissioners of trade -- and
lastly, he obtained the post of Secretary of State.

The literary fame of Pope was equal to the warmest expectations that ever
bard, even in the moment of poetic frenzy, could have indulged; and his
pecuniary emoluments also invested him with a handsome property. The
subscriptions which he obtained for the translation of the Iliad amounted to L.
6000; and he received beside, from Linto^ the bookseller, no less than L.1200.
After a patronage so liberal, he purchased his celebrated recess at Twickenham,
where he realized the luxury of filial tenderness, sentimental retirement, the
independence to which he was ardently attached, and that kind of friendship
which is the rich growth of disinterested esteem. Yet the literary annals of
the British page recounts the story of a writer, of no inconsiderable
celebrity, who absolutely yielded up his existence for the want of that support
so necessary to its endurance. But possibly, in this instance, economy and
conduct might be wanting. Prudence is not always the appendage of genius; and
the most liberal benefactions may prove insufficient, if discretion is not
consulted in their appropriation. Later times have given us an example in the
person of the unfortunate Savage; the efforts of his friends, to place him in
any degree of independence, were rendered ineffectual by his irregular conduct.
Occasional largesses but furnished the means of renewed imprudencies; and the
pension he received from Queen Caroline was annually squandered in a privacy,
attended with circumstances of ambiguity, from a knowledge of which his sense
of propriety impelled him to exclude his most intimate friends. But his justly
celebrated biographer realized all the sweets of an easy competency,
accompanied by the soothing reflection, that what he possessed was she well
earned reward of natural endowments, and of acquirements which perhaps have not
frequently been surpassed.

But whether the general suffrage of mankind has preponderated in favor of
genius, I do not presume to determine; my present object is only to establish a
persuasion of the necessity of a union of plans, and a combination of efforts,
in order to the procurement of any desirable end. It is with pain I have marked
the operation of that rivalship among the children of science, which too often
terminates in a rooted aversion from each other. The acrimony and confirmed
hatred of competitors, in any profession, is as unjustifiable as it is
injurious; and it is from a view of the alarming effects, too often consequent
on a similarity of pretensions, that I have taken the liberty to suggest the
necessity of some general arrangements, which may open a line of communication,
promote fraternity, and establish confidence and affection.

I am aware, that, agreeably to the decision of the Abbe Raynal, those are
attentions which ought to be regarded as wholly foreign from the contemplations
of an American. According to that writer, the rays of genius never have, nor
ever will, shed their genial influence on the benighted bosom of a native of
this younger world; punished even beyond the fourth generation for the crimes
of their ancestors, they are doomed, by the pen of this philosopher, to
experience an utter dereliction of all those rare abilities, which could give
them a title to enroll their names in the annals of fame! But transcendently
excellent as was the Abbe Raynal, he was however clothed in the habiliments of
mortality; and while thus invested, we are not to stamp his ideas with the seal
of infallibility. America has given birth to philosophers, politicians, and
warriors of the first description; she numbers also a long list of celebrated
proficients in the polite arts -- West, Copeley, and Trumbull, natives of her
soil, now take rank in the highest class of their profession, on the Albion,
shore; and it is said their admired productions are referred to, as a proof of
the flourishing state of painting in the island of Great Britain! We are
fearful to give this article of information all the coloring of which it is
susceptible, lest we should be suspected of a design to invigorate that
censurable and acrimonious kind of rivalship, we have professed a solicitude to
suppress.

Apelles, when painters are the subject, will always be observed as a prominent
figure; and the finished touches of his pencil were marked by the winged envoys
of fame. Yet did Apelles extend his regards to every competitor; he was
conscious of that superiority with which nature had endowed him; and he
ingenuously confessed that he supposed himself without rival or imitator, in
the gracefulness of his figures and attitudes; but, with that grandeur of soul
which involves a detestation of all unnecessary prevarication, he acknowledged
his inferiority in many other branches of his art. For the purpose of viewing
and admiring the performances of his cotemporary, Protogenes, he traveled to
Rhodes. The first rate talents of Protogenes would have blown up the passion of
jealousy in a mind less liberal; but, disdaining to submit to an impulse so
ignoble, he transfused into the breast of the artist the sentiments of laudable
ambition. He drew him from his solitude, enhanced the value of his pictures,
and, pointing out to the Rhodians his elevated abilities, he extorted from them
that applause, which, while they were lavish of their commendations of a
stranger, they had, until that period, denied to worth which was the growth of
their own soil.

Addison and Pope appear to have been, in some sort, under the influence of a
spirit of literary acrimony: Envy, it is but too obvious, more than glanced on
their minds; and the murky clouds of discord, dimmed, for a moment, the pure
luster of two of the brightest luminaries in a constellation, which will
continue to irradiate the latest ages. Of their disunion, posterity will judge;
partisans will enlist upon either side; and it is left for the careful
investigator of literary annals, to decide who was the aggressor, or with whom
the continuance of rancour remained. But the enthusiastic admirer of Addison,
will blush, while contemplating the accusation lodged against the elegant
moralist, whom he has ever delighted to honor; he can scarcely believe him
susceptible of duplicity, or that he could possibly, while descanting on a
meritorious production, Damn with faint praise, assent with civil leer,
And without sneering, teach the rest to sneer!
If, however, the fact is incontestibly proved, and it is reduced to a
certainty, that " Atticus is the man," genius itself will drop a tear, and the
lover of dignified humanity will lament that the infirmity of a mind so truly
ennobled, had not been consigned to oblivion.

As this, our sixty-ninth number, may probably stand accused of incoherence, we
take leave to state, in few words, a subject, the importance of which we have
been laboring to impress. We would open to the votaries of genius, in every
part of the habitable world, where they may be supposed to sojourn, a channel
of communication; we wish to see candidates for fame associated in every
possible view; we are desirous they should cultivate toward each other a spirit
of lenity and of candor; we have been aiming to excite an emulation of good
offices; and we ardently recommend an unremitted exercise of the habits of
affection.

No. LXX.
Candor enrob'd in spotless white appears,
Around her head a fragrant wreath she wears;
Indulgence uniformly marks her reign,
While information mingles in her train;
And, as the spark of genius bright^ning glows,
The m^^d of merit gladly she bestows.

To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
SIR,
ATTACHED to my country, and wishing her, very sincerely, a full harvest of
opulence and fame, I would endow her with all those meridian splendors which
encircle nations, that have for many centuries been pressing onward to the goal
of eminence. Yet, however precipitate my wishes may be, sober reason convinces
me, that every thing has its adolescence, and that the maturing hand of time,
and the sunny beams of invigorating applause, are requisite to bring forward
the germ, which the blighting breath of illtimed severity may blast in its bud.
Under this conviction, I read with candor the American page, and I am
solicitous to receive, with the utmost indulgence, every literary attempt.

Uniformly open to these impressions, my regrets on account of the fate of a
Comedy, which made its appearance in the Theater in Federal-Street, Boston, in
the winter of 1795, may be easily imagined. I pretend not to write a critique
on that play. I confess a partiality for the author, and I do not therefore
hazard an opinion; yet I take leave to repeat a well known truth: the
production has never been brought to the test; it was performed but once; the
players were generally deficient in their parts; and more than one of the
comedians confessed, that they came on the stage with scarce a recollection of
the sentiment which they were to express!! And yet this mutilated presentation
has been deemed sufficient to procure a decision on the merit of the production!

I will own, that I have attended with some displeasure to comments, which were
evidently the result of a want of information, and which were, nevertheless,
pronounced with all the peremptory warmth of rancorous criticism. One coxcomb
observed, that the piece was nothing else but a string of tedious, insipid,
unconnected dialogues, without even the smallest vestige of design, and that he
found it altogether impossible to continue in the playhouse during its
presentation. A second wished the author had not kept the den^^ument out of
sight until the last scene in the last act! It would have been better, he said,
if the catastrophe could have met the view of the audience at every turn, and
thus given them an interest in, and prepared them for, the event!! A third
conceived he evinced his candor by allowing, that if the play could be
metamorphosed into a novel, it might be endured! and a pretty Miss of twenty,
titteringly expressed her hopes, that if the Comedy should be presented again,
the players, in the plenitude of their theatrical knowledge, might for the
honor of America, have the goodness to bestow on the paltry production --
"What?" -- Why, Mr. Gleaner, nothing more nor less than a plot!!

It seems, that the feelings of the writer of this Drama, depressed by remarks
of this description, officiously handed her both by friends and enemies, has
declined the second presentation, which the justice of the Manager honorably
tendered her: Yet the Comedy, notwithstanding the disadvantages under which it
labored, was certainly heartily received by the audience; and, desirous to
furnish those who have any degree of curiosity, with an opportunity of
examining for themselves, I have obtained permission to transcribe the
manuscript in question, with a view to its obtaining a place in your periodical
publication.

Your work is confessedly a Miscellany; and, as there can be no impropriety in
your admitting, among the variety it contains, dramatic performances, you may
probably find it convenient to give it a regular continuation through the
numbers of the Gleaner.

The author of the Medium, disgusted with an appellation which has been
sufficiently productive of vexation, now entitles her Comedy " Virtue
Triumphant;" and you will have the goodness to introduce it to the public by
this appellation.

I am, Sir, with due esteem, your constant reader,

PHILO AMERICANUS.


VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
MEN.
Mr. RALPH MAITLAND Mr. CHARLES MAITLAND Major GEORGE BLOOMVILLE Colonel
MELLFONT Mr. WESTON Captain FLASHET ROBERT WILLIAM.
WOMEN.
MATRONIA AIMWELL Mrs. AUGUSTA BLOOMVILLE ELIZA CLAIRVILLE Miss DORINDA
SCORNWELL DEBORAH JENNY MOLLY.
ACT FIRST.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Mr. Maitland's House. [Enter Weston, preceded by Mr.
Maitland, senior, in a morning gown and slippers.] Maitland. YES, I maintain
it; this project of my son's is the height of folly.


Weston. As how, Sir?


Maitl. As how, Sir? Has he not, passing by the happy Medium, beyond which no
action can ever be right, rashly leaped all bounds, and pressed forward to that
extremity, which, being the farthest from the center, is the greatest possible
remove from the propriety and fitness of things?


Weston. But, Sir, may it not be necessary to observe a little moderation with
the young gentleman?


Maitl. Moderation, Weston! what! when he has transgressed every rule of that
due Medium, which makes up the invisible balance on which hangs the system of
the universe?


Weston. Dear Sir, that very Medium you so justly admire, never appears more
self-balanced, than when it is the origin of that kind of conduct, which forms
an equilibrium between inflexible severity and unwarrantable indulgence.


Maitl. Right, good Weston -- perfectly right -- you have spoken like an angel
-- a Medium is ever self-balanced -- it is the center of perfection -- the
philosopher's stone -- the genuine panacea for every evil. It is that divine
alchymy, the operation of which will finally transmute this iron age of ours,
restoring the golden reign of philosophy and of reason. I tell you, Weston, I
will absolutely write a book, in the which I will prove, that nothing more is
necessary to establish general tranquillity, than the uniform observance of
this same Medium.


Weston. Surely, Sir, it would be better you first attended to your son.


Maitl. Why, Weston, it is my attachment to the immaculate consistency of a
Medium, which makes me such a confirmed enemy to the Aristocrats, Democrats,
Jacobins, le Peuple Soverain, etc. etc. Kings are one extreme, subjects are
another; while fraternity, blessed fraternity -- O there is magic in the
characters which compose the term! it is the divine talisman of every virtue;
and under its auspices we embrace mutual toleration, allow for mutual
imperfections, cease to arraign --


Weston. True, Sir, most true, and --


Maitl. Banish ridicule, guillotine satire, select the comment of candor, and
unite together for the general good! Hence originates the Commonwealth of
Equality, in defense of which, quitting my comptinghouse, I would myself, were
it necessary, fight and die.


Weston. Dear Sir, your son stands more in need of your assistance than your
country; he is now suffering under the pressure of your displeasure, and my
heart bleeds for him.


Maitl. My displeasure, Weston! why I am cool -- absolutely cool -- cool as the
mild temperature, which makes up the exact Medium between the torrid and the
frigid zone.


Weston. And yet, Sir, you last night banished the young gentleman from your
presence, with a declaration, that if he did not forego wishes, which seem
interwoven with his existence, he must relinquish every hope of a
reconciliation with you!


Maitl. And I persist in this declaration. What! consent that Charles should
marry a girl, who has not a single relation in the world, nor a shilling to
help herself! a mean servile dependant on the Bloomville family? The very idea
is the extreme of absurdity, and a glaring outrage on every principle of
moderation.


Weston. Allow me, Sir, to say, that Miss Clairville is neither mean nor
servile; she is the companion of Mrs. Bloomville; and she possesses sterling
worth, sufficient to invest her with importance and independence.


Maitl. Ha, ha, ha! Importance and independence! a girl, without either family
or fortune, important and independent! ha, ha, ha!


Weston. I wish, Sir, you would consent to see Miss Clairville.


Maitl. I know her, Sir, I know her; she is a needy adventurer, who came over
here in the train of a French lady; and, imagining America was the land of
Utopia, she preferred a continuance here to a return to blood and murder, and
she has now set up the very honorable trade of fortune-hunting. There, Sir --
there is her character in toto, and her hopes are the natural result of her
situation.


Weston. Dear Sir, you would not be thus irrational in matters of business; you
would not judge and condemn a lot of merchandise by hearsay only.


Maitl. Why really, Mr. Weston, you seem to take a violent interest in this
preposterous affair; and you must give me leave to tell you, Sir, that I do not
take it well of you, Sir -- No, Sir, I do not take it well of you, Sir.

[Walks about in disorder.
Weston. I am sorry, Sir, to offend you.


Maitl. Had Charles Maitland taken it into his head to have fallen in love with
the cherry-cheek'd daughter of any reputable mechanic, with whom I could have
clubb'd the difference, and met on the true point of brotherhood, I might,
perhaps, have been satisfied -- But this foreigner -- this Anglois Francois --
this Mademoiselle -- No, no, Charles shall never bring me to this.


Weston. I fancy, Sir, you are right; your son, I believe, never will bring you
to this; and had you heard him out last evening, you might probably have
dismissed your anxieties relative to Miss Clairville.


Maitl. Dismissed my anxieties relative to Miss Clairville! Why, wha -- what!
How is that, Sir? Be so good as to explain yourself, Mr. Weston.


Weston. Sir, the young gentleman would have narrated every circumstance
relative to his attachment to Miss Clairville -- his prepossession in her
favor from the first moment he beheld her --


Maitl. Ah! I never liked this love at first sight.


Weston. He would, Sir, have laid before you the various methods by which he
has assailed her heart -- all the rhetoric of love has been exhausted --
flattery, protestations of eternal constancy, of immortal tenderness -- these
have been all in vain, while the young lady still remains firm and unyielding
in her rejection.


Maitl. Indeed!


Weston. Yes, Sir; and your son, despairing of success in his own character,
and confiding in your well known goodness, contemplated the obtaining your
sanction, that, thus reinforced, he may make his attack with the greater
probability of success.


Maitl. Ah! very fine -- very fine, truly -- all this is very fine -- but it
will not do, Sir -- it is all trick -- mere trick, Mr. Weston -- yet, let me
see -- since our little actress is in her heroics, it can do no harm to see how
long she can spin out the play, and you may tell my son, that as his Dulcinea
is resolved never to descend from her altitudes, I reverse that part of his
sentence which relates to his banishment.


[Enter a Servant, who presents a card to Mr. Maitland.] [ Maitland reads.]
Matronia Aimwell presents her most respectful compliments to Mr. Ralph
Maitland, and if he is disengaged, she will do herself the honor to call on
him in half an hour, on business of importance.


Maitl. Now what can her important business possibly be? But tell her that I
shall wait her commands with all reasonable satisfaction; and, d' ye hear,
throw open the shutters in the best parlour -- set the new vases in order; let
them be furnished with fresh flowers -- run for Frize, the barber, and let my
razors, powder and perfume-box be all ranged in my dressing room.


Serve. Yes, Sir.

[Exit Servant.
Maitl. Well, strange things do happen every day, and this Matronia is a
whimsical kind of a woman, um, um, um -- but I must prepare to meet her; and,
in the interim, you, good Weston, will see and converse with my son.


Weston. I wish, Sir, you would conclude to see Miss Clairville.


Maitl. Mr. Weston, determined as I am, it is not in the power of argument to
move me.

[Exit Maitl.
Weston. I believe it -- if he was less systematic, and less opinionated, there
might be some hope for my young friend. But, coolly inflexible as he is, even
the virtues of Miss Clairville will plead in vain.

[Exit Weston.
No. LXXI.
Continuation of the First Act of VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT.
SCENE -- Another Apartment. [Enter Charles Maitland, who traverses the stage
with folded arms.] Charles. THE more I reflect, the more calamitous my
situation appears! Methought my father's parting words amounted to a
malediction! Alas! alas! this dear obdurate girl was born for my undoing!!


[Enter Weston.] Weston. Good morning, Sir; have you prepared your written
address to your father?


Charles. No, Weston. [sighs deeply.]


Weston. But was not this your intention?


Charles. It was, Sir; but feeling a growing apathy which I determine to
encourage, I forbear to prosecute my design. I am become fond of misery,
Weston; I will woo it to my embraces, and it shall henceforth be my mistress.


Weston. Astonishing! Has Miss Clairville ceased to charm?


Charles. Oh! name her not -- her breast is harder than adamant! Colder than
the snow which tops the Alps -- to warm her to the genial meltings of pity, is
impossible; and she has no chords in her soul attuned to sacred sympathy.


Weston. Discretion is a rare accomplishment in a maiden under twenty.


Charles. Discretion, Weston! If she was awake to tenderness, it is impossible
she could be always thus wise. I tell thee, man, I have followed her upwards of
two years; and, although I have watched her every movement, yet not one dear
conceding moment, one propitious word, nor even an unguarded look, has ever
blessed my ardent wishes! And yet, Weston, I have not to accuse her of pride,
undue reserve, nor inconsistency -- however she manages it, for my soul I
cannot help acknowledging that her whole conduct seems one uniform
exemplification of dignified propriety.


Weston. I fancy if your pretensions were sanctioned by your father, your
difficulties would speedily vanish.


Charles. Ah! Weston, you are too sanguine! my father's active interference in
my favor, is not to be expected; and if it were, the probability is, that this
haughty beauty would shrink from what her extreme delicacy would teach her to
term an obligation.


Weston. You must forget her, then.


Charles. Forget her!! What, forget beauty, virtue, and all those peerless
accomplishments that give their possessor a claim to rank among celestials?
Forbid it Heaven, forbid it love, and every tender sentiment, which in bands
indissoluble shall ever bind my heart to her.


Weston. Have you ever learned any thing from her, of her extraction or
connexions?


Charles. Only general insinuations, ingeniously calculated, as she supposed,
to damp the ardour of my pursuit, and which have but served to add another
rivet to those chains that bind me eternally hers.


Weston. She is truly politic: Were women but sensible what charms unite in a
candid, generous and frank deportment, even their love of sway would teach them
to renounce the wily arts of deception.


[Enter Captain Flashet.] Capt. F. Faith, I am glad to see thee, Charles: How
is it, my boy?


Charles. Intolerable familiarity. [Aside.] When did you come to town, Sir?


Capt. F. Two days since, Charles.


Charles. Do you bring any news, Sir?


Capt. F. News, old boy, what of news? Why thou look plaguey glum. I should
hardly have run through fire and water to see thee, if I had prophesied such a
reception; and I have, bona fide, labored more to make myself visible in this
apartment, than ever Alexander the great did, in cleansing the Herculean
stables.


Charles. Idiot. [Aside.] What has been the matter, Captain?


Capt. F. The matter! Why one lady insisted that I should dine with her; a
second, that I should take tea; and a third, that I should pass an hour
tete-a-tete: But at Bloomville's I was absolutely arrested; my hat and cane
purloined; and I concluded I was made a prisoner for the day.


Charles. You have been at Major Bloomville's, then; How did you make your
escape?


Capt. F. A stratagem, Charles -- a mere stratagem. Hector surprised and
captivated Troy by stratagem. You are to know that I am an immense favorite
with the ladies at Bloomville's; for the Major, he is one of your sober dogs;
but the lady of the house might vie with the mother of the Scratehii, when she
visited king Solomon to admire his wisdom; and the charming Eliza, for whom, by
the way, I have conceived an insurmountable tendresse, is as beautiful as a
vestal, and not even Penelope, when she stole her father's images, was a
greater thief; for, with one glance of her bright eyes, she has pilfered the
stout heart of a soldier, who has had the honor to serve under the great
WASHINGTON; who escaped from the savages with half a dozen wounds, upon the
tremendous fourth of November, and who has since been principally concerned in
quelling the whisky insurrection.


Charles. Amazing!


Capt. F. Admitted into all WASHINGTON's councils -- finger next to the thumb
-- nobody but Captain Flashet, Captain Flashet, at every turn.


Charles. Prodigious! I could kick the puppy.

[Aside.
[Enter a Servant.] Serve. Colonel Mellfort, Sir.


Charles. Desire the Colonel to walk in.


Serve. Yes, Sir.

[Exit Servant.
[Enter Colonel Mellfort.] Col. M. Gentlemen, your most obedient -- Mr.
Maitland, good morning; agreeably to promise, I just call en passant.


Charles. You do me honor, Sir; pray be seated.


Col. M. I have not a moment to tarry, Sir. My stay in town will be short; and,
desirous to see as many of your curiosities as time will permit, I have engaged
to meet some friends in the Mall, this morning, from whence we are to commence
our tour of observation.


Charles. Will you permit me to accompany you, Sir?


Col. M. Sir, it will give me singular pleasure.


Charles. Will it be convenient for you to join us, Mr. Weston?


Weston. Perfectly so, Sir.

[Exeunt Col. Mellfort, Charles and Weston.
Capt. F. A sheer affront, by Jupiter! But, by the rules of Longinus, nothing
is ill meant, until it is ill taken; and so I will after them to the Mall, heap
coals of fire on their heads, and thus take an honorable revenge.

[Runs off precipitately.
SCENE -- A handsome Parlour. [Mr. Maitland in full dress; rings violently.]
[Enter a Servant.] Maitl. Here -- set chairs -- there, that will do. -- You may
go, boy.

[Exit Servant.
[Maitland adjusting his cravat and periwig in the glass.] Maitl. What can this
Madam Matronia possibly want with me? Her character stands very high in the
world; but women are women. I have heard that she liked my house -- liked my
son -- liked my fortune, my principles, and my way of life. Now, if she should
chance to have taken a liking to my person too -- he, he, he -- there is no
calculating the caprices of the sex; but fair and softly. I have had one wife
-- one good wife too -- and on just and equal distribution, one good wife is as
much as ought to fall to the lot of one man: To continue a bachelor is one
extreme, repeated marriages is another; a Medium is my hobby horse, and dearly
do I love to canter thereon; therefore, and for this reason, among many others
that might be urged, dear, good, faithful Gertrude, I will continue loving and
constant to thy memory.


[Enter a Servant.] Serve. Madam Matronia, Sir.


Maitl. Show her in.

[Exit Servant.
Maitl. Now will I be as coy as a young maiden, when she is first left alone
with her future lord and master, after he has obtained the approbation of the
old folks.


[Enter Matronia.] Maitl. [Bowing very low.] Madam, your most obedient.


Matronia. [Courtesying.] Sir, I have taken the liberty to call on you this
morning on very particular business.


Maitl. Madam, you do me a great deal of honor. Pray be seated.

[They take seats.
Matr. Sir, you are very polite; but I really feel a little awkward. --
[Hesitating confusedly, blushing, and looking down.] New to negociations which
custom has in some sort interdicted my sex, a degree of embarrassment may be
compatible with the most upright intentions.


Maitl. Madam, I am entirely at your service.


Matr. You are very obliging, and I flatter myself, that, in this my native
place, my character is so well established, that a person of Mr. Maitland's
well known candor will not see the necessity of scruples; and, although the
nature of my request may be allowed to excite your surprise, yet as my honor
has hitherto remained unimpeached, you will not think it a very improper one.


Maitl. Lord! Lord! what shall I say to her? [Aside.] As to that, Madam -- as
to improper, and all that, it is hardly possible to say any thing about it.
Some things are proper, and some are improper -- I am not fond of extremes --
others are -- and so we wrap it up, Madam. I prefer liberty; I have been
married, Madam -- you have not; every one to his fancy. I, for my part, am
perfectly content as I am.


[Maitland appears embarrassed; takes out his snuff box, and plays whimsically
with the lid.] Matr. Good heavens! what can he mean? [Aside.] Sir, I must
confess you are a little ambiguous; but, to prevent every possibility of
mistake, I will be very explicit. I have invested the whole of my property in
bank stock -- I have immediate occasion for one thousand pounds, for which I
will give my note; there are some formalities attendant on drawing money out of
our public repositories, which I am willing to spare myself; and, if you can
conveniently furnish we with this sum on my engagement that it shall be
returned to you in one month, the purpose, the whole purpose [bowing] of my
visit here this morning, will be pleasingly answered.


Maitl. Is that all? [Aside.] Madam, I am happy -- I had thought -- I, I, I, am
extremely happy, upon my soul, and I will fetch you the bills immediately.
Well, I am greatly relieved. [Aside.]

[Exit Maitland, precipitately.
Matr. [Rising and crossing the stage.] Well, this is singular, upon my word;
ha, ha, ha, truly ridiculous. It is beyond a doubt, that this good old
gentleman supposed me a candidate for the vacant place in this elegant mansion!
Surely it should teach me a lesson; for, if pursuits, far from being
reprehensible, and a purpose that indisputably wears the garb of virtue, cannot
shield from injurious suspicion, how are the votaries of folly exposed to the
multiplied shafts of censure! Unhappy sex! whose ways are environed with peril;
surely we should not fail hourly to invoke the guardian care of attending
angels.


[Enter Mr. Maitland.] Maitl. Here, Madam, here they are -- exactly one
thousand pounds; and you have only to sign this bond, and the business is
finished.


Matr. [Seats herself and writes.] Sir, the facility with which you have
complied with my wishes, and your confidence in my honor, has made me
eternally your debtor.


Maitl. O! it is a mere bagatelle; never mention it, Madam.


Matr. Assure yourself, Sir, that I shall be punctual; some affairs of great
urgency have impelled the application of this morning.


Maitl. It matters not, Madam; I make no inquiries -- life is always subject to
vicissitudes! and, to say truth, I have myself been lately thrown from the
equality of disposition that I am accustomed to preserve.


Matr. Really! I trust no accident has happened in your family, Mr. Maitland.


Maitl. Yes, Madam, an accident of the greatest possible magnitude!


Matr. May I ask of what nature, Sir.


Maitl. My son, Madam, my only son, has thought proper to fall irretrievably
(as he says) in love with one Eliza Clairville.


Matr. And is this the accident which has so disturbed you?


Maitl. It is, Madam.


Matr. Is it possible?


Maitl. What is there in it so strange?


Matr. Excuse me, Sir, if I express my wonder at your regarding this event as a
misfortune.


Maitl. Why, ought I not to regard it as a misfortune, Madam?


Matr. I think not, Sir -- Eliza Clairville possesses more dignity of sentiment
than any young person I have met with; she is a high soul'd girl, and has more
of mind than commonly falls to the lot of mortality.


Maitl. It may be so; but I hate all extremes; and I had rather she were less
aspiring.


Matr. Sir --


Maitl. I wish she would cease to play off her light airs on my boy.


Matr. [Warmly.] Sir, a sense of obligation ought, perhaps, to seal my lips;
but, thus urged, I must say you do Miss Clairville much wrong; and I take a
particular pleasure in repeating that she is the most faultless young lady
within my knowledge.


Maitl. Pray, Madam, how long have you known her?


Matr. Years, Sir -- ever since she has been in the country; the lady, under
whose protection she left France, yielded her reluctantly to my care; and,
regarding her as a model of discretion, I bestowed her upon my niece, on her
marriage with George Bloomville.


Maitl. And how long has my hopeful son been enlisted in her service?


Matr. Your son, Sir, was early captivated by the charms of Miss Clairville;
nor should you have wanted the fullest and most timely intelligence of this
event, had there existed the smallest probability of a union of the parties.


Maitl. I do not understand you, Madam.


Matr. Sir, I pledge my honor, my life, my reputation, that you shall never be
entitled to call Eliza Clairville daughter, but by your unbiassed and avowed
choice.


Maitl. Very well, very well; this looks well; the young woman may be prudent;
and if she behaves properly, she will merit my thanks.


Matr. Sir, my visit has been unexpectedly prolonged: I wish you a good morning.


Maitl. I will attend you to your carriage, Madam.

[Exit, leading Matronia.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
No. LXXII.
VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT, continued. ACT SECOND.
SCENE -- A beautiful Garden, adjoining to Major Bloomville's House. [Eliza
Clairville, seated in an alcove, pensively sings:] AH me! what ills encompass
round,
How thick the shafts of sorrow fly;
Of hapless (...), how deep the wound,
How pangful the corroding sigh!
An angel, in discretion's form,
The orphan'd maiden should attend;
To shield her from the gathering storm,
With faithful vigils should descend.
Oh! if Eliza's plaints could woo
The seraph from the bending skies,
Then might her feeble steps pursue
That smooth shorn path which peace supplies.

[She rises and advances forward.] Eliza. No, it will not be -- music has not
charms sufficient to remove the melancholy pressure by which I am borne down.
Unhappy girl! orphanaged in my dawn of being -- thrown on the compassion of
strangers -- rendered, by the malice of my fate, an outcast from that
compassion -- exiled in a foreign land -- involved in a hopeless passion --
every sentiment of my soul approving him, whom virtue impels me to reject!
Wretched, wretched Eliza! ill-fated maiden! it is only from the icy darts of
death thou can expect relief!

[She walks about, agitated and unhappy.
[Enter Charles Maitland from the house.] Charles. Madam, forgive this
intrusion; I sought you in the house; your servant informed me you were here;
and having business of importance to myself, I so far presumed on your
indulgence as to follow you.


Eliza. The visits of my friends, Mr. Maitland, can never be unwelcome.


Charles. How cutting is this indifference! [Aside.] Perhaps, Madam, I ought to
esteem myself happy, that I am admitted in the number of your friends; and yet,
Miss Clairville, to purchase a dearer title, had I worlds to bestow, I would
think them well relinquished!


Eliza. It is matter of regret to me, Sir, that instead of that sentimental
intercourse, which it would be one of my felicities to cultivate, you should
thus snatch every opportunity of reference to a subject, which ought never to
have been introduced.


Charles. Ought never to have been introduced, Madam! Can, then, the rational
Eliza think so severely of that tender connection, which has received the
sanction of all ages, and which is the source of every felicity?


Eliza. No, Sir; Eliza Clairville does not think severely of wedded amity; she
respects, as she ought, the sacred ties of mutual love; but when fate
interposes its insurmountable bars, it surely must be considered as the height
of folly, to be thus unceasingly at odds with destiny.


Charles. Ah! Eliza, did you but know the daggers which your words convey, you
would exercise more lenity. Once more I solemnly protest, that, to call you
mine, no sacrifices would be deemed too great! with you, each spot would seem a
paradise! without you, life remains a barren wilderness.


Eliza. Sir, this is too much; your looks too absolutely border on frenzy! If
you persist in what I can scarce forbear to term an ungenerous persecution, I
must, however reluctantly, request Mrs. Bloomville to deny me to your visits.


Charles. Ah! Madam, you may spare that request. I have called on you this
morning to make one last effort; the success of this effort I have already
seen; and, with tomorrow's sun, I bid you, perhaps, an everlasting adieu!


Eliza. [Alarmed, and off her guard.] How, Cha -- Mr. Maitland -- What can you
mean?


Charles. Simply this, Madam. Traversing the Mall this morning with a friend,
of whose worth, while in New York, I had repeated proofs, we accidentally
discovered that, added to the ties of amity, we were also kindred of the
melancholy mood. Allied by misfortune, we have agreed to become companions in
exile; and, with the coming day, I depart from those native haunts, which my
Eliza -- forgive the freedom of a despairing youth -- can alone teach me to
value!


Eliza. Are you serious, Sir?


Charles. Certainly, Madam.


Eliza. Have you the approbation of your father?


Charles. My father will suppose me on a tour of business. [Eliza, much
disordered, melts into tears.] Good Heaven! Miss Clairville, what mean these
tears? Surely, the purple stream that warms me to existence, is not so precious
in my estimation. Oh! could I flatter myself, that tenderness for me impelled
the kindly gush -- But no -- it is impossible -- Eliza, in what have I offended?


Eliza. Mr. Maitland, your unimpeached veracity forbids me to question your
sincerity -- You certainly leave town tomorrow?


Charles. Undoubtedly; unless I should be so superlatively blessed, as to be
honored by a countermand from you.


Eliza. In such a moment as this, then, virtue herself will permit a degree of
relaxation. You have often, Mr. Maitland, accused me of insensibility: Alas!
you little knew the heart you thus arraigned; it was cast in the mould of
tenderness, and its dearest sentiments have ever been the offspring of
friendship and of love.


Charles. But these blessed sentiments refused to sanction the vows of Maitland!


Eliza. I will be very explicit, Sir. Had I been addressed by a man, whom my
heart and my judgment had approved, and who had been born the equal of my
humble family and lowly fortunes, to a single moment's suspense he should not
have been condemned; my extended hand, accompanying my yielding heart, our
mutual attachment should have received the sanction of the holy priest; and it
would have become my study, to ameliorate the interest I had obtained in his
bosom.


Charles. Charming, inimitable woman! I would have died to have originated an
affection so divine!


Eliza. Ah! Charles, is it possible you have yet to learn, that you are indeed
the friend of my choice -- that my tenderest wishes are yours? Nor will I
blush to own, that if propriety and virtue would permit, this hand should be
only yours.


Charles. [Seizing her hand, and bowing upon it.] Heavens and earth! What do I
hear?


Eliza. You hear a truth, Sir, which, had not insurmountable obstacles have
opposed our union, should long since have been familiar to your ear -- You hear
a truth, for which my breast should still have been a grave, had not the
precipitancy of your departure extorted it from me: But the knowledge that we
are to meet no more, has produced, by way of justice to my feelings, a
declaration, which sincerity has a thousand times suggested. And now, Charles,
may eternal blessings crown your virtues -- receive my last adieu!


Charles. What means my angel?


Eliza. That, as you depart on the morrow, a moment like this may not again
present.


Charles. And think you, dear, enchanting girl, that, so unexpectedly attaining
the summit of felicity, I will thus voluntarily relinquish my stand?


Eliza. Surely, Charles Maitland will not deceive me?


Charles. My projected banishment was on the agonizing presumption, that Eliza
never could be mine.


Eliza. And it is as true, as that her each pulsation beats for thee, that she
never can be thine.


Charles. You deal in paradoxes, my love!


Eliza. My meaning must surely be obvious: Eliza Clairville will never unite
herself to a man, whose family detests her.


Charles. Let us hope that my father may be propitiated.


Eliza. That hope is not the offspring of probability; it may serve to illumine
the pages of a novel, or produce a happy denoeument to the fifth act of a play;
but as it consists not with reason, let us not indulge it. No, my friend,
prosecute your intended plan, and tender remembrance shall be dear to our
bosoms! in dreams we will converse, and in future worlds we shall be happy!
Once more, adieu!

[Going.
Charles. Distraction! a moment stop, if you would not reduce me to a state of
desperation!


Eliza. [Weeping.] What I can still urge to soothe your wounded spirit, I will
not withhold; and, in the same moment that I declare, I never, but on equal
terms, will plight my faith with yours, I pledge to you my veracity, that this
heart shall never know a second lord -- that this hand shall never be given but
to you.


Charles. Heavenly condescension! Matchless goodness! I am in a delirium of joy!

[Bows impassioned upon her hand.
Eliza. Leave me, Charles; I entreat you to leave me; and remember, I expect
the performance of your journey!


Charles. And shall we, then, meet no more?


Eliza. On this one condition -- that, with tomorrow's sun, you accompany your
friend.


Charles. Divine, yet severe arbitress, I obey -- the mingling emotions of my
bosom, it is not in language to express. May guardian seraphs hover round you!

[Bows expressively, and Exit.
Eliza. [After standing a moment in an attitude of reflection.] I am not sure I
have acted quite right -- the trial was unexpected, and more than proportioned
to my discretion: But even repentance cannot recall the past; and, having enough
of present misery, I will cease to arraign, or to investigate.

[Exit.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Major Bloomville's House -- Books and Papers
promiscuously thrown about. [Enter Major Bloomville and Matronia.] Major B.
Madam, those mere bagatelles, on which the censorious world is pleased to
comment so severely, would be placed by me, to the account of youth, a
consciousness of superior beauty, and extreme inexperience, were I sure she
regarded me with that decided preference, which a husband has a right to expect.


Matr. Bless me, nephew! you terrify me! Have you any doubts of her fidelity?


Major B. No, Madam, not absolutely. Augusta Bloomville has too much pride to
submit to actual debasement; yet, give me leave to observe, that, bred in the
school of honor, I have imbibed a soldier's delicacy, and I am ready to say, "
Cesar's wife should not be suspected."


Matr. I have, indeed, grieved to find my niece so little domesticated, and so
regardless of your interest; but I had flattered myself, that the innate
rectitude of her mind had rendered her conduct, in other respects,
irreproachable.


Major B. Far be it from me, Madam, to accuse my Augusta; and yet, to you, her
more than parent, it may not be wrong to say, that I live in a state of married
solitude! that my Augusta, all charming as she is, constitutes to me, a source
of agonized inquietude! Shop-hunting, visiting, cards, balls; these make up the
routine of her life; while her husband can scarce obtain the smallest attention!


Matr. Strange, strange degeneracy!!!


Major B. Every powdered puppy has her smile -- that coxcomical wretch -- that
Flashet, is at this moment gallanting her through the streets, and escorting
her to the new milliner's, Mrs. Lacewell's, where she will doubtless empty her
pocketbook.


Matr. Have you made her acquainted with your late embarrassments?


Major B. I have not; for, notwithstanding her unkindness, I cannot, for my
soul, bring myself to inflict on her a single moment's unnecessary pain.


Matr. Your indulgence merits a reward; and a thorough knowledge of the
principles of my niece authorizes me to say, that time will remove your
difficulties.


Major B. Heaven grant it.


Matr. Amen. I have taken up for you, George, one thousand pounds, of which I
think you said you stood in immediate need.


Major B. You surprise me, Madam! Surely, you have not withdrawn your interest
from the stocks?


Matr. No, George, I have not -- inquire no further. Let it suffice, that I
have deranged no plans, and that I have procured the money on common interest.


Major B. Ever since the moment which introduced me to the knowledge of
Matronia, she has continued uniformly and condescendingly kind, and my
obligations are unreturnable.


Matr. You estimate common actions too highly. Here are the bills; and if they
may contribute to your convenience, my reward will be more than proportioned to
my merit!


Major B. They will do me incalculable service, Madam; and I will go this
moment and adjust a business, in which my commercial reputation is importantly
involved.


Matr. And I will await the return of my niece in her dressing room.

[Exit Matronia.
Major B. Incomparable woman! If she succeeds in shaping the conduct of her
niece after the model of her own exalted character, my happiness will be
complete. Here, William --


[Enter William.] Will. Did you call, Sir?


Major B. Yes, William; take care of these books and papers; and, if I am
inquired for at dinner, let your mistress know, I shall not return until the
evening.

[Exit Major Bloomville.
Will. My mistress! um, um, um! she will hardly make the inquiry, I believe.


[Enter Deborah, in a great ferment.] Deb. Here, you fellows, William, John,
Thomas, Molly! Why, where the dickens are you all? You Sir, why do you loiter
thus, pray?


[Enter Molly.] Molly. I wonders who calls -- so I does -- one would think the
house was on fire -- I never was in such a place in all my born days -- so many
mistresses -- ^'fackins! I wishes I was at home, milking my cows again -- so I
does.


Will. Zookers! Molly, don't speak so loud; for if you do, Mrs. Deborah will
hear you, as sure as eggs is bacon.


Molly. And who cares if she does? [contemptuously.]


Deb. Why, what the plague are you muttering about, there? Did you expect to
come into such a house as this, to sit on the cupboard's head? Only see now,
what a litter is here! Do you not know, there are ladies calling every hour in
the morning? -- rap, rap, rap -- no peace for the knocker. Here, you dainty
fingers, clear these message-boards, that we may have room for fresh cards; and
you, William, do you pick up these books and papers, and see that the steps and
street before the door are thoroughly swept and cleansed.


Will. Pray now, good Mistress Deborah, what is all this bustle about? Why need
you put yourself in such a wicked passion?


Deb. Hold your tongue, saucy jackanapes. Do you not know, that there are
strangers expected at dinner, and company in the afternoon? Stir your stumps, I
say; stir your stumps, all of you.


Molly. I Am resolved I gives Madam warning before tomorrow night -- getting up
by break of day in the morning, sitting up till midnight, cleaning here, and
running there -- one has not a moment's quiet -- and I gets nothing by it after
all, only four dirty shillings a week, while Mrs. Gadabout's Susan has a whole
dollar, only for dressing her mistress's false hair.


Deb. Let Us have none of your sauce, Mrs. Minx. Marry come up! Do you not know,
it is an honor to serve Mrs. Bloomville? But while I am spending my time to
talk to you, my cakes and tarts will be burnt to cinder; so you had best mind
your business, and get the room in order as soon as possible.

[Exit Deborah, in a violent hurry.
Molly. [Setting back the chairs.] I Will not stay here -- so I will not.


Will. Pshaw, pshaw! good Molly, never mind it, never mind it. Why, I Will be
hanged now, if I don't think Mistress Deborah was born scolding; and what is
bred in the bone will never come through the skin, as the saying is.


Molly. Why, William, it would provoke a minister -- so it would.


Will. I tell you what, Molly, I have been thinking and thinking, and I do now
really believe, as sure as we are born, Molly, that this Mistress Deborah of
our's, is the Witch of Endor.


Molly. That she is, Mr. William; and so, as every good Christian should, I
hates all witches and witchgoblins, as bad as I hates Old Nick.


Will. Ah! that is right, Molly, that is right -- But we must make haste now, and
do our work, or she, being a witch, will sartingly bewitch us, and haunt us
into the bargain.


Deb. [Calls without.] Here you, Molly, William! Where the plague are you both?


Molly. Let me die if she ben't calling again. Well, I knows I Will quit this
service before it be very long.

[Exit Molly, sullenly.
Will. [Gathering up the books.] I follows Molly -- butter me if I don't.

[Exit William, humorously.
SCENE -- Another Apartment in Mr. Bloomville's House. [Enter Miss Clairville.]
Eliza. It is in vain I shift the scene! the settled gloom on my spirit knows no
abatement!


[Enter Miss Dorinda Scornwell, sans ceremony, and with a supercilious air.]
Miss Sc. [contemptuously.] Is your lady visible today, child?


Eliza. Madam Bloomville is in her dressing room, Miss Scornwell.


Miss Sc. Why, what is the matter, young woman? you look disturbed.


Eliza. Pardon me, Madam, I am perfectly tranquil.


Miss Sc. Well, girl, will you trip to your lady, and let her know, Miss
Dorinda Scornwell has done herself the honor of calling on her this morning.


Eliza. You shall be obeyed, Madam.

[Exit Eliza.
Miss Sc. Creature! she absolutely apes the grace and dignity of we people of
fashion. I hate your dirt-sprung beings. If this Bloomville was a degree
removed from idiotism, she would long since have discarded her, especially as I
have so often remonstrated on this head.


[Enter William.] Will. Madam, my mistress requests your company in her
dressing room.


Miss Sc. I attend her, William.

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- A Dressing Room. [Matronia and Mrs. Bloomville seated -- Miss Dorinda
Scornwell enters -- both ladies rise and courtesy.] Mrs. B. Dear Dorinda, I am
monstrously happy to see you! I called at your lodgings en passant, in the
course of a tour I have been making among the shops, and was mortified to death
at not finding you.


Miss Sc. You are a charming creature, it must be confessed: But it is a divine
morning; and I have already looked in on a little hundred of my friends. It is
true, I was happy enough to find many of them had rambled abroad; but my call
will, nevertheless, answer every purpose quite as well.


Matr. Really, Miss Scornwell! this is quite a new method of calculation; it is
the first time I have ever heard the absence of friends placed in the chapter
of felicities!


Miss Sc. O Madam! we do these things every day -- ha, ha, ha!


Matr. Niece -- I had communications for your private ear; but as you are at
present engaged, and I have visits of friendship to make, I will call on you a
few hours hence.


Mrs. B. I shall expect you with pleasure, Madam.

[Exit Matronia.
Miss Sc. I suspect, Augusta, that my presence is ill timed.


Mrs. B. Your presence, my friend, can never be ill timed.


Miss Sc. Thank you, Bloomville. I have had a fatiguing round this morning --
the people in this town will never learn breeding -- New York is more than a
century advanced before us!


Mrs. B. It is really surprising!


Miss Sc. We are tormented to death by stiff compliments, and all the awkward
grimace of ceremony! Heaven hasten the reign of true politeness, I say.


Mrs. B. Dear Dorinda, I second your petition with genuine ardour; for I am a
perfect enthusiast in my admiration of those easy manners, which are always the
appendage of real gentility.


Miss Sc. And then, forsooth! there is an affectation of sentiment, which is
altogether intolerable: "I suppose, Miss Scornwell, [speaks affectedly] you was
present at the representation of the Jew -- Is it not a sweet play? -- The Jew
was a noble fellow, and Eliza Ratcliff was a most interesting girl -- it was
replete with sentiment, and both myself and daughters were drowned in tears."


Mrs. B. You must own, however, that these remarks are not very ill placed.


Miss Sc. Why, to tell you the truth, Bloomville, I am not extravagantly
pleased with these same sentiments -- I prefer cards to conversation, a ride to
a book, and the ball-room to the playhouse.


Mrs. B. Not a strong predilection in favor of sentiment, Miss Scornwell!
amazing! Why, sooner than I would confess myself at odds with sentiment, I
would relinquish all pretensions to taste, quarrel with benevolence for its
benignity, with the sun for its brightness, and with Philenia for the
captivating charms of her understanding.


Miss Sc. Well, well -- I am not desirous of quarreling with Augusta for any
thing. I was last night at the assembly, where, if I had not expired at the
thought of your absence, I should have been the happiest being in the universe.


Mrs. B. Indeed!


Miss Sc. Yes, indeed; for at the very moment when I was on the point of
securing my number, who should enter the ball-room, but the very enamorata that
I met at the New York assemblies; drawn thither, undoubtedly, by my
irresistible ladyship, and evidently improved in every fascinating grace!


Mrs. B. This was indeed fortunate.


Miss Sc. Fortunate! it threw me into the most happy flow of spirits imaginable.


Mrs. B. Did chance give him to you for a partner.


Miss Sc. The Colonel never dances -- so we enjoyed a most enchanting aside
conversation, cut in at whist, came off victorious in the rubbers, and thus
concluded a divine evening.


Mrs. B. Why will you not indulge me with the name of your redoubtable hero?


Miss Sc. Because I mean to present you with the name and person of my Adonis
in the same moment; and, by the way, he has engaged to escort me to your levee
this very afternoon.


Mrs. B. I shall be happy to see him, undoubtedly. Pray, what figure did our
ladies make before this stranger?


Miss Sc. O the frights! but he had eyes only for me. There was Mrs. Gadabout,
most preposterously dressed, and Miss Trimwell, loaded with finery, while Betty
Brilliant seemed a moving jeweller's shop.


Mrs. B. Ha, ha, ha! O Scornwell! you are monstrously severe.


Miss Sc. There, too, was that antiquated dame, Arabella Worthy, whose face is
a perfect antidote to every idea of conviviality; not a female but seems to
shun her; and yet, because, forsooth! she chooses to commence Argus to her
baby-faced daughter, she never misses an assembly! Ha, ha, ha!


Mrs. B. Astonishing! Ha, ha, ha!


Miss Sc. Such outree heads -- such a redundancy of silks, laces, ribbons and
feathers -- O it is ridiculous! truly ridiculous, indeed.


Mrs. B. Dear Dorinda, you have given me as perfect an idea of them as if I had
myself been present.


Miss Sc. O! by the bye -- Do you know that I absolutely saw Tom Dapperwit and
Miss Lovett, pass, arm under arm, down the covered promenade last evening? that
off down to the ground, eyes rivetted, and tongue as smooth as oil.


Mrs. B. Is it possible? I had thought that affair was entirely given up.


Miss. Sc. O! she is the very quintessence of prudery -- But now I think of it,
I promised to accompany her this morning, on a visit to Mrs. Arabella Worthy,
and I make it a point not to break my word.


Mrs. B. Well, dear, Dorinda, I shall expect you at tea, accompanied by your
agreeable Colonel. Adieu.


Miss Sc. Adieu. Ma chere amie.

[Exit Miss Scornwell.
Mrs. B. This chere amie of mine, is wholly absorbed in what she terms pleasure
-- I, too, have made the experiment; I have plunged into a life of gaiety, and
the conclusion, which forces itself upon me, does not decide in favor of
dissipation. Would, that fate had given me an object in which I could take an
interest! -- But I must not indulge reflections of this nature -- it shall not
be long before I will set about a reformation; and, by way of exordium, as I
have a few leisure moments, I will devote them to Miss Clairville.

[Rings. [Enter Molly.] Request Miss Clairville to favor me with her company.


Molly. Yes, an't please your La'ship.

[Exit.
Mrs. B. I have too much neglected the good Eliza of late: There is a kind of
dignity and uniform propriety in her deportment, which involves a tacit censure
upon the whim and levity of my more splendid acquaintance.

[ Enter Miss Clairville.] Miss Clairville, we have, for many weeks, been much
estranged; permit me, my dear, to assure you, that this circumstance does not
contribute to my felicity.


Eliza. You do me honor, Madam.


Mrs. B. Madam! Why that formal appellation? Let me be known as your Augusta;
and address me as in those happy days, when order led the hours, and my aunt
presided our sweetly indulgent monitress.


Eliza. It was, indeed, a blissful period.


Mrs. B. Why that sigh, Eliza? that swelling bosom, and that falling tear? Give
me leave to tell you, that I have still a heart to feel for the sorrows of my
Eliza.


Eliza. You are too good, Augusta. My sorrows should be all my own, while
happiness remains for Mrs. Bloomville.


Mrs. B. Fie! fie! Eliza, do not let despair, with blighting influence, blast
your opening prospects. I shall yet see you blessed in your own way -- the
amiable and deserving wife of Maitland.


Eliza. Never, Madam.


Mrs. B. Why not? Is he not truly worthy?


Eliza. O! he is all luxuriant fancy can image, mid its golden dreams of
happiness -- In figure, unexceptionable -- in grace, inimitable -- in mind, the
model of perfection -- firm as integrity -- melting with sympathy for every
child of woe -- manly and brave, as conscious worth can render him -- mild as
the gentle breath of zephyr -- candid as mercy -- open as the liberal hand of
Heaven -- and frank as young sincerity.


Mrs. B. O brave! It is evident, however, that his picture is drawn by the
lavish pencil of his mistress; but, do you know that this same idol of yours
was once on the very point of devoting himself to me; and that your saucy face,
very mal-apropos, presented itself to rob me of my conquest? However, be not
alarmed, child, I am not vindictive; and I shall give my voice for a speedy
wedding.


Eliza. I shall never be the wife of Charles Maitland, Madam.


Mrs. B. What is to hinder, in the name of goodness?


Eliza. I will never obtrude myself on a worthy family, which would justly
consider me as an obstacle to their advancement.


Mrs. B. We will find means to conciliate the elder Mr. Maitland.


Eliza. Were he to condescend to woo me for his daughter, I would persist in my
rejection.


Mrs. B. Strange romantic girl!


Eliza. Madam, in vindication of this, my unalterable determination, I will
furnish you with some particulars relative to myself, which I have not, till
now, thought it necessary to divulge.


Mrs. B. I am all attention.


Eliza. I drew my first breath in humble life -- my parents commending me to
the care of an opulent and noble family in England, left me an infant orphan;
and my only patrimony was their benediction. From the family in which I was
thrown, I received an education which might have suited royalty; but ere I had
completed my fifteenth year, my patroness, the first of women, swelled her last
sigh! Forgive my tears; the unexampled goodness of my lost benefactress, must
ever excite them; they are a tribute due to her inestimable worth!


Mrs. B. Your tears are natural, and I cordially sympathize with you.


Eliza. My happiness fled with my angel protectress; the family estates
devolved on the youngest son, who, of a numerous progeny, alone survived: This
gentleman was a bachelor, and many years my senior; the ill state of health
under which he at that time labored, with the immoderate grief occasioned by
the death of his excellent mother, who had long been his only parent, induced
his physicians to advise a residence of some months in the south of France, and
it was judged necessary I should accompany him. What shall I say -- a sense of
gratitude and honor seems to tie my tongue, and the shade of my departed
benefactress arbitrarily imposes silence.


Mrs. B. Without being a conjurer, I can easily decypher the consequences; your
quondam guardian was metamorphosed into a lover.


Eliza. I imagined him a bright exemplar of every virtue; but, forgetful of the
ties of honor and the delicacy of my situation, he was capable of forming a
deliberate scheme of seduction! and, while he assumed the guise of a tenderness
truly paternal, he was cruelly plotting my ruin!!!


Mrs. B. O Lord! I almost gasp for you! By what means did you receive the
knowledge of his infamous designs?


Eliza. From a faithful friend, who, like a guardian seraph, hovered round my
steps, and procured me a sight of letters, written by his own hand, wherein the
deep laid scheme was fully arranged!!!


Mrs. B. These, indeed, were indisputable evidences. How did you escape?


Eliza. The proofs, as you observe, were irrefragable; and, when he commenced
his plan of operation, by inviting me to a little tour, in the progress of
which, he engaged to make me certain communications which would importantly
involve my future prospects, my vigilant friend received me to her arms, and
secretly procured me a rank in the family of that lady, then on the eve of her
departure from France, with whom your excellent aunt first saw me.


Mrs. B. Your history, Eliza, is indeed eventful; but for my soul I cannot see
a single circumstance which reason can consider as a bar to your union with
Maitland.


Eliza. Surely, Madam, you must have seen that I am lowly born, portionless and
unfriended! and shall I come like a heavy cloud on the prospects of that good
young man! a step so reprehensible, would indeed evince me unwarrantably
interested; nor will I enter a family whose every attention I should regard as
a condescension which would tinge my cheek with the hectic of conscious
inferiority.


Mrs. B. Do you not perceive, Eliza, that it is hardly consistent with your
flighty sentiments, to set such a prodigious value on money?


Eliza. I do but submit to a necessity which the despot, Custom, has rendered
irreversible; and besides, Madam, who that has experienced the luxury of
wiping the tear from the haggard cheek of penury, will deny, I had almost said,
the omnipotence of money!


Mrs. B. Well, well, I will only say that you are a dear, irresistible,
romantic girl: But, as the dinner bell rings, we must haste to meet our guests,
and we will seize the first opportunity of conversing further on these
momentous affairs.

[Exeunt.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
No. LXXIII.
VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT, continued. ACT THIRD.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Mr. Maitland's House. [Enter Robert, preceded by
Charles Maitland.] Robert. DEAR heart! dear heart! these old eyes are almost
blind with weeping! and my gray hairs, I verily think, will be brought with
sorrow to the grave!


Charles. Good Robert, be comforted.


Robert. Alas! Sir! how can I be comforted? There is no good got by wandering
from home. Master Charles, a young man, as you are, can have no idea of the
mischiefs which abound in this wicked world!


Charles. You seem to have forgot those principles which should support your
age; you should remember that I shall have the same protection in distant lands
that has been my refuge in America.


Robert. This is very true, Sir, but -- [sighs deeply.]


Charles. But what, Robert?


Robert. But these are perilous times, Sir; very perilous times; it looks as if
there would not be a mother's son left in the Old World; and, when I consider
how often I have carried you in these arms, it afflicts me sorely, Master
Charles, that you should run after wars, and murders, and bloodshed.


Charles. I am not going to the field of battle, Robert.


Robert. There is no knowing what may take place, Sir; and then this Colonel
Mellfont belongs to the English -- every body says they will have bloody times
in England, Master Charles; and, for my part, Sir, I think them are best off
who have least to do either with French or English.


Charles. Fie, fie, Robert, these prejudices are unworthy of your benevolence.


Robert. Well, may be so, may be so; but my heart strangely misgives me; and if
you go, poor Robert will have seen you for the last time! and who is there left
to pity or to care for me!!


Charles. My father will take care of you, Robert.


Robert. Ah! Sir, Master is very good; but -- but -- [weeps.]


Charles. Poor old man! I do not like to see thee weep. Have thou visited our
friends in Stricken Alley, as I requested?


Robert. Oh! Sir! could you have heard their piteous lamentations, I am sure it
would have melted you!


Charles. Lamentations, Robert?


Robert. Yes, Sir; for at the same time that I gave them your liberal
benefaction, I informed them of your intended departure; and such a general
shout of sorrow, old as I am, I never before heard.


Charles. Poor unfortunates!


Robert. And then such blessings as they poured on you -- His reward will be
great, said one -- It cannot exceed his deservings, said another -- May the
good God protect him, said all.


Charles. I feel myself enriched by their united benedictions.


Robert. But what, dear Sir, will become of them?


Charles. They shall still be my care.


Robert. But who will take care of Madam Eliza, Sir?


Charles. What do you mean, Robert?


Robert. Excuse me, Sir, but, in my humble opinion, there never was a more
heavenly minded young lady; and I have said it a thousand and a thousand times,
that she was the exact resemblance of my young Master.


Charles. Of me?


Robert. Yes, Sir; for whenever I have carried her your letters, she has been
so gracious, and has inquired so kind after my little orphan grandchildren!


Charles. Miss Clairville is indeed an angel.


Robert. And, when I have ventured to speak of your charities, Sir --


Charles. Of my charities?


Robert. Yes, Sir; how you took the poor man out of prison; purchased all his
goods at auction; and, after restoring both them and him to his wife and
children, how you gave him a sum of money to begin business again: How you were
constantly taking the part of the oppressed. When I have told her all these
things, and much more, Sir, she would turn away to wipe off the tears, and
then, lifting up her white hands and beautiful blue eyes to heaven, Robert,
says she, your Master is a good young man, and a blessing will surely attend
him.


Charles. Was my Eliza so kind?


Robert. O yes, Sir, I cannot remember the half of what I have heard her say;
but we all think, if once you come together, there will not be a poor person
within a hundred miles of your dwelling.


Charles. Well, Robert, we must all submit to necessity. Go, my good fellow,
and desire Mr. Weston to step hither.


Robert. I will go, Sir. -- It breaks my heart to think of his turning out into
the world in these bad times.

[Exit Robert.
Charles. Poor old man! I am not ashamed to own that the parting with him is
not the least of my inquietudes. But my Eliza, exalted pattern of every
excellence! may Heaven shield thy virtues: Surely the gifts of fortune are
estimated at the very lowest rate, when they are withheld from merit so
transcendent, and profusely showered on vice and folly.

[Enter Weston.] Well, Weston, what says my father?


Weston. He takes the matter precisely as you expected; he thinks your absence
will be temporary; laughs at the idea of your perpetual banishment; and pleases
himself with anticipating your victory over a passion which he pronounces
extravagant, the mere consequence of youth and inexperience: And he doubts not,
he shall see you in the full enjoyment of that happy calm which is the
offspring of reason, and the corrected successor of the heyday of the blood.


Charles. A mere duplicate of what he said to me not an hour since. -- I have
narrated to you my eclaircissement with Miss Clairville.


Weston. That eclaircissement must have been very satisfactory.


Charles. Why, Weston, so it was; and yet, strange as it may seem, while the
recollection of her tenderness elevates me above myself, a recurrence to her
determined resolution spreads over my soul a kind of melancholy calm, which
very much resembles despair.


Weston. But ought you not rather to implant hope thereon, or at least to
forego your design of quitting us?


Charles. To what purpose?


Weston. Methinks flight implies cowardice, while the exercise of manly
firmness might restore your peace; and, it should be remembered, that we ought
to sustain rather than quit our posts.


Charles. I do not see that my removal from hence is quitting my post.


Weston. You seem stationed here by Providence; it is your native place, and
your munificence has rendered you a general blessing.


Charles. It is not my intention to elude the designs of Providence; I will
pursue commerce, and if my father's overgrown fortunes should come into my
possession, I will devise a regular system, which shall render them as useful
as their magnitude will admit.


Weston. Excellent young man! surely the interposition of Heaven will be
manifested in your favor!


Charles. There is little merit in bestowing on the necessities of others what
we cannot possibly appropriate to our own emolument. Have you adjusted those
accounts which I committed to your care?


Weston. I have carefully executed your wishes.


Charles. Are the receipts past?


Weston. They are, Sir.


Charles. Then there remains but one account open; Major Bloomville is
considerably in arrears to me, but as I have reason to think his circumstances
a little deranged, I will not make application to him.


[Enter Robert.] Robert. Sir, the English Colonel desires to see you.


Charles. Show him in, by all means.


Robert. O, lack a day! lack a day!

[Exit Robert.
Charles. The deep grief, of which this fellow's countenance is expressive,
really affects me.


Weston. It must indeed interest your humanity; but I will now devote myself to
those preparations which yet remain to be made previous to your departure.


Charles. Do, Mr. Weston.

[Exit Weston.
[Enter Colonel Mellfont.] Col. M. Mr. Maitland, your most obedient -- I have
called on you to learn if you held your purpose, relative to your journey; but
I could hardly persuade your servant to permit my entrance.


Charles. He is a weak old man; and, much concerned at the prospect of my
departure, he has, perhaps, conceived a kind of prejudice against the person,
to whom he imputes a design, which he imagines so ill advised. There is some
allowance due to years, Sir.


Col. M. Undoubtedly. Poor fellow, I would gladly dry his tears -- I always
feel compassion for persons in a state of servitude and dependence, Mr.
Maitland.


Charles. You are perfectly right, Sir.


Col. M. Your servant, Mr. Maitland, has an added claim to my attention; old
age, and grief, are powerful recommendations to that heart, which has been
long a proficient in the school of affliction.


Charles. I have often been fearful that your bosom harbored some latent cause
of grief; and our last conversation, without explaining the nature of your
misfortunes, has confirmed my suspicions, given me a very important interest in
your happiness, and originated a wish that I could be any how instrumental in
producing it.


Col. M. You are truly friendly; but, as the knowledge of my misfortunes can be
of no immediate import, it may suffice to say that I am unhappy; that I wander
from place to place without diminishing my sorrow, and that I hardly expect a
remedy this side the grave.


Charles. Pardon me, Sir; I can commiserate, without being impertinent.


Col. M. Nay, the probability is, that the accusation of impertinence will
devolve upon me; for, I am induced to put a question, which only a long and
approved friendship can justify. I am informed, that you quit this town with a
declaration that you will never return to it again! and that you are driven
hence by unsuccessful love! Can this be true?


Charles. It is, Sir.


Col. M. Methinks, Mr. Maitland, the lady must have made an erroneous
calculation, who refuses to exchange her vows with yours.


Charles. You are very polite, Sir; but mine is no uncommon case. Fortune,
blind to the perfections of the most charming and accomplished of women, sat
her down in her book of distributions, pennyless.


Col. M. Does your father approve of your attachment?


Charles. By no means; he condemns it as the grossest absurdity.


Col. M. But how happens it that he has no eyes for merit so conspicuous?


Charles. My father has never yet seen Miss Clairville. An excess of delicacy
leading her to conceive that visiting in promiscuous company, and frequenting
public places, would ill accord with her humble fortune -- she is only to be
met in the circle of a few intimate friends, with whom my father is not
conversant.


Col. M. This is unfortunate -- if you could, by any means, procure an
interview, youth, beauty and innocence might become very powerful pleaders.


Charles. Alas! Sir, my father will not see my Eliza; and, if he could even be
brought to consent to our union, it is more than probable Miss Clairville would
reject our united supplications; for, while she has, in the most unequivocal
terms, avowed her preference, she has, with the same breath, declared that she
will never meet me at the altar, but on equal ground.


Col. M. This is noble, it must be confessed; but it is easier to form
resolutions than to persist in them; indeed, the capability of such a
determination, is, in itself, a prodigious effort, especially in a young woman.
She, doubtless, has her advisers -- are any of her friends within my knowledge?


Charles. I think you mixed in the same circles with Miss Dorinda Scornwell,
while in New York; her intimacy with the Bloomville family, gives her frequent
opportunities with my Eliza.


Col. M. This may be a happy circumstance. I will request the honor of her
private ear. I have often known female influence acquire an ascendency, which
demanded the utmost address to surmount.


Charles. Ah! Sir, you are about to engage in a very untoward affair.


Col. M. Perhaps not. I have some knowledge of the character of your father --
if I could converse with him on your subject, I have a pre-sentiment that I
could inspire him with a degree of complacency for my opinion.


Charles. You would find it an Herculean labor; but I will step to the
library, where, at this hour, he is commonly to be found, and I dare say he
will be with you in a moment.

[Exit Charles.
Col. M. Written in the irreversible decrees of fate, the son of sorrow! I
would extract a balm for my lacerated bosom from every fair occasion, in the
which I can mitigate the ills, that seem allotted for a fellow creature:
Indeed, the power to soothe the woe-fraught mind, partakes essentially the
nature of divinity. O Howard! Howard! illustrious philanthropist! thou were the
veriest mental epicure that ever mere humanity embodied.


[Enter Mr. Maitland senior, and Charles.] Charles. Give me leave, Sir, to
introduce to you my very worthy friend, Col. Mellfont.


Maitl. Servant, Sir -- servant.


Col. M. I am, Sir, happy in an opportunity of paying my respects to the parent
of a young person, to whom my heart has, for a considerable time, been not a
little attached.


Maitl. I am obliged to you, Sir; but, as to happiness, Sir, it is an extreme
which may do well enough as a Utopian plant, but which has never yet been found
to take a very deep root in America.


Col. M. We accustom ourselves, Sir, to a language, which, although perhaps,
strictly speaking, is not chaste; yet, as it is generally understood, receives,
nevertheless, a current acceptance.


Maitl. Ah, very likely, very likely -- this world is given to see things
through a false medium.


Col. M. I am perfectly of your opinion, Sir; the world is, indeed, given to
error; it is only a select few who see things as they are; while the blinded
multitude, borne in the vortex of folly, will continue their idle whirl on the
very brink of destruction.


Maitl. That is a striking sentiment, Sir -- " the blinded multitude, borne in
the vortex of folly, will continue their idle whirl upon the very brink of
destruction." I congratulate thee, Charles, on having attained so valuable a
friend.


Charles. Sir, I have long been deeply impressed with a very high sense of the
worth of Col. Mellfont.


Col. M. You are very obliging, gentlemen.

[Bowing.
Maitl. Sir, you deserve it; you have spoken rationally. I have always been a
cool, deliberate man, Sir, a lover of reason, and a friend of equality: Some of
my countrymen hate Frenchmen -- some hate Englishmen -- these are both
extremes, Sir; but, for my part, I love a man of worth, let him be the growth
of what clime he will. I am a true brother of the Royal Arch -- my motto is
equality, and I embrace the brotherhood with my whole heart, Sir.


Col. M. Admirable, Mr. Maitland -- truly admirable! I have often wondered at
the early virtues of my friend Charles; but, as his youth has been formed under
the genial influence of an example so transcendently excellent, I shall
henceforward cease to wonder.


Maitl. Why, ah! Charles is well enough for a young man, as young men go -- he
has, perhaps, a few youthful follies that stand in need of pruning, and he may
make a tolerable figure.


Col. M. I cannot but regret, Sir, whatever pleasure I may anticipate from the
tour, that he is so soon to be removed from your guardian observation.


Maitl. It is his own choice, Sir.


Col. M. Perhaps, Sir, this choice may be influenced by circumstances. I
suppose, my friend, that you would prefer a father's wing, to a state of
wandering, amid that world of which you, at present, know so little?


Charles. Certainly, Sir; but, such is my unhappy situation, that those scenes
which have heretofore contributed to my felicity, now stand forth, mementos of
the severity of my destiny!


Maitl. Ah! let him make the experiment, Colonel -- let him make the experiment
-- he talks of never returning; but, this is all mere romance: we shall soon
see him again, like the prodigal son, cap in hand; and he will then know how to
distinguish properly, and to make prudent calculations, Colonel.


Charles. Sir, you are my father; I therefore owe you reverence, and I will be
patient.


Maitl. Patience! ah, there is not a better ingredient in life, Charles, than
patience; it is the very essence of Moderation -- cultivate patience, boy, and
thou shall have my blessing with all my heart.


Col. M. Spoken like a father! I dare say, Sir, it is your wish that your son
should prosecute business under your own eye.


Maitl. Yes, Sir; but, if he, not having received a sufficient quantum of
centripetal force, is thus neglectful of the laws of gravitation, thus
centrifugally inclined, and chooses to fly off in a tangent, I shall not
constitute his antipodes -- I shall not weep myself into a Niobe; I can tell
him that, Sir.


Col. M. Will you permit me, Sir, as the friend of your son, and the admirer of
yourself, to speak with freedom?


Maitl. O Sir, I have all suitable regard to freedom; and it is my wish to
support liberty of speech, by all means.


Col. M. In perfect confidence then, that I shall not offend, and with all due
deference to your superior judgment, I will say, that I do not know any event
that can have a more probable tendency to establish a young man in life, with
the fairest prospects of tranquillity, than an early connection with a discreet
and deserving young woman.


Maitl. Yes, Sir, provided always, that the choice of the said young woman be
discreetly made, Colonel.


Col. M. And what, Sir, in your opinion, constitutes a discreet choice?


Maitl. Equality, Sir; by all means, equality. If I have got ten thousand
pound, the case is clear, she must lay down ten thousand pound; and thus it
will appear a connection of cool, deliberate prudence, and not the impassioned,
high flying result of romantic folly.


Col. M. But, Sir, are there not qualities infinitely more valuable than riches?


Maitl. Undoubtedly, Sir; and if it were a law as irrevocable as that of the
Medes and Persians, that no one, who possessed money, should superadd merit, I
would assuredly give my voice in favor of merit.


Col. M. You would, certainly, Mr. Maitland, find an exquisite pleasure in
transplanting virtue into the most friendly soil.


Maitl. Give me leave to tell you, Colonel, once for all, that I am not fond of
your exquisites -- moderation is my desideratum; and my plan is, to abide by
its dictates.


Col. M. Moderation is certainly highly estimable, Sir.


Maitl. Why, now, Col. Mellfont, in things of less consequence, you would be in
the exercise of prudence -- you would not stake a thousand pound, in a game of
whist or quadrille, against sixpence, Colonel. My name is Ralph Maitland, Sir;
and I am determined to act for myself -- I have not yet got into my dotage, Sir.


Col. M. You ought, undoubtedly, Sir, to be your own master; and you are right,
in supposing I would not hazard a thousand pound against sixpence; and yet,
Sir, I should conceive, that a thousand pound was well laid out, in purchasing
a virtue, in communicating felicity, or, in placing a fellow creature in the
rank, for which nature seems to have designed her.


Maitl. Ah! ah! all this is very fine talking; but virtue is not to be bought
and sold, nor, do I pretend to write notes, critical and explanatory, on the
designs of nature; and, moreover, Colonel, you are quite wide in your
calculations, for I am not ignorant of the purpose for which you have given
yourself all this unnecessary trouble; but, I say, you are quite wide of the
matter; it is not in my power to communicate felicity, for the young woman,
being a rational young woman, is herself perfectly convinced, that her
connection with my son would, in the nature of things, be highly preposterous.


Col. M. This conviction must have proceeded from a sweet and amiable
disposition; it has made me a lover of her character; did she assure you of
this herself, Sir?


Maitl. O, no Sir, I never saw her in my life.


Col. M. And do you not think it would be proper you should pay her a visit of
acknowledgment on this occasion?


Maitl. Perhaps it may, Sir; and in order to convince Charles that I will
comply with him in all that is reasonable, I do not much care if I call upon
the girl on this business.


[Enter Robert.] Robert. Did you call, master Charles?


Charles. No, good Robert; and I would thank you to see that we are not broken
in upon.


Robert. I will, Sir, I will. Heaven bless him; I have not seen him look so
happy this many a day; who knows what may happen after all! [Aside.

[Exit Robert.
Maitl. We shall be subject to continual interruptions here, Charles, I will
therefore invite you both to my library, and we will there adjust the necessary
preliminaries to this visit of acknowledgment.


Col. M. I will attend you with pleasure, Sir.


Charles. Sir, you have bound me to you by yet added ties.

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- The Vestibule of Mr. Maitland's House. [Enter Captain Flashet, who
rings vehemently.] [Enter Robert.] Capt. F. Here you, Mr. Gray Hairs, where is
my friend Charles?


Robert. My master, Sir, is very busy, and cannot be interrupted at present.


Capt. F. Cannot be interrupted, rascal?


Robert. Rascal, Sir! that is a name which I never yet received from either of
my masters!


Capt. F. Don't prate, old fellow, don't prate, I say; or, as I am a soldier, I
will lend thee a blow that shall lay thee as stiff as was Julius Caesar, when he
was beheaded by Oliver Cromwell. Sir, I am your master's friend; tell him
Captain Flashet waits for him, and you will see he will present himself
immediately, Sir.


Robert. [Aside.] Bless me! what a fiery blade it is; I had best decamp, I
believe!

[Exit Robert.
Capt. F. If we men of the sword do not exert ourselves, and be seen in our
places, we shall be treated with as little respect as a dead Carthagenian, and
as our employment is undoubtedly honorable, even as honorable as was that of
the great Charles of Constantinople, when he swore eternal enmity to the
Russian Scipio's, so I think proper to behave with dignity, and to show, on all
occasions, a becoming spirit.

[Rings. [Enter a Servant,] Send that gray headed old fellow to me.


Serve. Yes, Sir.

[Exit Servant.
Capt. F. Why Tantalus, when he was broiled on the gridiron by old Father
Gregory, was never worse treated.

[Enter Robert.] Well sirrah, where is your master -- ha?


Robert. Good Sir, be not angry with an old man! My master Sir, bid me to make
his excuses, and (...) tell you that being engaged in business of importance,
he could not wait on you at this time.


Capt. F. You lie, sirrah.


Robert. Indeed Sir, I --


Capt. F. Hold your tongue, you old scoundrel -- I Will teach you what it is to
affront an officer of my rank.

[Collars and shakes him furiously -- Robert roars out.]
[Enter Charles Maitland.] Charles. For shame, for shame, Captain! lift your
hand against a feeble, gray headed old man!


Capt. F. Yes Sir, an old scoundrel who has used me ill.


Charles. Sir, he is not a scoundrel; he has acted entirely by my direction.


Capt. F. Acted by your direction, Sir?


Charles. Yes Sir, and what have you to say to that, Sir?


Capt. F. That I am not treated like a gentleman, Sir.


Charles. Robert, you may go.


Robert. Now pray, dear master --


Charles. Away -- you know I will be obeyed. [Exit Robert, agitated and
alarmed.] If you conceive yourself injured, Captain Flashet, I will not deny
you redress. I do not mean to violate the laws of hospitality in this mansion;
but you will know how to call on me, Sir.


Capt. F. O! not in the least, my dear friend, not in the least! no, I
perfectly coincide in opinion with the brave Tacitus, in his reply to Pope
Clement -- If Clement is tired of his life, he shall not find death on the
point of my sword: So, my very dear friend, I wish you a very good day.

[Exit Captain Flashet.
Charles. Ha, ha, ha -- this is truly ridiculous -- ha, ha, ha.

[Exit.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
No. LXXIV.
VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT, continued. ACT FOURTH.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Major Bloomville's House. [Enter Miss Clairville --
looks at her watch.] Eliza. HEIGH ho! Time wears but slowly; and yet, when I
think on tomorrow's sun, it has an eagle's wing! Farewell! a last farewell!
What deep-felt pangs does that heart-affecting word involve!!!


[Enter William.] Will. Miss Eliza, there is a gentleman, Mr. Maitland, who
wishes to see you.


Eliza. Hah! I had thought his visit would have been delayed until evening.
[Aside.] Be so good as to desire Mr. Maitland to walk in.

[Exit William. And now, assist me, each incentive which can render firm a
feeble maiden -- shed over me thy invigorating influence, divine fortitude --
support me through this last interview! and to tender regret, a comfortless
victim, I thenceforward devote me!


[Enter Mr. Maitland, senior.] Maitl. An assemblage of all that is lovely in
woman! [Aside.] I hope I do not intrude, young lady?


Eliza. In the name of wretchedness, who can this be? [Aside.] Have you any
commands for me, Sir?

[Courtefying modestly.
Maitl. For thee, Madam! Thou look as if thou were formed to give, rather
than receive commands! O the rogues! they knew what a trial they were preparing
for me.

[Aside.
Eliza. Perhaps, Sir, you wish to see Major Bloomville, or his lady?


Maitl. No, sweet lady; if thou art Miss Clairville, my business is with thee:
Can thou lend me thine ear for half an hour?


Eliza. Will you have the goodness to let me know from whom I receive a request
so uncommon?


Maitl. And is there no one striking lineament, by which thou can recognize
the father, from his resemblance to the son?


Eliza. Hah! Sir?


Maitl. It were a sin, young lady, to keep thee in a moment's painful suspense:
My name is Ralph Maitland, Miss Clairville, and I am very much at thy service,
I assure thee.


Eliza. Amazement!


Maitl. Yes, Madam, I am the father of a headstrong boy, who has given thee
much uneasiness; and I have to thank thee for the exercise of a degree of
moderation, which is very seldom found among the catalogue of a woman's virtues.


Eliza. Can I believe my ears?


Maitl. Give them full credit, my dear; thou shall hear nothing but truth from
Ralph Maitland.


Eliza. [Trembling exceedingly.] This is a very unexpected visit, Sir.


Maitl. Be composed, Miss Eliza: We have, perhaps, hitherto been a mutual
terror to each other; but henceforward I request thee to know me for thy friend.


Eliza. My friend, Sir! O how soothing is that tender appellation! how balmy to
the wounded bosom of the orphan Eliza!


Maitl. And have thou been so deeply wounded, Eliza?


Eliza. Indeed, Sir, you see before you the daughter of misfortune and of
sufferance; alas! I know no other parents.

[Weeps.
Maitl. Young lady, I advise thee to take comfort; I confess obligations to
thee; and I assure thee, that I would willingly go almost any lengths to serve
thee.


Eliza. Your countenance, Sir, is a pleasing index of the goodness of your mind.


Maitl. Be assured, Miss Clairville, that I lament every circumstance that
opposes my styling myself thy father.


Eliza. Alas! Sir, to hail the venerable name of Father, was not reserved for
the poor Eliza; my infant tongue was never taught to lisp it; and in no moment
has my maturer years, with unauthorized presumption, aspired to so vast an
acquisition.


Maitl. Interesting woman! henceforward I acquit my son!


Eliza. Alas! Sir, I should reckon your censure of that good young man as a
serious calamity.


Maitl. Then he shall not have my censure, Madam; for I will never contribute
to thy inquietude.


Eliza. You are unexpectedly kind, Sir; but for me, accustomed to misfortunes,
I have learned to bear them; my life has been a life of humiliation, and my
most arduous struggles to submit to that necessity which destiny has imposed.


Maitl. By my serenity, a fascinating girl!

[Aside.
Eliza. Yet I have had friends, Sir; with gratitude I make this confession; and
the privilege of ranking Mr. Maitland in the number, is a circumstance which
furnishes a relief, that is, on the present occasion, truly necessary.


Maitl. If I have ever, Miss Clairville, given thee a moment's pain, I repent
it from my soul.


Eliza. And I, Sir, take leave to make the same acknowledgment: An interference
with your plans has ever been foreign from my intention.


Maitl. I doubt it not, Madam. Will thou permit one question? Has my son's
departure thy approbation?


Eliza. Perhaps, Sir, I have no right to give an opinion respecting his
movements.


Maitl. Yes, Madam; friendship alone will authorize thee; and, as I respect thy
judgment, I take the liberty to solicit thy sentiments on a step so important
as his contemplated tour.


Eliza. You do me too much honor, Sir; but, as I feel a degree of confidence
in your indulgence, I will say, that I think young men of observation cannot
fail of reaping advantage from a knowledge of the world.


Maitl. Unexampled prudence! But perhaps, Miss Eliza, thou do not love, or,
as young ladies phrase it, thou have no preference for my son?


Eliza. [Greatly agitated.] Hah! Sir?


Maitl. Can thou, Miss Clairville, rise so far superior to the forms and
fashions of thy sex, as to tell me plainly, how thy heart stands in regard to
my son?


Eliza. Circumstanced as I am, Sir, your question, it must be owned, is a
little singular.


Maitl. It is so, Madam; but my freedom is a proof of my esteem.


Eliza. To be distinguished by you, Sir, must unquestionably be highly
gratifying to me.


Maitl. Consider me as an old man, and do not hesitate.


Eliza. I have ever reverenced years, Sir.


Maitl. Do not evade my question, Madam.


Eliza. I will not make a merit with you, Sir, for an avowal which will be
entitled to no praise. From the first dawn of my reason, I have been accustomed
to admire virtue, even to a degree of enthusiasm; and I have been taught to
feel a strong predilection in favor of every genteel and graceful
accomplishment.


Maitl. Well, Miss Clairville.


Eliza. And I do not wish to conceal, that I have not felt my attachment to the
virtues and the graces diminish, because they happen to be personified by
Charles Maitland.


Maitl. And this ingenuous declaration thou do not wish to conceal?


Eliza. No, Sir; for, not choosing to present myself as a candidate for
matrimonial life, I care not who knows, that I have no heart to give.


Maitl. But it is very natural for a young woman to contemplate an
establishment by wedlock.


Eliza. Undoubtedly, Sir; but, as I believe there are joys and sorrows peculiar
to every situation in life, and, as I have conceived that it is not so much the
part, as the acting well that part, which entitles the performer to
respectability, so I am determined to rest satisfied with that character in the
Drama, in which the great Manager seems to have cast me my lot.


Maitl. Admirable young woman!


Eliza. Your approbation, Sir, is truly soothing.


Maitl. Thou have thought very deeply, Madam, and made uncommon proficiency.


Eliza. Adversity, Sir, is an excellent school.


Maitl. [Walks about irresolute, and appears much moved, after which he says:]
I have conceived, Miss Clairville, that there was a natural beauty in
propriety, an unalterable rule of right, and an eternal fitness of things; nor
will I yet relinquish my principles. Opposition to thee, enchanting maid, must
constitute the extreme of obstinacy; while, in thy lovely bosom, every virtue
has found a calm and happy asylum.


Eliza. [Weeping.] Alas! Sir; you little know the imbecility of that heart
which you would thus exalt.


Maitl. Thou shall weep no more, my love -- Know me henceforth as thy
protecting father -- the wishes of my son have now the fullest sanction.


Eliza. Amazement!


Maitl. Will thou not accept me as thy paternal friend?


Eliza. [Kneels.] On my knees, Sir, I supplicate eternal sunshine on that dear
paternal bosom -- but know, Sir, that my sacred, my irrevocable vow is
registered in heaven -- I can never wear the envied title of your daughter,
except a miracle should render me the equal of your son; nor can even the
wishes of Mr. Maitland recall the solemn hour which witnessed a transaction,
that renders his unexampled condescension forever ineffectual.


Maitl. Astonishing! What have thou done, Eliza?


Eliza. Forgive me, Sir; but, fearing that my tenderness would one day betray
my resolution, I bound myself by ties indissoluble.


Maitl. My persevering obstinacy has undone my son! Rise, Eliza, dear, rash,
heroic, and uncommon girl! What step remains to be taken?


Eliza. [Rising.] To submit to destiny, Mr. Maitland; and remember that this
life is but a passage to a better scene of things.


Maitl. It is a hard necessity.


Eliza. You accuse me of rashness, Sir: You behold in me an orphan, friendless,
poor, and claiming no natural protector! nor did I ever yet behold the being,
whom I could challenge as relation! Consider, Sir, is such a female a fit
companion for your son? Subordination, rank and degree, are of divine original;
the lines are justly drawn; and he who breaks the rank assigned him by his
Creator, is surely an aggressor.


Maitl. Dear, uncommon girl! never were my own sentiments so well expressed
before -- it were a crime of no inferior dye, to urge thee further -- I cannot
even wish thee to relinquish ideas, originating in divine propriety. But what,
Miss Clairville, are thy plans? Will thou permit me to regard thee as the
daughter of my affection?


Eliza. My utmost gratitude is due to Mr. Maitland -- But, although orphanaged
with my first breath, I have received from strangers that kind of education
which secures my independence.


Maitl. High-soul'd girl! it is impossible to fasten on thee the shadow of an
obligation! Do thou expect to see my son before his departure?


Eliza. I do, Sir: As if in love with anguish, we have appointed this evening
to exchange the last farewell!


Maitl. Charming frankness! Admirable young lady! I tear myself from thee. Thou
have made large inroads on that calm equality of disposition, which it has
been the study of my whole life to cultivate; and I hasten from thee, to
recover that firmness of which I stand so much in need. Accept, Miss
Clairville, my cordial benediction.


Eliza. May Heaven grant you peace, Sir. [Exit Mr. Maitland precipitately, and
much disordered.] My soul has been too highly wrought, and the retirement of my
chamber is necessary to restore me to the power of assuming a calm which I
shall never feel.

[Exit Eliza.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Miss Dorinda Scornwell's Lodgings. [Enter Miss
Scornwell and Jenny.] Miss. Sc. And so, Jenny, you say that Mr. Charles
Maitland is really going to flee his country?


Jenny. O yes, Ma'am, sartingly.


Miss Sc. But where did thou get thy knowledge, Jenny?


Jenny. Why, you know, Ma'am, you sent me to Mrs. Lacewell's for a new head --
and so, seeing a crowd of people about Master Maitland's house, what does I do
but pop my head in for a few moments, and there I found the whole house in
tears, Ma'am.


Miss Sc. And pray, could your ingenuity devise no cause why the whole house
should be in tears, except the departure of the young gentleman?


Jenny. You shall hear, Ma'am. Master Robert was in a piteous taking -- and so,
says I, what is the matter? says I. Why, says they, Master Charles is going to
leave us, says they; and we shall all break our hearts, Miss Jenny, says they.


Miss Sc. A mighty important matter to break hearts, indeed!


Jenny. Why, so I thought, Ma'am; but it didn't become a servant, as I was, to
say so.


Miss Sc. And pray, did not your curiosity inquire the reason of his departure?


Jenny. O yes, Ma'am; and they says, Ma'am, how that it is all for the love of
Miss Clairville.


Miss Sc. Nonsense -- that creature!


Jenny. Why, so I thought, Ma'am.


Miss Sc. It is really intolerable, that servants should give themselves such
liberties; but thus it is, they are eternally fabricating motives for the
conduct of their betters.


Jenny. Why, so I thought, Ma'am -- It Is quite intolerant, says I, and
impossible besides -- But they says, that old Mr. Maitland will never consent
to the match, and that he is willing young Mr. Maitland should go to the wars,
in hopes that it will break the neck of it.


Miss Sc. To the wars, Jenny?


Jenny. Yes, Ma'am; for they says, as how that nobody goes over the seas, in
these trepidation times, without fighting, Ma'am -- so young Mr. Maitland may
stand a chance of getting a wooden leg, or, may be, have his head chopped off
by the Gluttoner, who, they says, is so greedy as to swallow a thousand heads
for a breakfast -- and then, I thinks, Ma'am, he will pay very dear for the
love of Miss Clairville.


Miss Sc. Ridiculous!


Jenny. Why, so I said, Ma'am -- It is the hyperdistic of folly, says I.


Miss Sc. Flee his country, indeed! Let me hear no more of it, I charge you,
Jenny.


Jenny. No, truly, Ma'am -- and I told them all this -- Says I, Mr. Charles,
says I, knows better than all that there; and if he might have Miss Dorinda
Scornwell, I am sure she is better than she, every day she rises, says I; and a
more richer, and a more prettier, and a more handsomer lady into the bargain --
and, says I, if she is a little older, what of that, says I, we cannot be
always babies.


Miss Sc. Amazing!


Jenny. Yes, Ma'am, I did not spare them -- not I -- and I told them it was all
as falsity as falsity could be; for that you were never desirous to marry
Master Charles in all your born days.


Miss Sc. Astonishing! Where will your impertinence end? [outer bell rings.]
Take yourself to the door, Miss Impudence, and see if there is no message for
me.

[Exit Jenny, muttering. The ignorance of this wench is intolerable; yet I
cannot say that I feel perfectly indifferent with regard to this extraordinary
decampment: Maitland was once my favorite; and, were it not for the attention
paid me by the irresistible Colonel, I should still think it worth while to
throw some impediments in his way -- But what a captivating successor is
Colonel Mellfont; descended from a noble family, and of princely fortunes -- it
is true, he is my senior; but maturity has its advantages -- there can be no
doubt entertained of my conquest of the Colonel's heart; his being here is a
strong evidence, and his marked politeness at the assembly last evening, is
proof positive.

[Enter Jenny, who presents a billet.] Leave the room, Impertinence.

[Exit Jenny.
[ Miss Sc. reads.] "Colonel Mellfont will not approach Miss Dorinda Scornwell
with compliments, presuming on former acquaintance, he offers his respectful
regards, and being extremely impatient to present himself before her, having a
very tender interest to plead, he takes leave to request the honor of a
private conference. If Colonel M -- is fortunate enough to obtain Miss
Scornwell's permission, he will wait on her, previous to the appointment for
the afternoon."

O the dear, dear paper!

[Presses it to her lips, and rings clamorously. [Enter Jenny.] Is the man who
brought this billet, gone, Jenny?


Jenny. He waits for an answer, Ma'am. [sullenly.]


Miss Sc. Return my best compliments -- No -- stop -- I will write -- but that
will look too forward -- let me see -- Yes, it must be a verbal message -- Do
you hear? -- My best compliments to Colonel Mellfont, and I shall be at home to
receive him.

[Exit Jenny. Now shall I be the envy of the whole town -- the ladies will so
rail -- the gentlemen will so ogle -- and at plays, balls, and card parties, I
shall assume such a well bred indifference, stare so confidently, and insult my
inferiors with an air so genteel, so careless, and so delectably imperious,
that it will be divinely charming! -- Bloomville will absolutely break her
heart -- ha, ha, ha! Poor thing! her fortunes have long been on the decline --
But I will trip to my dressing room, consult my glass, and set my features in
the best imaginable order.

[Exit.
SCENE -- Another Apartment in Miss Scornwell's Lodgings -- Room highly
decorated. [Enter Captain Flashet.] Capt. F. Heigh-day! the house alone here --
but I Will soon make myself heard.

[Rings. [Enter Jenny.] By Jupiter, a pretty wench. Hark'ye, sweetheart, will
you tell your lady, that her faithful soldier petitions for an interview?


Jenny. O yes, Sir.

[Exit Jenny.
Capt. F. There is nothing like doing things genteelly -- Why, Doctor Johnson
would never have figured so wonderfully, if he had not studied the graces. Let
me see -- should I become a favorite with Miss Scornwell, my fortune is made
forever! and -- and -- I will live -- O! how I will live! -- Why, not even Dean
Swift himself, was ever a politer man, or a fonder lover, than I will be. But
here she comes -- here she comes.

[Enter Miss Scornwell.] Miss Scornwell, your most obedient.


Miss Sc. O the malice of fortune! What sent that coxcomb here? [Aside.]
Captain Flashet, this visit is immensely kind.


Capt. F. Learning, Madam, that you were engaged to visit Mrs. Bloomville this
afternoon, I have taken the liberty to call in, proposing to myself the
felicity of being accepted as the escort of the divine Miss Scornwell.


Miss Sc. O Sir! you are very polite; but I have some business of importance,
which claims my previous attention.


Capt. F. Business! O mores! O temporal! a lady of Miss Scornwell's rank and
fortune, attend to business! Now, by my soldiership, it is beneath you, Madam.


Miss Sc. Why, as to that, Sir, the word business admits of various
significations -- there are domestic affairs, there are commercial affairs, and
a multiplicity of affairs -- all of which come under the description of
business, and all of which, I do assure you, Captain Flashet, I most truly
detest.


Capt. F. Certainly, Madam -- certainly -- I should conceive, a lady of your
good sense would detest all these.


Miss Sc. But then, Captain Flashet, you know there are other people's affairs,
and there are affairs of the heart, [looking archly] both of which kinds of
business may very properly help a fine lady to kill time.


Capt. F. Very wisely said, Miss Scornwell; the wise Nero himself could not
have expressed it better.


Miss Sc. Nero, Sir! if I mistake not, Nero was a Roman pontiff.


Capt. F. He was, Madam, and very remarkable for his pithy sayings.


Miss Sc. You are disposed to compliment, Sir; and indeed I am sufficiently
inclined to hear you; for I have always known how to set a proper value on the
approbation of a soldier.


Capt. F. [Bows to the ground.] Madam, you are superlatively good, and you are
superlatively fair, too; and, upon the faith of a soldier, Madam, I pronounce
you to be as beautiful as a full blown sun-flower.


Miss Sc. As a full blown sun-flower! I do not understand you, Sir.


Capt. F. Nay, be not offended -- you are the quintessence of all loveliness,
and your beauty exceeds even that of Medusa! -- that head becomes you
infinitely -- and, if I believed in fairies, I should conceive you to be the
divine Erebus, whom the fiddler Jason, with his golden bow, redeemed from the
lower regions, whither she had sailed with King Agamemnon, after his conquest
of Bohemia.


Miss Sc. I am no reader, Sir; and, of course, these are names which are not
familiar to me -- Were they English, French, or Spanish, Sir?


Capt. F. O Lord! Madam, neither -- it would have been grossly impolite, to
have compared the charms of Miss Scornwell to any thing earthly -- they were
heathen gods and goddesses, Madam -- But now I think of it, you mention the
approbation of a soldier -- Are you fond of music, Madam?


Miss Sc. Immensely so, Captain.


Capt. F. Well then, I will give you a song, which was composed by the great
Voltaire, in praise of soldiership, set to music by the Roman Hannibal, and
sung by James I. of England, when he was on the point of mounting a breach in
one of those victorious battles for which he was so celebrated.


Miss Sc. I should like it of all things, Captain Flashet.


Capt. F. [Sings affectedly.] Say, is there aught which can compare
With the laurels soldiers wear?
Inglorious peace, what can thou give?
With thee no martial worth can live.
How we tread the ensanguin'd field!
The missive shafts well skilled to wield;
Inglorious peace, what can thou give?
With thee no martial worth can live.
Hark, hark, through the air the cannon resounds,
The ranks, how they thin; destruction abounds.
Our enemies flee,
Victorious we,
How bravely we press,
The foe shall confess
That undaunted we are,
While the standard we rear,
And hasten loud paeans to raise,
And hasten loud paeans to raise.

[Enter a Servant.] Serve. Colonel Mellfont, Ma'am.


Miss Sc. Desire the Colonel to walk in.


Serve. Yes, Madam.

[Exit Servant.
Capt. F. O the devil! he here?

[Aside.
Miss Sc. I am immeasurably delighted with your song; but, I protest, you seem
thoughtful, Captain.


Capt. F. The slave of your beauty, Madam -- the approach of Colonel Mellfont
has thrown me into the horrors.


[Enter Colonel Mellfont.] Col. M. Miss Scornwell, your most obedient. Captain,
your servant.


Miss Sc. [Courtesying affectedly.] Pray seat yourself, Colonel.


Capt. F. Sir, I am happy to see you -- very happy, upon my honor.


Col. M. Sir, you are sufficiently obliging; there are very few moments, when I
do not receive pleasure from the society of my friends; but, having solicited
the honor of a private conference with Miss Scornwell, I presume that Captain
Flashet is too gallant a man, to expect either compliment or preference.


Miss Sc. Charmingly said, upon my word -- he is a divine man. [Aside.]


Capt. F. Sir, you are a gentleman; and as Achilles says, in Young's Paradise
Lost, let nor foot impertinent, nor eye obtrusive, invade the sanctity of
private sentiment. Sir, I am your most obedient humble servant. Miss Scornwell,
adieu. I wish I had not thrown away so many compliments on the fright. [Aside.

[Exit Flashet.
Col. M. Captain Flashet is really a curiosity, Madam.


Miss Sc. Yes, Sir, quite a curiosity. [mincingly.]


Col. M. Miss Scornwell, I have taken the liberty to solicit this interview, on
an affair of tender importance.


Miss Sc. [confused and looking down.] S -- i -- r, you are -- I never was at
such a loss for words in my life.

[Aside.
Col. M. I have, Madam, a request of a very delicate nature to make to you; and
I flatter myself, in a bosom so compassionate, I shall not want an advocate.


Miss Sc. Sir, I hardly think Colonel Mellfont can request, what Miss Scornwell
ought not to grant.


Col. M. You are truly polite, Madam; I am aware that I have not been long
enough in the list of your friends, to authorize my becoming your petitioner --
but I throw myself entirely on your mercy, well knowing that in an ingenuous
female mind this celestial virtue bears extensive sway.


Miss Sc. Sir, I must own -- I -- I -- I think, Sir, as you say, that our
acquaintance is not of very long standing; but I believe I may trust to the
honor of Colonel Mellfont -- a soldier, Sir, will not betray a woman's
confidence.


Col. M. No man of virtue, Madam, will ever betray a trust.


Miss Sc. I am perfectly of your opinion, Sir.


Col. M. I am a plain man, Madam, and rather advanced in years; a tale of love
will come but awkwardly from my tongue; and it is so long since I have
practiced the language of supplication, that I am really at a loss for proper
terms, in which to clothe my address.


Miss Sc. Sir, I can dispense with forms.


Col. M. Thank you, Madam; I have known much of sorrow, and hence, perhaps it
is that my feelings vibrate, even to agony, at a tale of woe.


Miss Sc. Probably, Sir.


Col. M. If the tender bosom of my amiable friend has ever been interested by
the perturbed sensations of an impassioned attachment; if she can
experimentally decide on the tyranny of the despot Love, even when success
awaits his progress, she will be able to form an idea of the sensations of that
heart in which hope is almost extinct, and her fair hand will be lent to
extricate an unhappy man whom despair has nearly engulphed.


Miss Sc. S -- i -- r, however little I may know of love, were it consistent
with delicacy, I could own -- I could acknowledge that my heart is far from
being insensible.


Col. M. What can she mean? [Aside.] It would be impertinent, Madam, to press
you further; and I will proceed to urge my suit with that energy with which
deep feeling naturally inspires a man who is grown old in misfortune.


Miss Sc. Colonel Mellfont can never plead in vain; and, I must say that it
will be a distant day before his years will be considered as impeding his hopes.


Col. M. Thank you, Madam -- again I thank you; and, thus confirmed, I will
proceed to say, that my yound friend, Charles Maitland --


Miss Sc. Charles Maitland, Sir!


Col. M. Yes, Madam, Charles Maitland.


Miss. Sc. And what of Charles Maitland, Sir?


Col. M. Charles Maitland is the most despairing and impassioned of men!


Miss Sc. Lord, Sir, I -- I -- I thought -- I supposed -- I -- I -- I --


Col. M. What, Madam, did you suppose?


Miss Sc. That you had been speaking of yourself, Sir.


Col. M. No, Madam; certainly not; I have not the happiness of knowing the lady.


Miss Sc. What lady, Sir.


Col. M. Miss Clairville.


Miss Sc. Miss Clairville, Sir! and is this the mighty matter that has
occasioned all this fuss?


Col. M. Fuss! Madam.


Miss Sc. Do you mean to insult me, Sir?


Col. M. God forbid!


Miss Sc. Well then, Sir, what is Miss Clairville, or Charles Maitland to me?


Col. M. Will you, Madam, condescend to hear me?


Miss Sc. [angrily.] O by all means, Sir.


Col. M. I was told you were intimate with Miss Clairville.


Miss Sc. I intimate with Miss Clairville!


Col. M. I was told so, Madam; and, judging by my own feelings, that you must
have acquired an ascendency over her mind, I took the liberty of soliciting
this interview, for the purpose of supplicating for your interest in the bosom
of this young lady in favor of my friend.


Miss Sc. Lady indeed!


Col. M. If I have offended, Madam, I beg pardon.


Miss Sc. It may be as well not to lose him, however. [Aside.] Pray, Sir, of
what use was it supposed I could be in this business?


Col. M. We have some hope, Madam, that the attractions of Miss Clairville may
soften the opposition of the elder Mr. Maitland; and we entertained an idea,
that the securing the aid of Miss Scornwell, would be one principal step toward
propitiating the mind of the young lady.


Miss Sc. [haughtily.] Sir, you are deceived; Eliza Clairville is not of the
number of my acquaintance.


Col. M. Is not Miss Clairville a resident in the family of Major Bloomville?


Miss Sc. Yes, Sir: She is a low bred girl, with a tolerable face; a kind of
upper ^ervant, whom the childish good nature of Mrs. Bloomville sometimes
permits to make one of the mutes in her private parties.


Col. M. I was informed she was a young person of superior worth and
accomplishments.


Miss Sc. It is a gross misrepresentation, Sir; however, I dare say, if you
obtain the father's approbation, and if the son is in earnest, (which, I assure
you, I very much doubt) you will find little difficulty in obtaining the young
woman.


Col. M. I begin to think, Miss Scornwell, that it is possible you yourself may
be deceived.


Miss Sc. You will find the girl precisely such as I have described her.


Col. M. Then, Madam, I shall deeply lament the infatuation of my young friend.


Miss Sc. She may please the eye, Sir; but, believe me, her power over Colonel
Mellfont will extend no further.


Col. M. Your sentiments, Madam, are a perfect contrast to those of Charles
Maitland; and you will forgive me, if, in a point so nice, I suspend my
judgment.


Miss Sc. O Sir, you are undoubtedly at liberty to decide for yourself; and I,
Sir, shall take the liberty to decline all interference in this preposterous
business.


Col. M. [rising.] Well, Madam, I have only to beg pardon for this ill fated
application. I shall have the pleasure of meeting you at Major Bloomville's
anon. Your most obedient, Madam.


Miss Sc. [courtesying ceremoniously.] Your most obedient, Sir.

[Exit Colonel Mellfont, profoundly bowing. Audacious, ill-mannered fellow! But
this same dirt-sprung Eliza of their's shall pay for all. Yes; I will be
revenged, if it is in the power of a woman's tongue to speak those daggers, the
wounds of which are mortal*

[Runs off precipitately.]
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
No. LXXV.
VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT, concluded. ACT FIFTH.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Major Bloomville's House [Enter Matronia and Mrs.
Bloomville.] Mrs. B. WELL, really, my dear aunt, this early visit makes me very
happy.


Matr. I flatter myself, my love, that you do not now need to be told, my chief
business in life has long been to contribute to your happiness.


Mrs. B. Certainly not -- but why so serious, Madam?


Matr. Are you not my niece, my very niece, Augusta?


Mrs. B. Dear Madam!


Matr. Did not these hands convey you from the breathless remains of your
sainted mother, to that loved retirement, where it became my only consolation
to inform and to soothe your infant mind?


Mrs. B. My obligations to you, Madam, are immeasurable.


Matr. Say, Augusta, in those interesting moments, did you not sweetly promise
you would transfer to me all that vast stock of duty, which, had she lived,
would have been the unquestioned right of my angel sister?


Mrs. B. Certainly, Madam; but you terrify me beyond expression!


Matr. And tell me, dear Augusta, have I not merited your confidence?


Mrs. B. You have merited my confidence, my gratitude, my every thing -- but
whither does all this tend?


Matr. Ah! Augusta, I weep for you: How happens it that I have been the last to
learn your unfortunate situation?


Mrs. B. Unfortunate situation, Madam?


Matr. Yes, Augusta! the whole town is loud in its comments -- you are scarce
ever in your own house. Did happiness dwell at home, Augusta would meet her
there!


Mrs. B. Dear Madam, I am not to be accountable for the censorious malice of an
invidious world!


Matr. Your husband, your family -- I blush while I make the confession, are
entirely neglected!


Mrs. B. Has Mr. Bloomville given himself airs?


Matr. Airs, Augusta! your husband is too indulgent!


Mrs. B. Ah! Madam, as you were never married, you do not know what these men
-- the best of them, are!


Matr. Had my Edward lived, Augusta, and had Hymen sanctioned our plighted
vows, it should have been my study to have made him happy -- I would have wept,
when he wept -- I would have rejoiced in his smiles; and my convivial hours
should all have been his.


Mrs. B. Dear Madam! a very trite adage is at my tongue's end, which I am half
mad to utter.


Matr. What is it, Augusta?


Mrs. B. Bachelor's wives, and old maid's children, are finely governed.


Matr. Strange, strange levity! In the name of Heaven, from whence proceeds
this change of character? I remember when you would weep at a tale of woe, and
utter sentiments that would have become a saint.


Mrs. B. Dear Madam, you are too serious -- indeed you are!


Matr. Never shall I forget the divine morality that passed those beauteous
lips, when thou were rescued from impending death by the very man whom thy
well-timed charity had saved from ruin. Ah! Augusta, why has not thy wedded
days presented the ripened fruit which thy early virtues promised? [ weeps.]


Mrs. B. Would, I could dry those tears, Madam.


Matr. You can, Augusta -- My early sufferings devolved my every hope on you;
and, in your happier lot, I fondly calculated all those virtuous pleasures, and
that tender glowing friendship, which, but for Edward's death, had blessed my
lengthening years.


Mrs. B. But, Madam, you loved, you fondly loved your Edward.


Matr. What says Augusta?


Mrs. B. Shall I confess a truth?


Matr. I seek not for disguises.


Mrs. B. Then know, my dear maternal friend, though much too late the sad
confession, that I have never loved!


Matr. Astonishing! Can this be Augusta Bloomville?


Mrs. B. Yea, verily -- and hence she seeks, in varied dissipation, to suppress
that chagrin, so dangerous if indulged!


Matr. In the name of Heaven, Augusta, why did you marry?


Mrs. B. Because -- because -- because it was the fashion, Madam.


Matr. I charge you, on your obedience, that you be more explicit.


Mrs. B. You have a right to my most humble duty, Madam. Major Bloomville was a
soldier of rank, of family, and of fortune -- of unquestioned bravery, and
gentle manners.


Matr. Well, very well, Augusta.


Mrs. B. Yet, Madam, he did not particularly please me; I experienced not those
strong sensations which I have heard described; and my unconscious heart was as
light as the party-colored wing that skims the blue expanse.


Matr. Proceed in your narrative.


Mrs. B. To admire Major Bloomville, became the fashion -- rival maidens
contended for the military hero; and my vanity was agreeably flattered by
bearing off a prize on which so many bright eyes had been fixed.


Matr. But with what sentiments did you marry Major Bloomville?


Mrs. B. Long before that solemn hour, which made us ostensibly one, I was
fully sensible of the situation of my heart.


Matr. And why did you not deal frankly with your lover?


Mrs. B. I wanted resolution, Madam.


Matr. Why did you not confide in me?


Mrs. B. Ah! Madam, I feared the comments of an invidious world, and trembled
at its censures.


Matr. But I, Augusta, could have borne you guiltless, becoming myself
responsible for your imaginary errors.


Mrs. B. I never doubted your indulgence; but --


Matr. But what, Augusta?


Mrs. B. But my coward heart, esteeming Major Bloomville, and avowing no tender
preference for any individual, shrunk from the various inferences, which
receding would have furnished -- and met him at the altar.


Matr. [deeply sighing.] Alas! Augusta; the solemn hour which witnessed the
perjured vow, has registered the guilty deed in heaven!


Mrs. B. Guilty, Madam!


Matr. Yes, Augusta -- for in the presence of angels and of men, you made
professions which were foreign to your heart! on us too surely you imposed,
while bright celestials blushed at the transaction!


Mrs. B. [Weeping.] Wretched, wretched Augusta!


Matr. You betrayed the tender confidence and fond attachment of a worthy man!
-- implanted mid his fairest hopes the bitter seeds of anguish, and did him a
most heinous injury.


Mrs. B. Tell me, revered woman, thou who formed my youth to virtue, is there
no way by which I may yet recover the path of honor?


Matr. Yes, Augusta; forgiveness dwells in heaven! let your husband's wishes
become your future study, and rectitude shall once more crown your hours.


Mrs. B. Shape thou my course, guardian of sacred virtue, and I will never
recede.


Matr. Reflection, my beloved Augusta, does not show you so very faulty, as
your frankness, delicately susceptible, has represented.


Mrs. B. Blessed indulgence! O speak, and soothe my soul to harmony.


Matr. You esteemed the man to whom you gave your vows -- loved no one else --
and your fidelity remains inviolate.


Mrs. B. It surely does.


Matr. Perhaps your gentle bosom was never formed to combat the ungovernable
ardours of imperious love; all are not fated to submit to its tyrannic sway:
Love is an impassioned flame which often consumes the noblest principles -- it is
a fierce monopolizer; and, trust me, dearest, at best an evanescent fire, which
storms its little hour, usurping every thought, and then in air evaporates.


Mrs. B. Your words possess an honied influence, that steals into my soul with
healing power.


Matr. Friendship is still the ne plus ultra of every married pair --
Friendship eternal is; it dwells in heaven, crowned with immortal beauty.


Mrs. B. But what remains for thy Augusta?


Matr. Respect your husband's virtues -- dwell on each splendid trait that
marks his character; if he has faults, extend the ready mantle; let them not
harbor in your bosom; but, far as you may, erase them from remembrance.


Mrs. B. Blessed casuist! a path so strewed with flowers should seem the great
reward of peerless virtue.


Matr. Virtue is always pleasant, and her rewards are with her!


Mrs. B. Already, Madam, my heart acknowledges that sweet complacency, from
which, alas! it long has been estranged.


Matr. It Is a blessed omen; and indeed, Augusta, in every view your husband
merits much; he is at this moment struggling with embarrassments, which his
tenderness for your peace constrains him studiously to conceal from you.


Mrs. B. I trust, Madam, that in this instance your information may be
erroneous; for it was but yesterday that Mr. Bloomville sent me home a rich
embossed tea urn; and as I did not stand in need of such an article, I think it
could not be the offering of depressed circumstances.


Matr. Augusta, I have full authority for what I say; nay, I have myself this
very day taken up money as a relief to his pressing exigencies. The urn but
serves to prove his fond solicitude to please; and at such a crisis it is
indeed an uncommon instance.


Mrs. B. [Weeping.] How barbarously have I requited such unexampled worth!


Matr. Dry up thy tears, girl; thy future happiness depends in a great degree
on thy own conduct; from pecuniary embarrassments Matronia can extricate thee;
mean time, Miss Clairville needs thy consolatory soothings; hasten to her,
dearest, and I Will prepare to meet thy guests.


Mrs. B. Indulgent goodness! [ bows on the hand of Matronia.] Mercy has chosen
thee on earth her venerable agent!

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- Miss Clairville's Dressing Room; Miss Clairville seated in a pensive
Attitude. [Enter Mrs. Bloomville.] Mrs. B. I have had, Eliza, a very
interesting conversation; my heart has yielded up its most important secrets,
confessed its faults, and received kind indulgence.


Eliza. Faults! Mrs. Bloomville! they must be eagle eye'd who can discover your
faults!


Mrs. B. You are a sweet flatterer; but my aunt is all kindness, and I her
grateful penitent.


Eliza. Your aunt is indeed the first of women.


Mrs. B. True, Eliza; and thou, her charming copiest, shall be my youthful
monitress; why there is precept in thy eye, and I will learn to watch its
dictates.


Eliza. Indeed, dear lady, you tinge the poor Eliza's cheeks with blushes; you
certainly tax your past indulgencies too severely.


Mrs. B. Ha! if you knew all! -- but the world never saw such a pattern of
wifehood as your Augusta is determined henceforth to exhibit. But enough of
self -- I would disperse those piteous sighs which tear your gentle bosom.


Eliza. Have I not cause to sigh?


Mrs. B. Undoubtedly; and yet I have a strong pre-sentiment that every cloud
that gathers round your fortune will quickly be illum'd.


Eliza. This, Madam, is your wish; but I, who know it is impossible, may be
allowed to mourn.

[Weeps.
Mrs. B. Fie! my beloved Eliza; indeed you must not thus indulge your grief;
your presence in the drawing room, this evening, will be absolutely
indispensable; in the new career on which I joyful enter, I shall have need of
your support.


Eliza. To convince you, Madam, how much I Would sacrifice, did fortune lend the
power, I will devote me to your wishes.


Mrs. B. Thou art a good girl, and we will put the best face on each
misfortune, and thus convince the world that evils of a moment possess no
mortal arrows.

[Exeunt, arm under arm.
SCENE -- A handsome Drawing Room. [Enter Matronia.] Matr. I cannot but
congratulate myself on my present prospects; the recollection of my sufferings
begins to set more lightly on my memory, and I trust my life will yet close in
tranquillity.


[Enter Mrs. Bloomville and Eliza.] Mrs. B. Dear Madam, if we could restore
peace to the bosom of this lovely girl, what a happy trio we might reckon
ourselves.


Matr. Time, Augusta, with a due exercise of that fortitude which our dear
Eliza so eminently possesses, will, undoubtedly, bestow on her the rich
blessings of serenity.


Eliza. To that time, my commiserating friends, I must refer my hopes.


Matr. Thou art a dear heroic girl, and virtue owns thy lineage.


[Enter Major Bloomville.] Mrs. B. [tenderly.] My dear, your vacant seat at
dinner reproached me very keenly.


Major B. [with a countenance expressive of astonishment.] What says my angel?


Mrs. B. That, having learned my duty and your uncommon worth, your absence
will, henceforth, be matter of regret.


Major B. Necessity, my love, can only tear me from you. [Bows on her hand.]
But do I hear aright?


Matr. You do, George: Receive Augusta, now fully worthy of all your tenderness.


Major B. [kneeling.] Thus on my knees, then, I receive the blessing; nor was
the nuptial hour replete with half the joys that bounteous fate, in this glad
moment, is lavishing upon me!


Mrs. B. [kneels.] It Is I who ought to kneel and ask forgiveness.


Major B. Forgiveness! Gracious Heaven!


Matr. Rise, my children, and may the tranquil pleasures of sweet complacency
attend your future hours. [They rise.]


[Enter William.] Will. Captain Flashet, Sir.


Major B. Let him come in, good William.

[Exit William. Flashet is a harmless flutterer, whose singular frivolities
will hardly check our pleasures.


[Enter Captain Flashet.] Capt. F. Ladies, your most obsequious -- Major, your
servant -- Now, by Jove, I question whether the god Pan, when seated on the
very pinnacle of the Alps, had three such immaculate beauties to choose a wife
from.


Matr. When was the god Pan thus exalted, Captain?


Capt. F. History, Madam, will inform you; I have forgotten my Geography.


Mrs. B. I fancy you mean Chronology, Captain.


Capt. F. Ah! it makes no odds, Madam.


Major B. Captain Flashet, ladies, knowing that, although Pan was god of the
shepherds, he was not absolutely confined to the valleys, but sometimes skipped
on the mountains, has thought proper to endow him with the prerogative of the
Trojan youth, and having converted Mount Ida into the Alps, it is easy for him
to change a decision of taste into an hymeneal election.


Capt. F. You have hit it, Major, clearly; it is the very thing I designed.


[Enter William.] Will. Miss Dorinda Scornwell, Madam.


Mrs. B. Desire Miss Scornwell to walk in.

[Exit William.
Capt. F. Now shall we have an addition to our blazing stars.


Major B. You are quite gallant, Captain.


[Enter Miss Scornwell, courtesying all round -- she looks contemptuously at
Eliza.] Mrs. B. Miss Scornwell, we are happy to see you.


Miss Sc. You are politely obliging, Bloomville.


Mrs. B. I expected you would have been accompanied by your friend.


Miss Sc. Thank you, Augusta, he will be here anon. Dear Bloomville, surely,
you do not mean to act so ridiculously, as to let that upstart Eliza make one
of this evening's party?

[Apart to Mrs. Bloomville.
Mrs. B. [Aloud.] Miss Clairville is one of my most esteemed friends, and as
such, Dorinda, I would thank those who regard me, to respect her -- I never
wish to make one of any party which she does not grace.

[Miss Scornwell fans herself haughtily -- Eliza courtesies gratefully.]
[ Enter Charles Maitland.] Charles. [Bowing to Major Bloomville.] Accustomed
to indulgence from you, Sir, I waited not to be announced.


Major B. The presence of Mr. Maitland will always confer a favor.


Charles. Thank you, Sir.

[Talks apart with Eliza.
[Enter William.] Will. Mr. Maitland, senior, Sir.


Major B. Desire Mr. Maitland to walk in.

[Exit William. The society of men of genuine worth, should be always courted.


[Enter Mr. Maitland.] Maitl. Major Bloomville, the center of every virtue
being stationary in your house, it will naturally attract the votaries of
goodness.


Major B. Whatever may attract you, Sir, it is we who shall reap the benefit;
and the friends of Miss Clairville are always entitled to our preferable esteem.


Miss Sc. So, so -- the mania is spreading, I find.

[Aside.
Maitl. Sir, you have spoken politely and properly. My good young lady, [taking
the hand of Eliza] you must pardon this intrusion; it is natural for the
planets to hover round their central orb.


Eliza. Mr. Maitland is entitled to my utmost veneration.


[Enter William.] Will. A gentleman wishes to see Mr. Charles Maitland.

[Exit Charles and William.
[Re-enter Charles Maitland, introducing Col. Mellfont.] Charles. [To Major
Bloomville.] Colonel Mellfont, Sir.


Col. M. Heavens and earth! What do I see? [Eliza ulters an agonized shriek,
and sinks fainting into the arms of Matronia -- the ladies furnish salts, etc.
etc. -- Colonel Mellfont grasps her hand.] Oh my Eliza! my long lost, long
mourned, and ever loved Eliza! look up, my treasure, and bless the man who
lives but to shield and cherish thee.


Eliza. [Recovering, hastily withdraws her hand.] O ladies! blessed
benefactors! guardians ever honored, ever good! -- protect me -- save me from
the man who seeks my ruin!


Col. M. You are deceived, Eliza; and when you fled from my paternal
guardianship, you then abandoned the only near relation whom fate had left you.

[All the company stand as if wrapped in mute astonishment.
Eliza. My relation, Sir?


Col. M. Yes, Eliza -- your maternal uncle -- the only surviving brother of her
who bore you.


Eliza. [Weeping.] Oh! do not seek to impose on the vain credulity of an
unfortunate, who has tasted much of sorrow!


Col. M. Hear me, my Eliza -- I will call the Deity, and all the ministering
spirits which circle round his throne, to witness my veracity.


Eliza. My parents were obscure, and in the lowly grade of honest poor
humanity, obtained their bread.


Col. M. So thou believed, Eliza; but listen to an eclaircissement, which, but
for crimes atrocious, would long ere this have reached thy ear.


Eliza. Good Heaven, support me!


Col. M. Thy mother was my eldest sister, and only two revolving months
witnessed her wedded life. Thy father, Colonel Seymour's death, plunged her
into a fixed melancholy, deeply impressing on her mind, that she should not
survive her infant's birth. Some circumstances of her life had induced her to
conceive, that persons, bred to an expectation of affluence, could not so
easily be formed to virtue, as those who saw themselves the offspring of
poverty; and, thus conceiving, she bound her family by engagements truly
solemn, that, in case she bore a daughter, the secret of her birth should never
be disclosed to her, until she had completed her sixteenth year. The event too
well justified the prediction of thy mother; in giving thee existence she
yielded up her own; and her family considered her injunctions as sacred.


Eliza. But did my uncle know of this affinity, while penning certain letters?


Col. M. Dear Eliza! thy uncle never penned those letters -- No, he detests the
wretched scrolls -- they were forged, my love; and forged by that execrable
female in whom thou placed thy confidence.


Eliza. Gracious God! By Olivia?


Col. M. Yes, thou soul of beauty! Her wayward fancy fixing on thy uncle, and
judging by appearances that we meditated marriage, contrived that horrid plot
to bar our union! You recollect the jaunt which I proposed, hinting at certain
interesting communications that I should make -- it was the very day on which
you disappeared -- you had then reached the era appointed by your mother -- the
rest you know.


Eliza. [Kneeling.] Father of infinite perfection! and do I grasp the dear
paternal hand of a protecting uncle?


Col. M. Indulgent God, I thank thee! It is enough, enough, my dear Eliza -- I
ask not how thou fled -- some calmer moment shall tell me all. Mean time, come
to my fond encircling arms, my loved, my long lost child! [Raises and embraces
her.] Yet thou must say, Eliza, how it happens that, rejecting the name of
Seymour, thou wearest that of Clairville?


Eliza. Olivia bid me wear it, as I valued life or honor.


Col. M. Her reason is most obvious -- but she no more exists.


Eliza. Hah! Is she gone, my uncle?


Col. M. Yes, dear Eliza; and among her papers were found the fatal scrolls
that urged thy flight: But alas! they furnished no friendly clue, by which to
trace thy wandering footsteps out -- But we forget, my love; wholly absorbed in
self, we little heed our friends -- yet will their kind indulgence, in such a
moment, dispense with cold apologies. Have thou a heart to give, Eliza?


Eliza. Sir, your paternal wishes shall ever govern mine.


Col. M. Well, my best love, thy uncle knows the history of thy passion -- he
knows, and he approves. Thou art a noble girl -- and know, thy mother's
patrimony, with interest carefully improved, awaits thy order, and mine is in
reversion. Now yield thy willing hand -- Maitland, approach.


Eliza. [Giving her hand to Charles Maitland.] Nor ever virgin felt sincerer
joy, than swells my gladdened heart at this bestowment.


Charles. [Kneeling.] Exalted generosity! Matchless goodness! [Bows on her
hand.] Thus, on my knees, let me receive the heavenly investiture -- thus pay
my vows, and grateful worship at the blessed shrine of bright TRIUMPHANT VIRTUE.


Eliza. Rise, my beloved friend! to trace thy splendid footsteps will be my
great ambition.

[Charles rises.
Maitl. Oh! I shall weep myself as blind as fortune. Why, who would ever have
thought Ralph Maitland could he brought to this! Why, son -- daughter --
Colonel -- but words are vain -- they are the extremes of folly; and silence
only, the Medium of wisdom!


Matr. Till this blessed hour, Eliza, my heart never tasted a joy so unalloyed!


Mrs. B. My bounding spirit with difficulty presses down its big emotions!


Major B. Congratulations swim in every eye.


Eliza. Friends in adversity, prosperity shall tell how well thy orphan charge
deserved thy bounty.


Miss Sc. [awkwardly.] Can Miss Seymour forget past disobligations, for which
the contrite author blushes with deep confusion?


Eliza. In such an hour as this, Eliza Seymour can find within her grateful
bosom no place for dark remembrance.


Capt. F. Ah, I always thought that Miss Clairville was the Queen of Sheba in
disguise; and I expected some youthful Nestor to bear her to her palace.


[Enter William with a face of glee.] Will. Mr. Weston, Sir.


Major B. Admit the honest man, by all means.

[Exit William. To such a party, virtue carries its own credentials.


[Enter Weston.] Charles. Weston, look there -- how blessed is the transition --
Why, thy despairing friend now speeds upon the fleetest wings of joy, and
blooming hope devises arts yet unthought of, to enhance his pleasures!


Weston. The tale of transport met me in the outer court, my friend; Miss
Clairville's fainting diffused it through the house; and never man tendered
congratulations with sincerer joy.


Charles. I doubt it not, good Weston; for mild benevolence is natal in thy
bosom.


Weston. It was with pleasing haste I sped me hither; for, standing at the
water's edge, ten minutes since, I saw the ship Narcissa, which we supposed had
foundered, the property of Major Bloomville, full deeply laden, with sails well
trimmed, and streamers flying, almost in port.


Major B. Thanks to indulgent Providence; and thanks to thee, friend Weston.
Then my affairs are all retrieved; not one regret remains. [Pressing the hand
of Mrs. Bloomville, and regarding her with a look of enraptured tenderness.]


Mrs. B. Why, it is a day of joy, my love, and it shall never return, but we
will deck it out with never dying garlands.


Col. M. [to Eliza.] Two hours since, I thought I plead the cause of a
de^enceless orphan; nor knew that happiness awaited me in the sweet person of
her whose interest I espoused.

[To the Audience.] And thus it ever is; VIRTUE is still TRIUMPHANT, and
rectitude its own reward; for, although her just arrangements are not always so
conspicuous, yet, pointed by conviction, truth brightens to the eye, and the
observing mind will trace her lineaments in every proper action, nor hesitate
to own the blessed complacency that still attends on VIRTUE.

[Exeunt omnes.
No. LXXVI.
The hero's soul, by dauntless valor nerv'd,
From honor's radiant path has never swerved;
Brave though he is, yet judgment points his way,
And peaceful counsels in his bosom sway.

PERHAPS there is not, in the whole catalogue of masculine virtues, a more
desirable attainment, than that systematic bravery, which is the result of
principles, deduced from a rational and philosophical view of the propriety of
those arrangements, consequent on the agency of a prescient and all-wise First
Cause.

The true hero enters the field of battle with intrepid valor -- his innate
serenity of mind is produced by a regular and well digested train of
reflections -- with a degree of tranquillity, beyond the reach of accident, he
mounts the breach, and, with manly firmness, he leads on the martial band --
the alacrity of his movements are obvious; and, with fortitude unappalled, he
prepares to meet the foe -- innumerable deaths surround, yet he continues
uniformly sedate -- he deviates not to the right, nor to the left; but, to more
than probable destruction, he marches on, and the language of his conduct seems
to be: "To die is not an evil; when found in the bed of honor, it is even
eligible. As death is a natural, it is, therefore, a beneficial event: If I am
under the guidance of a supreme, all-wise, and all-gracious Being, his
regulations in regard to me, must be replete with judgment, rectitude and
mercy. To die is the lot of humanity; the present mode of existence must
terminate; and every man, at some period or other, must inevitably submit to
the pangs of dissolution. Let me, then, meet the angel of death, while engaged
in a laudable pursuit; I shall only be removed from one scene of things to
another; the curtain will arise upon a higher order of beings; and I shall
still continue under the cognizance of a paternal Creator. Honor demands my
attendance in hostile fields; let me, then, cheerfully obey: The voice of my
country has called me forth; the career is meritorious; glory beams its most
transcendent rays; and, at the destined goal, I shall receive my laurel crown.
Avaunt! then, every ghastly spectre; nor presume to pervade, by the chaotic
influence of disorganizing hesitation, the region of my imagination. Length of
days are not principally to be desired -- let me rather devote my life to the
service of those with whom I stand connected -- let me rather dignify the term
of my probation, by achievements which deserve to be immortalized! In a
righteous cause I have drawn my sword -- if I fall, my exit is both expected
and honorary, and I am prepared to meet my fate -- if I escape, it shall be my
care to ascertain the justice of my claim to the warrior's meed, and Fame's
loud clarion shall resound my deeds of arms!"

Thus, come life, come death -- tranquillity is the hero's portion; integrity
presides in his bosom, and valor is his birthright: He goes forth to the
battle, and his countrymen, his friends, and his brethren, fall around! --
Humanity drops a tear -- but fortitude is still an invulnerable shield; while,
undismayed by danger, and beyond the reach of personal apprehension, he
triumphs in the midst of slaughter; and if, at length, the missive weapon urged
against his life, should transfix, by a mortal wound, he smiles beneath the icy
darts of death -- his equanimity is still the same; and with placid composure
he will resign his breath. Such are the endowments he ought to possess, who
enters on a military career.

The true hero is also a uniform patriot -- his ambition is circumscribed by
the public weal; and so well does he love his country, that, although he
possesses the soul of valor, yet, if the councils of peace are dictated by,
and consist with honor, he will embrace them as his chief desideratum. He
loves, and he will protect his country -- her emolument is the ultimatum of his
wishes; but still he is a citizen of the world, and the wounds of humanity
transfix his sensibility. He is the guardian of the people's rights -- but he
girdeth not on the sword, except the manifesto of their grievances is stamped
by the broad seal of justice. A well regulated government is the sovereign
dictator of all his actions -- his arrangements are the result of order, and
his appeal is to the laws which are ordained. He loves his country -- but he is
not solicitous to enlarge her boundaries -- he remembers that Rome, when she
styled herself mistress of the world, was not, in fact, more respectable than
when her lust of domination was confined within a narrower circumference. He is
not actuated by that wild ambition, which, with maddening influence, urged the
baleful progress of the Macedonian chief -- he feels no Robespierian thirst for
human blood -- he will never cry havoc, but when hard necessity compels -- nor
will he, but in the last extremity, let loose the dogs of war. Thus, while
every circumstance of his life evinceth the energy of that amor (...) which
gloweth in his bosom, the broad philanthropy of his disposition is still
proclaiming him the friend of man.

The profession of arms is useful and respectable. The Patriot Warrior is
deservedly in possession of the esteem of mankind; and, if he acts a consistent
part, he is an ornament to human nature. It is in this walk that a WASHINGTON,
the illustrious Hero of this younger world, has reaped undying laurels! and
his immortal deeds illume, with newborn splendors, the brave man's path!

His early virtues authorized the most splendid predictions; and, although
sequestered in his first years amid his native shades, the neighborhood of his
Vernonian groves contained the only witnesses of his youthful progress; yet,
from the studies in which he was engaged, resulted the most substantial and
best kind of information, while the useful and the pleasing enriched and
adorned his mind. The mountain breeze endowed him with the glow of health; and
he procured, from the pleasurable and salutary toils which diversified the
enchanting scenes of rural life, a firm robust constitution, expanded limbs,
and a graceful, majestic, and well proportioned exterior.

His filial piety was early evinced. At that period of ardent expectancy, when
the vivid buds of hope began to unfold their tender leaves; when tip-toe
imagination assumed its richest coloring, and the opening prospect was arrayed
in the most splendid hues; just as the interesting youth had attained his
fifteenth year, although entered, under the most favorable auspices, on board
a ship of war, and only not embarked -- in a moment so critical, he was
withheld from the eventful pursuit, by the tender remonstrances of a mother,
who, not availing herself of the authority with which nature had invested her,
condescended to employ the language of entreaty. Soon, however, the venerable
matron called into action that Grecian firmness, which was inherent in her
bosom; and the youthful hero, while engaging in the military career, was
enriched by the maternal benediction.

How honorary were his first onsets! and how strikingly did they evince the
unequalled abilities, that gave him an indisputable claim to those united
suffrages, which have so repeatedly proclaimed him the Man of the People -- the
man who deserved, and who has received, both the military and the civic wreath.

Illustrious citizen! how faultless and how glorious are the splendid
transactions which have marked and dignified thy eventful life! What American
but must delight to trace the gradual steps, by which thou have advanced to thy
present, perhaps unparalleled, eminence! Viewed in the aggregate, or in
detached instances, thy administration must furnish the bosom of every
contemplative Columbian with immeasurable complacency! A glow of conscious
exultation pervades reflection -- thou art our countryman! we claim kindred
with thy worth; and we derive a kind of respectability from this national
affinity! Let us trace and retrace -- the theme is rich -- its interest to an
American ear will still accumulate; and revolving ages will confess it
inexhaustible!

It was a happy moment, in which our venerable legislators hailed a Washington,
as Commander in Chief of the forces of United America! Armed with the weapons
of defense, and girding on the sword of power, his progress was astonishing,
and his achievements truly important! Confusion fled at his approach;
discipline ranged itself under his banners; order presided in his arrangements;
and simple, untrained villagers became a regular army of brave, patient, and
effective soldiers! The termination of the first campaign was worthy of the
philanthropic soldier; and HUMANITY will record those dispositions, which
reduced the British to the necessity of yielding up the metropolis of the State
of Massachusetts, without the effusion of a single drop of blood, among the
foremost of his deeds of worth. But every thing was to be expected from a Chief
so amply endowed by nature, and who blended with the first abilities, that
prudent caution so requisite in the catalogue of a soldier's virtues -- who,
while he was never arrogant or assuming, was, on every great occasion, nobly
firm and becomingly dignified.

The best principles of philosophy were early implanted in his bosom. His
passions, all arranged by reason, were kept in uniform subjection. He knew no
party; and against the inroads of prejudice he erected the strongest barriers.
He was incapable of illiberal views or conclusions; and his movements, ever
dictated by a sound understanding and a well regulated judgment, were
invariably marked by propriety. Accustomed accurately to investigate, he became
familiar with both the probable and the possible. He understood the relative
concurrence of events, and was, in a good degree, prepared for the consequences
of the measures which he adopted. Always contemplative, his faculties were
habituated to exercise; and hence his mind became invigorated and capacious,
while he acquired the power of readily recognizing truth, and of embracing, in
the midst of difficulties, the most salutary and extricating expedients. To
this effect is the sketch, which those, who are the best informed, have given
of the Hero of this new world; and the splendour of his career has surpassed
the highest strains of eulogy!

His reply to the annunciation of his appointment to the conspicuous and
honorary station, to which the combining suffrages of his country had elevated
him, while it is amiably ingenuous and truly noble, is also evincive of
unassuming worth and interesting diffidence. Modesty is a gem, which,
advantageously disposed, may sparkle becomingly, even among the assemblage of
manly virtues; and it frequently diffuseth a luster over the bravest exploits!
Illustrious man! admiration is tasked, when seeking to clothe, in language
adequate to their splendour, the matchless deeds which have marked a life so
fraught with usefulness! It is not astonishing, that his election to office was
unanimous -- it is not surprising, that he was received, by all orders of
people, with every demonstration of applause, nor, that the army, in
particular, evinced their confidence by the most unequivocal acclamations of
joy.

Our theme is indeed richly copious; and we invite the reader to pursue it
through the pages of the next Gleaner.

No. LXXVII.
With gratitude we mark his splendid course.

HOW prodigious must have been those talents, which were capable of conducting
and effectuating in a part of the country, to which the hero had been recently
introduced, "within musket shot of twenty British regiments, the disbanding of
one army, and the enlistment of another!" But the path of this new star in the
military hemisphere, seems to have been literally progressive.

All eyes were toward him; and every tongue was emboldened to express the
various sentiments of an extensive and a fluctuating populace, which, ignorant
that their army was, in many instances, destitute of arms and ammunition,
presumptuously dictated measures that, if adopted, would have insured immediate
destruction; and they ungratefully ascribed improper motives to the Commander
of their forces, (who, from reasons of the soundest policy, concealed the
distresses of his soldiers) because he did not rush to an instant, and probably
fatal, decision!! But the Patriot Warrior loved his country; and, more firm
than the Roman Fabius, he disdained to submit, even (...) a day, to the
ill-informed impetuosity of an imperious multitude. His reputation was at stake
-- but his mind was truly noble; and, with inherent magnanimity, while assured
of his measures, he silently submitted to the p^tulent reflections of invidious
and injudicious men! How indisputably did he merit those testimonials of
approbation, which marked his entrance into Boston! The voice of a rescued and
gratulating people -- Can strains more enchantingly sweet vibrate on the hero's
ear? To be hailed as the DELIVERER of his distressed, and almost despairing
fellow-citizens -- What car-borne victor ever deserved or enjoyed a triumph
more truly, more affectingly elevating! The general assembly of the Union
applauded, and the concentrated voice of Massachusetts thus addressed him: "
May you still go on, approved by Heaven, revered by all good men, and dreaded
by these tyrants, who claim their fellow-men as their property."

Thus wa^^^d forward, he proceeded on, nobly persevering, amid circumstances of
the most depressing aspect. Innumerable were the difficulties and hardships
with which he was condemned to struggle; alarming disappointments of many
high-raised expectations, general dejection, and an almost total defection of
resources! What must have been the feelings of the Patriot Warrior, on the
repeated desertions, so disgraceful to the American character, which, at some
disastrous periods, were the events of every hour! How must he have agonized,
while witnessing the universal gloom pourtrayed in the countenances of his
reduced troops -- " the militia departing in whole companies, and their example
infecting the regular regiments," while subjected, by the necessity of
retreating, to the most mortifying sensations, and forbid by prudence to
exonerate himself from the defamatory remarks, originating in those inevitable
movements! Yet, by that innate probity which ever maintained its regency in his
bosom, he was once more rendered greatly superior to the ills that encompassed
him; and, confident that his line of conduct would best conduce to the
accomplishment of that independence, at which America justly aimed, he calmly
submitted to a momentary envelopment, anticipating the elucidating crisis,
which, withdrawing the veil, would present causes and effects in their true
point of view.

Cowardice, also, dared to produce among the ranks of freemen, its dastardly
adherents!! O WASHINGTON! what were the conflicts of thy heroic spirit, at that
portentous era, when all thy rhetoric was employed in vain -- when both thy
example and thy authority were ineffectual to the rallying those panic-struck
men, who abandoned thee in thy utmost extremity!!! It cannot be matter of
surprise, that, in a moment so tremendous, thou were deserted by thy wonted
serenity -- that the calm region of thy bosom became unusually tempested, and,
that the hurricane within well near prostrated the barriers of reason.

This most interesting period of the American revolution, and the effect of
these calamitous events on the mind of her hero, is strikingly sketched by the
historian: "The General having embarked in the American cause from the purest
principles, viewed, with infinite concern, a behavior so shameful! His soul
was harrowed up with apprehensions, that his country would be conquered, her
army disgraced, and her liberties destroyed. He anticipated, in imagination,
that the Americans would appear to posterity in the light of high-sounding
boasters, who blustered when danger was at a distance, but shrunk at the shadow
of opposition. Extensive confiscations, and numerous attainders, presented
themselves in full view to his agitated mind. He saw, in imagination, new
formed States, with the means of defense in their hands, and the glorious
prospect of liberty before them, levelled to the dust. Impressed with these
ideas, he hazarded his person, for some considerable time, in rear of his own
men, and in front of the enemy, with his horse's head toward the latter, as if
in expectation, that, by an honorable death, he might escape the infamy he
dreaded from the dastardly conduct of troops, on whom he could place no
dependence." To this humiliating and dispiriting 15th of September, 1776,
succeeded a train of calamities; for, although the dismayed soldiers, in one
gallant action, retrieved their military fame, misfortune, with baleful wing,
still brooded over the American standard. Unutterable was the distress of the
hero; and his embarrassments and regrets, when retreating with his few
remaining followers, destitute and forlorn, without the means of procuring the
indispensable necessaries of life, must have exceeded even the powers of
conception! "Scarce an inhabitant of the towns through which he passed, could
be induced to join his almost deserted standards, while he beheld numbers daily
flocking to the royal army, to make their peace and obtain protection. When he
contemplated on the one side, a numerous, well appointed, and full clad army,
dazzling the eyes of the soldiers with the elegance of uniformity, and on the
other, a few poor fellows meanly clothed, sinking under the pressure of
accumulated wants, and flying for their safety, what words can describe his
augmented sufferings, as he thus witnessed the American army relinquishing its
General -- the people giving up the cause -- some of the leaders going over to
the enemy -- and the British commanders succeeding in every enterprise!"

But the Genius of Columbia, and of Washington, at length arose triumphant! It
suddenly pierced the dense clouds which had so long obscured its radiance!
Trenton and Princeton first experienced its resuscitating influence --
brilliant was its progress -- and august the arrangement, which, in the most
critical conjuncture, stationed the hero betwixt the contending parties! See!
he marches on to death or victory! his exhortations and his example are now
gloriously influential! The soldiers bravely follow, and incalculable
advantages are obtained! -- decisive consequences ensue -- captivated towns are
evacuated -- the clouds are rapidly dispersing -- and the sun of liberty, with
genial influence, once more expands the tender buds of hope! -- But, to descant
upon the merits, the hardships, and the splendid and substantial services of a
Washington, volumes are insufficient!

Truly arduous was his task. "To preserve order," says the narrator of his
actions, "and subordination, in an army of free republicans, even when well
fed, clothed and paid, would have been a work of difficulty -- But to retain
them in service, and restrain them with discipline, when destitute, not only of
the comforts, but often of the necessaries, of life, requires address and
abilities of such magnitude, as are rarely found in human nature. In this
choice of difficulties, General Washington not only kept his army together, but
conducted with so much discretion, as to command the approbation, both of the
army and of the citizens."

Glorious meed! May the benign rays of gratitude, cherished through these
emancipated States, ever gild the laurels which it entwines. Every true
American, passing on from these success crowned scenes, will hail with pious
rapture the memorable day which placed the Patriot Warrior at the head of these
infant republics. Just such a Father -- just such a Leader -- just such a
Guardian of our long contested rights, our exigencies required. Grateful and
upright retribution! happy unanimity! -- thus did the hero merit -- well had he
earned the righteous tribute -- and, in the annals of America, the 30th of
April, 1789, must ever be considered as a prominent epoch; for on that day, her
beloved WASHINGTON received the investiture, which clothed him with all the
authority that FREEMEN COULD CONSENT TO DELEGATE.

See where he stands! an object of the highest veneration to his admiring
countrymen -- traits of affectionate and respectful gratitude are impressed on
every countenance -- thousands are collected -- all ranks and descriptions of
people demonstrate the gladness of their hearts, by unequivocal marks of
hilarity -- a general joy is diffused -- and every tongue proclaims the hero,
as the FATHER, the DELIVERER, and the illustrious PROTECTOR of his country! And
now the oaths of office are administered -- Mark! what fervor of devotion
glows in his manly features, as he repeats the solemn affirmation! -- See! with
what inimitably becoming piety, he bends to kiss the sacred volume! -- Hark!
what a burst of applause succeeds -- loud and repeated acclamations! Oh! may he
long live to iterate a triumph so august, an elevation so unparalleled!

A spectator has happily sketched the uncommonly interesting scene, and
expressively delineated his consequent feelings. "It seemed," says he, "from
the number of witnesses, to be a solemn appeal to heaven and earth at once.
Upon the subject of this great and good man, I may perhaps be an enthusiast;
but I confess, I was under an awful and religious persuasion, that the Gracious
Ruler of the universe was looking down at that moment, with peculiar
complacency, on an act which, to a part of his creatures, was so very
important. Under this impression, when the Chancellor pronounced, in a very
feeling manner, "Long live GEORGE WASHINGTON!" my sensibility was wound up to
such a pitch, that I could do no more than wave my hat with the rest, without
the power of joining in the repeated acclamations which rent the air!"

From that eventful era, what transcendent wisdom has marked the regency of
this illustrious, this time-honoured man! How accurately has he distinguished
merit! how deliberate are his counsels! how firm and impartial are his
decisions! and how judicious are his rewards! While he is the patron of the
good, he regards even the sons of sedition with lenity: Their progress over the
western mountains, was marked by the hero with such regrets as became a
patriotic chief; yet, amid the impending storm, his equanimity remained
unruffled; with placid dignity he assumed that power, which, as a sacred
deposit, he had accepted; while the angel pity presided at his deliberations,
and sweet mercy pointed all those arguments which the heavenly pleader knew to
urge. The poor delinquents were viewed with paternal tenderness, and humanity
dropped a commiserating tear! Rectitude, however, asserted its prerogative, and
the sword of justice was more than half unsheathed -- This was enough --
Discord, appalled, and shrinking from the awful face of offended government,
sought shelter in oblivion; and the golden reign of order was again restored.

Thus honorable has proved the military career! thus splendid is the path of
the Patriot Warrior! Envy sickens at the view; but her pointed arrows have lost
their murderous powers -- the slanderous tongue of envenomed faction is either
mute or ineffectual -- and through thy borders, blessed Columbia! the healing
voice of truth, peace, and unexampled prosperity, auspiciously reverberates.

No. LXXVIII.
Often times the mind, where melting pity reigned,
And generous worth the regency sustained
Where all the glowing virtues were impressed,
With philanthropic ardour greatly blessed,
By dire misfortunes finds its feelings steeled,
And apathy becomes the bosom's shield!
Gloomy misanthropy in course succeeds,
And a long train of hydra mischiefs leads:
Where sympathy in hue vermilion glowed,
And where " the milk of human kindness flowed,"
There pale disgust pursues its barren walks,
And rancour over the mournful ruin stalks.

IT is a melancholy truth, that the best minds, when outraged by injuries, and
rendered callous by a series of unmerited misfortunes, too often become the
receptacles of inflexible austerity. The virtuous philanthropist, urged by his
ardent love of mankind, paints individuals agreeably to his sense of moral
rectitude; he has imaged in his mind a pleasing model, he delineates the
virtues which he conceives attainable, he is solicitous for the elevation of
the human character; what he wishes, he considers as practicable; and, adopting
an admeasurement of accomplishments that rarely ever exist, he is continually
subjected to disappointment, and that kind of disgust, which terminates in a
cynical arrangement of those propensities that were originally replete with the
best affections of which humanity is susceptible.

The little narrative, selected as the subject of this Gleaner, is a striking
proof that misanthropy obtains its most rampant growth in the soil of virtue;
that misfortunes are its manure, the impassioned sighs of anguish its genial
atmosphere, and the torrents descending on the cheek of woe its fertilizing
showers.

Octavian was a youth, whose dawn of being authorized the highest expectations;
amid an assemblage of the most brilliant qualities, he possessed that endearing
benevolence and tenderness of disposition, which would become those attendant
seraphs appointed to hover round the children of mortality. The young
philanthropist was an enthusiast in his attachment to his species, and he was
fond of believing their virtues inherent, and their vices the result of
casualty or foreign agency. His education was truly judicious, and every year
served to advance and to ameliorate those rare qualities that enriched his
mind. His sensibility was extreme; and the ardour of a luxuriant fancy taught
him to regard this globe as a paradise, and its inhabitants as administering
spirits, ordained as aids to each other. Even reason seemed to quaff the
intoxicating draught; and as his fine understanding was embellished by a
pleasingly prepossessing exterior, and the demise of his excellent parents had
early made him the entire master of a very handsome property, persons were not
wanting, who, by the exercise of captivating urbanity, contributed to heighten
and to continue the sweet delusion.

Thus accomplished, and thus circumstanced, did the young Octavian commence the
eventful career of life. Honor, highly wrought, and glowing with the most
liberal purposes, was created the master spring of every movement; while rich
in conscious worth, and estimating persons and things by his own feelings, he
seemed to tread enchanted ground, gaily anticipating more happiness than the
calculation of experience would assign to a million of mortal lives. He looked
around, and the wide extensive globe, with the blue ^^rene of heaven, alike
conspired to swell his heart with ineffable rapture; his path was strewed with
flowers; pleasures, laudable in their source, were the companions of his days;
and from the far distant haunts, and situations the most barren, he
industriously extracted a motive for complacency. Thus enchantingly the lucid
vision swam before him; suspicion slept in its caverns; friendship assumed its
most benign aspect; and love, garbed in all the captivating allurements of
youth and beauty, unveiled before him its bewitching features; the irresistibly
commanding passions asserted their inborn vigor, and every faculty was
engaged. Nature, when she attuned his heart to the refinements of amity,
rendered him also capable of the tender passion in its utmost extreme, and its
ungovernable emotions and delicious tumults rushed forcibly on his perception;
a vision of halcyon days succeeded; freely he indulged the dream of fancy; and,
without a single pause of discretion, he wedded the young, the gay, the
beauteous Messalina, incautiously entwining those bands which were to ensure
felicity, or to tinge with the blackest hues his future destiny!

But Octavian hesitated not to affirm, that he had attained the summit of
bliss; and it must be confessed, the catalogue of his enjoyments was ample;
virtuous, rich, sentimental, enamoured with the world, blessed with a chosen
friend, whom he conceived attached to him by every tie which the most cordial
amity could throw about the heart; and, to complete the picture, wedded to a
female who had been followed by a crowd of candidates for her favor, who
apparently returned his tenderness with equal ardours, and whose movements
seemed the result of discretion; was there a good which Octavian possessed not?
-- Once more he turned his admiring gaze, and the face of contentment gladdened
his eye, while the voice of congratulation vibrated sweetly on his ear. He had
been accustomed to embrace appearances as realities; and while beneficence
acquired new energy in his bosom, again he blessed the celestial countenance of
humanity.

In this delirium some months rolled away; but the child of prosperity
generally becomes a mark for the envenomed shafts of the invidious. Envy set on
foot her machinations -- injurious reports were whispered -- the feelings of
Octavian were wounded, and the darts were urged by those on whose good offices
he had fondly calculated. Friendship, truth and honor, he no longer supposes
them the inmates of every bosom, and suspicion rankled in his breast. He traced
the tale of scandal, and some oblique hints glanced on the faith of that early
friend, whom, from the first dawn of reason, he had cherished as his life's
rich treasure. For a moment he became petrified by the intimation, while horror
aimed at his peace an icy dart. Alas! from that fatal period the dark passions
were all unchained: Mistrust, assuming the ascendency, commenced its regency,
and the observations of so indefatigable and eagle eyed a scrutator produced a
conviction of the blackest perfidy. The discovery was, however, gradual; at
first, prevarication, equivocal or hollow appearances of kindness, a manifest
declination of wonted attentions, the ardours of attachment indisputably
subsiding, the total disappearance of those honest transports which had swelled
each glowing feature, estrangement succeeding, the silken bands of amity, "
string after string," by cold reserve, " were severed," the habits of generous
confidence gave place to icy distance, and the agonizing era at length
presented, when insult, contemptuous disdain, and barbarous ridicule keenly
pointed the perfidy, which thus beyond a doubt was demonstrated. The injuries
Octavian had received were most atrocious; under the sacred name of friendship,
the abandoned wretch whom he had trusted had seduced the too credulous
Messalina! who, becoming an easy prey to the destroyer, imbibed with avidity
his licentious principles; while abundantly more criminal than the well known
Ninon de L'Enclose, (who broke no solemn vows) her amors were notoriously
multifarious, and caprice was ordained distributor of her guilty favors!!!

Poor Octavian! who but must weep his unmerited fate! The world, on which he
leaned, has pierced him through with many sorrows; from what an eminence is he
precipitated! how has his golden dream of happiness vanished! how agonizing is
the void in his bosom! All else he might have borne -- but to the overwhelming
force of a calamity so deeply aggravated, what Stoic fortitude could have
remained inaccessible? In that tremendous hour, which gave indubitable
conviction of the infidelity of the deluded Messalina, what conflicting
emotions, what soul harrowing passions were concentrated! There, where his
confiding heart had fondly trusted, where he had accumulated his best and
dearest wishes! she, who was the object of his unbounded admiration, who he was
positive united every thing which he believed of virtue, who was the universe
to him!! -- Suddenly conviction was forced upon him; the ties of love are
rudely torn asunder, and the cup of felicity is dashed from his lips! Octavian
saw himself alone in the world; an object of trust existed not; thick darkness
enveloped his mind, and he sickened at the journey of life! Divested of motive,
the vigor of exertion expired, and the blandishments of hope were at an end.
The consequences were natural; for while retrospection was replete with all the
anguish of regret, the pencil of futurity was employed in sketching visions the
most dark and comfortless; and the constant recurrence of memory to those gaudy
visions, which had so deeply imposed on the confiding morning of his existence,
loudly proclaimed in the ear of his understanding, that suspicion, ever on
duty, was the only guard he could oppose to the base treachery of deep,
designing, artful man.

Thus those sentiments, formerly arranged by mild benignity, taking their hue
from the most endearing sweetness of disposition, now arming against each
other, produced a chaos in his breast; where bloomed the sweet flowers of
complacency, there sprung the poisonous weeds of mistrust and bitterness of
spirit; while those rich fervours which nerved the glowing purposes of
benevolence, now miserably warped by disappointment, heightened the rancour of
the misanthrope, pointed his implacability, and produced him the determined
enemy of his species; and thus on the ruins of philanthropy were unfurled the
misanthropic banners; gloomy malevolence raised high its ramparts, and war,
inveterate war, was declared against humanity! His abhorrence of mankind hourly
augmented; nor did he assay to struggle with feelings which procured him a
transient and savage relaxation from inquietude; but studiously cultivating the
severest austerity of disposition, after procuring a divorce from the
perfidious woman who had completed his ruin, he took refuge in the retired
recesses of his own apartments, uniformly secluding himself from every inquirer.

It was at this period, that, urged by pity, and wishing to point his views to
that futurity, which is to distressed humanity truly consolatory, I often
presented myself at his door; but although I petitioned in a supplicating tone
for entrance, I could never gain admittance; and, trusting that reason, when
time had ameliorated his deep regrets, would resume her salutary guidance in
his bosom, I forbore to press upon his sorrows the continuance of a request
altogether unavailing, and obviously considered as impertinent.

There were others, however, who, more persevering or more curious, forcibly
passed those doors, which Octavian had determined to bar against every foot but
that of one domestic, whose services the exigencies so intimately inwoven with
existence rendered absolutely necessary. The unfortunate man received the
intruders with inflexible resentment; and, accusing them of an unwarrantable
violation of those privileges to which as a citizen he was entitled, he added,
that he had looked for security within his own walls, but that he was fearful
the globe could furnish no place of refuge against the inroads of an animal so
savage as the human; and sternly insisting on their immediate departure, he
affirmed that if they continued their unwelcome molestations, as he should be
far from opposing himself to their united strength, he should be necessitated
to commence the life of a wanderer, seeking some remote cavern, where he might
hide himself from the hated visage of beings who excited his most abhorrent
feelings, and from whom his full soul revolted!! Our gentlemen, abashed by a
rebuff so uncommon, and so determined, hastily retired. But Octavian,
suspecting that he should be subjected to their future encroachments, suddenly
withdrew himself from their knowledge; becoming a voluntary exile from fortune,
friends, and all those blooming hopes, which, in the gay metropolis where he
received a being, had approached him in the most fascinating garb. Immediately
on his departure, a man of merit, who was his relation, took possession of his
estates; from which the unhappy and still notoriously guilty Messalina receives
an annual provision.

I have frequently conversed with the present possessor of those estates; but
his silence to every question relative to his kinsman, has been firm and
invariable; and I despaired of obtaining further information of the lost
Octavian, until prosecuting some weeks since a journey which I was necessitated
to make; in consequence of an unavoidable detention, I was benighted in the
midst of a road that I had seldom traveled; and a sudden and violent shower of
rain, adding to the inconvenience of my situation, I hastened for shelter to a
neighboring wood, where I had not remained many moments, when a remote
glimmering attracting my attention, my curiosity was irresistibly excited; and
I determined to follow the clue which the light presented: Dismounting,
therefore, and securing my horse, I made the best of my way over the roughest
road I have ever passed; when, arriving at a small cottage, almost embosomed by
a tall growth of trees, I knocked vehemently at the door; and the pelting rain
at that moment so strongly enforced the propriety of my demand, that a
reluctant entrance was cautiously granted: The door was opened by an old man,
bent by a weight of years; and the wary hesitancy which marked his movements,
contributed not a little to augment my surprise.

" It is a man, Sir," in faultering accents, said he to a grotesque figure,
who, with folded arms, occupied a corner of the hermitage. " Well, well,"
returned the Recluse, in a tone of displeasure, " let him continue during the
violence of the storm, but when that shall abate he must not delay his
departure!" With an address the most insinuating I could assume, I approached
the ferocious master of this mysterious cell, who, catching a glance of my
countenance, hastily endeavored to conceal himself from my observation. The
expression of anguish which suddenly pervaded his features, was, however, but
too evident; and under an assumed acrimony, it was obvious that he harbored
the most corroding glooms! His sorrows were contagious; my sympathetic feelings
instantly confessed their power, and commiseration impelled an essay to
alleviate his misfortunes. Summoning therefore all the rhetoric of which I was
master, I proceeded to urge whatever I imagined might assuage the anguish of a
mind struggling with the ills of life. He heard me with a kind of sullen
disdain, when, taking advantage of my first pause, and waving his hand with an
emotion of despair, to my great astonishment he replied, " I know you, Sir -- I
know you, Mr. Vigillius, from my boyish years I have known you; you are said to
be a man of virtue; but I am not to be deceived; my name is Octavian, Sir --
the suffering, the betrayed Octavian; I was betrayed by virtue, Sir; hear this,
and learn the necessity of your instant departure. I detest the affectation of
rectitude -- it is but a mask to conceal the blackest purposes; but if you
would still wear the semblance of integrity, I charge you to conceal the place
where my wretchedness has found an asylum. No one until now has penetrated my
retreat; my secret has been lodged only in the bosom of this aged man, and ^he
person who makes me the necessary remittances, whose interest it is to be
faithful, as his possession of my property depends on his silence."

Had Octavian been fully aware of the alteration he had sustained, his secret
might have remained in his own bosom: I should never have recognized him; that
expression of divine benevolence, which mantled on his cheek, had given place
to a deep and hollow countenance, the hue of which was become pallid and
unpleasing; on his smooth and well turned forehead, grief had imprinted her
furrowing characters; habit had bent his fine figure, while sorrow,
anticipating the hand of time, had bleached his head, every hair was white, and
his unrazored beard swept venerably on his bosom! If the stranger at first
sight had strongly interested me, the early loved and long lamented Octavian
now took full possession of every faculty of my soul; and, grasping his hand
with a sudden exclamation of pity and admiration, I pressed it alternately to
my lips and to my bosom.

" No, Sir, I will not leave you; Providence has conducted me to this cell, and
nothing but violence shall turn me from the path to which our common Father
has directed me!" A transient acknowledgment of surprise escaped Octavian, at
the energy of my words and manner; and, in defiance of his impassioned
remonstrances, devoting the whole night to him, I labored to awaken him ^o
those sympathies, which had so long remained prostrate in his bosom. I
confessed that he had been the victim of a deep designing villain, associated
with a perfidious woman; but his mind, I observed, had been too highly wrought,
and his confidence in mankind in the aggregate, imposing on his understanding,
had blinded him to the necessity of investigation. I acknowledged that vice, in
its most odious practices, was but too prevalent; yet I asserted that examples
of generous rectitude were frequent in our world; and I held up to his view
many instances, selected from the present day. Good and evil, it was notorious,
alternately predominated; and it was a duty, highly incumbent on minds
fashioned like his, instead of remaining sequestered amid the solitary wilds of
nature, to occupy their understanding and their judgment in devising methods
for the extirpation of crimes, and for the promoting and establishing the
interests of virtue.

These were the themes on which I largely expatiated; but, alas! my efforts
effectuated not the desired purpose: And, while he affirmed that his hatred and
detestation of his species were utterly insurmountable, the vehemence of his
manner enforced a strong conviction of his sincerity. Repeatedly he implored me
to leave him; but my persevering solicitude was not easily overcome; nor did I
quit the cottage, until I obtained what I esteemed a capital concession,
permission to repeat my visits. And should I be the fortunate instrument of
restoring Octavian to the world, with all those social feelings with which the
omnipotent hand of his Creator endowed him, I shall then possess at least one
claim to the gratitude of mankind; and I shall, in such a propitious event,
with honest exultation, again produce him an object worthy the attention and
approbation of the most meritorious among my readers.

No. LXXIX.
To all the various grades that mark mankind,
Discriminating manners are assigned:
Propriety erects her decent bounds,
And every sense of real worth surrounds;
She points her landmarks, designates her lines,
Consorts with order, and with truth combines;
Each just distinction studiously preserves,
Nor from her radiant course one moment swerves.

THERE is, undoubtedly, a beauty and a consistency in uniform propriety, which
is beyond the reach of those irregular flashes that are sometimes the
production of caprice or chance; and we may as rationally rank the efforts of
the Egyptian magicians in the same class with the divine mission and heaven
sanctioned miracles of the Israelitish lawgiver, as compare an action, however
beneficial in itself, which is merely the result of a momentary impulse, to
that systematic virtue that is founded on the arrangements of reason, confirmed
by habit, and matured by experience.

Propriety, said a friend of mine, is my deity -- and if we must commence
idolaters, I do not see that he could have chosen better: Nay, I will go
further, and while I am beyond a doubt with respect to the only true object of
adoration, I will hazard a question whether the self-existing First Cause may
not, in fact, be worshipped under the comprehensive term propriety? It is
certain that every thing useful and becoming must proceed from the Author of
every good; and, while we render homage to the Parent of the universe, it may
not be essential whether we hail him as " Jehovah, Jove, or Lord."

I am free to own, that I am wonderfully attached to this same Propriety; I
would caress her as my bosom friend; she should be an attendant ever on duty;
and I would constitute her the inseparable companion and guide of every moment
of my existence. I have a set of nerves so whimsically consorted, that by a
confusion of characters, unbecoming usurpations, and a gross departure from the
lines evidently designated by nature, I am absolutely unhinged, plunged into a
kind of melancholy, and rendered, for the time being, totally unfit for
society. Indeed every violence done to order, is naturally succeeded by
deformity; and it is undeniably true, that there are no arrangements so
perfect, but may be essentially benefited by regularity.

Many an individual has passed a laborious existence in pursuit of an object he
has never obtained, merely because his efforts have been improperly directed.
I know a lady, born and educated in one of the southern S^ates, in which she
still continues to reside, who possesses talents sufficient to render her
respectable, and in whose bosom a solicitude to please has been from infancy
the ruling passion: She is now far advanced in life; she is in possession of
affluence; and she was early wedded to a gentleman who concedes to her full
power to consult, in every respect, her own taste: He^ sons and daughters are
all advantageously disposed of in wedlock; and she devotes her time and fortune
to attempts at conciliating esteem; yet it is at this moment altogether
problematical, whether this well meaning old lady has the good fortune to
please any individual except her husband! How shall we account for a
circumstance so adverse? We answer -- she is not under the domination of
propriety. It is evident she possesses great goodness of heart; her apartments
are the resort of the rich, the young, and the gay; she is free of access to
persons of every description, who can form the smallest pretensions to decency;
her table is elegantly furnished; and her music, her wine, and her suppers, are
the theme of many a tongue. Balls, card-parties, and morning collations -- of
these she is liberal; and, as it is her choice to see company at home, she
seldom subjects her guests to the expense of entertaining her in return. Her
benefactions are numerous; she is ambitious of supplying even imaginary wants;
and the ribbons and laces which ornament many of the younger part of her
acquaintance, are the production of her undistinguishing bounty.

Her life has been unoffending; I never learned that she was in any instance
essentially culpable; and yet I have always heard her mentioned with contempt,
and that kind of ridicule which has manifestly evinced that her whole plan of
operations has been radically wrong. To instance -- she mingles with every
description of guests; and, although it is long since she has passed her grand
climacteric, she is still garbed in habiliments so fantastically gaudy, that,
was a girl of sixteen thus clad, she would inevitably draw upon herself the
combined censures of prudence and of elegance. But it is not enough that she is
reprehensible in the choice of her apparel; her person, thus preposterously
arrayed, is now seated at the card-table, and now placed at the head of the
dancing party, grouped with girls and boys, who, while they soothe her by the
most flattering encomiums, impatiently wait the opportunity of turning her into
derision; she walks down the ranks; and, having unfortunately no ear for music,
she is commonly out of time and place; and, in the same moment that she is thus
ridiculous, she fancies herself the object of universal admiration!

Poor deluded lady, should thy eye ever glance over this page, let not its
sincerity offend; trust me it is penned by one who is suitably impressed by a
due respect for thy virtues, and who has repeatedly combated in thy behalf. It
is beyond a doubt, that thy solicitude to please is not only justifiable, but
laudable; and the prime error in thy arrangements, has been the neglecting to
engage that propriety which is a guide every way adequate to the conducting us
through the most intricate paths. That thou have missed thy goal, circumstanced
as thou art, cannot be matter of wonder: We regret thy disappointment, and as
we are in possession of such documents concerning thee, as convince us that thy
ruling passion is still strongly operative in thy bosom, we are happy that it
is not yet too late to sketch for thee a plan, which, if adopted, will
infallibly invest thee with that desideratum at which thou have so long
ineffectually aimed.

We will be careful to abridge thy pleasures as little as possible; and, as
society may be requisite to cheer the winter of age, we will agree that thy
extensive acquaintance shall be the coevals of thy convenience. Of parties of
pleasure, under the direction of amity and corrected hilarity, we decidedly
approve. Music has been styled intellectual food; and dancing combines the
advantages of exercise, with convivial enjoyment. But, although we
unhesitatingly allow thy frequent assemblies, we cannot admire thy individual
wanderings; thy smiles and thy presence may sanction youthful glee, while no
antique movements absurdly point the venerable appearance thou have received
from the hand of impressive time. Do thou want exercise, thy convenient
carriages wait but thy command to waft thee to the charming recesses of the
village groves; and all the rural pleasures of which the peaceful hamlet is
productive, are at thy command. A celebrated writer informs us that the
polished sons and daughters of France always refuse to mingle in the dance,
after they have passed the age of thirty. French etiquette has long been
distinguished and observed; and I am free to own, that I admire the propriety
of this resolution.

There is, unquestionably, a period when the manners of the human being ought
to assume a dignity of character, when they cannot consistently nor gracefully
descend to frivolity; and we should be careful that we do not forfeit that
respectability, which is the prerogative of years. Observe the time-honoured
matron who has enlisted under the banners of propriety; her brow is not
contracted by severity -- she presides in the circles of gaiety, without
casting a cloud on their enjoyments -- she mingles in the parties of the
youthful candidates for pleasure; and those remarks which she is occasionally
induced to make, drawn from the treasury of wisdom, are calculated both to
delight and inform. Her sentiments are the growth of a good understanding,
enriched by experience, and they are pointed by candor; she is regarded as a
model, and beloved as a friend; her language is never adulatory; and yet she
hastens to render that just tribute of praise which should be considered as the
unalienable reward of merit. When she is under the necessity of pointing out a
fault, the persuasive energy and conviction of her remarks, combine that kind
of mildness, which is always sure to soothe, while they effectuate the
reformation they are designed to procure; her looks, her movements, her every
arrangement, is descriptive of propriety; condescending dignity is inscribed on
the features of her finely expressive countenance, and all who behold her are
constrained to admire and to venerate the truly consistent matron. By the
benedictions of the young people of both sexes, she is constantly followed --
they court her society with avidity, and retire from her presence cheerful,
grateful, and comparatively happy. In her gratuities she judiciously
discriminates, and she uniformly prefers aiding the efforts of the deserving
orphan, who, by the assistance of her needle, is struggling to obtain a decent
support, to the pleasure of adding a few yards of lace to the ornaments of her
greatest favorites. Once I knew such a female; but alas! she is now no more --
the big stream of unavailing sorrow marked her exit; the virtues clad in sables
joined the funereal procession; propriety mourned the decease of the most
unoffending of her votaries, while the regrets of all ranks of people were
productive of a general lamentation. Sweet is the recollection of her life; and
her memory, embalmed by her worth, will endure until the powers of retention
shall be consigned to oblivion.

If those in whose bosoms a desire to please irresistibly predominates, gave
themselves time to reflect -- if they would establish the regency of propriety,
conviction would unavoidably follow, and they would then know that a regular
and persevering conformity to her dictates, is the only career, the unclouded
splendour of which can effectually silence the clamours of rancour and the
hootings of envy. The confounding different periods of time and destroying
those discriminating marks which are calculated to designate characters, must
always disgust; the man who would mount the breach, clothed in canonicals,
would be alike preposterous with him who should ascend the pulpit, arrayed in a
suit of full trimed regimentals! and the giggling Miss who has just completed
her tenth year, habited in the gravely fancied garb, designed to enrobe the
decent limbs of the venerable matron, is not more ridiculous than the woman of
sixty, whose ill chosen ornaments answer no other purpose than to render her an
object of derision! The truth is, she thus excites attention to the years she
has numbered, forcibly pointing her longevity by the very method she has
taken to conceal it! her gay apparel seems to multiply the furrows on her face,
every unbecoming article apparently deepens her wrinkles, and renders still
more hollow the hollow of her cheeks.

Custom has judiciously affixed to the various ranks in society its
ascertaining marks, and we cannot see her barriers thrown down, or the rushing
together of the different classes of mankind, without regret. Had I been born a
female, it is very possible I might have conducted as females do; but however
this might have been, I think I could not have denied that the fantastical
trappings of dress are always indicative of a frivolous mind. It must be
confessed that plainness of apparel is much more descriptive of dignity of
character than embroidered vestments, furbelowed robes, or full dressed caps.
Singularity of dress is a peculiar trait in the principles of quakerism, and
the garb of this sect is calculated to give a rational impression of their
tenets. The plain quaker-coloured satin, neatly sewed together, the milk white
muslin or lawn, fashioned into the becoming handkerchief and well set colf --
in short, the tout ensemble of the modest quaker's attire has generally
extorted the most unequivocal testimonies of approbation. A maiden thus clad
prefers at first sight her claim to our esteem -- we are not impelled to an
appreciation of the value of that time she has murdered at her toilette -- we
have no useless appendages to calculate, and we indulge a pleasing hope that
she has devoted her hours to the cultivation of her understanding.

I do not recollect ever to have heard a single gentleman expressing his
sentiments on dress, who has not been decisive in his preference of the quaker
habit. I know some men who are mute on almost every other subject, who,
whenever this is introduced on the tapis, are even eloquent in the avowal of
their admiration -- and ladies of the best understanding have regularly given
their voices on the same side of the question. How then does it happen that
every description of women among us, quakers excepted, are ambitious of
exhibiting as much of show in their apparel, and of making as glittering an
appearance as their ideas of the rules imposed by elegance and propriety will
admit? This is an enigma reserved for THE SEX to explain; and in the mean time
it may be presumed, that when the period arrives which shall render it
fashionable to accustom females to an early attention to useful studies, which
shall teach them to reason, investigate, and compare, and to invigorate their
understandings by a comprehension, and a consequent adoption of those arguments
which result from sound sense, and are recognized by truth -- when, I say, in
the history of human nature, this period shall have displaced the
administration of frivolity, I will pledge my reputation that their dress will
become an object of less importance, that it will be remarkable for its
simplicity, and that every absurdity will be banished from the toilette.

No. LXXX.
Perhaps it is well with lenient eye to view
Those errors that from inexper'ence grew --
To shield the germ that may perchance expand,
If by the airs of soft indulgence fanned.

To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
SIR,
YOUR prompt attention to " Virtue Triumphant" induces me to forward you The
Traveller Returned. It is the second Dramatic production of the same Author,
and is, perhaps, as worthy to supply a few numbers for the Gleaner as the
first. I am, Sir, with due respect, your most obedient humble servant,

PHILO AMERICANUS.


THE TRAVELLER RETURNED.
PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
MEN.
Mr. RAMBLETON Major CAMDEN Mr. STANHOPE ALBERTO STANHOPE Mr. VANSITTARY
PATRICK O'NEAL OBADIAH.
WOMEN.
Mrs. MONTAGUE HARRIOT MONTAGUE EMILY LOVEGROVE Mrs. VANSITTART BRIDGET.
Members of the Committee of Public Safety -- Officer, Soldiers, Sailors, and
Servants.

ACT FIRST.
SCENE -- A Parade -- Sea Prospect -- Ship discovered at a Distance. [Enter Mr.
Rambleton.] Rambleton. IT IS well -- auspicious morn, I hail thy gladsome rays
-- once more I breathe again my native air -- once more I tread that earth, now
doubly dear, for having given birth to such a race of heroes, as Rome, in all
her pride of greatness, could never boast.

[Hallooing without.]
[Enter Patrick, with Sailors bearing Trunks.] Patrick. Ow, may I never see my
own sweet country again, if I did not think this land of America had been all
salt water, do you see, we were so long in finding it. Arrah now, while we are
standing here, by my soul we may as as well be looking after a place to rest
our-shelves in, so we may.


Ramb. Here, friends deposit your burdens in this niche. Your ship is under
sail; it will be prudent for you to get on board as soon as possible. Farewell,
comrades.

[Gives them money.]
Sailors. [all vociferate] God bless your honor; you are a gentleman. God
bless your honor!

[Exeunt Sailors.
Ramb. Now, Patrick, you must keep guard here, while I proceed to reconnoitre.


Patr. Ow, that I shall master; but did you not say now, that you should be
after taking your land tacks on board?


Ramb. I did, Patrick; twelve miles from this city, nineteen years since, I
left my family.


Patr. Twelve miles, do you say? Ow then, that is but a trifle, my dear: It is
only six miles a-piece, master; and who would grudge that, I wonder, for the
sake of seeing the sweet faces of wife and children. But did not you say now,
how that you had written them word you was dead, or the like of that?


Ramb. I said, Patrick, that they probably supposed me dead, for they have not
heard from me since I left them. A friend whom I commissioned for that purpose
has informed me in general terms of their welfare; I forbad particulars.


Patr. Arrah, is not that strange, now?


Ramb. I have very powerful reasons for my conduct; and remember, Patrick, you
must be secret.


Patr. Ow, never fear Patrick O'Neal, Sir; an Irishman shall hang, drown, and
quarter for you, Sir, and afterward serve you every bit as well as if nothing
at all at all had happened.


Ramb. I had an estate in this city. I am not sure that I shall not find my
family here; but my present purpose is to take lodgings.


Patr. Arrah, get out with that, now. If Patrick O'Neal was three thousand
miles separated from his bit of an Irish girl, he shall swing his hammock close
along side of her for all that, Honey. Give me l^ve to say, Sir, would it not
be better if you went right home to your own wife, now?


Ramb. All in good time, Patrick. But hist! who have we here? Stand a one side.


[Enter Major Camden.] Major C. This sea breeze is very refreshing during this
sultry season; I will enjoy it a little. Hah! a ship under sail, and without
colors, too! this looks suspicious. Bless me! a stranger of dignified mien and
prepossessing aspect; I will accost him -- It is a divine morning, Sir.


Ramb. It is so, young man; and I feel enough interested in you to wish you may
enjoy it.


Major C. Thank you, Sir. Can you tell from whence came yonder ship, that now
crowds every sail to quit our coast?


Ramb. I can, Sir. You wear your country's uniform, and it is a fair
presumption that you will emulate her virtues. That ship, Sir, is British
property, hired by me to transport myself, my baggage, and my servant, across
the vast Atlantic.


Major C. But are you not apprized that our guardian legislators have
recommended to the good people of the United States a suspension of all
intercourse with the subjects of his Britannic majesty, during the war?


Ramb. Yes, Sir; but I presume they have not proscribed the true-born sons of
America?


Major C. Certainly not, Sir.


Ramb. Well, Sir, in this land of liberty I commenced my being. Some years
previous to the present struggle, private motives induced me to quit it; and,
perhaps, I should not yet have returned, had not fame's shrill clarion so
loudly sounding my country's honors, have given to ambition the fleetest
wings, and thus accelerated my suspended purpose.


Major C. Your words involve conviction: And yet, perhaps, I should not trust.


Ramb. The morn of life is seldom found suspicious -- I come prepared to aid a
struggling people -- My purse, my counsel, they shall both be their's; and, if
need be, my sword shall fight their battles.


Major C. [pausing.] What is the line of conduct which Camden should pursue?


Ramb. Camden! -- hah! that name awakens in my soul the strongest passions.
[Aside.] If you have doubts, examine well my baggage -- my person -- I dare the
strictest scrutiny.


Major C. Pshaw! I disdain suspicion, and venerate your frankness.


Ramb. Only direct me for a single night to some convenient lodging.


Major C. I am at present here on duty; will you accept apartments under the
same roof with me?


Ramb. Most gladly.


Major C. Then, Sir I will conduct you.


Ramb. I will speak to my servant, and accompany you immediately. Here, Patrick
--

[Patrick comes forward.
Patr. Sir.


Ramb. I shall send persons, who will assist in conveying my trunks to my
lodgings.


Patr. So do then -- and, by the body of St. Patrick, my shelf shall be able to
carry them like nothing at all at all.

[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to an Apartment in an Inn. [Mr. and Mrs. Vansittart at
breakfast.] Mrs. V. Why husband, at this rate we shall certainly starve!


Vans. Vise, vise! I to vish you woult eat your preat ant putter, and let that
content you at this present time.


Mrs. V. Content me! Lord, how can I be contented? no jonteel people are
contented: Besides, are we not over head and ears in debt, and not a single
dollar to help ourselves? I thought, when I married a Dutchman, who, they say,
can make land out of water, that I should at least have been above so low a
thing as poverty.


Vans. Lort, Lort! Mrs. Vansittart, you are quite unreasonaple now -- Have not
I tolt you a thousant times, that I coult not vork without tools? Suppose I pe
a Tutchman -- vhy my creat ancestor, Van Tromp himself, coult never fleet his
ships vithout vater. You are as pat as the Egyptian taskmasters; for you are
alvay^ expecting preak vithout shtraw.


Mrs. V. I say, husband, there is straw enough; and you miss many a jonteel
opportunity. Major Camden for instance -- he could not appear so alegunt
without a power of money. I warrant you, his trunks contain many a good pound;
and, as he is in such haste to get rid of his cash, as to part with it to every
shameless beggar, no one could say, it would not be doing a perlite thing, to
assist him in the disposal of it.


Vans. Torothy, Torothy! how are we to come at it, at this present time?


Mrs. V. Get every thing in readiness, force the trunks, make off before we are
discovered, and thus give all our creditors the slip at once.

[They rise from table.
Vans. Mercy on us! mercy on us!


Mrs. V. In the general confusion into which the great people are thrown, it
would be easy to retire indignantly with our money, and nobody would be the
wiser.


Vans. Torothy, Torothy! tossed thou never reflect? [Screams in her ear.] Tossed
never think of the callows, chilt? Cot a' mercy! it voalt make my very ploot
chill, to see my poor tear Torothy swinging in the air!

[Affects to weep ludicrously.
Mrs. V. Lord! Mr. Vansittart, how could you fright a body so? [Knocking at the
door.] I sha'n't get the odious figure out of my head today -- you are as
unperlite as a Heartentot. [Knocking at the door repeated.] Do see who is at
the door; for pity's sake, how came it fastened?

[Vansittart opens the door.
[Enter Major Camden, introducing Mr. Rambleton.] Major C. Landlord, I have
brought you a new lodger, and I recommend him to your best attention.


Vans. [Bowing.] Ve shall pe prout to vait on the shentleman, at this present
time.


Major C. Mrs. Vansittart, be so obliging as to order breakfast in your little
parlour.


Mrs. V. You shall be obeyed, Sir.

[affectedly.
Major C. I will show you into the parlour, Mr. Rambleton.

[Exeunt Major Camden and Mr. Rambleton.
Mrs. V. Rambleton -- Rambleton -- Who can this same Rambleton be?


Vans. Rampleton, Rampleton -- and vat the plague is that to you? -- Now, vhy
ton't you set apout getting preakfast for the shentlemen, I say?


Mrs. V. Lord! man, it is already got; I have only to order it in.

[Exit Mrs. Vansittart.
Vans. Vicket jate! vicket jate! it vill pe a vonter if she toes not prink me
to shame; ant yet, Cot knows, I have creat occasions. If I coult safely come at
a coot ^antsome rount sum, I pelieves I shoult not stick at pocketing it, any
more than poor Torothy.

[Loud knocking at the door. [Mrs. Vansittart passes hastily over the stage,
and throws open the door.]
[Enter Patrick, with Porters bearing trunks.] Patr. Arrah now, good people,
can you tell me if one Mr. Rambleton has cast anchor hereabouts?


Mrs. V. O yes, Sir; and he is now at breakfast in the parlour.


Patr. Arrah, then, Patrick O'Neal did not care if my shelf had a little of
that same breakfast, after Master Rambleton has eaten it, Honey. By my soul, I
am quite wary -- so I am; and if you shall be after showing me where I will
stow this rich cargo, I will be for stepping into your cabin a bit, and trating
myself with breakfast, dinner and supper, all at one meal -- so I shall.


Mrs. V. Here, Mr. Patrick -- this way, this way, if you please; I will show
you Mr. Rambleton's chamber.


Patr. Mr. Patrick! How the je^^e could the sweet crature find out my name, now?


[Patrick and the Porters follow Mrs. Vansittart with the baggage.] Vans. So,
so -- Mrs. Vansittart is likely to get into pusiness, I f^nt, at this present
time.

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- A Parlour in the Inn. [Mr. Rambleton and Major Camden just rising
from the breakfast table.] Ramb. Well -- I would travel many a rood to see this
wonder of a man: I have never doubted his intrepid valor and inborn
patriotism; but, are his military talents so great as you describe?


Major C. I hold them to be unequalled, Sir. Having the happiness to be born in
the neighborhood of Mount Vernon, I have enjoyed the patronage of the General,
and I have been an eyewitness of the most glorious achievements.


Ramb. Cannot you furnish me with some examples? I should dwell with singular
pleasure on a recital so interesting.


Major C. Fame early marked the steps of the youthful Warrior; and his
political address, undaunted bravery, and military talents, were all evinced in
his journey from Winchester, his defense of Fort Necessity, and his judicious
arrangements after Braddock's defeat.


Ramb. His conduct would indeed have done honor to a veteran.


Major C. And, Sir, were there no other proofs of his uncommon military
abilities, but the victorious actions of Trenton and Princeton, (both of which
were the result of his superintending genius) they were alone sufficient to
place him on the highest summit of martial glory!


Ramb. Young man, I admire thy generous warmth.


Major C. O, Sir! had you seen him in an hour of the greatest public depression
-- his noble bosom torn with apprehensions for his oppressed country --
hazarding his person in front of the enemy's line -- animating his followers by
example, as well as precept -- and, with intrepid valor, pressing on to death
or victory!


Ramb. May eternal blessings crown his honored head!


Major C. Various are the scenes which have witnessed his undaunted bravery;
while his unyielding fortitude and equanimity, under the pressure of
complicated evils, authorize the most elevated ideas of the firmness and
magnanimity of his mind.


Ramb. It is hardly possible to reverence his virtues too highly; and yet, the
ignominious death of Major Andre has taught some people to question his
sensibility.


Major C. Gracious God! Had they witnessed the struggles, which the fate of
that interesting, brave, and truly accomplished man occasioned in the bosom of
the Warrior, they would have learned to venerate the sorrows of a martial
spirit. But, Sir, there are periods, when sacrifices on the altar of public
opinion become absolutely indispensable.


Ramb. Undoubtedly there are.


Major C. Question his sensibility, Sir! he deeply laments the calamities of
the war! and, while his soul bleeds for his country, the delicacy of his
feelings acknowledges a suitable sympathy with the unfortunate of every
description.


Ramb. This finishing of his character gives me inexpressible satisfaction.


Major C. I glory in my country, Sir; and, while I do reverence to Warriors,
Philosophers and Statesmen, whose fame shall reach the utmost verge of polished
humanity, I forget not to estimate, as they deserve, the merits of those
matchless soldiers, whose hardships have been incredible -- who have withstood
the most splendid offers of the enemy, when, at the same moment, their
footsteps over the frozen ground were tracked by their blood!


Ramb. Heroic men! they merit more than language can express! How long have you
served in this unequalled army, Sir?


Major C. My father had designed me for mercantile life; but, on the
commencement of hostilities, he received letters from a friend abroad, which
determined him to arm me in my country's cause.


Ramb. Little does he suspect the hand which penned those letters; but, though
my bounding heart would leap into his bosom, I will not yet disclose myself.
[Aside.] To bear arms in defense of the invaded Rights of Man, is truly
honorable, Sir.


Major C. It is so, Sir; and many brave citizens have lately joined our
standards. Some hours hence, the noble volunteers will rendezvous on that
parade where first we met: Should your curiosity lead you thither, you may
observe a specimen of that spirit which actuates the bosoms of FREE AMERICANS!


Ramb. I will not lose the opportunity, Sir.


Major C. Engagements unavoidable command me hence.


Ramb. Do not hesitate -- we are both at home.

[Exit Major Camden. I will attend to my baggage, and then prepare for
observation.

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- A Bedchamber in the Inn. [Enter Mr. Rambleton, preceded by Patrick.]
Ramb. Patrick, I have business abroad, and I wish you to tarry within during my
absence.


Patr. Juring your absence? Ow! that I shall, Sir? and, although I wander all
over the city, I shall not stir a bit. Never fear Patrick O'Neal, Sir.


Ramb. Well, good Patrick, leave me for the present.


Patr. Ow! that I shall now, with the biggest pleasure in life.

[Exit Patrick.
Ramb. So far is well. [Takes out a box, from which he produces a miniature
picture, richly set, on which he gazes impassioned.] Angelic loveliness! and
could such a form become the receptacle of deliberate vice? Yet she was grossly
wanting, both to herself and me, if not absolutely guilty; and this day must
decide, whether the portrait or the original shall ever again resume their seat
in my bosom. [Puts up the miniature in the box, and places it on the toilette.]
My agitation, so near the scene of action, is extreme. Perhaps -- But I Will
think no more -- It is full time that I commence my operations.

[Exit.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
No. LXXXI.
THE TRAVELLER RETURNED, continued. ACT SECOND.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Mrs. Montague's House. [Emily Lovegrove is seated in
a contemplative attitude -- she rises and advances forward.] Emily. MISFORTUNE
upon misfortune! The loss of my dear and tender parents! my patrimony, reduced
by the ruinous paper currency almost to nothing; and, as if these repeated
strokes were not sufficient, I am no sooner adopted by the sister of my mother,
from whom I receive even maternal tenderness, than my wayward hear becomes
ungratefully attached to the very man who is on the point of marriage with her
daughter! Gracious Heaven! was ever unfortunate girl so cruelly circumstanced!
But here comes my unsuspecting cousin, as happy as youth, innocence and
vivacity can render her.


[Enter Harriot Montague.] Harriot. Dear Emily, where have you hid yourself;
why I have had the most divine ramble imaginable, and have been searching the
house over to make you a partaker of my felicity; but tell me, dear, has not
this straw hat and lilach ribbons a most fascinating effect? O I have been so
enchantingly flattered -- But I protest you look as if you had been in tears!
you are melancholy, my dear.


Emily. No, Harriot, not melancholy, only tranquil; but where have you been, my
love?


Harriot. Been! why, you shall hear: I just looked in on Mrs. Fallacy, and
found her exercising her talents at ridicule, by describing to neighbor
Chitchat in a manner truly ludicrous, the party she last night entertained, in
such a high style of elegance, and with such apparent affection -- Ha, ha, ha.


Emily. And could this give you pleasure, Harriot? it has, I assure you, a
contrary effect on me; I shall henceforth, never enjoy myself in her society.


Harriot. Never enjoy yourself in her society, Emily? why she is the most
sprightly and agreeable woman in the world.


Emily. It may be so, but I should be confident that I, in my turn, should be
served up as the subject of her unwarrantable mirth: And, indeed, Harriot it is
an eternal truth, that whoever will divert you at the expense of any one with
whom they are apparently in the habits of friendship, will not hesitate to
sacrifice you, whenever occasion offers.


Harriot. Ah, this may do well enough for you plodding, sentimental girls; but
I, who resolve to enjoy the present moment, am determined to laugh where I can,
and not be so grossly absurd as to throw myself into the horrors by anticipated
evil -- ha, ha, ha! laughing, my dear, is absolutely necessary to my existence
-- ha, ha, ha.


Emily. You are a happy girl, cousin.


Harriot. Why, so I think, Emily; for who should I meet at Mrs. Fallacy's but
Miss Worthy, Arrabella Clermont, and Eliza Meanwell; so, gallanted by Alberto
Stanhope, away we scampered, and had the most delectably romantic promenade
that can be conceived of.


Emily. Had Major Camden been of the party, the pleasure you seem to have
derived therefrom, might have been accounted for.


Harriot. For pity's sake, Emily, be quiet, or you will absolutely make me as
melancholy as yourself.


Emily. Will the name of Major Camden make you melancholy, cousin?


Harriot. O yes, it is a perfect antidote to every mirthful idea.


Emily. Amazing! I had thought you regarded him as your future husband.


Harriot. So mamma would have me, Emily; but if ever I do marry, child, it will
be a distant day; and I pray Heaven that Major Camden may not be the man.


Emily. What can be your objection to Major Camden? he is young, rich,
handsome, gay, generous, informed, and polished.


Harriot. Bless me! Emily -- why, you have given him qualities enough for a
line of high sounding Alexandrine measure; and, if you had but arranged them
musically, I should have set you down as a most excellent poet: Could you not
transpose them, my dear?


Emily. How agreeably a heart at ease can trifle.


Harriot. Well then, my dear girl, seriously, and in your own way, I allow
Major Camden every attribute which you have so liberally bestowed upon him: I
sincerely esteem him; but for love, [courtesying humourously] I must beg your
pardon for that, my dear.


Emily. Is my aunt acquainted with your sentiments?


Harriot. Why, child, I do not often keep secrets from my mother; she has the
most contemptible idea of love -- but enter nous -- I believe she has been
cruelly wounded by the little archer; this, however, is conjecture; for there
is a mystery in the story of my good mother, which, although my curiosity is
wound up to the highest pitch, I could never yet unravel.


Emily. But it is strange she should wish you to enter into engagements at
which your heart relucts.


Harriot. It is not more strange than true, Emily. Major Camden commenced his
acquaintance with my mother by saving her from imminent danger: She was taking
an airing on a very rough road -- her horses took fright -- the driver was
thrown from his seat -- a precipice was in view -- and her destruction had been
inevitable, had not Providence sent Camden to her assistance, who saved her
life at the risque of his own!


Emily. I shudder at her danger! It was indeed an heroic action.


Harriot. The gratitude of my mother was unbounded; mine also was powerfully
engaged -- for a time it deceived me: Camden declared himself my lover; but
although I have long since understood the situation of my own heart, I am not
permitted to deal explicitly with Major Camden.


Emily. But on what principle can my aunt proceed?


Harriot. She has a most exalted opinion of Major Camden -- tenderly loves her
daughter -- and thinks the passions should always be under the government of
reason.


Emily. Heigh ho!


Harriot. And heigh ho! say I -- but, hang it, your glooms are contagious, I
believe: I Will never stir a single step in pursuit of cross accidents, I Am
resolved: [hums a tune.] "The world, my dear Mira, is full of deceit." [Swims
gracefully in a minute; strikes suddenly into a cotillion step; and warbles a
gay air.]


Emily. Amiable vivacity!


Harriot. I protest, Emily, you shall not be so grave; I have half persuaded my
mother to consent to our hop this evening; and if you will join me, I shall be
sure of success. Come, let us renew our petition in concert. [She chants a
sprightly air, and runs off with Emily.]


[ Enter Obadiah, followed by Bridget -- Obadiah making a clamourous outcry.]
Ob. Ouns! blood and thunder! what will become of poor Obadiah!


Bridget. What Is the matter, Obadiah?


Ob. Oh! the maple log, the maple log was in me! Oh, oh, oh! what shall I do?
what shall I do?


Bridget. What is the matter, I say, Obadiah?


Ob. Oh! tarnation, tarnation, tarnation!


Bridget. Are you mad? [shaking him violently.] Tell me what ails you, I say?


Ob. Oh! I have broke -- I have broke -- I cannot speak it --


Bridget. Broke what?


Ob. I have broke -- I have broke th-th-the -- what do you call it -- I have
broke th-th-the -- what do you call it.


Bridget. Th-th-the -- what do you call it -- Now what the plague do you mean,
Obadiah?


Ob. Why that there glass thing, Bridget, by which folks finds out when we
should be cold and when we should be warm.


Bridget. I Will be hanged, Obadiah, if you don't mean the thermometer.


Ob. Yes, Bridget, it is the mormeter, the mormeter; the worse luck mine! yes,
yes, it is the mormeter sure enough -- oh, oh, oh!


Bridget. Why, don't take on so, man; my mistress is a good kind lady, and
never faults people for trifles and accidents, and the like of that.


Ob. Does not she, Bridget? ha, ha, ha! [jumps about upon the stage.] ha, ha,
ha! Well -- but, Bridget, I Will tell you a story, Bridget; I once lived with a
lady -- she looked as mild as a lamb, and she was not bigger than a good stout
yearling; but, for all that, she had spurits to the back bone, as a body may
zay; and so, as I was zaying, I lived with she, and I only broke a China
tea-cup -- it is true it belonged to a zet; but my little mistress was in such
a bloody passion, that she flew at me, tooth and nail, as a body may zay; and I
swamp it, if she did not fetch blood of me, Bridget.


Bridget. Well, well, we are no boxers here; and so do you go along about your
business, and ask your mistress what we shall get for dinner.

[Exeunt Bridget and Obadiah.
SCENE -- A Library -- Table covered with Books -- Mrs. Montague making
Extracts -- She rises and comes forward. Mrs. M. I often think in this life of
solitude, to which my errors have condemned me, it is a very fortunate
circumstance that I am able to turn my attention to pursuits which are at once
replete with amusement and instruction; but what says my extracts? [reads a
paper on which she has been writing.] " Some modern philosophers are of
opinion, that the sun is the great fountain from which the earth and other
planets derive all the phlogiston -- "


[Enter Miss Montague and Miss Lovegrove.] Harriot. Do, dear mamma, consent to
the violin and dancing this evening, and I will be the best girl in the world.


Mrs. M. Daughter, my commands were, that I would not be interrupted; let me
see -- where did I leave off? O, here it is; [reads] " which they possess, and
that this is formed from the combination of the solar rays -- "


Harriot. O, mamma, what a combination of reasons I shall have to love and
honor you, if you will but oblige me; it will amuse my cousin Emily too.


Mrs. M. Peace, Harriot; your cousin has not expressed a wish of this kind. [
read^] " with all the opaque bodies, but particularly with the leaves of
vegetables, which they suppose to be organs adopted to absorb them, and that as
animals receive their nourishment from vegetables, they also obtain in a
secondary manner their phlogiston from the sun."


Harriot. Dear mamma, exercise is as necessary for girls, as phlogiston is for
vegetables: you are our sun, mamma, and pray now beam forth thy sweet
consenting rays, and we shall become the most grateful creatures in the
universe.


Mrs. M. [Smiling] Why do'nt you speak, Emily?


Emily. Madam, my wishes are in unison with those of my cousin.


Mrs. M. You know, girls, that I am not fond of these convivial parties; my
time of life and situation render them improper for me; but for this once I
will indulge you.


Harriot, [courtesying low.] Dear mamma, we thank you -- Emily we will be as
gay as -- as -- but hang it, I Will not study for a simile.


Emily. You are perfectly right, cousin, we will express our gratitude by our
hilarity rather than our wit. [Harriot and Emily seem to confer apart.]


Mrs. M. [resumes her reading] " And lastly, as great masses of the mineral
kingdom, which have been found in the crust of the earth, which human nature
has penetrated, has evidently been formed from the recrements of animal and
vegetable bodies."


Harriot. May I send to Mrs. Shapely to put the silver trimmings upon my white
satin, mamma?


Mrs. M. Yes, child -- [reads] " These also are supposed thus to have derived
their phlogiston from the sun."


[Enter Obadiah.] Ob. There Is Mr. Major Camden zays how that he wants Miss
Montague.


Mrs. M. Go, my dear.


Harriot. Heigh ho! Will you go, cousin?


Emily. I will join you presently, my dear.

[Exit Harriot.]
Mrs. M. [reads] " Another opinion concerning the sun's rays, is, that they are
not luminous till they arrive at our atmosphere, and that there uniting with
some part of the air, they produce combustion." Be so good, my dear Miss
Lovegrove, to step and desire Major Camden to tarry and dine with us.


Emily. I obey you with pleasure, Madam.

[Exit Miss Lovegrove.
Mrs. M. [reads.] " And light is emitted, and that an etherial acid, yet
undiscovered, is formed from this combustion. The more probable opinion perhaps
is, that the sun is a phlogistic mass of matter, whose surface is in a state of
combustion, which, like other burning bodies, emits light -- "


[Enter Obadiah.] Ob. Bridget wants to know as how, Madam, would you have the
partridges roasted, with the pudding?


Mrs. M. Yes, Obadiah.

[Exit Obadiah.] [Reads.] " With immense velocity in all directions; that these
rays of light act upon all opaque bodies; and, combining with them, either
displace or produce their elementary heat, and become chemically combined with
the phlogistic part of them; for light is given out when phlogistic bodies
unite with the oxygenous principle of the air. As in combustion or in the
reduction of metallic calxes: Thus in presenting to the flame of a candle, a
letter wafer, if it be colored with red lead, at the time the red lead becomes
a metallic drop, a flash of light is perceived. Doctor Alexander Wilson -- "


[Enter Obadiah.] Ob. There is a dreadful accident come to pass, Madam! [Looks
ruefully.]


Mrs. M. For pity's sake, what is it?


Ob. Fraid to zay, Ma'am.


Mrs. M. I command you to speak.


Ob. Will Not you be angry, though?


Mrs. M. You will make me more angry if you disobey me.


Ob. Well, then -- adds rat me if I can speak.


Mrs. M. I order you, as you value my favor, to tell what is the matter.


Ob. Well, then, if I must speak, matter enow' of conscience -- why, I thinks
every thing is going to ruin -- Wauns! I does not think you will stand it long;
but, ods bodikins, I was not to blame for this neither, for the matter of that,
as a body may zay.


Mrs. M. You would weary even patience itself, Obadiah -- come to the point
immediately.


Ob. Well, well -- point enough, in conscience. Why, you must know, Ma'am, that
the cook has left open the door of the larder, and the gray cat has helped
herzelf to the partridges -- There, Ma'am, there is point enough, zaving your
presence.


Mrs. M. Is that all, Obadiah? -- well, I rejoice that it is no worse -- here,
take this bill, and see what dispatch you can make in furnishing more.


Ob. Yes, that I will, Mistress -- ho, ho, ho! I ^wamp it, a good milk's cow
this. [Aside.

[Exit Obadiah.
Mrs. M. [reads.] " Doctor Alexander Wilson ingeniously endeavors to prove,
that the sun is only in a state of combustion on its surface, and that the dark
spots seen on its disk, are excavations, or caverns, through the luminous
crust, some of which are four thousand miles in diameter." [Throws the paper on
the table.] One is really lost in the immensity of these speculations --
perhaps, books engross too much of my time. I thought my daughter sighed deeply
at the name of Camden; indeed, she has lately given me to understand, that she
can never be his! If I cannot reward the deserving Camden by her hand, I shall
regard the disappointment as the seal of my misfortunes.

[Exit.
SCENE -- A Parlour. [Major Camden and Miss Montague seated.] Harriot. Why,
Major, you always make me grave; you are too serious, a great deal too serious
for me.


Major C. I have long, Madam, been fully convinced, that it is out of my power
to render myself agreeable to you.


Harriot. Ha, ha, ha! That collected countenance becomes you infinitely, I
protest; look always thus captivating, and I shall be half mad with love.


Major C. If you knew my heart, Miss Montague --


Harriot. O! for heaven's sake, Camden, throw aside that lullaby tone, or I
shall absolutely, [yawns] or I shall absolutely fall asleep.


Major C. Madam, Madam, you do not use me well: [rising] You would not use
Stanhope thus.


Harriot. How well he reads my heart. [Aside.] Stanhope is as gay as a
butterfly; we have laughed in concert a full hour; I protest, I think we were
made for each other -- But here comes my sentimental cousin; she is always to
your taste, Major.


[Enter Miss Lovegrove.] Emily. My aunt, Sir, requests you would dine with her
today.


Major C. She does me honor, Miss Lovegrove; and I am infinitely obliged to
her charming messenger.


Harriot. Well, I see, by your features, you are disposed to be charming
company; and so I Will take the opportunity of giving orders to Shapely,
respecting my dress for the evening.

[Exit Harriot.
Major C. Say, Miss Lovegrove, is not extreme gaiety, and uninterrupted
frivolity, strong marks of indifference?


Emily. My cousin has a fund of vivacity, Sir; but, as it never transgresses
the bounds of discretion, it would be criminal even to wish it lessened.


Major C. Would, that she could combine those rational and sentimental charms,
which so eminently distinguish Miss Lovegrove.


Emily. Sir, Miss Montague is amiable and good; and innocence and gaiety are
frequently associates.


Major C. Would, I had known Miss Lovegrove sooner!


Emily. [hesitating and alarmed.] Sir, you may assure yourself, that my
interest in the heart of Miss Montague shall be wholly employed in your favor.


Major C. In the heart of Miss Montague! [takes her hand.] Charming Emily! --
But what am I about -- I stand on a precipice, down which a single movement may
plunge me! Oh, Miss Lovegrove! could you witness the conflict in this devoted
bosom, your heavenly sensibility, enchanting woman! would extort from your mild
eye the tear of gentle pity.


Emily. [blushing and trembling.] Sir, you are in full possession of all my
commiseration; my most arduous efforts shall be wholly yours! and I will this
moment seek my cousin, and endeavor to persuade her to become every thing a
man of honor can desire.

[Exit precipitately.
Major C. She either affects ignorance, or she does not understand me -- Were I
more explicit, I should be a villain. I esteem Harriot Montague; but Emily
Lovegrove enchants my reason, and triumphs over my dearest sentiments! Yet, the
accusation of broken faith shall not entwine a soldier's laurels -- Indeed,
these struggles do not well suit with my profession! America, now weeping over
her desolated plains and warriors slain in battle, should be my sovereign lady.
It is not thus her heroes -- it is not thus that WASHINGTON inglorious wastes
his hours! Well, well -- I Will haste to you parade, and there forget my weakness.

[Exit.
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
No. LXXXII.
THE TRAVELLER RETURNED, continued. ACT THIRD.
SCENE -- The Parade -- Sea Prospect. [ Mr. Rambleton discovered at a corner of
the stage, in a convenient position for viewing the recruits -- Major Camden
enters, followed by Soldiers, clad in the American uniform, drums beating,
fifes playing, and colors flying -- they perform military evolutions, marching
and countermarching -- after which Major Camden addresses them:] Major C. WELL,
my brave fellow soldiers, it is engaged: My glowing spirit, with congenial
ardours, marks your glad alacrity: Your promptness and your order far exceed my
utmost expectations! but Liberty can animate to deeds that far exceed all
common credibility! The Rights of Man, my friends -- auspicious Liberty! --
these are our objects.


Soldiers. Huzza for Liberty! huzza for Liberty!


Major C. We have a Leader, my brave friends -- the Patriot WASHINGTON -- who,
for the Rights of Freemen, hazards his valued life and all his dearest hopes,
greatly refusing every compensation!


Soldiers. Long live the glorious WASHINGTON! Long live our noble General!
Huzza for WASHINGTON and Liberty!


Major C. When power oppressive shall be crushed before him, and Independence
on firm base established, then will our General, like another Quintus, gladly
put off the robes of power, and seek, amid his loved Vernonian haunts, those
calm enjoyments which attend on virtue!


Soldiers. Huzza for WASHINGTON and Independence!


Major C. Frenchmen espouse our cause -- Frenchmen have joined our battles;
and, fighting by our side, the brave Fayette their leader, they will augment
our triumphs!


Soldiers. Long live the gallant French!


Major C. Our guardian Legislators issue their wise decrees -- their utmost
efforts ardently combining, up to their best abilities they will reward us. The
Congress, fellow soldiers, are our protecting Fathers!


Soldiers. [Throw up their hats.] God protect the Congress! We will fight and
die for the Congress!


Major C. Lastly, my friends, remember, though it is an arduous struggle, yet
your best interests are all at stake -- your wives -- your children -- your
liberties -- THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA! If we are subjugated, we are no more a
Nation!


Soldiers. We will defend our Liberties! -- we will defend the People! Long
live America! Long live our freeborn Nation!


[ Drums beat -- fifes play Washington's March -- Soldiers form a procession,
and, headed by Major Camden, pass off the stage.] [ Mr. Rambleton comes
forward.] Ramb. My soul is wrought up to a degree of extacy! my brave, brave
boy! I glory in my son! How regular the movements of the soldiers! their
evolutions would have done honor to the best disciplined troops in Europe!

Thank Heaven, my inquiries relative to Louisa have hitherto proved very
satisfactory, and I hasten to complete my investigation.

[Exit.
SCENE -- A Parlour at Mrs. Montague's. [Enter Harriot, followed by Obadiah.]
Harriot. Well, Obadiah, and how did you manage?


Ob. Odds flesh! why, I thought as how I should never have found un, Miss.


Harriot. You should have gone directly to Mr. Stanhope's.


Ob. Adds wauns! Miss Harriot, and zo I did; but you zaid I must zee un myself;
and zo I could na find un -- Adds rabit it, if I did not chase all over the
town.


Harriot. And so, then, you have not seen Mr. Stanhope?


Ob. O yes, Miss -- yes, yes, I have zeed un.


Harriot. And you told him I would comply with his request?


Ob. Yes, Miss; but a murrain deal of trouble I had first, though.


Harriot. Well -- and come, what did he say?


Ob. Wauns! Miss, he was nation glad.


Harriot. But what did he say?


Ob. Why, Miss, he zaid -- he zaid -- why, he did not zay nothing, Miss.


Harriot. Said nothing!


Ob. No, Miss, nothing -- he, he, he!


Harriot. What do you laugh at, Impertinence?


Ob. Do'ont be angry, Miss Harriot; but I cann^ help laughing; zee! he gave me
all this money for my good news, and something else for somebody else, besides
all this here.


Harriot. What is it, in the name of goodness?


Ob. But will not mistress blame I, now, Miss Harriot?


Harriot. Fear nothing, Obadiah.


Ob. But I fears mortally.


Harriot. Fiddlestick! Obadiah, I will take care you shall not be blamed; and,
if you have any thing further to say, pr'ythee let us have it.


Ob. I have nothing to zay, Miss; but, if I was sure I should not be turned out
of doors, [takes a letter, with gestures expressive of awkward fear, from his
pocket] I would give you this here letter.


Harriot. [Snatches the paper and reads.] Um, um, um!


Ob. Addsniggers! Miss Harriot, you are nation strong.


Harriot. You have acquitted yourself admirably, Obadiah -- reach me my scarf
-- Do you be secret, [gives him money] and expect my future favor.


Ob. All this for me, Miss Harriot? what a power of money it is! Adds rabbit
me, if I blab -- he, he, he! Well, I vows, now, I Will zee the Panorama, and the
lion, and all the wild beasts -- ay, and I Will zee a play, too.


Harriot. You may go, Obadiah -- remember your word.


Ob. Yes, that I wull. [Looks at the money.] Why, what a lucky house I have got
into! Wauns! what a mavelous lucky whelp I be!

[Exit, bowing and scraping his feet.
Harriot. That I am not, strictly speaking, within the line of discretion, I am
fully sensible -- Alberto himself will set me down as a mad girl, although I do
but comply with his pressing entreaties -- But what with mothers and cousins,
there is no such thing as getting a moment to one's self, here; and so, for
this once, I Will even sally forth.

[Exit Harriot.
SCENE -- The Inn. [Mr. and Mrs. Vansittart -- Mrs. Vansittart discovered,
holding a miniature picture.] Mrs. V. O the dear pretty creature! set all round
with rose diamonds of the first water! I vow, husband, it is the j^^^teelest
thing I ever saw.


Vans. Rose tiamonts of the first vater! I say, Torothy, you hat petter put it
on the shentleman's toilette again -- you petter not pe mettleing -- I tell
you, Torothy, you petter not pe mettleing.


Mrs. V. Why, Mr. Vansittart, I would not do an unperlite thing, any more than
another; but this Mr. Rambleton is most pertinaciously a spyington from the
British. You see he has not a paper dollar in the world! nothing but good hard
English crowns and guineas -- his Irish servant has his pockets lined with
money; and he says that his master's trunks are as rich as the mines of Poteldo.


Vans. Vel, and vat then?


Mrs. V. Why, as sure as you are alive, Major Camden is his accomplishment.


Vans. Vel, and vat then?


Mrs. V. Why, then it is just such another case as Arnold and Andre.


Vans. Vel, and vat then?


Mrs. V. Why, then it would be doing a jonteel thing, and a patrolitical thing,
to inform against them to the Committee of Safety.


Vans. And vat shoult ve get py that?


Mrs. V. Every thing, husband; for, while our gentlemen were had before the
Committee, we could ply the Irishman with his favorite liquor, and, when he
was secured, break open the locks, seize the cash, and make the best of our way
to New York, which is at no great distance; and there remain concealed, until
opportunity offered to quit this Freetonian land altogether.


Vans. Cot a' mercy! I smell a rat, at this present time.


Mrs. V. And then no one could say, black is the white of our eye; for we have
but served ourselves at the expense of abomination tories, and thus done a
jonteel thing for our country.


Vans. Why, Torothy, Torothy! thou have creat vistoms, ant I have creat
occasions, at this present time.


Mrs. V. Well, husband, do you give information instantly; and, as soon as his
toryship is secured, you shall take this picture to the jeweller's, and pretend
that it belonged to one of the rich relations, of which you have so often
boasted, and that you are obliged to part with it; and thus we shall find money
to supply ourselves with cloaks, masks, etc. etc. in which we shall be so
disguised, that our own natural-born fathers would not know us.


Vans. Vel, vel, Torothy -- put I tremple all over like an aspin leaf; ant I
have creat fears ve shall pring ourselves to shame!


Mrs. V. What ails you, husband? -- the goods of a tory are free plunder! --
why, we are doing the most handsomest thing in the world; and, as we shall not
break the trunks until the last moment, we are perfectly secure. Away to the
Committee of Safety -- away! I say. [pushing him off.]


Vans. O mercy on us! mercy on us! I to think there pe creat tangers ant creat
tifficulties.

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- A sequestered Walk, beautifully shaded. [Alberto Stanhope and Harriot
Montague are discovered, sitting on the turfed seats, and engaged in close
conversation.] Harriot. Well, Alberto, I can only repeat, that I do most
sincerely regret this clandestine intercourse; in compliance with your
importunities, I have given you this meeting. The world considers me as a gay,
unthinking girl; yet I have my moments of reflection. My preference of you I
will not deny; but the, if possible, augmented indulgence of my mother, has
roused to action every proper sentiment, and the highest sense of the duty
which I owe her.


Alberto. Perhaps, Harriot, your heart now decides in favor of Camden! but let
him take care --

[They rise.
Harriot. Pshaw, pshaw! Stanhope, this is exactly in his style. [Throws herself
into a fencing attitude.] Yet, don't put yourself in a passion, man; for I
protest, I begin to think he has absolutely thrown off his allegiance, and that
he is, at this very moment, fomenting a rebellion against his sovereign lady!


Alberto. What means my Harriot?


Harriot. Why, enter nous, I suspect he has conceived a most violent penchant
for Emily Lovegrove.


Alberto. Heaven grant it.


Harriot. It would be delectable! they would make the most charming sentimental
pair in the world! and I take every opportunity of leaving them together, not
doubting but their private interviews will wonderfully increase their tendresse.


Alberto. Does my Harriot draw this conclusion from her own experience?


Harriot. [Striking the powder out of his hair with her fan.] Yes, villain; and
hence she resolves to make no more assignations.


Alberto. Charming vivacity! [seizing her hand.]


Harriot. Unhand me, wretch!


Alberto. But what are we to do, my angel?


Harriot. Do! why, sit down, like the babes in the wood, and cry ourselves to
sleep, and see what little robin red-breast will prepare our leafy covering.


Alberto. Pr'ythee, do not thus trifle with my feelings -- You have forbid my
application to your mother.


Harriot. Because I knew it would be ineffectual.


Alberto. [Again taking her hand.] In the name of Heaven, how shall I proceed?
Shall I engage my father to intercede for me?


Harriot. Why, ah! these managing people understand each other best; and it is
as well to proceed in the good old fashion way: [looks at her watch.] But it is
time for me to scamper. Adieu -- you will make one of our dancers this evening?


Alberto. Enchanting girl! I shall attend you with rapture!

[Exeunt.
SCENE -- An Apartment at Mrs. Montague's. [Enter Mrs. Montague and Emily.]
Mrs. M. Emily, where is Harriot?


Emily. I cannot tell, Madam; but she is fond of walking, and, I suppose, is
improving this fine day, by indulging in her favorite exercise.


Mrs. M. Emily, young people generally understand each other. There was a time,
when I conceived the heart of my girl entirely devoted to Major Camden; but she
has of late given me reason to regard her attachment as problematical. Am I to
impute this apparent change to caprice, or to a growing disgust?


Emily. [Confused and hesitating.] Why, really, Madam, it is not for me to say.


Mrs. M. Your looks, Emily, and your manner, convince me that you could say a
great deal! I am engaged in gratitude, in honor, to Major Camden -- my promise
is irrevocable. I had the full consent of Harriot; and the world expects their
speedy union. Tell me, Emily, if you know aught which can militate against my
plans?


Emily. [Trembling and blushing excessively.] Pray, Madam, excuse me! pray do!


[Enter Harriot.] Emily. What a fortunate relief! [Aside.]


Mrs. M. Harriot, where have you been rambling?


Harriot. Rambling, sure enough, mamma! why, half the town over; and I am so
delightfully fatigued --


Mrs. M. Well, my love, take off your scarf, and let us have a little serious
chit-chat.


Emily. Have I your leave to retire, Madam?


Mrs. M. Go, my good girl.

[Exit Emily.
Tell me, Harriot -- Have you ceased to love Major Camden?

Harriot. To love him, mamma! why, that is a business I have never yet begun.


Mrs. M. My dear Harriot, I am serious.


Harriot. Well then, mamma, seriously, although I esteem Major Camden, I can
never marry him; for I can never love him, mamma.


Mrs. M. If you esteem him, my dear, it is sufficient.


Harriot. God bless you, Madam! you would not surely insist that my hand should
be a solitary gift?


Mrs. M. Love, my dear, is a chimera, which has undone your mother!


Harriot. Madam!


Mrs. M. For your advantage, Harriot, I will sketch some particulars of my
life, which I had intended to keep forever from your knowledge.


Harriot. If you please, mamma.


Mrs. M. When I married your father, although I regarded him as the first of
men, yet I felt not for him what is called, love.


Harriot. [archly.] And was you very happy with my father, Madam?


Mrs. M. I understand you, Harriot. I engaged in a round of dissipation -- I
continued the most censurable pursuits; and at length imagined myself tenderly
attached to a person, who was every way the inferior of your father.


Harriot. Well, Madam.


Mrs. M. Your father continued his forbearance, until convinced, by
circumstances, that he had a rival in my affections! when, leaving me at our
country seat, without a single remonstrance, and taking with him your brother,
then only four years old, he departed for this city, leading me to expect he
would return with the coming day! [weeps.]


Harriot. Dear Madam, proceed!


Mrs. M. You were then but two months old: The first post brought me a letter,
in which he informed me, that, as he was convinced I was unalterably attached
to another, he should bid me an eternal adieu! -- that he took with him our
son, as the only solace of his exile -- that he left me the uninterrupted
possession of his town and country house, with a sufficient income to support
myself and daughter -- and he concluded by wishing me, with the man of my
heart, all that felicity on which he supposed my fond imagination had
calculated.


Harriot. For God's sake, Madam, proceed!


Mrs. M. I came immediately to town; but he had embarked on board a ship, bound
to some part of Europe! From season to season, for a long time, I encouraged
hope; but, although nineteen years have since revolved, not a single syllable,
either respecting himself or my son, has ever blessed my ears!


Harriot. Gracious Heaven! both my father and my brother may be yet alive!


Mrs. M. Alas! No -- I feel it is impossible! my wounds bleed afresh at this
recital! they have long since bid adieu to a world, to which I am chained a
miserable captive! [weeps agonizedly.]


Harriot. Forbear! best of mothers! forbear these tears. Surely, surely, your
experience does not decide in favor of an Hymen unblest by love!


Mrs. M. Observe me, girl; although I was indiscreet, I was never criminal; and
the moment of your father's departure convinced me of my error -- the charm was
broke -- I detested the author of my sufferings -- I never after saw him; and,
to my great satisfaction, I learned that he immediately quitted the continent.
I dwelt with unutterable admiration on your father's virtues; and had I
possessed worlds, I would have parted with them all to have purchased his
return!


Harriot. Ah! Madam, your story is indeed instructive: But --


Mrs. M. But what, my love? -- I am indebted to Major Camden for my life -- you
have received him with approbation -- he is every way worthy; and, next to
yourself, Harriot, he is now the dearest object of my affections! -- But alas!
my love, you are ill -- my woe-fraught narrative has been too oppressive!
Heaven guard my child! Let me lead you to your chamber.

[Exit Mrs. Montague, supporting Harriot.
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
No. LXXXIII.
THE TRAVELLER RETURNED, continued. ACT FOURTH.
SCENE -- An Apartment in the Inn. [Enter Patrick.] OW, if ever I got into such
a place before now -- by my soul, the Mistress of this same tavern, do you see,
is the prettiest bit of a cratur, as a body may say, that ever a man set eyes
on; and, may I never see Killmallock again, if she is not better than a ship
load of peraters, just landed from the county of Cork -- But here comes my
master, now.


[Enter Mr Rambleton.] Ramb. Well, Patrick, how wears the day, and what sort of
a house have we got into?


Patr. Ow, as to the day, I don't bodder myself about that, at all, at all;
for, do you see, I don't matter time three skips of a grasshopper; but, as for
the house, Ow, if I was in my own sweet Killmallock, in the county of Limerick,
in dear Ireland itshelf, my own born mother could not be better to me; why,
they have already given me three breakfasts, and as many dinners; and, as to
drink, my dear honey, ow, let me alone for that, Master.


Ramb. Why, I believe, indeed, thou have taken a plentiful portion of the good
creature; [loud knocking without] but see if thou can open the door.


[Patrick opens the door, Officer enters and gives Rambleton a letter.] Ramb.
Hah! where can I have picked up a scribbling acquaintance already?

[Reads.] Mr. Rambleton,
By virtue of the power delegated to us by the people, we summon you to appear
before us, the Select Committee of Public Safety for the City of --.
Information has been lodged against you as a spy, employed by the British
government; and we have authorized the bearer of this notification to bring you
before us, for the purpose of examination.

ARTHUR VIGILANT,
Secretary of the Committee of Public Safety.


Ramb. [appears much agitated.] Can you inform me from what source this
officious interference originated?


Officer. Sir, my orders are to attend you to the honorable Committee, without
answering any questions; but, you may depend on receiving every indulgence,
that the nature of the case, and the circumstances of our country will admit.


Ramb. Thank you, Sir. Gracious God! If Harry Camden is the informer, my hopes
of happiness will, indeed, prove the dream of the moment!

[Aside. [Walks about, agitated and distressed.]
Patr. Ow, then, if it is not a shame now, to be after boddering a stranger in
his own country. I say, now, little Honey, cannot you be taking your shelf off
a bit, my dear, and lave my poor master all alone, with his own faithful
Patrick O'Neal, do you see?


Officer. I do but my duty, friend.


Patr. Your juty, do you call it! Ow, by my soul, Mr. Tipstaff, this is the
first time I ever heard say it was a juty to bodder a man in his own country
after he had got into foreign parts! Hark'ye, little Honey! will I put a
remembrance upon you now? -- suppose you and I should take a bit of a knock for
love, my dear?


Ramb. Patrick, you have nothing to do in this business. Sir, I attend you.


Patr. Arrah, my dear, now, it will never be said that Patrick O'Neal suffered
his master to get into the limboes alone, and so I will be after going with
you, that, if we will both be taken prisoners, we may rescue one another.


Ramb. Patrick, I have nothing to fear -- I have valuable articles in this
house, and I entrust them to your care.


Patr. Arrah, now, my dear, let them same articles take care of themselves, I
shall be after going with your worship, do you see.


Ramb. Patrick, I command you not to quit the house.


Patr. Arrah, then I shall stay behind; for, he that is willian enough not to
plase a man in distress, ought to have been assassinated twenty years before he
was born -- so he had.

[Exeunt Officer and Rambleton. Ow, if I was but in dear Ireland now, in the
borough of Killmallock, in the county of Limerick, may be, I Would soon see the
white boys about me -- may be I would; and then my shelf would be taking my
poor master out of jurance -- so I would; but a wet sorrow is better than a dry
one, as the saying is, and so I Will be after another little sip of comfort, so I
will.

[Exit.
SCENE -- An Apartment in Mrs. Montague's House. [Enter Obadiah, picking his
teeth.] Ob. Well, I Will swamp it, now, I have made as good a dinner as if I had
eaten baked beans and pudding -- Ouns, I could not fare better in Natick.


[Enter Mr. Stanhope, senior.] Stanh. Is your mistress at home, Obadiah?


Ob. At hume, Zir! he, he, he, I cant zay, Zir -- I Will ax her if she chooses to
be at hume, Zir.

[Exit Obadiah.
Stanh. May I never take the field, but this is a fine musical custom, which
our new formed States have adopted -- we are not always in a disposition to see
our best friends, and we have a right to be at home just when we please.


[Enter Obadiah.] Ob. Yes, Zir, you may zee mistress -- walk after me, Zir,
walk after me.

[Exit Mr. Stanhope, following Obadiah.
SCENE -- A Parlour -- Mrs. Montague seated. [Enter Obadiah, introducing Mr.
Stanhope.] [Exit Obadiah. Stanh. Good morrow, fair lady.


Mrs. M. Your most obedient Mr. Stanhope, I hope you are in health, Sir?


Stanh. Yes, Madam, partly; and yet I am not as young as I was fifty years ago,
neither.


Mrs. M. Time, Sir, imprints its footsteps upon every thing visible.


Stanh. And yet, Madam, may I never take the field, if I do not think you look
as young as you did twenty years ago.


Mrs. M. O dear, Sir!


Stanh. Yes you do, yes you do; and if I was twenty years younger, Madam, I do
assure you I should feel strongly inclined to strike about myself.


Mrs. M. Strike about, Sir!


Stanh. Yes, widow, I would make my bow, squeeze your ladyship's hand, whisper
soft things in your ear, hint indirectly at marriage, and publish the bans in
less time than you could finish your wedding cap.


Mrs. M. You are disposed to be pleasant, Sir! but as this is a subject on
which I never jest, I beg leave to say, that had you the faculty of renewing
your youth, and were to advance with the most serious proposals, I should not
hesitate in putting my negative thereon.


Stanh. Indeed! Well I profess this is somewhat surprising! but mayhap I am not
to your taste; do you not hold matrimony to be a musical Musical, a term used
in many of the interior parts of the New England States, to express every thing
convenient, excellent or elegant: thus, they say a musical horse, day, garment,
etc. etc.
thing.


Mrs. M. O yes, musical enough; but I am principled against second marriages,
Sir.


Stanh. O, is that all? well, then I hope my son may succeed.


Mrs. M. Your son, Sir?


Stanh. Yes, Madam, my son has taken a violent fancy to a good handsome young
woman of whom you have the disposal. I perfectly approve his choice, and have
waited on you to endeavor to obtain your consent.


Mrs. M. Can my niece have made a conquest of such importance already? [Aside.]
Why, Sir, the young woman you mention is calculated, both in mind and person,
to command affection as well as esteem; had her father lived, her consequence
would doubtless have been augmented; but I shall make every effort in my power,
which I can suppose will be for her advantage.


Stanh. Madam, she cannot stand in need of proper aid, under your care.


Mrs. M. Sir, it is my wish to discharge the duty of a mother.


Stanh. I never heard any thing more musical in my life, Madam; may I inform my
son that he has your approbation?


Mrs. M. Sir, if your son can render the young lady propitious, he shall have
my best wishes.


Stanh. Madam, I was made to believe that you were not favorably inclined in
this affair, but the best are liable to mistakes; you have done me a very
particular kindness, Madam; Alberto will run mad with joy! and I will make all
possible dispatch to inform him of his happiness. Sweet lady, I take my leave,
and shall ever be your most obedient humble servant.


Mrs. M. Sir, your most obedient. [Exit Stanhope.] Quite a whimsical old
gentleman, on my word; his way of thinking, too, is rather singular, for
Emily's fortune is a mere trifle, and Alberto, accomplished as he is, might
form the most aspiring expectations. I will take the earliest opportunity of
sounding my niece, and govern myself by her wishes.


SCENE -- Another apartment; Harriot and Emily seated on a Sofa. Harriot. Well,
Emily, although I have confessed to you that this little heart of mine beats
only for Alberto Stanhope, yet you still remain as profound as a pedant who
studies obscurity, or as close as Olivia in the Good natured Man. Come, child,
you had better make a confession.


Emily. Dear Harriot, permit me to be a miser of my woes! I would slide through
life, performing my little part without observation, and --


Harriot. [Humorously putting her hand on Emily's mouth.] For heaven's sake,
Emily, be not thus humble! Without observation, say you! why I would rather be
paragraphed in the newspaper, than not distinguished at all.


Emily. Paragraphed in the newspaper!


Harriot. Yes, my dear, although said paragraph should hold me up in the most
ridiculous point of view!


Emily. I cannot conceive of this!


Harriot. Why child, a single scribbler, scratching his malicious noddle, may
fabricate his abuse, and the cynic has only to preface his invidious production
by the little comprehensive monosyllable we think and we wish, while he thus
hands my name to thousands, who would not otherwise have known that I had an
existence.


Emily. Well, but with the knowledge of your existence, they would at the same
time receive an impression that would not be to your honor.


Harriot. Yes, Emily; but their curiosity would be called into action -- it
would impel them to inquire; I should come out an innocent sufferer, be allowed
my full share of merit, and acquire a prodigious deal of consequence; ha! ha!
ha! I protest the very idea is enchanting.


Emily. Mad girl! but however you may divert yourself, I still insist, that
were I to be publicly traduced, I should never enjoy peace afterward!


Harriot. Then you would be very irrational, my dear, for envy is a powerful
stimulus to the misanthropic mind, and merit is ever the mark at which it aims
its most envenomed shafts. But we have strangely wandered from our subject -- I
am positive, Emily, that my friend Camden is not indifferent to you.


Emily. Dear Harriot, spare me.


[ Enter Bridget, who presents a billet to Harriot.] [Exit Bridget. Harriot.
[reads.] Raptures -- um, um, um! Eternal obligations -- um, um, um! Duty -- um,
um, um! Reverence -- O Emily! I am in a delirium of joy! My mamma has
sanctioned my wishes! she consents to my union with Alberto Stanhope! Camden
shall be yours. Adored parent! but I will go this instant, and on my bended
knees I will thank her for her unparalleled goodness.

[Exit Harriot, agitated.
Emily. Well, this is passing strange! my aunt is indeed the noblest of human
beings; yet, that she should thus easily relinquish the favorite wish of her
soul! -- but I will await the issue in my chamber.


SCENE -- The Library; Mrs. Montague is discovered with a Book in her Hand;
Harriot rushes in, and throws herself on her Knees at the Feet of her Mother.
Harriot. O my angelic parent! may ten thousand blessings crown your honored
head! You have indeed made me the happiest of human beings!


Mrs. M. Gracious Heaven! my poor child has lost her reason!


Harriot. No, Madam, reason at this moment imprints on my heart duty, gratitude
and love, to the most condescending parent that ever bore that revered name.


Mrs. M. Rise then, my daughter, and let me know what has thus discomposed you?


Harriot. [Rising.] Here, Madam, [presenting the billet she had received from
Stanhope.] these extatic lines, penned by my Alberto, inform me, that foregoing
your former wishes, you now consent to crown our youthful hopes by your
maternal approbation.


Mrs. M. [Taking the billet.] His extacies should have been addressed to Emily
Lovegrove.


Harriot. To Emily Lovegrove!!!

[Aside.
Mrs. M. [After reading the billet.] You have, child, acted very reprehensibly
in concealing your inclinations thus long from your mother.


Harriot. I had hoped to have conquered them, Madam, and to have bent me to my
duty.


Mrs. M. I am disposed to think the best, Harriot. I had thought the father of
Alberto solicited me for my niece, and I consented that his son should address
Miss Lovegrove. Imagining that you were already regarded as the wife of Camden,
I could not expect to receive proposals for you.


Harriot. [Weeping.] Oh Madam, how cruel is my situation!!!


Mrs. M. To say truth, child, I pity you; and I lament my own embarrassments; I
cannot break the heart of Harry Camden! he interests me more and more every
time I behold him! I have thought, Harriot, that he bears a strong resemblance
to your father! But compose yourself, my love; enjoy, with your accustomed
vivacity, your evening's entertainment; with the coming day I will converse
with Camden, and in the mean time hope every thing from the indulgence of your
mother.

[Exeunt.
END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
No. LXXXIV.
THE TRAVELLER RETURNED, concluded. ACT FIFTH.
SCENE -- The Inn. [Enter Patrick, tipsy, with a mug in his hand -- he hickups
and sings:] OW! Patrick's not drunk, to be sure,
Although in the liquor quite drowned; [Drinks.]
The wine in his stomach secure,
His head for pure joy it runs round. [ Drinks.]
Tol de re lol -- tol de re lol.
I Will stand by my master all night,
And sleep in his hammock all day;
And Patrick, though dead in a fright,
Shall never be running away. [ Drinks.]
Tol de re lol -- tol de re lol.
My shelf shall be fighting for him;
I Will follow, although I stand still;
Ow! if I am drowned, I can swim;
The world it runs round like a mill. [ Drinks.]
Tol de re lol -- tol de re lol.
Well, now, if Mistress Van -- Van -- juce take me, if I have not forgot -- If
she was to see me, she would be after taking me off -- Don't they call it
taking off? Well, now, if Master Rambleton should get out of the limboes,
himshelf would be apt to think I was a little the worse for the good cratur, or
so; and so I Will even turn in; and after taking a nap, may be I would be sober
again. Here Is good luck to us, Master Rambleton. [Drinks.]

[Exit, staggering. [Enter Mr. Vansittart.] Vans. Cot a' mercy! where can
Torothy pe, at this present time? I have creat occasions for manhoot -- It is a
polt untertaking; ant I treamt all last night of coffins, cross pones and the
callows. O tear! I am all over of a colt sweat.


[Mrs. Vansittart, having forced the trunks, enters, followed by two servants,
bearing bags of money -- she slips her foot, falls head foremost into the
parlour, and, in her fall, overturns a large screen.] Vans. [Roars out.] Cot a'
mercy! Cot a' mercy!


Mrs. V. [Rising.] Why, husband, what ails you? I am sure you are an unmannerly
fellow, to leave me sprawling thus.


Vans. [Trembling excessively.] Torothy, Torothy! vat shall ve to, Torothy?


Mrs. V. Do! why, put on this here mask, and this cloak.

[She helps him on with the cloak.
Vans. [Still trembling and terrified.] Oh! Torothy, Torothy! let me tie teat,
if I have not creat occasions to tislike this pusiness -- it has creat tangers!


Mrs. V. Well, well -- never mind -- Come, let us away. [They all mask.] We will
take the road to New York, through the woods, and over the mountains.

[ Exeunt, bearing the treasure -- Vansittart still agitated.
SCENE -- A genteel Parlour at Mrs. Montague's. [ Mrs. Montague, etc. etc. all
in full dress -- Alberto and Harriot d^ncing a minuet -- all the rest of the
company sitting. -- Obadiah (...), and presents a folded parcel to Mrs.
Montague, who reads, and, after unfolding another paper, exclaims:] Gracious
God! my own picture! the very miniature, which the man I so deeply injured was
accustomed to wear next his heart! Oh! Harriot, Harriot! I am now, indeed,
undone! Some villain has murdered your father!

Harriot. For Heaven's sake, Madam, explain.


Mrs. M. Read that paper, my dear; read it aloud; and advise me, my friends,
what step I am to take.


Harriot. [Reads.] Madam,
Vansittart the innkeeper, some hours since, parted with the enclosed
miniature for a sum of money, by no means adequate to its value. As the picture
was set by me, I could not but recognize it. If you think it necessary to take
any steps respecting it, you must be speedy; for I shrewdly suspect, Vansittart
is on the point of decamping. I have the honor to be, Madam,

Your most obedient humble servant, JEREMY TRUEWORTH.



Major C. Madam, Vansittart is my landlord -- I will fly instantly, and force
him to confess by what means he obtained this picture.


Mrs. M. Do, dear Harry: But before you go, it is necessary you should know I
am ignorant of the fate of my husband, and that this picture was in his
possession when he left me. [weeps.]


Alberto. Camden, permit me to be the companion of your enterprise.


Major C. With all my heart, Stanhope.

[Exeunt Camden and Stanhope.
Mrs. M. O my children! my very soul seems to die within me!


Harriot. Dear Emily, assist me to bear my mother to her apartment.

[Harriot and Emily bear off Mrs. Montague, and the scene closes.]
SCENE -- The Inn. [Enter Patrick, who is supposed to have slept off the
effects of his liquor, and who raves and stamps about outrageously.] Patr.
Murder! hanging! drowning and quartering! why, every thing which ever happened
in this beggarly, rascally world; ow! it was every bit of it no more than the
skip of a flea to this -- the trunks are all wide open -- there is not a soul
left in the house; and nobody that I meet can give me a bit of an answer! -- my
poor master clapped up, and Patrick O'Neal in a strange outlandish country! May
be the Indian savages shall take my shelf prisoner too -- may be they shall.
Ow! what had I to do, to be after running such a wild-goose chase? But here is
some one coming: I Will give um a little bit of a taste -- so I will. Oh! murder!
robbery! bloodshed! fire and thunder!


[Enter Major Camden, Alberto Stanhope, Officer and Soldiers.] Major C.
Patrick, for Heaven's sake, what is the matter? Where is Mr. Vansittart?


Patr. Ow! Master Camden, Methuselah himshelf could not tell that, I believe.


Major C. What do you mean, Patrick? Is he not in the house?


Patr. Ow! I have searched the house from garret to cellar, and the juce a bit
of a human soul, except the cat, is there to be found; and what is more, they
have broken open all my master's trunks, and boddered him out of a million
guineas more than he had, my dear.


Major C. Good God! is it possible? Robbed the trunks! Where was you, Patrick?


Patr. Ow! you may say that -- shame burn my cheek! My master, do you see, had
gotten into the limboes; and so, to make my shelf asy, I took a drop, or so,
and fell fast asleep, and then, before I was awake, the deed was done.


Major C. But what do you mean by your master's being in the limboes, Patrick?


Patr. Why, Master Tipstaff here -- Is Not it Tipstaff ye call him? -- kidnapped
him; that is all, Honey.


Officer. Information was given to the Committee of Public Safety against Mr.
Rambleton, and I had the honor of attending him before them, Sir.


Major C. Good heavens! I must hasten to his assistance. Mr. Stanhope, I may
want your aid. The probability is, that the villainous plunderers have taken
the road to New York; and, by the assistance of these soldiers, Sir, [speaking
to the Officer] you may surprise and bring them back -- their booty will retard
their flight. Patrick, you will accompany the officer; you can best designate
your master's property.


Patr. Ow! that I shall, with the biggest pleasure in life, Sir.


Major C. Mr. Stanhope, we must away to the Committee.

[Exeunt severally, in opposite directions.
SCENE -- An Apartment in another Public House. [Mr. Rambleton and the Members
of the Committee of Safety seated round the table.] Ramb. Gentlemen, you have
detained me many hours -- I could clear up all your doubts; but I have private
reasons for wishing to remain concealed at present. Yet, however you may be
disposed to call my veracity in question, you have so highly obliged me, by
assuring me that you received no intelligence respecting me from Major Camden,
that I shall not easily take offense.


1 st Memb. Your attachment to Major Camden would almost induce us to suspect
the fidelity of that young soldier.


2 d Memb. Major Camden is a brave, a gallant officer; but so was General
Arnold!


3 d Memb. The defection of Arnold has rendered us abundantly more wary; we
have every thing at stake, Sir.


Ramb. I commend your caution, Gentlemen. I have already narrated my accidental
meeting with Major Camden; but perhaps it might be agreeable to summon the
Major; and we will submit to cross examination.


1 st Memb. This, in my opinion, Gentlemen, is a proper motion.


[Enter a Servant.] Serve. Major Camden and Mr. Stanhope crave admittance,
Gentlemen.


2 d Memb. Let them enter immediately.

[Exit Servant.
3 d Memb. This looks well.


[Enter Major Camden and Mr. Stanhope.] Major C. May it please this honorable
body, Mr. Stanhope and myself wait on you to offer our joint bonds for the
release of Mr. Rambleton; his affairs stand in immediate need of his presence.


Ramb. What mean you, Sir?


Major C. The villain Vansittart, having robbed you of every article of value,
has absconded!


Members of the Committee. [all exclaim] Vansittart! the very man who lodged
the information!


Ramb. The picture of my Louisa, then, is ravished from me!


Major C. The picture, Sir! [Pauses.] Yes -- it is possible! -- Vansittart sold
the picture to a jeweller; and it is now in the hands of Mrs. Montague, whose
soul is harrowed up by agonizing fears for him whose property it was.


Ramb. Oh! give me way; and let me fly, the messenger of peace!


Major C. Explain yourself, Mr. Rambleton.


Ramb. If she can feel so deeply, disguises are no longer necessary. My real
name is Montague! the husband of the lady whom you mention.


Major C. Good heavens! what a discovery!


Ramb. Having reason to call in question the tenderness of my wife, I meant
this very evening to have learned her sentiments, under a disguise which should
have veiled me from her knowledge; and even now, I must insist on being myself
the bearer of the tidings of my return: In her emotions I mean to read my fate.


Major C. Upon the truth and firm affection of Mrs. Montague, I Would stake my
hopes of happiness.


Ramb. With the good leave of this most honorable Committee, we go to make the
experiment.


1 st Memb. We can no longer doubt.


2 d Memb. Or if we do, these gentlemen will become responsible.


Major C. Most certainly. What say you, Stanhope?


Alberto. Ah! to the utmost farthing I can call my own. [Committee rises.]

[Exeunt severally, in opposite directions.
SCENE -- A Mountain and adjacent Wood. [Enter Mr. and Mrs. Vansittart, with
Servants -- Mrs. Vansittart weary.] Mrs. V. Oh! I cannot go another step -- Was
ever woman so completely fatigued? This wood will clandictedly conceal us. It
would not be doing the thing jonteelly, to go any further tonight.


Vans. Shenteelly! Why, who ever thought of shenteelly, at this present time?
Come along, vise -- come along, Torothy, I say.

[He pulls her after him.
Mrs. V. [Struggling.] Dear Mr. Vansittart, you have no alegunt idears.


Vans. Elegant itears! Cot a' mercy! Torothy, you woult provoke a saint!


Mrs. V. I will not proceed -- I insist on sitting down.

[They lay down their booty, and seat themselves.
Vans. Vell, if you must pe opeyt, you must; put, vise, vise! I tell you no
coot vill come of our expetition.


[Enter Patrick, Officer, and Soldiers, in different directions -- they all
rise up, shriek, and endeavor to make their escape; but are severally seized
by their pursuers -- Mr. Vansittart falls flat on his face, and roars
tremendously -- Patrick raises him.] Vans. O tear, plesset Mr. Patrick! I have
creat occasions for mercy, at this present time; ant so, if you vill pe so coot
as to parton me, I will take my piple oath, that I will never commit another
roppery, as long as I to live in this here vorlt.


Patr. Why, look'ye, my dear, it is none of my affair, do you see; but, as you are
taken prisoner, or the like of that, my shelf shall be after making a promise,
that if ye cry pecavia, Master Rambleton shall never knock your words down your
throat -- he never bodders a poor fellow who cannot help himshelf, Honey.


Mrs. V. What Is that you say, husband? I desire you would behave jonteelly. I
say it is an alegunt thing, to take the property of a vile tory, and our
country will thank us for it.


Vans. Holt your tongue, Torothy -- holt your vicket tongue, I say.


Patr. Ow! lave off your palavering, woman; you had better be after coming
along. Ow! I wish I had the white boys here, for your sake; I would have you
fairly trounced -- so I would; and after that you might be carried before the
Justice: But humsomever, do you see, these same goods are all Master Rambleton's;
and so, Master Tipstaff, you may do your juty again, if you plase.

[Exit, with Officer and Soldiers, bearing the booty, and pushing the
delinquents before them.
SCENE -- A Parlour in Mrs. Montague's House. [Enter Harriot and Emily.]
Harriot. My mamma, thank Heaven, has reasoned herself into a degree of
composure.


[Enter Mr. Rambleton, Major Camden, Stanhope senior, and Alberto.] Major C.
Miss Montague, this stranger [Rambleton bows] has some knowledge of the
picture, which he will communicate only to your mother.


Harriot. I will inform my mamma immediately, Sir.

[Exit Harriot, accompanied by Emily.
Ramb. Exquisite beauty! a perfect transcript of her mother! It was with
difficulty I could forbear folding her to my bosom.


Alberto. Miss Montague's mind is a fit accompaniment for her exterior. It is
strange, Sir, [speaking to his father] that you should so immediately recognize
Mr. Rambleton.


Stanh. Body on me, why he was my old school-fellow! ah, and a musical boy he
was too. Why neighbor Montague, my name is not Stanhope if I do not mightily
rejoice to see thee.


[Enter Mrs. Montague, led by Harriot and Emily.] Mrs. M. [She starts back,
draws away her hands, clasps them in an extacy of joy, and exclaims,] Oh all ye
saints and angels! it is my husband! my long lost, highly injured, and dear
lamented husband; [rushing forward, she is on the point of falling, but is
saved in the arms of Rambleton.]


Ramb. O my Louisa, this one luxurious moment is a vast, an ample compensation
for every evil which I ever suffered!


Mrs. M. [Kneeling.] Can you forgive me, Edward? my heart was never in fault;
each day, since your departure, has been marked by suffering; and every passing
hour has witnessed my regrets!


Ramb. [Raising her.] No more, my love, I have been too severe^ But rigid
honor demanded much, and I was not apprized how deeply you were wounded!

[Mrs. Montague leans on Emily, Harriot comes forward and kneels.]
Harriot. And is there yet in store for Harriot Montague a father's benediction?


Ramb. [Clasping her to his bosom.] Come, my sweet cherub, thy father's heart
is open to receive thee, and thou art far dearer to his soul than the life
blood which warms him to existence.


Mrs. M. Edward, one fond impatient question yet trembles on my tongue -- our
son --


Ramb. Loved Louisa, he is doubly yours, by virtue and by nature! Camden, come
to my bosom! My love, behold our son!


Major C. What say you, Sir?


Mrs. M. Harry Camden! Astonishing!!


Ramb. Yes, my soul's treasure -- behold the boy whom you so often have pressed
to that maternal bosom! E're I became a voluntary exile, sojourning in
Virginia, I left our son with Mr. Camden, a man in whom my soul confided; and
'twas from me, my son, that your supposed father received the letters that
placed you in the military line.


Major C. I do remember something of mystery about those letters; and with
duteous veneration I kneel to such a father.

[Kneels.
Ramb. Rise, my brave boy -- Cato himself might glory in such a son!


Major C. [Bowing on the hand of Mrs. Montague.] Madam, I tender never ending
duty! my elevation shall be marked by filial affection!


Mrs. M. Harry, no words can speak the strong sensations which mingle in my
bosom!


Major C. Sister, [to Harriot] thou art now every thing a fond transported
brother can desire.


Harriot. I glory in my brother, Sir.


Stanh. A good musical discovery this! and may I never dance at Alberto's
wedding, if I do not think it is best to strike while the iron is hot. [Aside.]
My son, neighbor, has, I assure you, a very warm heart for Miss Harriot; and I
cannot but hope that you will not stand in the way of the young people.


Ramb. It shall be my care to break no tender ties, Sir; if he wins my
daughter's love, he shall have my approbation.


Alberto. To gain that blissful summit, my most arduous efforts shall not be
wanting.


Major C. [introducing Emily Lovegrove.] Your beauteous niece, Miss Lovegrove,
Sir, to whose superior virtues your son would fain do justice.


Ramb. [taking the hand of Emily.] I understand you, Harry; but what says our
daughter Emily?


Emily. That while she blesses Heaven for your return, she marks, with glowing
admiration, your brave heroic son.


Ramb. Well said, my good girl! I congratulate you, Harry! a father's
approbation shall not be wanting to crown the wishes of his children.


Major C. [bowing impassioned on the hand of Emily.] Now I am truly blessed!


Harriot. [addressing her mother.] How is my dear and tender mother?


Mrs. M. Ah! my daughter, I shudder at the precipice on which I stood! Had the
marriage, I so ardently desired, taken place! -- Why, my Edward, our children
have been on the point of exchanging the nuptial vow! -- a brother and a sister
wedded!! How wide the evils, which, but for interposing Heaven, my fatal
indiscretion might have originated!


Ramb. Forget them, dear Louisa, and hail thy opening prospects! Now Rambleton
no more -- thy Edward Montague -- thy Traveller Returned, wedded to love and
thee.


Mrs. M. My enraptured spirit lowly prostrates to Edward, and to Heaven.


Harriot. This evening, Sir, we had devoted to a private party -- lovers of
mirth, who dance away the hours -- girls* like thy Harriot, and her chosen
friends -- even now they grace the ball-room, glad at thy return; and, sure
convivial joys should mark this happy era!


Ramb. Thank you, sweet cherub! quick bid the dancers enter.


[ Music plays -- Scene draws and discovers the company, which immediately join
in the dance, after which the curtain drops.] END OF THE COMEDY.
No. LXXXV.
I love the virtues even of a foe;
Those acts benign from sympathy that slow;
And gratitude impressed on radiant worth,
Of honor born, and nursed by meek eyed truth,
To my admiring gaze conspicuous stands,
On white cliff'd Albion, though its leaf expands.
Nations their virtues have -- their vices too --
In human soil perfection never grew,
(Save when the Branch of Jesse stood confessed,
With all the Deity inherent blessed!)
I would embrace the good; the bad reject;
Worth ever glowing as my theme select.

I HAVE passed one of those days, that, on sober reflection, I would gladly
reiterate. The morning rose delightfully serene; and, having offered at the
shrine of Deity our early orisons, I proposed to Mary a visit to our children;
an enchanting little jaunt produced us at Hamilton Place. Edward met us with
customary expressions of kindness, and Margaretta with those demonstrations of
affection that have ever marked her conduct. We passed some delightful moments
amid the captivating endearments of the little William and his sisters, and
their society operated as the sweetest solace to our minds. On the entrance of
less interested friends, we were, however, constrained to dismiss the lovely
prattlers; and, bestowing on them the benediction of affection, we committed
them to the care of a faithful woman, to whom Margaretta, when unavoidably
engaged, is in the habit of entrusting them.

The commencement of the conversation, after the children had retired, took a
turn extremely adverse to my wishes -- British enormities, and British
ingratitude was the theme; and I, who spontaneously shrink from instances of
human depravity, naturally turned with disgust from the subject. It is true I
am a Gleaner; but, I am, nevertheless, at a world of pains to winnow my
multifarious collections; and I must be fully convinced of their utility,
before I can consent that the bitter ingredients should obtain the ascendency
even in a single essay. Fortunately for me, the course of those observations,
which were issuing with a sufficient quantum of acrimony, was unexpectedly
arrested, and conducted into an opposite channel, by the interference of a
young gentleman, a Captain L --, whom I have long regarded with no small
complacency: The seeds of every virtue are implanted in his breast; but
conceiving an aversion from the ostentious parade of excellence, he has, I
have imagined, embraced a contrary extreme; and his fine qualities, are,
consequently, veiled by appearances, which the superficial regard as expressive
of propensities directly opposite to those that are paramount in his bosom.
Young as he is, he seems precisely to have estimated the value of the human
character; the man of real virtue will ever find him warmly attached to his
interest; and he is sincerely beloved by every one to whom he is fully known.
All the energies of his soul have today been called into action; and his fine
eyes, sparkling with even more than their wonted luster, while he plead the
cause of truth, evinced the kindred virtues which are inherent in his bosom.

He introduced his testimony by observing it was very probable the Britons
might, in many instances, have been offenders, but that his own experience was
an exception to clamours, which he imagined were far too general; and he
proceeded to inform us, that, having taken the command of a ship, he had
crossed the Atlantic with all the prejudices of an American; that, with the
pride of a young man enthusiastically devoted to his country, he had anchored
in the river Thames; that he went on shore prepared to repel insults, and with
a high sense of the haughtiness and ingratitude of the English nation.
Circumstances, however, soon produced a pleasing revolution in his mind; the
disposal of a large and various cargo, introduced him to different descriptions
of people, all of whom he found easy of access, and fair and open in their
dealings. The knowledge that he was an American, seemed to augment his
consequence; and every one appearing eager to serve him, he was led to wonder
whither the arrogance and reserve attributed to those Islanders had vanished.
Retiring to his ship, he was indulging a reverie on this subject, when an
unknown voice, observing to one of the ship-mates, who was lighting him into
the great cabin, that he had but recently heard the name of the commander,
arrested his attention; he had scarce time to form a conjecture, ere the
stranger presented himself before him.

"Your name, Sir, I am informed, is L --; but information is superfluous; your
features have taken too great hold on my mind ever to be erased therefrom." --
The stranger advanced with open arms -- The American stood collected -- "You
have the advantage of me, Sir; I have not the pleasure of knowing you." --
"Probably not, Sir; and yet I have often clasped you to my bosom; you used to
be ambitious of a place on my knee; and your innocent remarks have amused me,
during some very gloomy hours. My name is P --. I was captured by Captain N --,
commander of the ship S -- * a man, in whose bosom true nobility seemed
inherent. I have said a thousand times, that his spirit was too big for his
body; and when, after my return home, I put to sea again, one of my leading
motives for wishing to make a prize of Captain N --, was, that I might be
furnished with an opportunity of emulating his acts of generosity. But in your
father's house, Sir, I found even a paternal home. God bless the honored man
-- Does he still live? If he does, the wandering sufferer may yet obtain a
friend and father, who is not only an honor to the American name, but to
humanity at large."

Captain L --, it will not be doubted, received a man so deeply impressed with
the virtues of his father, and on whose bosom the laws of gratitude seemed
imprinted, with the requisite attention. The grateful Briton would have
conducted him immediately to his house; he entreated him to take up his
quarters there; and, although pained by a refusal, his frequent invitations,
while he continued on the river, hardly left him an unappropriated day. Captain
P -- quitting his employ on the ocean, had entered into a line of business
which empowered him to supply the navigator with many articles of which he was
in want; and the American commander, with a view of giving him the preference,
made continual application to his warehouse: But occupied, previous to his
departure, in closing his accounts, he commissioned the person whom he had
employed to discharge the debts he had contracted, to wait on his hospitable
friend for his bill; when, to his great astonishment, he was informed that he
had no pecuniary demands upon him. He immediately hastened to the
compting-house of the merchant. -- "What can you mean, Sir, by the message I
have just received? Am I not indebted to you for articles to a considerable
amount?"

"No, indeed, Sir," returned the sea disciplined veteran, while an honest tear
glittered in his eye -- " Your father has rendered it impossible for you to
become my debtor!! I wish to God the articles to which you refer, were of
greater value. Commend me to the good man to whom you are returning; and if you
are not disposed to affront a brother Sailor, you will mention this affair no
more." This was sufficient; our young gentleman was necessitated to defer the
day of retribution. They drank together a parting bottle; and he hoisted sail
with far other ideas of English men and manners than those with which he had
cast anchor.

While Captain L -- was concluding his recital, we were joined by Seymour and
his Serafina, who had recently returned from an excursion into the State of
Vermont; and they related a little narrative altogether in point; for the
authenticity of which the Gleaner pledges his veracity.

Captain A --, a British officer of family and fortune, was one of the many
brave men, who, induced by a sense of duty to their sovereign, or erroneous
ideas of the cause in which they engaged, armed and embodied themselves for the
purpose of exterminating from this new world all opposition to the mandates of
a government, usurping an unwarrantable sovereignty, and peremptorily insisting
on the power of binding, in all cases whatsoever, a people separated from them
by the broad Atlantic, and who had never been represented in their national or
legally constituted assemblies.

Captain A -- shared the fate of many of his associates in the war; and after a
number of marches and counter-marches, he was reduced to the necessity of
surrendering to those undisciplined men, whom he had hardly deigned to consider
as soldiers. He was committed to the care of a Major B --, then stationed in a
metropolis, well known in the commercial world; this officer, from the dawn of
the revolution, had glowed with a holy zeal in his country's cause; he was
foremost in those ranks who distinguished themselves in defense of that
liberty, for which such countless heroes fought and bled; and in addition to
the rank of Major, he was invested with that of Commissary of Prisoners.
Captain A -- received every indulgence of which his situation was susceptible;
the Commissary knew how to appreciate his virtues, nor was any effort left
unassayed, which it was imagined might render his captivity easy. Love, all
potent love, seconded these benign arrangements, and the brave, the humane
soldier was in every view a conquered man; but he was received by the lovely
subduer of his heart with enchanting lenity; honor was regent in her bosom,
frankness dwelt on her lips, and she intuitively felt that she might confide.
The parental sanction awarded her election; the holy priest received their
vows; and to a heart so faithfully devoted, the bonds of captivity became
indeed silken.

Thus blessed by friendship and by love, it cannot be matter of astonishment,
that a strong predilection in favor of America triumphed in his bosom; nor
that he was with the foremost in offering up his ardent vows for the success of
her battling chiefs. It is true, when the final adjustment of the preliminaries
of peace left the prisoner at liberty to return to his native country, that,
accompanied by his Honora, he departed with the rest; but he departed with a
determined resolution to return as soon as the posture of his affairs would
permit; and on his arrival in England, he was so indefatigable in procuring
those arrangements, which were necessary to the sale both of his patrimonial
and acquired estates, that he very speedily re-embarked for this new world. His
voyage was prosperous, and he arrived here, flushed with the most pleasing
expectations.

Dispatch necessarily attends the transactions of an active and an ardent mind,
and but a short period elapsed, ere he possessed himself of a large tract of
most excellent land in the Genessee country, where, taking his stand, he
conceived the laudable resolution of collecting round him as many industrious,
well disposed and sober citizens, as should feel a freedom to embrace plans,
which combined as their object, not only his own emolument, but the advancement
of the country of his adoption, and of all those individuals who might be
disposed to adopt his views. It is hardly possible to conceive of a situation
more pleasingly elevated than that of bestowing protection, with the means of
competency, and observing in return the spontaneous fruits of gratitude. Yet
Captain A -- was but half blessed; for his most diligent researches could
discover no vestige of the friend, who in the night of adversity had illumined,
by his beneficent interposition, the thick darkness by which he was surrounded.

Major B --, from the era which disbanded the American army, had been involved
in a series of misfortunes! Generous, perhaps to an extreme, and eminently
humane, the necessities of his dependents were, in effect his own; he was
wedded to a woman, lovely in her person, and superior in her mind; his infant
train, even in the estimation of a disinterested observer, were highly
promising, and the care of an ancient and widowed mother devolved solely on
him. No pecuniary reward awaited his services; his pay had never exceeded his
expenditures; and the close of the war consigned him to penury.

Would that his fate exhibited a solitary instance! Oh, America, America! where
is the harvest which thou have treasured for thy war-worn chiefs? Is poverty
the wreath which thou reservest for the brow of thy soldiers? When will my
country be fully exonerated from the charge of ingratitude? When will she
assign to deeds of worth a suitable and adequate compensation?

Major B -- possessed an undaunted spirit, and, with a view of warding off the
impending evil, he had taken up sums of money, expecting that, by some
propitious adventure, he should be able to extricate himself from his
embarrassments. Hope was warm in his bosom, and he was sanguine enough to
imagine he should be able to discharge the last farthing of his arrearages; but
all his enterprises failed; the waves of misfortune swiftly succeeded each
other; an arrest terminated his career, and he was immured within the
comfortless walls of a prison. That he should long remain in durance was,
however, improbable; every sentiment of humanity embodied for his release, and
his known integrity and irreproachable character procured his enlargement* Yet
he was thrown pennyless on an unfeeling world; and the consequent situation of
those beloved claimants, who possessed the dearest right to his aid, produced
sorrows which harrowed up his soul; reason tottered on her throne, and he was
driven to the verge of desperation.

Reflection, however, at length produced a melancholy calm; the storm of the
passions subsided; and, resolving to retire far from the knowledge of those
with whom he had once associated, he took shelter on the extreme verge of a
newly located township, in the State of Massachusetts, bordering on that of
Vermont. Here, despoiled of every other resource, and sinking under a weight of
calamity, his health impaired and his spirits broken, the brave, the benevolent
officer, with a wife who would have added new luster to a diadem, with a lovely
and interesting family of children, and an aged mother -- here, in this
desolate spot, renting a small house on the country road, and putting up a bill
for entertainment, he depended for his subsistence on the necessities and
caprices of the passing traveller; while the scanty pittance he thus obtained,
was attended with such a variety of humiliating circumstances, as to render the
burden of life almost insupportable!

It was on a fine evening in June, just as the parting rays of the sun had
darted his setting beams on the western mountains, that this meritorious
sufferer indulged his corroding melancholy at the door of his cottage. Sorrow
had well nigh obliterated from his memory all traces of Captain A --, and he
remained in entire ignorance of his return to America. A superb phaeton
appeared in the road, and, conscious of his situation, he shuddered at its
approach. It stopped -- a servant alighted, and a gentleman and lady issued
from the carriage. Nothing of this kind had ever before made its appearance in
that place, o^ its vicinity, and the spirit of the care-worn soldier almost
died within him. He surveyed his guests; and as he reverted to the
insufficiency of that provision which it was within his ability to make, the
anguish of his mind was more than proportioned to the occasion. It was too
late, however, for the travelers to proceed farther that night; no other
public house was within many miles; and with an air of ineffable benignity, the
gentleman handed the lady into the cottage; but hardly had he passed the
threshold, when, glancing the highly honored Veteran, in a voice of extacy,
inmingled with astonishment, he exclaimed:

" Great and good God! who do I see? -- Major B --, is it possible, or do the
visions of the night once more mock my wishes? Tell me, are you indeed my
incomparable friend?" He hastened forward -- in a moment they were locked in
each others arms; the unfortunate man almost gasped for breath; to respond was
not immediately in his power. At length, however, he articulated -- " Yes, yes,
I am indeed your once happy -- now desolate friend. My prospects -- where are
they? Fled -- gone forever." "Cloud not," interrupted Captain A --, (for the
feelings of the reader have doubtless already recognized the grateful Briton)
"could not, I charge you, the happiness of this unexpected meeting, by
unavailing reflection; but, embracing henceforward the same hopes and fears,
let us, on this memorable evening, reciprocate vows of eternal amity, and let
us mutually consent to put it beyond the power of fate again to separate us."

The expressions of Mrs. B -- and Mrs. A -- were even more impassioned than
those of the gentlemen; they had been attached in early life -- and the night
was spent in mutual congratulation, mutual recitals, and reiterated professions
of undiminished and unalterable regards, while the travelers failed not
repeatedly to bless that curiosity, which, leading them to make the tour of the
eastern States, had thus bestowed on them the objects whom they had so long
unavailingly pursued.

To penury, and all its gloomy attendants, Major B -- has now bid adieu.
Captain A -- presented him with a deed of gift, conveying to him, and his heirs
for ever, as a patrimonial inheritance, one thousand acres of the best of his
land. Two thousand more are his, at half the price for which they are sold to
original purchasers; and he is to dispose of these to the best possible
advantage. His eldest daughter is adopted into the family of his patron, and
treated in every respect as a child of his house; he is furnished with
sufficient sums to remove his family; a commodious habitation is erected for
him on his own grounds; again he basks in the full meridian of society and of
friendship, and the sun of prosperity gilds the evening of his days. The
sensations of his soul are frequently too big for utterance; he gazes on his
matchless benefactor, and the tear gushes in his eye; ardent affection, and
grateful admiration are impressed on his manly features, while gestures,
abundantly more expressive than the most emphatic language, pourtray the
energies of his soul.

His venerable parent lived only to see the clouds of adversity disperse; her
parting spirit blessed the refulgent beam of light, and hastened, without a
remaining regret, to the paradise of its GOD.

No. LXXXVI.
Local affections even as nature cling;
About the heart their tenfold cords they sling:
A gordian knot with magic skill they tie;
While close enwrought the complex fibers lie.

YES, it is possible, there may perhaps have been individuals, who, in the most
extensive sense of the word, have merited the appellation, Citizens of the
World -- whose strong minds, struggling successfully against every view which
has not received a general contour, and prostrating at the shrine of human
nature, in the aggregate, have conducted as if the vast globe was their
country, the venerable pair o^ Eden their immediate parents, and every
wide-spreading collateral branch of the family of man, alike entitled to their
good offices.

Yet, I take leave to ask the reflecting and intelligent reader, if this divine
expansion is not, strictly speaking, the property of Deity? and whether those
who affect his attributes are not guilty of arrogant assumption? Man is a
limited being; his movements are circumscribed within narrow bounds; his eye
can take in, at a single view, but a small portion of our world: If he would
transport himself from place to place, his progress, impeded by a variety of
encumbrances, must be gradual; and if he would traverse the globe, he must
devote to the arduous enterprise the revolution of many succeeding months.
Every individual is necessarily descended from a particular family; nature
implants her attachments, and the hand of violence can alone uproot them.

The Deity views, at a single glance, the universe outspread before him -- he
is not confined to time, or place: Every created being is the offspring of his
commanding fiat; and the unbounded diffusion of his copious and impartial
regards, is therefore an effect necessarily resulting from a great and
Omnipotent Cause. When we are disencumbered from these material machines, and
move with the velocity of spirit, the probability is, that we shall partake
more essentially the properties of our Divine Original. But different
dispensations authorize a varied economy; and the difficulty (and, in almost
every instance, the impossibility) of surmounting inherent and local
attachments, may, perhaps, like every other prominent feature of nature, be
attended with its coeval advantages.

"I cannot, for my soul," said Albinus, as arm under arm he crossed
State-street with Degeneus -- "I cannot, for my soul, obliterate my local
partialities. Born in London, the name of an Englishman operates as a kind of
charm; I involuntarily yield him a moiety of my affection; and I am better
pleased to meet a good character from that country, than from any other part of
the globe." I would advise Albinus not to attempt the extermination of his
local partialities: In other words, I would advise him not to enter the lists
as a combatant against parent Nature. Has not the preferable love of country,
has not family attachments their advantages? In what period of the world was
not the real patriot held in admiration? and is not patriotism another word for
a zealous devotion to the interests of our country? It is certainly laudable to
cultivate and invigorate a spirit of general philanthropy; but still, is it not
according to the course of things, that the ardent glow should embrace "
friends, parents, neighbors, first?" until, in a regular progression, circles
thus formed succeed each other, while nature views complacent, the order and
gradual advances of her children. -- Let us pause to investigate for a moment.

The fact advanced is, I presume, self-evident; and I conceive its utility is
as clearly demonstrable. The approbation of those with whom we are connected,
frequently furnishes the most powerful incentive to virtue. Every local
preference produces a motive to proper and becoming actions; they continually
operate as so many mentors, suggesting and nerving the purposes of virtue.
Shall I wound the tender bosom of her to whom I am indebted for my existence?
Shall I transfix the paternal feelings of that white-headed man, who, from my
first dawn of being, has watched over me for good? Shall I outrage the manly
tenderness which my brothers have cultivated toward me? Shall I call a blush
into the cheek of my sisters? Shall I do violence to the confidence of
friendship, or cover with confusion the countenance of my fellow-citizens?
These are considerations which sometimes operate on the man, keeping him steady
to the arrangements of rectitude, even when the agency of the vicegerent in his
breast is suspended, or becomes ineffectual in its administration.

Are we removed from that spot of earth, where first the purple stream
commenced its vital flow? the report which echoing fame will waft to those dear
native haunts, becomes, in our estimation, an object of the greatest magnitude.
What ideas will the narration of such and such an action originate? How will my
connexions, who still continue there, be affected by such a particular step?
and what will they think of my conduct, on any occasion, on which all the
energies of my soul may have been called into exercise? Thus I am induced to
think, that a venerating attachment to the opinions, and a solicitude for the
approbation, of those with whom we were early in the habits of amity, have a
tendency to originate and confirm a regular system of propriety, to establish a
scrupulous accuracy of conduct, and frequently to operate as the talisman of
every laudable exertion. I am not a friend to the despotism of prejudice; I
would discountenance undue partialities; and I contend only for the utility of
prominent and distinguishing, not exclusive, regards. He, whose range is the
universe, will, too, probably, become also an itinerant in virtue; or at least,
the dissipation of his views may gradually consign his merit to oblivion. I do
not assert, that my ideas may not be erroneous; I pretend not to fill the chair
of infallibility; but it is, perhaps, well to put the best face on a necessity,
which seems comprised in the very complexure of our nature.

Local attachments, we have said, (and we believe, with a few exceptions, it
will be found true) insinuate themselves into, and become interwoven with, the
very fibers of our existence; and their invincibility, when it is remembered
that we are under the direction of unerring Wisdom, is a commanding proof of
their utility. Much time has elapsed since I bid adieu to my native place; but
neither years nor distance can obliterate the sensations which cluster round
reflection, as I contemplate that, to me, interesting spot. It was the scene of
my early pleasures; and the recollection of its dear domestic haunts are right
precious to my soul. There, too, were passed the most agonizing moments I have
ever yet endured. The authors of my being have long since slept in the dust;
but their ashes hallow that earth, which will ever be entitled to, and which
will still possess, my veneration. Misfortunes elouded my youth -- my path was
marked by sorrow. Many painful events have conspired to throw a gloom over the
place of my birth -- I would not return to it -- I would not again commence a
dweller there; but my most ardent benedictions will ever rest upon it; and the
affectionate attachment and approbation of its inhabitants will still
constitute one of the principal sources of my complacency. I rejoice in its
prosperity; and I cannot hear it named with applause, but my heart acknowledges
an accompanying glow of satisfaction.

The love of our country has been deemed a universal passion; and strong must
be the interest that can supersede its operations. It is observed, that the
natives of every climate, and the subjects of every State and kingdom, are so
strongly operated on by local attachments, and their consequent partialities,
as to conceive their own spot of earth the best of all possible situations. The
elegant songstress of the Albion world does not paint too highly, when she
says: The peasant of the Alps his cottage forms,
And builds his humble, happy home.
Unenvied is the rich domain,
That far beneath him on the plain
Waves its wide harvests, and its olive groves:
More dear to him his hut, with plaintain thatched,
Where long his unambitious heart attached,
Finds all he wishes -- all he loves.


Instances have been known, where a fondness for the scenes of infantile life,
and the sportive days of boyhood, have enabled persons, in an advanced stage of
their existence, to encounter numerous difficulties, for the purpose of
visiting a spot, which fancy has continued to paint in all the vivid colors
bestowed on it by the glowing imagination of youth. It is true, if, urged by
tender recollection, they quit their more commodious accommodations, the
probability is, that, rendered peevish and frigid by years, and not allowing
for the vicissitudes of time, the termination of a fatiguing jaunt may
generally give them expressions and feelings, similar to those of Doctor
Johnson, when, departing from the city of London, he devoted a portion of his
time to the pleasingly remembered haunts of Litchfield. Yet, I conceive, the
multiplication of instances of this kind will not break the charm: The
fascinating influence of juvenile pleasures will still remain; they will take
possession of the heart with pleasing accompaniments; and memory will still
revert to the native lawns, the native hills, groves, meadows, rocks, and
streams, with all those corresponding raptures which thrilled the bosom, when
first the dawn of admiration awakened every sense to the sweet enthusiasm of
newborn rapture.

Yes, the amor patrioe is a natural, a beneficial, and a laudable passion --
May it ever glow with Decian energy in the Columbian bosom -- May we continue
to regard, with filial veneration, our country's Warriors, her Patriots, and
her Statesmen -- and may we enumerate, with fervid exultation, those able
proficients in excellence, who daily throng the splendid paths of fame!

Naturally and unalterably attached to this New World, I love and revere its
Constitution, its laws, and its government; and I would obliterate every
circumstance that might either immediately, or eventually, envelop in clouds
its dignity, its honor, or that national magnitude, to which it is so rapidly
advancing. Columbia has been accused of ingratitude! and of exercising an
impolitic and penurious economy, in her pecuniary rewards, to those to whom she
has delegated the most important trusts! Possibly, Uzza like, I may be actuated
by undue officiousness, when I would assay to put forth my hand to touch the
tottering ark; and yet I cannot forbear to mourn the fate of those unrewarded
veterans, who are consigned to all the glooms necessarily attendant on blasted
expectations; and who, wounded by ingratitude and neglect, are at this moment
struggling with those depressing evils, which are the appendages of
disappointment, penury, and consequent regret. And is that arrangement, I would
ask, which appropriates to first rate abilities, for exertions that require
every faculty of the mind, and all of life, only a scanty pittance, that will
scarcely command the articles necessary to existence, either honorable or
judicious? Are not such measures calculated to drive from the most important
offices, men who would do honor to their country? Will it not fill the places
of government with needy adventurers, who are drove to the last extremity for a
bare subsistence? and will not the people eventually suffer, for the niggardly
system they may at present impose?

I am personally acquainted with some gentlemen, highly meritorious as
individuals, whose abilities are splendid, whose integrity is without a
blemish, and whose accurate discharge of the trust reposed in them has met
with universal approbation: Yet these gentlemen have been compelled to
relinquish their employments, merely because the emoluments annexed thereto,
were inadequate to the support of their families! Devoted as I am to my
country, I will repeat, that I lament the necessity which is multiplying
instances of this description! and with all humility I ask -- Is it not worthy
the wisdom of government to consider, whether a remedy for this growing evil is
not within the limits of its authority?

No. LXXXVII.
[Written December 1st, 1796, during the important Contest which agitated the
Public Mind, relative to a Successor to the immortal WASHINGTON.]
This party fury harrows up the soul!
The whirlwind of the passions tears the breast!
Let sovereign Reason each debate control,
Of calm investigating powers possessed.

"I LOOKED in on Publicola this morning," said my friend, "and I found, on his
reading desk, the Holy Bible, the Sentinel, and Johnson's quarto dictionary;
and, hence I conclude Publicola orthodox in his religious sentiments, found in
his politics, and correct in his literature." These were your conclusions,
returned I; but another would have been better pleased to have observed on the
reading desk, Paine's Age of Reason, Robespierre's sanguinary code, and a
treatise on the utility of the guillotine -- its various user, and the
different cases, in which, by legal and received construction, it might be put
into action.

It will ever remain an incontrovertible fact, that, while the understandings
of men are dissimilar, they can never contemplate persons or things in the same
point of view; and, if they would learn to dissent with moderation, and discard
from their vocabulary a language, for which, madness only can apologize, this
world of ours would be a much more tolerable place of residence, than, in the
present disposition of party, it is likely to become.

It is true, I cannot regard a pure unmixed democracy as that precise form of
government, which is, in all its parts, the most friendly to the best interests
of mankind. I cannot think that the art of legislation is within the knowledge
of every man. He whose mind is filled with agricultural or commercial pursuits,
whose education and subsequent occupation has been principally directed to a
particular business or profession, cannot, I have conceived, obtain sufficient
leisure to investigate, with the requisite attention, the great art of
government; and, as I have regarded power, in unsteady and unskilful hands, as
a great evil, so I have called that man misguided, and an invader of the public
peace, who, advancing the doctrine of claims, has inflated the fanciful and
superficial with erroneous ideas of retaining prerogatives, which, by their own
free suffrages, they had voluntarily relinquished. He who violently or
insidiously destroys the unquestionably necessary series of subordination, who
produces the various classes of mankind as usurpers on those orders, which, in
the scale of being, take rank above them, must inevitably throw a nation or a
state into strong convulsions; nor, will reason authorize such an attempt, save
in the last extremity. When the officers of government are chosen -- when they
are legally inaugurated, and have, in due form, taken their appropriate places,
I am free to confess that I adopt, in an unqualified sense, the sentiment which
Homer has put into the mouth of his Pylian sage; and, at least until a
succeeding election, I would say, Be silent, friends, and think not here
allowed,
That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.


I confess that a Federal representative Republic is the government of my
election, and under the constitution of the United States of Columbia I would
choose to pass my days; yet, I possess no right to impose my sentiments on my
brethren; nor can I be justified in flashing the lie in his face, who would
maintain opposite principles. A paragraph is produced in to-day's paper, which
I conceive fundamentally and totally wrong; but, is it not possible that the
veracity of the writer may, nevertheless, remain unimpeachable? may he not have
been misinformed, and under the impression of an error, in which circumstances,
beyond his control, may have involved him? may he not have given precisely that
representation which appeared to him literally true? and, would it not best
consist with the character of the rational man, to respond with mildness, and
that candor which generally points the luminous rays of conviction?

Every sense of propriety is lacerated by the ungentlemanlike warmth, with
which a certain class of political writers handle each other; and, for myself,
when pursuing my vocation, in my accustomed routine of duty, I essay to glean,
in those copious fields, the scattered grain which may perchance remain, my
feelings are too often barbarously mangled by the briars and thorns with which
they abound. If great national questions are to be agitated, why not enlist
under the banners of reason, and manage the important proposition with cool and
temperate discussion? Why not light the torch of investigation, and, after
deliberately and minutely scanning one by one, circumstances and positions, why
not calmly submit the decision to the unbiassed suffrages of a great, an
enlightened, and a free people? Why must the reputation of individuals be
blackened, and sentiments and opinions arraigned, altogether foreign from the
subject in debate? Why is philosophy maligned, and the caution of wisdom
contumeliously attributed to the most unworthy and debasing of motives? Why is
firm, unyielding integrity, warm and glowing in the common cause, accused of
the temerity which marks the aristocrat -- of absurdly aspiring to a
monarchical establishment, and of those unwarrantable views which the soul of
rectitude abhors?

If there exists reasons why particular men are not competent or eligible to
certain offices of state, would it not be noble, and in the true Horatian
spirit, to sacrifice private feelings to the public weal; and, heroically
appearing even against the dearest of our friends, produce to the public eye,
those unpropitious features, or pernicious plans, which, endangering the
commonwealth, unquestionably render the candidates, embracing such adverse
sentiments unworthy the confidence of their constituents? If the reprehensible
particulars were, with all requisite decency and honest frankness, boldly
pointed out; if chapter and verse were cited; and if the name of the accuser
was affixed to the impeachment, the matter then properly introduced to the
public mind, would be in an honorable train, free inquiry would succeed, and
truth thus placed within our reach, the crest fallen culprit would sink to the
oblivion which he merits; while the hero, who, influenced by no other motive
than zeal for the public cause, risked the eternal enmity and gave a mortal
blow to the reputation, perhaps of a friend, would be crowned with those
unfading honors which should ever be reserved for the real patriot.

It is to be regretted that the anonymous defamer, although adorned with
news-paporial distinctions, ever obtains the smallest consideration. Was the
dignity of legislation mine, it should stand conspicuous in my code of laws,
that every unclaimed and unsupported allegation, intended as derogatory to a
character, should be esteemed as operating, in all respects, to the building
up, elevating and confirming said character; and, did calumny thus defeat its
own purpose, only the disinterested, and truth taught man of principle, when
seriously and loudly called on by his country's exigencies, would assume the
invidious task of holding up to a nation's view, as circumstances might
require, the discriminating glass; which, divesting of every adventitious
covering, would display the candidate such as he really was.

Disorganizers of government, fomenters of confusion, friends to anarchy. --
Discarding all these irritating epithets of reproach, I would rather denominate
that respectable class of citizens which, at present, constitute the democratic
party, misguided sons of liberty. It is matter of serious mortification, that
we cannot exonerate the advocates of the cause of our election from the odium
of unjustifiable and indecent warmth; but, when, as if no human delinquent
could furnish an example sufficiently atrocious, the arch incendiary, who
filled the beautifully tranquil walks of paradise with disobedience, disorder,
and consequent death, is summoned from his Tartarean domains, as the prototype
of combinations of men who certainly enrol in their catalogues, names which are
an honor to human nature -- when, I say, such intemperate and inflammatory
instances of aggravation are notorious, the votaries of reason must blush for
the unwarrantable outrage which is thus done to virtue, in the persons of those
whose lives have been squared by her dictates. We are desirous of seeing virtue
and vice, truth and error, delineated in the strongest colors: but, let them
not be blended with the rage of faction, nor deformed by the frenzy of passion;
let reason hold the pencil; let the style of painting be that of veracity; let
the tints be accurately combined, and meliorated by candor; let the
disposition of light and shade evince the touches of a master -- of a master
thoroughly informed and perfect, as well in execution as design; and let the
striking exactness of the resemblance stand conspicuous.

We pity the mind which is not sufficiently expansive to embrace the man of
worth, whatever his political, or even his religious sentiments may be; and
although the present head of the Columbian Union concentrates in his own great
and virtuous mind every excellence which can adorn humanity, it yet becomes us
to acknowledge the luster of those gems which demonstrably irradiate the bosoms
of surrounding worthies? We thank God that the superabounding weight of merit
abundantly preponderates in the Federal scale; but we would be therewith
content; and, ceasing to detract from the virtue of individuals, who lament
what they esteem ruinous in the administration of our government, or even of
the Constitution itself, we would allow them all the applause to which they are
incontrovertibly entitled. Nor need we have recourse to unrighteous methods;
the decision is in proper hands, and the majority will entwine in their
investigations that wisdom which shall point out the man of virtue as a
successor to the august Father of this younger world, which shall raise to the
presidential chair, him whose brave, undaunted spirit, unappalled in the midst
of danger, has risen superior to every trial. The often proved friend of his
country's cause, who, unawed by the acrimonious breath of faction, and
unbiassed by the adulatory strains of interested men, will pursue the shining
path of rectitude.

Let us then cease by unmanly reproaches to corrode the festering wounds of
discontent; we are indeed brethren, and contention is therefore most improper!
It will never cease to be true, that divided we shall fall an easy prey to an
invading foe, and that our bond of union is the talisman of our prosperity. We
would rather hear an enumeration of the virtues of our opponents than attend to
a disquisition of errors, which our political ideas render self evident. And
prominent in the list of meritorious characters, who have become the victims of
malevolence, we distinguish the respectable name of J -- s! Ill mannered zeal
has christened him the Demagogue of a faction, but candor sits enthroned on
his brow, and from his tongue issues the mellifluous strains of lettered
eloquence; he is possessed of extensive information while native genius
uniformly irradiates his theme; with men (...) and genuine talents he must ever
take rank, (...) from the woe-worn bed of languishment, gratitude will raise to
him a song of praise. Humane physician! thy panegyric, penned as we presume by
the hand of one who knew thee well, has sounded gratefully on the ear of
complacency; and we have blessed the soothing strains. Yet, strange to tell --
the malignant vocabulary of acrimony has been exhausted, to supply epithets
expressive of the libellous and unfounded slanders, which have doubtless
wounded the exquisite susceptibility of a man whose abilities and amiable
benevolence, would reflect honor on the most luminous cause: Such are the
murderous effects of party rage!!

Yea, verily, instances of merit cluster in the minorty; and, if our
information is accurate, its principles have strongly attached the elegantly
moral poetess, and faithful historian, who at the head of female literature in
this new world, undauntedly dares to think, and as undauntedly dares to write,
while we cannot but do homage to that noble independence which seems natal in
her bosom.

But if we are disgusted by the dark hues in which the enthusiasts of opinion,
paint the intellectual qualities of their opponents, we are both astonished and
shocked, at the impious absurdity of ridiculing the figure, complexion, or
particular features of a fellow creature, whose ideas do not exactly square
with those, which we arbitrarily impose, as the very quintescence of rectitude.
Are these fit subjects of animadversion? or are we to be made responsible for
their supposed irregular proportions; our intellectual propensities, our
actions of every description, these, or at least the government thereof, may be
imagined in some sort subject to our control; but it must be contrary to every
rule of justice and decency, to arraign a man at the bar of a respectable
public, or to subject him to the licentious grin of invidious ridicule, for
arrangements wholly independent of him, and for which, therefore, he cannot be
accountable.

Are we not, we would ask, the workmanship of the Supreme Architect of heaven
and earth? And are the productions of the one self-existent being, to be
subjected to the malevolent criticism of those, who are also wholly dependent
on the all-commanding fiat of that God whom they thus irreverently and
impiously offend? To assign particular qualities to a particular size, or
association of features; if, by Lavaterian ingenuity, established as a general
rule -- must, nevertheless, like most other general rules, admit its
exceptions; and, although, even the laughter loving Stern may expatiate on "
fat contented ignorance," tacitly rendering extension of limbs, synonimous with
a vacant or uncultivated mind; yet, while the venerable figure of a Johnson
presses on our recollection, we cannot admit his unqualified decision.

The man who has not music in his soul (says the immortal bard of Avon) is fit
for treason, for actions of the blackest hue -- let no such man be trusted. But
we have known the milk of human kindness, and sweet benevolence, with firm
integrity, flow in the bosom, and indelibly imaged on the spirit, of him who
could not name a single note of music, nor could distinguish the finished
composition from the wildest strains which float upon the ear of fancy. But let
the licensed poet enjoy his free domain, while we, unversed in that fine frenzy
by which from earth to heaven and heaven to earth he glances, leave his
unbridled muse to climb Parnassian heights, gladly embracing truth as reason
shall direct us.

We think attempts to reconcile the contending parties, would be an office
worthy the acceptance of patient virtue. England and France, it is said, divide
our politicians; and, admitting this assertion, much may be said for either
party. On one side, ancient kindred -- parental acts of kindness -- similarity
of customs, of manners, of language and religion, with combining influence, may
have obliterated that keen sense of injuries, and repeated outrages, which once
obtained in the American bosom. On the other hand, assistance nobly granted in
the hour of dark oppression and greatest need, involving sacred gratitude,
apparently connects a nation's honor; but who sees not, that, discarding these
contending claims, unerring justice should be created umpire, and invested with
full power to draw the line.

Let the advocates for these clashing opinions remember, that affinity
attenuated through many succeeding generations, loses in energy what it gains
in extension; and, that from the man and woman once inhabitants of Paradise, we
all originated. Let the friends of the Gallic interest also recollect that the
generous Frenchmen, whose opportune assistance nerved for decisive combat our
battling heroes, have either thrown off those mortal habiliments in which they
joined our warriors, or, by despotic rigor deep immured, wear out what remains
of life in comfortless imprisonment! Was the appeal to me, I would thus
determine, or thus presume to counsel -- Americans, assert yourselves --
Embrace that independence for which ye fought and bled! -- Submit to exigencies
which you cannot avert -- and trust to those whose better judgment has been
your star of guidance -- Give national reliance ample way -- Maintain a
character, a national character and preference; and learn to fill the rank by
great events assigned you -- Disdain to wear the badge of foreign influence --
cultivate an exchange of good offices with every nation who will accept your
consistent and dignified advances, but do not pusillanimously court their
favor -- Preserve inviolate your national honor -- Learn to defend yourselves
-- Be neither Frenchmen nor Englishmen -- be AMERICANS; and delay not to
embrace as brethren.

Your contentions grate barbarously dissonant on the ear of LIBERTY. The
radiant goddess is wounded by the hands of her children. Hark! she shrieks
terrifically! See, her venerable form appears -- her cap and staff are thrown
unheeded by -- arrayed in flowing robes of sky tinctured blue, she moves
majestic -- her parental bosom, lacerated by those whom she fondly cherished,
issues a purple stream -- they have aimed at her vitals a fatal blow -- her
altars are thrown down -- and they have ignorantly assayed to embrue their
hands in the fountain of her existence. " Go," she exclaims, " Go, direct my
erring children: They are dearer to my soul than the light of heaven. But
subordination, equal laws, salutary institutions, firm adherence, and impartial
administration -- these are the stamina of my being; divested of these
indispensably requisite observances, I am muffled in clouds -- my steps are
marked with blood -- anarchy, with murderous, fiend-like visage, is in my train
-- the flames of discord are in my path -- the universe expires in my grasp,
and the reign of chaos is restored!!! WASHINGTON is my vicegerent on earth --
let my sons obey the Patriot Warrior -- let them venerate the unrivalled sage,
and they may yet be happy. Peace, order and good government -- these are the
specifies for my bleeding wounds, and the renewal of unreserved confidence and
harmony among my descendants, the only panacea for the injuries inflicted on a
denizen of the celestial world."

She said, and, enveloping her grief-worn countenance in her starry mantle,
suddenly she sunk amid the whelming shades of night. And may the wisdom of our
regulations, the order of our movements, and the complete restoration of that
fraternity which should be the glory of FREE AMERICANS, give her speedily to
emerge from thence; while, arrayed in newborn splendour, she bestows
consistency, union, patriotism and dignity on this younger world, thus
proclaiming CONFEDERATED COLUMBIA the children of her adoption.

No. LXXXVIII.
Amid the blaze of this auspicious day,
When science points the broad refulgent way,
Her iron scepter prejudice resigns,
And sovereign reason all resplendent shines.

THE reader is requested to consider the four succeeding numbers as
supplementary to an Essay, which made its appearance, some years since, in a
periodical publication of a miscellaneous nature. The particular paper to which
I advert, was entitled, The Equality of the Sexes; and, however well I may
think of that composition, as I do not conceive that the subject is exhausted,
I have thought proper, treading in the same path, to set about collecting a few
hints, which may serve as additional, illustrative, or ornamental.

And, first, by way of exordium, I take leave to congratulate my fair
country-women, on the happy revolution which the few past years has made in
their favor; that in these infant republics, where, within my remembrance, the
use of the needle was the principal attainment which was thought necessary for
a woman, the lovely proficient is now permitted to appropriate a moiety of her
time to studies of a more elevated and elevating nature. Female academies are
every where establishing, and right pleasant is the appellation to my ear.

Yes, in this younger world, "the Rights of Women" begin to be understood; we
seem, at length, determined to do justice to THE SEX; and, improving on the
opinions of a Wollstonecraft, we are ready to contend for the quantity, as well
as quality, of mind. The younger part of the female world have now an
inestimable prize put into their hands; and it depends on the rising generation
to refute a sentiment, which, still retaining its advocates, grounds its
arguments on the incompatibility of the present enlarged plan of female
education, with those necessary occupations, that must ever be considered as
proper to the department and comprised in the duties of a judiciously
instructed and elegant woman; and, if our daughters will combine their efforts,
converts to the new regulations will every day multiply among us. To argue
against facts, is indeed contending with both wind and tide; and, borne down by
accumulating examples, conviction of the utility of the present plans will
pervade the public mind, and not a dissenting voice will be heard.

I may be accused of enthusiasm; but such is my confidence in THE SEX, that I
expect to see our young women forming a new era in female history. They will
oppose themselves to every trivial and unworthy monopolizer of time; and it
will be apparent, that the adorning their persons is not with them a primary
object. They will know how to appreciate personal advantages; and, considering
them as bestowed by Nature, or Nature's God, they will hold them in due
estimation: Yet, conscious that they confer no intrinsic excellence on the
temporary possessor, their admeasurement of real virtue will be entirely
divested of all those prepossessing ideas, which originate in a beautiful
exterior. The noble expansion conferred by a liberal education will teach them
humility; for it will give them a glance of those vast tracts of knowledge
which they can never explore, until they are accommodated with far other powers
than those at present assigned them; and they will contemplate their removal to
a higher order of beings, as a desirable event.

Mild benignity, with all the modest virtues, and every sexual grace -- these
they will carefully cultivate; for they will have learned, that in no character
they can so effectually charm, as in that in which nature designed them the
pre-eminence. They will accustom themselves to reflection; they will
investigate accurately, and reason will point their conclusions; Yet they will
not be assuming; the characteristic trait will still remain; and retiring
sweetness will insure them that consideration and respect, which they do not
presume to demand. Thinking justly will not only enlarge their minds, and
refine their ideas; but it will correct their dispositions, humanize their
feelings, and present them the friends of their species. The beauteous bosom
will no more become a lurking-place for invidious and rancorous passions; but
the mild temperature of the soul will be evinced by the benign and equal tenor
of their lives. Their manners will be unembarrassed; and, studious to shun even
the semblance of pedantry, they will be careful to give to their most
systematic arguments and deductions, an unaffected and natural appearance. They
will rather question than assert; and they will make their communications on a
supposition, that the point in discussion has rather escaped the memory of
those with whom they converse, than that it was never imprinted there.

It is true, that every faculty of their minds will be occasionally engrossed
by the most momentous concerns; but as often as necessity or propriety shall
render it incumbent on them, they will cheerfully accommodate themselves to the
more humble duties which their situation imposes. When their sphere of action
is enlarged, when they become wives and mothers, they will fill with honor the
parts allotted them. Acquainted, theoretically, with the nature of their
species, and experimentally with themselves, they will not expect to meet, in
wedlock, with those faultless beings, who so frequently issue, armed at all
points, from the ^eeming brain of the novelist. They will learn properly to
estimate; they will look, with pity's softest eye, on the natural frailties of
those whom they elect partners for life; and they will regard their virtues
with that sweet complacency, which is ever an attendant on a predilection
founded on love, and happily combining esteem. As mothers, they will assume
with alacrity their arduous employment, and they will cheerfully bend to its
various departments. They will be primarily solicitous to fulfill, in every
instance, whatever can justly be denominated duty; and those intervals, which
have heretofore been devoted to frivolity, will be appropriated to pursuits,
calculated to inform, enlarge, and sublime the soul -- to contemplations, which
will ameliorate the heart, unfold and illumine the understanding, and gradually
render the human being an eligible candidate for the society of angels.

Such, I predict, will be the daughters of Columbia; and my gladdened spirit
rejoices in the prospect. A sensible and informed woman -- companionable and
serious -- possessing also a facility of temper, and united to a congenial mind
-- blessed with competency -- and rearing to maturity a promising family of
children -- Surely, the wide globe cannot produce a scene more truly
interesting. See! the virtues are embodied -- the domestic duties appear in
their place, and they are all fulfilled -- morality is systematized by
religion, and sublimed by devotion -- every movement is the offspring of
elegance, and their manners have received the highest polish. A reciprocation
of good offices, and a mutual desire to please, uniformly distinguishes the
individuals of this enchanting society -- their conversation, refined and
elevated, partakes the fire of genius, while it is pointed by information; and
they are ambitious of selecting subjects, which, by throwing around humanity,
in its connection, additional luster, may implant a new motive for gratitude,
and teach them to anticipate the rich fruition of that immortality which they
boast. Such is the family of reason -- of reason, cultivated and adorned by
literature.

The idea of the incapability of women, is, we conceive, in this enlightened
age, totally inadmissible; and we have concluded, that establishing the
expediency of admitting them to share the blessings of equality, will remove
every obstacle to their advancement. In proportion as nations have progressed
in the arts of civilization, the value of THE SEX has been understood, their
rank in the scale of being ascertained, and their consequence in society
acknowledged. But if prejudice still fortifies itself in the bosom of any; if
it yet enlisteth its votaries against the said despot and its followers, we
produce, instead of arguments, a number of well attested facts, which the
student of female annals has carefully compiled.

Women, circumscribed in their education within very narrow limits, and
constantly depressed by their occupations, have, nevertheless, tinged the cheek
of manhood with a guilty suffusion, for a pusillanimous capitulation with the
enemies of their country. Quitting the loom and the distaff, they have beheld,
with indignation, their husbands and their sons flee in battle: With clasped
hands, and determined resolution, they have placed themselves in their paths,
obstructing their passage, and insisting, with heroic firmness, on their
immediate return to death or conquest! They have anxiously examined the dead
bodies of their slaughtered sons; and if the fatal wounds were received in
front, thus evincing that they have bravely faced the foe, the fond
recollection of their valor has become a source of consolation, and they have
sung a requiem to their sorrows! Women, in the heat of action, have mounted the
rampart with undaunted courage, arrested the progress of the foe, and bravely
rescued their besieged dwellings! They have successfully opposed themselves to
tyranny and the galling yoke of oppression! Assembling in crowds, they have
armed themselves for the combat -- they have mingled amid the battling ranks --
they have fought heroically -- and their well-timed and well-concerted measures
have emancipated their country! They have hazarded the stroke of death in its
most frightful form; and they have submitted to bonds and imprisonment, for the
redemption of their captive husbands!

The character of the Spartan women is marked with uncommon firmness. At the
shrine of patriotism they immolated nature. Undaunted bravery and unimpeached
honor, was, in their estimation, far beyond affection. The name of Citizen
possessed, for them, greater charms than that of Mother; and so highly did they
prize the warrior's meed, that they are said to have shed tears of joy over the
bleeding bodies of their wounded sons!

When Europe and Asia were infested by armed multitudes, who, emigrating for
purposes of devastation and settlement, perpetrated the most ferocious acts,
among all those various tribes of unprincipled invaders, no discriminating line
seems to have marked the sexes; wives submitted to similar hardships with their
husbands; equally they braved the impending danger; and their efforts and their
sufferings were the same: Nor can their habits of endurance and patient
fortitude admit a rational doubt.

The women of Hungary have rendered themselves astonishingly conspicuous in
their wars against the Ottoman Empire -- But proofs abound; and numerous
actions might be produced to evince, that courage is by no means exclusively a
masculine virtue. Women have frequently displayed an intrepidity, not to be
surpassed by men -- neither is their bravery the impulse of the moment. They
not only, when trained by education, and inured by subsequent habit, rise
superior to the fears of death; but, with unimpassioned and sedate composure,
they can (...) li^e -- they can struggle with the fatigues and inconveniences
-- they can fulfill the duties, and they can support the irremediable calamities
of war. They have achieved the most surprising adventures; indulgencies have
been extended to them on the well-fought field; and they have expired with the
weapons of death in their hands! Actuated by devotional zeal, and stimulated by
the sublime expectation of an opening heaven, and a glorious immortality, they
have rushed into the flames, have ascended the scaffold, have suffered the
dismemberment of their bodies, have submitted to the tortures of dislocation,
and to the most excruciating racks, in defense of truth! nor has the voice of
murmuring or complaint escaped their lips!

Women have publicly harangued on religion -- they have presented themselves
as disputants -- they have boldly supported their tenets -- they have been
raised to the chair of philosophy, and of law -- they have written fluently in
Greek, and have read with great facility the Hebrew language. Youth and beauty,
adorned with every feminine grace, and possessing eminently the powers of
rhetoric, have pathetically conjured the mitred fathers and the Christian
monarchs to arm themselves for the utter extirpation of the enemies of their
holy religion.

In the days of knight-errantry, females, elevated by the importance with which
they were invested, discriminated unerringly between the virtues and the vices,
studiously cultivating the one, and endeavoring to exterminate the other; and
their seize equalled the heroism of their admirers; their bosoms glowed
with sentiments as sublime as those they originated; generosity marked their
elections; the impassioned feelings, the burst of tenderness, were invariably
blended with honor; and every expression, every movement, was descriptive of
the general enthusiasm. Pride, heroism, extravagant attachments; these were
common to both sexes. Great enterprises, bold adventures, incredible bravery --
in every thing the women partook the color of the times; and their taste and
their judgment were exactly conformed. Thus the sexes are congenial; they are
copyists of each other; and their opinions and their habits are elevated or
degraded, animated or depressed, by precisely the same circumstances.

The Northern nations have generally been in the habit of venerating the Female
Sex. Constantly employed in bending the bow, in exploring the haunts of those
animals, who were the victims of their pleasures and their passions, or of
urging against their species the missive shafts of death, they nevertheless
banished their ferocity, and assumed the mildest manners, when associating with
their mothers, their sisters, their mistresses, or their wives. In their ample
forests, their athletic frames and sinewy arms were nerved for battle, while
the smiles of some lovely woman were the meed of valor; and the hero who
aspired to the approbation of the beautiful arbitress of his fate, authorized
his wishes, and established his pretensions, by eminent virtue, and a long
series of unbroken attentions.

A persuasion, that the common Father of the universe manifests himself more
readily to females than to males, has, at one period or another, obtained, more
or less, in every division of the globe. The Germans, the Britons, and the
Scandinavians -- from these the supposition received an easy credence. The
Grecian women delivered oracles -- the Romans venerated the Sibyls -- among the
people of God, the Jewish women prophesied -- the predictions of the Egyptian
matron were much respected -- and we are assured, that the most barbarous
nations referred to their females, whatever they fancied beyond the reach of
human efforts: And hence we find women in possession of the mysteries of
religion, the arcana of physic, and the ceremonies of incantation. Writers
assert, that several nations have ascribed to women the gift of prescience,
conceiving that they possessed qualities approximating to divinity; and the
ferocious German, embosomed in his native woods, renders a kind of devotional
reverence to the Female Sex.

Such is the character of those periods, when women were invested with undue
elevation; and the reverse presents THE SEX in a state of humiliation,
altogether as unwarrantable. The females among the savages of our country, are
represented as submitting to the most melancholy and distressing oppression;
slaves to the ferocious passions and irregular appetites of those tyrannical
usurpers, who brutally and cruelly outrage their feelings. They encounter for
their support, incredible hardships and toils, insomuch that, weary of their
own wretched existence, the women on the banks of the Oronoko, urged by
compassion, not unfrequently smother the female infant in the hour of its
birth; and she who has attained sufficient fortitude to perform this maternal
act, esteems herself entitled to additional respect. Commodore Byron, in his
account of the inhabitants of South-America, informs us, that the men exercise
a most despotic authority over their wives, whom they consider in the same view
they do any other part of their property, and dispose of them accordingly: Even
their common treatment of them is cruel; for, although the toil and hazard of
procuring food lies entirely on the women, yet they are not suffered to touch
any part of it, till their imperious masters are satisfied, and then he assigns
them their portion, which is generally very scanty, and such as he has not an
appetite for, himself.

Thus have the Sex continued the sport of contingencies; unnaturally subjected
to extremes; alternately in the mount of exaltation, and in the valley of
unmerited degradation. Is it wonderful, then, that they evince so little
stability of character? Rather, is it not astonishing, that their seize
are so numerous, and so considerable? Turning over the annals of different
ages, we have selected a number of names, which we purpose, in our next Essay,
to cite, as vouchers of THE SEX's merit; nor can we doubt, that their united
suffrages will, on a candid investigation, effectually establish the female
right to that equality with their brethren, which, it is conceived, is assigned
them in the Order of Nature.

No. LXXXIX.
The historic page with many a proof abounds,
And fame's loud trump THE SEX's worth resounds;
The patriot's zeal, the laurell'd warrior's claim,
The sceptered virtues, wisdom's sacred name,
Creative po^sy, the ethic page,
Designed to form and meliorate the age,
With heroism, with perseverance fraught,
By honor, truth, and constancy enwrought,
And those blessed deeds which elevate the mind,
With female genius these are all combined:
Recording story hands their virtues down,
And mellowing time awards their fair renown.

PLUTARCH, in one of his invaluable compositions, speaking of men and women,
thus expresses himself -- "The talents and the virtues are modified by the
circumstances and the persons, but the foundation is the same." This celebrated
and truly respectable biographer has yielded every thing that we wish; and the
testimony of so nice a distinguisher must be considered as a very powerful
auxiliary.

It is not our purpose to analyze the properties of mind; we are inclined to
think, that accurately to discriminate, or draw the intellectual line, is
beyond the power of the best informed metaphysician within the purlieus of
humanity. Besides, as we write for the many, and as it is notorious that a
number of well attested facts have abundantly more weight with the multitude,
than the finest spun systems which ever issued from the archives of theory, we
shall proceed to summon our witnesses, arranging their testimonies with as much
order, as the cursory turning over a number of volumes, to which a deficiency
in memory necessitates us to apply, will permit; and here, (lest the patience
of our readers should reluct at the idea of the motley circle, to which they
may apprehend they are to be introduced) we take leave to inform them, that we
shall be careful to abridge, as much as possible, the copious depositions which
may present.

Many centuries have revolved, since the era, when writers of eminence, giving
a catalogue of celebrated women, have made the number to amount to eight
hundred and forty-five: From these, and succeeding attestators, we shall select
a few, not perhaps the most striking, but such as occur the most readily. Our
object is to prove, by examples, that the minds of women are naturally as
susceptible of every improvement, as those of men. In the course of our
examination, an obvious conclusion will, we conceive, force itself on every
attentive and ingenuous reader. If the triumphs and seize of THE SEX,
under the various oppressions with which they have struggled, have been thus
splendid, how would they have been augmented, had not ignorant or interested
men, after clipping their wings, contrived to erect around them almost
insurmountable barriers. Descartes expatiated on the philosophical abilities of
the sex; and, if their supporting themselves with astonishing equanimity under
the complicated oppressions to which they are not unfrequently subjected, may
be called the practice of any branch of philosophy, the experience of every
tyrant will evince their proficiency therein. But the highly respectable and
truly honorable court, is, we presume, convened; the jury are empanneled, and
we proceed to the examination of the witnesses, leaving the pleadings to those
silent suggestions and inferences, which, we are assured, will voluntarily
enlist themselves as advocates in every ingenuous bosom. The pending cause, as
we have before observed, involves the establishment of the female intellect, or
the maintaining the justice and propriety of considering women, as far as
relates to their understanding, in every respect, equal to men. Our evidences
tend to prove them -- First, Alike capable of enduring hardships. Secondly,
Equally ingenious, and fruitful in resources. Thirdly, Their fortitude and
heroism cannot be surpassed. Fourthly, They are equally brave. Fifthly, They
are as patriotic. Sixthly, As influential. Seventhly, As energetic, and as
eloquent. Eighthly, As faithful, and as persevering in their attachments.
Ninthly, As capable of supporting, with honor, the toils of government. And
Tenthly, and Lastly, They are equally susceptible of every literary acquirement.


And, First, They are alike capable of enduring hardships. A proposition so
self-evident, supercedes the necessity of either arguments or witnesses. On the
women of Brittany, and the females among the savages of our own country,
fatigues almost incredible are imposed. Imbecility seems to have changed sexes;
and it is in these instances, masculine weakness and feminine vigor. THE SEX,
enervated and sinking amid the luxuries and indulgencies of an Asiatic climate,
are elsewhere hardy and courageous, and fully adequate to all those exertions
requisite to the support of themselves and their supine oppressors; and these
well authenticated facts, are, I conceive, alone sufficient to prove the
powerful and transforming effects of education, and subsequent habits. But we
need not take a voyage to Brittany, nor penetrate the haunts of savages, to
prove that women are capable of suffering. They are the enduring sex; and, by
the irreversible constitution of nature, they are subjected to agonies unknown
to manhood; while I do not recollect that they are exempted from any of the
calamities incident to humanity.

Secondly, They are equally ingenious, and fruitful in resources. Female
ingenuity will not, we apprehend, be controverted; every day furnishes fresh
proof of their invention, and their resources are a consequence. We select,
however, a corroborating instance, which, from its salutary effect, seems to
claim a preference.

A certain sovereign, of avaricious memory, was so fond of amassing treasure,
that he arbitrarily compelled a very large proportion of his subjects to labor
in the mines; but while his majesty's ingots were rapidly augmenting, the
grounds remained uncultivated; famine advanced with hasty strides; and the
dreary prospect every moment gathered darkness. No one possessed sufficient
intrepidity to remonstrate -- the despot's nod was fate -- from his decrees
there was no appeal -- and the love of life, although its eligibles may be in a
great measure diminished, is generally a paramount passion. In this emergency,
the ingenuity of the queen suggested a resource that snatched the nation from
the horrors of that dearth which had seemed so inevitable. She secretly
employed an artist to produce an exact imitation of those luxuries, in which
the king most delighted, a variety of fish and fowl -- bread and fruits of the
most delicious kind, made of pure gold, were expeditiously completed, and
displayed in order on the costly board -- the table was highly decorated --
and, when every thing was complete, the king, (after having been purposely
diverted from taking his customary refreshment) was ushered into the
banqueting-room. His Majesty took a seat -- for a moment, astonishment
suspended even the clamours of hunger, and his mind was occupied by admiration
of the imagination of the queen, and the deceptive abilities of the artist. The
event was proportioned to the most sanguine expectations of the lady. The mines
were suddenly dispeopled, and the earth again produced the necessary support.

Thirdly, Their fortitude and heroism cannot be surpassed. Listen to a woman of
Sparta, reduced by melancholy casualties to a state of servitude -- She was
captured, and afterward sold as a slave. The question was put by him on whom
her very existence seemed to depend -- "What know thou?" "To be free," was
her characteristic reply: But the unfeeling despot, uninfluenced by indubitable
indications of a noble mind, proceeded to impose his ignominious commands; to
which she dispassionately returned, " you are unworthy of me;" and instantly
resigned herself to death. Fortitude and heroism was a conspicuous trait in,
and gave uncommon dignity to, the character of the Roman ladies. Arria, the
wife of Paetus, a Roman of consular dignity, is an illustrious instance of that
transcendent elevation, of which the female mind is susceptible. With
persevering firmness, and a tenderness not to be exceeded, she continued
unwearied in her endeavors to procure the life of her husband -- long she
cherished hope; but, when the pleasing vision fled, and the portending storm
was bursting over their heads: In that tremendous moment, while the
disappointed man, trembling on the verge of dissolution, had not the courage to
point the deadly weapon -- with that exquisite delicacy, true fortitude, and
faithfulness of affection, which is so highly sexual, she first imprinted on
her own bosom the characters of death; and, animated by that sublime
consciousness becoming a being more than half celestial, she then presented him
the pointed dagger, with this consolatory assurance -- " Paetus, this gives me
no pain."

But fortitude and heroism are not confined to the Greek and Roman ladies; we
have pledged ourselves not to multiply examples unnecessarily, otherwise a
crowd of witnesses presenting, we could with difficulty suppress their
testimony. Yet we find it impossible so speedily to close this part of our
examination; and from the multitude of examples in the Island of Great Britain,
we produce the Lady Jane Gray, who seemed an exemplification of every virtue
and every grace which has been attributed to the male or female character. The
excellent understanding the received from nature was opened and improved by
uniform application. At sixteen, her judgment had attained a high degree of
maturity. She was at that age an adept both in the Greek and Latin languages;
and she was able to declare that her Greek Plato was a more pleasing
entertainment to her than all those enchanting pleasures usually so captivating
to the unexperienced mind. Nurtured in the bosom of parental affection, and of
tender friendship -- happy in the distinguishing regards of her sovereign, and
permitted the sublime enjoyment of intellectual pursuits, she had no ambition
for the pageantry of royalty, and her advancement to the throne was an era,
over which she dropped the melancholy tear. We are sensible that in adverting
to these traits in a character, affectingly interesting, we do in fact
anticipate other divisions of our subject; but, contemplating a mind thus
richly furnished, it is difficult to consider separately, endowments so nicely
blended, and reflecting on each other such unusual luster.

The passage of the Lady Jane, from the throne to the scaffold, was very short
-- her imposed queenship continued only ten days; yet she seemed displeased at
their duration, and she received, with heroic fortitude, the message of death.
The lover and the husband, whose vows she had recently accepted, was also under
sentence of death; and, on the morning assigned for their martyrdom, he
solicited for a parting interview; with solemn firmness she refused his request
-- yet her resolution originated not in a deficiency of tenderness; but it was
nerved by an apprehension that her sensibilities, thus stimulated, might
surmount her fortitude. With modest resignation she pursued her way to the
place of execution -- the officers of death, bearing the body of her husband,
while the headless trunk yet streamed with blood, met her on her passage --
neither of them had completed their seventeenth year -- she looked -- she
sighed -- and then, reassuming her composed sedateness, desired her conductors
to proceed -- she mounted the scaffold with an accelerated step -- she
addressed the surrounding spectators -- she committed the care of her person to
her woman; and, with a countenance descriptive of serene dignity, bowed her
head to the executioner. Thus perished a spotless victim of despotism and of
bigotry in the bloom of youth and beauty, rich in innocence, and adorned with
every literary accomplishment and sexual grace. Latest posterity will lament
her fate, and many hearts will join to execrate the sanguinary measures which
procured it. Under this head we produce but one more testimony.

Miss Anna Askew, a young lady of great merit, and possessed also of a
beautiful exterior, lived during the tyranny of Henry VIII. of England; a
despot, who seemed to conceive the female world created on purpose to
administer to his pleasures, or to become the victims of his cruelty and
implacability. Miss Askew was arraigned as a transgressor; her crime was, a
denial of the real presence in the eucharist; and for this atrocious offense,
she was rigorously imprisoned, and subjected to a series of barbarities that
would have ^^graced even savage inhumanity. Yet in a situation (...) involved
trials, that in a succeeding reign proved too mighty for the resolution even of
the virtuous (...), (...) and (...) continued unshaken. With unyielding (...)
she vindicated the truth of her opinion, and her hourly (...) were offered up
to her Father God. The chancellor, a bigoted Catholic, (...) questioned her
relative to her abettors; but she nobly disdained to present an accusation, the
consequences of which she so rigorously experienced: Her unbending integrity
furnished the pretense, and she was, without further delay, put to the torture;
but still her fortitude receded not; and her heroic silence evinced her
abundantly superior to their unmanly cruelties. The enraged chancellor, in
whose presence she suffered, transported with diabolic zeal, grasping with his
own hands the cords, violently stretched the rack, and almost tore her body
asunder; while yet unappalled, her fortitude forsook her not, and her triumph
over her barbarous tormentors was complete.

Her death-warrant was next made out, and she received the sentence which
condemned her to the flames, as an emancipation from every evil. All her joints
dislocated by the rack, she was borne to the place of execution; and there,
after being bound to the stake, was offered her life on condition of retracting
her supposed error; but she consistently rejected an existence to be purchased
only by the forfeiture of that consciousness of rectitude, which the virtuous
so well know how to prize; and as the flames that were her passport to regions
of blessedness, enkindled around her, a song of thanksgiving was on her lips,
and her exultation evidently augmented.

Fourthly, They are equally brave. Bravery is not a quality which figures
gracefully in the list of female virtues, nor are we anxious it should take
rank in the catalogue -- far from it; we should rather lament to see it become
a characteristic trait. We would have women support themselves with consistent
firmness under the various exigencies of life, but we would not arm them with
the weapons of death: Yet, when contending for equality of so^l, it may be
necessary to prove the capability of the female mind, to rear to perfection
whatever seeds may be adventitiously implanted therein. We therefore proceed to
produce a witness (...) two on this part of the question; and, consulting our
records, we assign the precedence, all circumstances considered, to a young
woman of Lemnos, an island in the Archipelago.

This magnanimous female beheld the streaming wounds of her expiring father, in
the fatal moment in which he was slaughtered on the field of battle; and,
instead of yielding to those tender sensibilities originating in nature, and
generally associated with valor -- instead of lamenting his fate by sighs and
tears, or the wordy exclamations of clamorous sorrow, she undauntedly seized
that sword and shield now rendered useless to the venerable warrior, and,
arming herself therewith, reanimated the dispirited soldiers, led them once
more to the charge; bravely opposed the Turks, who, having forced a gate, were
rapidly advancing; and gloriously avenged the death of her father, by driving
them back to the shore, and compelling them to take refuge in their vessels.

Jane of Flanders next presents: This lady, during the imprisonment of her
husband, nobly supported the declining honors of her house: With her infant
son in her arms, she met the assembling citizens, and pathetically deploring
her misfortunes, she secured their exertions in her favor. She sustained with
unyielding firmness the attacks of a vigilant and active foe. In the frequent
sallies made by the garrison, she herself led on her warriors. At the head of
three hundred horse, with her own hand she set fire to the tents and baggage of
the besiegers, thus necessitating them to desist from the general assault which
they were in the moment of commencing; and, although intercepted in her return
to the citadel, she nevertheless fought her way through one quarter of the
French camp, and rejoined her faithful friends in triumph!

Margaret of Anjou is a decisive proof that courage is not exclusively the
property of man -- Brave, indefatigable and persevering -- fruitful in
resources -- supporting by her genius and her exertions a pusillanimous husband
-- repeatedly emancipating him from prison, and replacing him on a throne which
he had lost by imbecility, and which he was unable to retain -- and equal to
every thing which depended on undaunted courage, she headed her armies in
person; directed their arrangements; and proceeded from rank to rank, animating
them by her undaunted intrepidity and judicious conduct; and, when borne down
by misfortunes, and apparently destitute of every resource, suddenly she
emerged, and, followed by numerous armies, again appeared in the field; nor did
she submit to fate, until she had fought, as a general and a soldier, twelve
decisive battles!!!

The French women -- Charlotte Cord -- But our depositions unexpectedly
multiplying, a recollection of our engagement can alone suppress their evidence.

No. XC.
It Is joy to tread the splendid paths of fame,
Where countless myriads mental homage claim;
Time honored annals careful to explore,
And mark the heights which intellect can soar.

Fifthly, THEY are equally patriotic. We have, in some measure, forestalled
this article. The Grecian women have produced their testimonies, and that
preference which they demonstrably manifested to the character Citizen;
estimating it beyond the endearing appellations, Wife and Mother,
incontrovertibly establishes their sex's capability of experiencing with an
ardour not to be exceeded, the patriotic glow; and yet it is true, that sexual
occupations frequently humiliating, and generally far removed from whatever has
a tendency to elevate the mind, may rationally be supposed to chill, in the
female bosom, the fine fervours of the amor patrioe.

Women are not usually exercised in those extensive contemplations which engage
the legislator: They are not called on to arm in their country's cause; to
appear in the well fought field, or to put their lives at hazard: But when they
part with him in whom is centered their dearest hopes, who blends the
characters lover, friend, husband and protector -- when they resign to the
hostile career the blooming youth whom from infancy they have watched with all
a mother's tenderness, and whose rich maturity has become the pride and
consolation of their declining life -- in those moments of anguish, their
heroism and their fortitude are indisputably evinced. Nor is the patriotism of
the chief arrayed for the battle; nor his, who devotes himself with all a
statesman's integrity to the public weal, condemned to an ordeal more severe.

The patriotism of the Roman ladies, procured a senatorial decree that funeral
orations should be pronounced from the rostrum in their praise: Repeatedly they
saved their country. And the patriotism of the mother and wise of Coriolanus,
while it snatched Rome from impending ruin, devoted to inevitable destruction
the husband and the son: Hence towered the temple consecrated to feminine
honor; and it must be confessed they had purchased this distinction at a very
high price. The venerable Senate, too, again interposed; public thanks were
decreed; and men were ordered, on all occasions, to yield precedence to women.

Sixthly, They are as influential. The ascendency obtained by females, is so
notorious, as to have become proverbial. Instances are multiplied, wherein
women have bent to their purposes the strongest masculine understanding.
Samson, the victim of female blandishments, is not a singular instance. The
example cited under the last article, is in point. Coriolanus rejected with
unbending severity supplicating friendship, garbed in senatorial robes;
succeeding deputies plead in vain -- The ministers of religion, clothed in
sacerdotal habits, joined in solemn procession -- they crowded around the
warrior, commissioned to advocate a sinking people's cause; still, however, he
continued obdurate, inflexibly firm and steady to his plans. But Veturia and
Volumnia, his wife and mother, attended by the most illustrious of the Roman
ladies, appear -- they shed torrents of tears -- they embrace his knees -- the
hero is disarmed -- his heart is melted -- his resentment and his resolutions
vanish together -- and Rome is saved.

Seventhly, They are as energetic, and as eloquent, Women always decree with
fervor: Did it depend on them, their movements would be decisive. Their
expressions are often as strongly marked, as they are vehement; and both their
plans and the execution thereof, are endowed with all the vigor that existing
regulations will permit. Their eloquence is indisputable. Possessing a richness
of fancy; their words are sufficiently copious; and education, when they are
indulged with its aids, prescribes the proper rules. Aspasia, of Miletus, it is
well known, taught the immortal Socrates rhetoric and politics. And, when Rome
groaned under the enormous cruelties of her second Triumvirate, the three
barbarians by whom she was enslaved, and who had armed themselves for the
destruction of her citizens, as if desirous of spreading every possible
calamity, seized not only the lives, but the treasures of the people, and
equally greedy of gold as of blood, after exhausting every other mode of
plunder, turned their rapacious views on those respectable matrons, who had
hitherto been exempted from pecuniary exactions; an exorbitant tax was levied
on every individual female, and the consternation occasioned by this unheard of
assumption, was proportioned to the distress of which it was productive.

In this extraordinary emergency, the oppressed females earnestly solicited the
aid of those advocates who were appointed to plead the cause of the injured and
defenseless; but the orators, fearful of incurring the displeasure of those who
had usurped the power of life and death, refused to interfere; and no means of
redress appearing, submission to an imposition acknowledged grievous, seemed
inevitable: It was, however, reserved to the talents and exertions of Hortensia
to furnish the desired aid.

This lady inherited all the abilities of her father; and she presented herself
a voluntary advocate for her sex. With modest intrepid^^y she opened,
conducted, and closed the pleadings. Persuasion dwelt on her tongue: Her
arguments resulting from rectitude, were pointed by reason: And it will be
conceived that her rhetorical powers must have been of the first rate, when it
is remembered that the countenances of the tyrants betrayed sudden and evident
tokens of that remorse which was then first enkindled in their bosoms; the hue
of guilt pervaded their cheeks, and they hastily repealed the injurious decree.
For the brow of Hortensia, fame prepared an immortal wreath: To the utmost
gratitude of her cotemporaries she was entitled: Her triumph was the triumph of
virtue and of talents: She enkindled even in the callous breasts of assassins,
the almost extinguished sparks of humanity; and she stands on the page of
history, a pattern of dauntless courage, and an example of genuine eloquence.

Eighthly, They are as faithful and as persevering in their attachments. Here
countless witnesses crowd on retention, and the greatest difficulty is in
choosing judiciously. Repeatedly have I seen the faithfully attached female,
firmly persevering in that affection which was first implanted in the soil of
innocence, and fondly watching with tender anxiety every symptom of the
diseased man: With patient assiduity she has hung over the couch, and sought
to mitigate the pangs of him, whose licentious conduct had brought ruin on
herself and her unoffending children! Had circumstances been reversed, divorce
would have succeeded -- a hospital must have sheltered the helpless woman; and,
had she received from the man she had injured any trivial attention, the
unmerited gratuity would have resounded through the circle of their connexions,
been dwelt on with rapture, and echoed by every tongue. But when virtue is the
basis; when acts of kindness cement the union, THE SEX in many instances have
set no bound to that faithful attachment which their hearts have exultingly
acknowledged. Filial duty -- conjugal affection -- persevering constancy --
these receive in the female bosom the highest perfection of which they are, in
the present state, susceptible.

The young Roman, supporting her imprisoned parent by the milk of her own
chaste bosom, if unparalleled in history, would yet, in like situation, obtain
many imitators; and the feelings of a daughter would prompt, for the relief of
the authors of her being, the noblest exertions. The celebrated Mrs. Roper,
eldest daughter of Sir Thomas Moore, continued his affectionate solace during
his imprisonment: With heart-affecting anguish she rushed through the guards to
catch, from the illustrious martyr, a last embrace. Bending under a weight of
calamity, she obtained permission to pay him sepulchral honors; and,
regardless of the tyrant's power, she purchased the venerable head of the
meritorious sufferer: Yet, too noble to permit the consequences to fall upon
another, with dauntless courage she became her own accuser; and, loaded with
^etters for two crimes, "for having watched the head of her father as a
relic, and for having preserved his books and writings," appeared with
unconcern before her judges -- justified herself with that eloquence which
virtue bestows on injured merit -- commanding admiration and respect -- and
spent the remainder of her life in solitude, in sorrow, and in study.

But women, unable to support existence, when deprived of those with whom they
have exchanged the nuptial vow, have mounted the funeral pile, and hastened to
rejoin their deceased partners in other worlds. Portia, the daughter of Cato
Uticensis, and wife of Brutus, hearing of the death of her husband, disdained
to live; and when debarred access to the usual weapons of destruction, made her
exit by resolutely swallowing burning coals of sire! Julia, the wife of Pompey,
expired upon seeing his robe distained with the blood which she imagined had
issued from his veins. Molfa Tarquinia, rendered illustrious by genius and
literature, of unblemished virtue, and possessing, also, a beautiful exterior,
although one of the brightest ornaments of the Court of Ferrara, and receiving
from the people of Rome, that unprecedented honor, the freedom of their city,
mourned, nevertheless, through a long life, until the hour of her dissolution,
the husband of her youth. Artemisia, wife of Mausolus, rendered herself
illustrious, and obtained immortality, by her devotion to the memory of her
husband. The Mausoleum, which she reared in honor of him, was considered as
one of the seven wonders of the world; and it gave name to all those succeeding
monuments, which were distinguished by extraordinary marks of magnificence.
Artemisia expired, the victim of inconsolable regret and tender sorrow, before
the Mausoleum was completed. Victoria Colonna, Marchioness of Pesca^ra,
ardently engaged in literary pursuits, while fame did ample justice to her
productions; yet, separated by the stroke of death, in the morning of her days,
from an illustrious and gallant husband, appropriated her remaining years to
unceasing grief, lamenting, in her pathetic Essays, the long-lost hero. The
celebrated Mrs. Row, equally conspicuous for genius and virtue, continued
faithful and persevering in her attachment to her deceased husband; nor could a
length of years abate her regrets.

Ninthly, They are capable of supporting, with equal honor, the toils of
government. Semiramis appears to have associated all the virtues and vices
which have received the masculine stamp -- she extended her empire from
Ethiopia to India, and subdued many nations -- her buildings and gardens were
also magnificent -- and she governed, in many respects, judiciously. Artemisia,
queen of C^ria, and daughter of Lygdamis, possessing, during the minority of
her son, sovereign authority, distinguished herself, both by her counsels and
her personal valor. Amalasuntha governed with the greatest justice, wisdom,
and prudence. Julia Mammaea educated her son, Alexander Severus, implanting in
his bosom the seeds of virtue, and adorning him with every princely
accomplishment: He was worthy of the high rank to which he was raised, and
disposed to become the father of his people: His mother presided in his
councils; the era of their administration was tumultuous and hazardous, and its
disastrous termination is one of the events which the student of history will
not fail to deplore.

Zenobia united genius and valor -- she was dignified by the title of Augusta.
After the demise of her husband, the supreme authority devolving upon her, she
governed with rectitude, firmness, and intrepidity. She preserved the provinces
in their allegiance, and added Egypt to her dominions. Moreover, when led into
captivity, she knew how to bring into subjection, her feelings; she endured
misfortune with the heroism of a noble spirit, and found a solace for the loss
of royalty, and the pageantry of a throne, in those rational pursuits, which
solitude and freedom from care uninterruptedly permit. Longinus was her
preceptor and friend; and she was worthy of his tuition and preferable
attachment. Elizabeth of England was endowed with energetic talents; her reign
was glorious for the people over which she presided; she was undoubtedly a
great politician, and governed with uniform vigor; she is characterized as
possessing much penetration, and an understanding fruitful of resources; her
foreign negociations were conducted with propriety and dignity; her mind was
opened and polished by all the aids of an extensive education, and adversity
was among her preceptors. Christina, queen of Sweden, governed her subjects
twenty-one years, with uniform wisdom and unimpeached prudence, when she
magnanimously resigned her crown; thus giving a rare example of an elevation of
intellect, which has not been surpassed.

Tenthly, and Lastly, They are equally susceptible of every literary
acquirement. Corinna, it is said, triumphed a fifth time over the immortal
Pindar, who had publicly challenged her to contend with him in the poetical
line. Sappho, the Lesbian poetess, was admired by the ancients -- she produced
many poems, and was addressed as the tenth Muse. Sulpicia, a Roman lady, who
lived under the reign of Domitian, was called the Roman Sappho. Hypatia,
beautiful, learned, and virtuous, the daughter of Theon, presided over the
Platonic school at Alexandria, about the close of the fourth century; she was
judged qualified to succeed her father in that distinguished and important
office; her wisdom was held in universal esteem; and from her judgment no one
thought proper to appeal: Persons clothed in public authority, even the first
magistrates, deliberated with her on the most urgent and important emergencies;
this unavoidably drew around her succeeding circles of men; yet she maintained
her intercourse with characters of various descriptions, without the shadow of
an impeachment of her reputation, until basely traduced, in a single instance,
by bigoted and interested calumniators. Cassandra, a Venetian lady, attained
an accurate skill in languages, and made great proficiency in the learning of
her time; she composed with facility, both in numbers and in prose, in the
language of Homer, Virgil, and Dante; she was a proficient in the philosophy of
her own and preceding ages; she rendered theology harmonious; she supported
theses with brilliancy; she lectured publicly at Padua; she blended the fine
arts with her serious studies; and the mild complacency of her manners
constituted the completion of her character: She received homage from sovereign
pontiffs, and sovereign princes; and she continued an ornament of her Sex, and
of humanity, one hundred and two years.

The daughter of Sir Thomas Moore, Mrs. Roper, already cited under the eighth
article, whose virtues were polished by literary seize, corresponded in
Latin with the celebrated Erasmus, and successfully appropriated many years of
her life to study: Her daughter inherited her erudition, and her amiable
qualifications. The Seymours, sisters, and nieces of a king, wrote elegantly in
Latin. Isabella of Rosera, in Spain, by her substantial arguments, natural
deductions, and able rhetoric, greatly augmented the number of believing Jews;
the great church of Barcelona was open for the exertion of her pulpitorial
abilities; and she acquired much honor by her commentaries upon the learned
Scotus. France knew how to estimate the talents of the Duchess of Retz; she
pursued her studies amid the seducing pleasures of a court; and, although young
and beautiful, spoke the ancient languages with propriety and elegance. Mary
Stuart, queen of Scotland, possessing all the advantages of exterior, and every
sexual grace, assiduously cultivated her mind: Her learning was as remarkable
as her beauty; she could, we are informed, write and speak six languages; her
numbers enchanted the Gallic ear; and, at an early age, she pronounced before
the French Court a Latin oration, calculated to convince her hearers, that
literary pursuits are proper to the Female Sex. Beauty could not plead in vain;
the lovely speaker exemplified, in her own character and seize, the truth
she inculcated; she was, herself, that happy combination, the practicability of
which she labored to impress; and conviction undoubtedly irradiated the minds
of her audience.

In the thirteenth century, a young lady of Bologna, pursuing, with avidity,
the study of the Latin language, and the legislative institutions of her
country, was able, at the age of twenty-three, to deliver, in the great church
of Bologna, a Latin oration, in praise of a deceased person, eminent for
virtue; nor was she indebted for the admiration she received, to the indulgence
granted to her youth, or Sex. At the age of twenty-six, she took the degree of
a Doctor of Laws, and commenced her career in this line, by public expositions
of the doctrines of Justinian: At the age of thirty, her extraordinary merit
raised her to the chair, where she taught the law to an astonishing number of
pupils, collected from various nations. She joined to her profound knowledge,
sexual modesty, and every feminine accomplishment; yet her personal attractions
were absorbed in the magnitude and splendour of her intellectual abilities; and
the charms of her exterior only commanded attention, when she ceased to speak.
The fourteenth century produced, in the same city, a like example; and the
fifteenth continued, and acknowledged the pretensions of THE SEX, insomuch that
a learned chair was appropriated to illustrious women.

Issotta Nogarolla was also an ornament of the fifteenth century; and Sarochisa
of Naples was deemed worthy of a comparison with Taffo. Modesta Pozzo's defense
of her Sex did her honor; she was, herself, an example of excellence.
Gabrielle, daughter of a king, found leisure to devote to her pen; and her
literary pursuits contributed to her usefulness and her happiness. Mary de
Gournai rendered herself famous by her learning. Guyon, by her writings and her
sufferings, has evinced the justice of her title to immortality. Anna Maria
Schurman of Cologne, appears to have been mistress of all the useful and
ornamental learning of the age which she adorned: She was born in 1607; her
talents unfolded with extraordinary brilliancy: In the bud of her life, at the
age of six years, she cut, with her scissors, the most striking resemblances of
every figure which was presented to her view, and they were finished with
astonishing neatness. At ten, she was but three hours in learning to embroider.
She studied music, painting, sculpture and engraving, and made an admirable
proficiency in all those arts. The Hebrew, Greek and Latin languages were
familiar to her; and she made some progress in the oriental tongues. She
perfectly understood French, English and Italian, and expressed herself
eloquently in all those languages; and she appropriated a portion of her time,
to the acquirement of an extensive acquaintance with geography, astronomy,
philosophy, and the other sciences: Yet she possessed so much feminine
delicacy, and retiring modesty, that her talents and acquirements had been
consigned to oblivion, if Vassius, and other amateurs of literature, had not
ushered her, in opposition to her wishes, upon the theater of the world: But
when she was once known, persons of erudition, of every description,
corresponded with her; and those in the most elevated stations, assiduously
sought opportunities of seeing and conversing with her.

Mademoiselle Scudery, stimulated by necessity, rendered herself eminent by her
writings. Anna de Parthenay possessed great virtues, great talents, and great
learning; she read, with facility and pleasure, authors in the Greek and Latin
languages; she was a rational theologician; she was a perfect mistress of
music; and was as remarkable for her vocal powers, as for her execution on the
various instruments which she attempted. Catharine de Parthenay, niece to Anna,
married to Renatus de Rohan, signalized herself by her attention to the
education of her children; and her maternal cares were crowned with abundant
success: Her eldest son was the illustrious Duke of Rohan, who obtained
immortal honor by his zeal and exertions in the Protestant cause; and she was
also mother to Anna de Rohan, who was as illustrious for her genius and piety,
as for her birth. She was mistress of the Hebrew language; her numbers were
beautifully elegant; and she supported, with heroic firmness, the calamities
consequent upon the siege of Rochelle.

Mademoiselle le Fevre, celebrated in the literary world by the name of Madame
Dacier, gave early testimonies of that fine genius which her father delighted
to cultivate. Her edition of Callimachus was received with much applause. At
the earnest request of the Duke de Montansier, she published an edition of
Florus, for the use of the dauphin; she exchanged letters with Christina, queen
of Sweden; she devoted herself to the education of her son and daughter, whose
progress were proportioned to the abilities of their interested preceptress:
Greek and Latin were familiar to her; and she was often addressed in both those
languages, by the literati of Europe. Her translation of the Iliad was much
admired. She is said to have possessed great firmness, generosity, and equality
of temper, and to have been remarkable for her piety. Maria de Sevigne
appropriated her hours to the instruction of her son and daughter; she has
enriched the world with eight volumes of letters, which will be read with
pleasure by every critic in the French language. The character of Mary II.
Queen of England, and consort to William of Nassau, is transcendently amiable.
She is delineated as a princess, endowed with uncommon powers of mind, and
beauty of person. She was extensively acquainted with history, was attached to
poetry, and possessed a good taste in compositions of this kind. She had a
considerable knowledge in architecture and gardening; and her dignified
condescension, and consistent piety, were truly admirable and praise worthy --
Every reader of history, and lover of virtue, will lament her early exit. The
Countess of Pembroke translated from the French, a dramatic piece; she gave a
metrical edition of the Book of Psalms, and supported an exalted character.

Anna Killigrew, and Anna Wharton, were eminent, both for poetry and painting;
and their unblemished virtue, and exemplary piety, pointed and greatly enhanced
the value of their other accomplishments. Catharine Phillips was, from early
life, a lover of the Muses; she translated Corneille's Tragedy of Pompey into
English; and in this, as well as the poems which she published, she was
successful. Lady Burleigh, Lady Bacon, Lady Russell, and Mrs. Killigrew,
daughters of Sir Anthony Cook, received from their father a masculine
education; and their prodigious improvement was an ample compensation for his
paternal indulgence: They were eminent for genius and virtue, and obtained an
accurate knowledge of the Greek and Latin languages. The writings of the
Duchess of Newcastle were voluminous; she is produced as the first English
lady who attempted what has since been termed polite literature. Lady Halket
was remarkable for her erudition; she was well skilled, both in physic and
divinity. Lady Masham, and Mary Astell, reasoned accurately on the most
abstract particulars in divinity, and in metaphysics. Lady Grace Gethin was
happy in natural genius and a cultivated understanding; she was a woman of
erudition; and we are informed that, at the age of twenty, " she treated of
life and morals, with the discernment of Socrates, and the elegance of
Xenophon" -- Mr. Congreve has done justice to her merit. Chudleigh, Winchelsea,
Monk, Bovey, Stella, Montague -- these all possess their respective claims.
Catharine Macauley wielded successfully the historic pen; nor were her
exertions confined to this line -- But we have already multiplied our witnesses
far beyond our original design; and it is proper that we apologize to our
readers, for a transgression of that brevity which we had authorized them to
expect.

No. XCI.
Nor are the modern Fair a step behind,
In the transcendent energies of mind:
Their worth conspicuous swells the ample roll,
While emulous they reach the splendid goal.

WE take leave to repeat, that we are not desirous to array THE SEX in martial
habiliments; we do not wish to enlist our women as soldiers; and we request it
may be remembered, that we only contend for the capability of the female mind
to become possessed of any attainment within the reach of masculine exertion.
We have produced our witnesses; their depositions have been heard; the cause is
before the public; we await their verdict; and, as we entertain all possible
veneration for the respectable jury, we shall not dare to appeal from their
decision.

But while we do homage to the women of other times, we feel happy that nature
is no less bountiful to the females of the present day. We cannot, indeed,
obtain a list of the names that have done honor to their Sex, and to humanity,
during the period now under observation: The luster of those minds, still
enveloped in a veil of mortality, is necessarily muffled and obscure; but the
curtain will be thrown back, and posterity will contemplate, with admiration,
their manifold perfections. Yet, in many instances, fame has already lifted her
immortalizing trump. Madame de Genlis has added new effulgence to the literary
annals of France. This lady unites, in an astonishing degree, both genius and
application! May her indefatigable exertions be crowned with the success they
so richly merit -- May no illiberal prejudices obstruct the progress of her
multiplied productions; but, borne along the stream of time, may they continue
pleasurable vehicles of instruction, and confer on their ingenious author that
celebrity to which she is indisputably entitled. France may also justly place
among her list of illustrious personages, the luminous name of Roland. Madame
Roland comprised, in her own energetic and capacious mind, all those
appropriate virtues, which are characterized as masculine and feminine. She not
only dignified THE SEX, but human nature in the aggregate; and her memory will
be held in veneration, wherever talents, literature, patriotism, and uniform
heroism, are properly appreciated.

The British Isle is at this moment distinguished by a constellation of the
first magnitude. Barbauld, Seward, Cowley, Inchbald, Burney, Smith, Radcliffe,
Moore, Williams, Wollstonecraft, etc. etc. -- these ladies, celebrated for
brilliancy of genius and literary seize, have rendered yet more
illustrious the English name.

Nor is America destitute of females, whose abilities and improvements give
them an indisputable claim to immortality. It is a fact, established beyond all
controversy, that we are indebted for the discovery of our country, to female
enterprise, decision, and generosity. The great Columbus, after having in vain
solicited the aid of Genoa, France, England, Portugal, and Spain -- after
having combated, for a period of eight years, with every objection that a want
of knowledge could propose, found, at last, his only resource in the
penetration and magnanimity of Isabella of Spain, who furnished the equipment,
and raised the sums necessary to defray the expenses, on the sale of her own
jewels; and while we conceive an action, so honorable to THE SEX, has not
been sufficiently applauded, we trust, that the equality of the female
intellect to that of their brethren, who have so long usurped an unmanly and
unfounded superiority, will never, in this younger world, be left without a
witness. We cannot ascertain the number of ingenious women, who at present
adorn our country. In the shade of solitude they perhaps cultivate their own
minds, and superintend the education of their children. Our day, we know, is
only dawning -- But when we contemplate a Warren, a Philenia, an Antonia, a
Euphelia, etc. etc. we gratefully acknowledge, that genius and application,
even in the female line, already gild, with effulgent radiance, our blessed
Aurora.

But women are calculated to shine in other characters than those adverted to,
in the preceding Essays; and with proper attention to their education, and
subsequent habits, they might easily attain that independence, for which a
Wollstonecraft has so energetically contended; the term, helpless widow, might
be rendered as unfrequent and inapplicable as that of helpless widower; and
although we should undoubtedly continue to mourn the dissolution of wedded
amity, yet we should derive consolation from the knowledge, that the infant
train had still a remaining prop, and that a mother could assist as well as
weep over her offspring.

That women have a talent -- a talent which, duly cultivated, would confer that
independence, which is demonstrably of incalculable utility, every attentive
observer will confess. THE SEX should be taught to depend on their own efforts,
for the procurement of an establishment in life. The chance of a matrimonial
coadjutor, is no more than a probable contingency; and if they were early
accustomed to regard this uncertain event with suitable indifference, they
would make elections with that deliberation, which would be calculated to give
a more rational prospect of tranquillity. All this we have repeatedly asserted,
and all this we do invariably believe. To neglect polishing a gem, or
obstinately to refuse bringing into action a treasure in our possession, when
we might thus accumulate a handsome interest, is surely egregiously absurd, and
the height of folly. The united efforts of male and female might rescue many a
family from destruction, which, notwithstanding the efforts of its individual
head, is now involved in all the calamities attendant on a dissipated fortune
and augmenting debts. It is not possible to educate children in a manner which
will render them too beneficial to society; and the more we multiply aids to a
family, the greater will be the security, that its individuals will not be
thrown a burden on the public.

An instance of female capability, this moment occurs to memory. In the State
of Massachusetts, in a small town, some miles from the metropolis, resides a
woman, who has made astonishing improvements in agriculture. Her mind, in the
early part of her life, was but penuriously cultivated, and she grew up almost
wholly uneducated: But being suffered, during her childhood, to rove at large
among her native fields, her limbs expanded, and she acquired a height of
stature above the common size; her mind also became invigorated; and her
understanding snatched sufficient information, to produce a consciousness of
the injury she sustained in ^he want of those aids, which should have been
furnished in the beginning of her years. She however applied herself diligently
to remedy the evil, and soon made great proficiency in writing, and in
arithmetic. She read every thing she could procure; but the impressions
adventitiously made on her infant mind still obtained the ascendency. A few
rough acres constituted her patrimonial inheritance; these she has brought into
a state of high cultivation; their productions are every year both useful and
ornamental; she is mistress of agricolation, and is at once a botanist and a
florist. The most approved authors in the English language, on these subjects,
are in her hands, and she studies them with industry and success.

She has obtained such a considerable knowledge in the nature of soils, the
precise manure which they require, and their particular adaption to the various
fruits of the earth, that she is become the oracle of all the farmers in her
vicinity; and when laying out, or appropriating their grounds, they uniformly
submit them to her inspection. Her gardens are the resort of all strangers who
happen to visit her village; and she is particularly remarkable for a growth of
trees, from which, gentlemen, solicitous to enrich their fruit-gardens, or
ornament their parterres, are in the habit of supplying themselves; and those
trees are, to their ingenious cultivator, a considerable income. Carefully
attentive to her nursery, she knows when to transplant, and when to prune; and
she perfectly understands the various methods of inoculating and ingrafting. In
short, she is a complete husbandwoman; and she has, besides, acquired a vast
stock of general knowledge, while her judgment has attained such a degree of
maturity, as to justify the confidence of the villagers, who are accustomed to
consult her on every perplexing emergency.

In the constant use of exercise, she is not corpulent; and she is extremely
active, and wonderfully athletic. Instances, almost incredible, are produced of
her strength. Indeed, it is not surprising that she is the idol and standing
theme of the village, since, with all her uncommon qualifications, she combines
a tenderness of disposition not to be exceeded. Her extensive acquaintance with
herbs, contributes to render her a skilful and truly valuable nurse; and the
world never produced a more affectionate, attentive, or faithful woman: Yet,
while she feelingly sympathizes with every invalid, she is not herself subject
to imaginary complaints; nor does she easily yield to real illness. She has
lately been indisposed -- and a life so valuable, when endangered, embodied a
host of fears for its safety: With difficulty she was persuaded to lie down
upon her bed; and the young woman who attended her, and to whom she had
endeared herself by a thousand good offices, after softly closing the shutters
and door of her apartment, privately summoned the aid of a physician; and when
the medical gentleman made his appearance, she accompanied him to the apartment
of her friend; but behold, the bird was flown! and when pursued, she was found
at a distance from her habitation, directing some laborers, who were employed
in her service, and who, she was fearful, were not sufficiently attentive to
her previous instructions. The event proved she had acted judiciously; for,
braced by the fresh air, her nerves new strung, assumed their usual tone, her
sickness vanished, and her native vigor returned.

Although far advanced in years, without a matrimonial connection, yet,
constantly engaged in useful and interesting pursuits, she manifests not that
peevishness and discontent, so frequently attendant on old maids; she realizes
all that independence which is proper to humanity; and she knows how to set a
just value on the blessings she enjoys.

From my treasury of facts, I produce a second instance, equally in point. I
have seen letters, written by a lady, an inhabitant of St. Sebastian, (a
Spanish emporium) that breathed the true spirit of commerce, and evinced the
writer to possess all the integrity, punctuality and dispatch, which are such
capital requisites in the mercantile career. This lady is at the head of a
firm, of which herself and daughters make up the individuals -- Her name is
Birmingham. She is, I imagine, well known to the commercial part of the United
States. She was left a widow in the infancy of her children, who were numerous;
and she immediately adopted the most vigorous measures for their emolument.
Being a woman of a magnanimous mind, she devoted her sons to the profession of
arms; and they were expeditiously disposed of, in a way the best calculated to
bring them acquainted with the art of war. Her daughters were educated for
business; and, arriving at womanhood, they have long since established
themselves into a capital trading-house, of which, as has been observed, their
respectable mother is the head. She is, in the hours of business, invariably to
be found in her compting-house; there she takes her morning repast; her
daughters act as clerks, (and they are adepts in their office) regularly
preparing the papers and letters, which pass in order under her inspection. She
signs herself, in all accounts and letters, Widow Birmingham; and this is the
address by which she is designated. I have conversed with one of our captains,
who has often negociated with her the disposal of large and valuable cargoes.
Her consignments, I am told, are to a great amount; and one of the principal
merchants in the town of Boston asserts, that he receives from no house in
Europe more satisfactory returns. Upright in their dealings, and unwearied in
their application, these ladies possess a right to prosperity; and we trust
that their circumstances are as easy, as their conduct is meritorious.

"Would you, good Mr. Gleaner, station us in the compting-house?" No, my fair
country-women, except circumstances unavoidably pointed the way. Again I say, I
do but hold up to your view, the capability of your Sex; thus stimulating you
to cultivate your talents, to endeavor to acquire general knowledge, and to
aim at making yourselves so far acquainted with some particular branch of
business, as that it may, if occasion requires, assist in establishing you
above that kind of dependence, against which the freeborn mind so naturally
revolts. Far be it from me, to wish to u^sex you -- I am desirous of
preserving, by all means, those amiable traits that are considered as
characteristic -- I reverence the modesty and gentleness of your dispositions
-- I would not annihilate a single virtue; but I would assiduously augment the
faithfulness and affection of your bosoms. An elegant panegyrist of your Sex,
has assigned you the superiority in the feelings of the heart; and I cannot
more emphatically conclude my subject, than in his beautifully pathetic
language:

"The pleasures of women must arise from their virtues. It is by the cradle of
their children, and in viewing the smiles of their daughters, or the sports of
their sons, that mothers find their happiness. Where are the powerful emotions
of nature? Where is the sentiment, at once sublime and pathetic, that carries
every feeling to excess? Is it to be found in the frosty indifference, and the
sour severity of some fathers? No -- but in the warm and affectionate bosom of
a mother. It is she, who, by an impulse as quick as involuntary, rushes into
the flood to preserve a boy, whose imprudence had betrayed him into the waves
-- It is she, who, in the middle of a conflagration, throws herself across the
flames to save a sleeping infant -- It is she, who, with dishevelled locks,
pale and distracted, embraces with transport, the body of a dead child,
pressing its cold lips to here is, as if she would reanimate, by her tears and
her caresses, the insensible clay. These great expressions of nature -- these
heart-rending emotions, which fill us at once with wonder, compassion and
terror, always have belonged, and always will belong, only to Women. They
possess, in those moments, an inexpressible something, which carries them
beyond themselves; and they seem to discover to us new souls, above the
standard of humanity."

No. XCII.
How acts of kindness meliorate the heart;
The solace once received we haste to give;
Warmed by example -- eager to impart,
We echo those blessed strains which bade us live.
So Luna, journeying in her ample round,
Bestows with liberal hand her borrowed light --
Illumes the "way worn trav'ller," homeward bound,
And sheds her silver radiance over the night.

IT was on a serene evening, just as the empress of night commenced her mild
career, that Adolphus with folded arms, and a heart on which was impressed the
most lively traits of devotional gratitude, paced and repaced the sea girt
strand of a wealthy emporium, whither he had been carried by the hope of
commercial advantage: His bosom was tranquillized by the eligibility of his
then situation; and the sunny beams of prosperity had invigorated all those gay
expectations that, shrinking from the clouds of adversity, prostrate before the
storms of life. A ship, the property of Adolphus, had a few hours before cast
anchor in the stream -- the shore resounded the cheerful voices of the
mariners, and the dashing of the waves vibrated gratefully on his ear.

Yet the chalice of misfortune had been mixed for Adolphus; recently he had
tasted the bitter draught, and it was to the humane interposition of strangers
that he was indebted for escaping the necessity of swallowing the very dregs.
Shipwrecked on a foreign shore -- totally unknown, and possessing not a
shilling of property. He had at this desolate period experienced the utmost
energies of philanthropy, and the efforts of benevolence had not only
extricated him from that ruin which his circumstances seemed inevitably to
involve, but, administering liberally to his necessities, had procured him
eligible accommodations and returned him in safety to his native country. "And
oh! exclaimed Adolphus, may I never cease to acknowledge the vast arrearage, by
succouring to the utmost of my power every son and daughter of misfortune; and
when I shall forget to extend to the hapless stranger, whose right is inscribed
by adversity, a portion of my regards, may I be dead to the pleasures of
existence, and may the grateful swell of complacency no more expand my bosom.
Gracious God! it is owing to the exertion of that sympathetic glow which thou
have implanted in the breasts of the far distant children of humanity, that my
gentle Anna has yet a protecting friend, that my little helpless family again
hear the responsive voice of a father, soothing them to peace, and pointing
them to the goal of virtue."

Just at this moment, a barge, launching from the shore, was on the point of
proceeding to the ship. Adolphus hailed the bargemen, and leaping on board, the
well plied oar soon produced him beside the Atalanta. Entering the ship, he
contemplated for a moment the splendors of a superb evening, with the
additional advantages of a beautifully extensive water prospect. The moon shone
forth in full orbed majesty, and he was indulging a most delightful reverie,
when his attention was suddenly arrested by an agonizing shriek issuing from
the cabin, the accent of which was evidently feminine. Instantly he descended
the stairs, when an elegant and interesting woman, on whose features was
impressed the frenzy of despair, wringing her snowy hands, in a tone of the
deepest anguish, exclaimed, " My God, it is impossible! surely it is impossible
-- some villain has basely traduced him!" Again she shrieked aloud, when,
raising her eyes with a fearful kind of horror, and observing numbers gather
about her, she clasped her hands in evident terror, and her calamitous
reflections for a time defeating themselves, she would have sunk lifeless on
the floor, had not the attentive Adolphus received her in his arms.

Under his humane direction, every necessary step was taken for her recovery;
and she too soon opened her eyes on a world in which her peace had been cruelly
wrecked. During her suspended animation, he had learned that the immediate
cause of her distress proceeded from a verbal message, containing much apparent
ingratitude, delivered to her in the name of a person from whom she expected
protection, and who she had informed by letter of her arrival. And, with the
hope of implanting that confidence which he judged necessary for her situation,
he informed her that he himself having been a son of sorrow, his sympathy was
the offspring of experience; that the ship and cargo was his property, and that
being largely in arrearage to the unfortunate, if she ranked in that truly
respectable description, he was ready to discharge his debt to her in whatever
mode might best correspond with her wishes.

Astonishment seemed to arrest, in the countenance of the lady, the progress of
grief; but assuming an air of dignified composure, she replied: "You must be
sensible, Sir, that your address is out of the common course. Accept, however,
my grateful thanks for whatever of kindness it contains; and be assured that my
distresses are not of a pecuniary nature; it is not in your power, Sir, to
relieve me. God forbid that in a case of so delicate a nature, I should stand
in need of foreign interposition. Unfortunately I have had too many witnesses
of a sorrow which is perhaps occasioned by a blameable susceptibility. Those
about you can inform you that a misunderstanding has taken place between my
husband and myself; but all will, all must end well. I have been wrong to be so
much disquieted, and that sympathy which you mention, induced by politeness,
will undoubtedly apologize for me, if I say that I have need of solitude to
collect my scattered spirits." Adolphus, after assuring the beautiful unknown
that if her future exigencies demanded the extricating hand of a friend, her
recognition of him would confer a pleasing obligation, drew from his pocket-his
address, and placing it in the hands of her woman, bowed respectfully, and,
quitting the cabin, took with him those observers whom her apparent sufferings
had drawn thither. Several days revolved, and he continued ignorant of the fate
of the lady; for reflecting on the elevated solemnity with which she replied to
his proffered aid, he conceived himself obliged in honor to desist from
further inquiries. At length, however, the following letter was put into his
hand:

July 15th, 1794. SIR,
A GOOD countenance is indeed a letter of recommendation -- and that benignity
which irradiated your features, when, on the fatal evening of the 1st instant,
you took such an apparent interest in the poor unfortunate, who then evidently
excited your commiseration, is my security for your continued favor. Alas! for
me, that I am reduced to the necessity of a reliance on one to whose very name,
but for my wretched situation, I had remained a stranger. Yet it is fit you
should be furnished with a few leading particulars, relative to the person who
now earnestly solicits your protection. Take then, worthy Sir, in few words,
the outlines of a life until within these two past years, marked only by
obedience, and consequent tranquillity.

My family name is --, I was born in the capital of Scotland -- my father then
possessed, and still continues to fill, an eligible and lucrative public
employment -- my mother died at a period when, hushed in the cradle of
innocence, I was insensible to every pain or pleasure, not originating in my
immediate wants, and her place was so well filled by her successor as to leave
my opening reason only natural regrets for this event. The attachment of my
parents was apparently equal, and I was blessed by every proper indulgence. Born
in affluence, I early received every advantage of which my tender years was
susceptible. The important era of sixteen found me at a celebrated boarding
school, where the ill judged liberties allowed to young ladies too often lay
the foundation of misfortunes that terminate not but with their mortal
existence. It was during my continuance at this seminary, that I saw and loved
the too insinuating Sebastian; his address is easy, his figure manly, and the
whole contour of his person strikingly impressive. He made his advances with
well dissembled delicacy; his ardent protestations of inviolable love were
clothed in the habiliments of friendship; and when at last his language became
more decisive, prepared for a declaration that I wished, I received the avowal
of his tender attachment with all those demonstrations of complacency which
youthful sincerity suggest, and which virgin modesty hesitates not to
authorize. Satisfied of the fervor of my own regard, I calculated on a mutual
passion, and my lover possessed my unbounded confidence. Fatal delusion!
Wretched esservescence of fancy -- ye have miserably undone me; and, strange to
tell, I live to lament the folly of my too easy faith.

You will observe, Sir, that my path was plain before me, and Sebastian was
immediately referred to my father. But what was my astonishment when that
father, ever attentive to my best interest, utterly refused to sanction my
choice, positively interdicting all future intercourse with Sebastian, and
making my continuance at the seminary to depend wholly on my obedience to his
commands. Ah, why did he trust to the discretion of a giddy lovesick girl. I
betrayed his honest confidence; and easily finding opportunities of conversing
with the seducer, the result of our frequent meetings was a clandestine
marriage; but no sooner had I become a wife, than all the daughter rushed on my
soul. I fondly loved, revered, and next to adored my father; and it was the
cherished hope of obtaining a reconciliation that gave me courage, in the face
of a solemn prohibition, to commit an offense that alas! has thrown me out of
his protection, and which has, I have every reason to fear, banished me forever
from his affections! Every method has been pursued, both by Sebastian and
myself, which we judged might obtain our pardon; but our conciliatory attempts
have proved ineffectual. Prayers and expostulations have been in vain -- my
father, my beloved father continues inexorable! Since the declaration of my
marriage, I have never once beheld his benign countenance. My mother, my
brothers, and my sisters, alas! his prohibition extends to them also! He
refuses to receive my letters; and, when in the perturbation of my soul I still
pressed them upon him, they were repeatedly returned unopened, and no language
can describe the consequent anguish of my spirit.

During my supplications for a reconciliation, the attention and unrivalled
tenderness of my husband continued unremitted; but at its close I saw, or
thought I saw a visible abatement of his kindness! I was, however, willing to
place this circumstance to a natural cause; and, solicitous to believe what was
so intimately connected with my tranquillity, I persuaded myself that he only
took rank with the generality of married men. It was at this juncture that the
decline of my health made it necessary I should take lodgings at Bath, while
business detaining Sebastian in London, a temporary separation seemed
unavoidable; and I struggled to embrace that composure which she who has
swerved capitally from the path of duty will find it very difficult to regain.

Thus was I circumstanced, when a letter was brought me from Sebastian,
acquainting me that he was on the point of embarking for America; that very
advantageous proposals had been made him, the emolument of which depended on
his immediate closing therewith, and on his collecting together every shilling
of property he could command. He entreated me therefore to think favorably of
him, and the step he meditated, and to send him as speedily as possible every
thing of value that I could conveniently part with. He informed me that he
contemplated an establishment in P --; and that on a supposition, my health and
inclination would meet his wishes, he had made arrangements for my passage to
the new world, on board the Atalanta, which ship was to sail in one month after
his embarkation. The letter containing this unexpected intelligence, was
replete with expressions of unalterable attachment; and I, who entertained no
doubt of my husband's honor, never regarded their sincerity as questionable.
The little interest in my gift was cheerfully surrendered -- my rings, my
jewels of every description, every thing that could be turned into ready money,
were all transmitted to the metropolis; and I only reserved my watch, the value
of which was enhanced by having been the property of my mother.

With a degree of alacrity, astonishing even to myself, I set about preparing
to follow; and I in reality experienced a degree of satisfaction in the idea of
quitting those dear native shores, where I was considered as an alien to those
persons whom I shall never cease to revere, and for whom the sigh of my bosom
still arose. I left England with those kind of feelings natural to a daughter
and a wife thus circumstanced: But every difficulty was lightened, by the
prospect of finding myself, at the close of my voyage, under the protection of
the man to whom my heart was most passionately devoted. I flattered myself
that, strangers in this new world, our consequence to each other would
necessarily augment; and the halcyon days of mutual love and confidence passed
in vision before me.

With the first possible moment after my arrival, I dispatched a line of
intelligence to Sebastian, and I received, by way of answer, a verbal
declaration, that except I could procure a reconciliation with my father, I
must never more expect to see his face!!! You, Sir, witnessed the effect of
this astonishing annunciation. Yet, after the first ebullition of grief and
surprise had a little subsided, I persuaded myself that it had been worded
during a moment of insanity; and I thought it became my character to seek an
eclaircissement. Obliged as I was by your proffered assistance, my spirit was
not then sufficiently broken to submit with composure to my humiliating
situation, and I am fearful that I received your unmerited attentions with
undue haughtiness; but that delicacy ascribed to your character, will, I trust,
enable you to account for my feelings. From the hour of my debarkation I have
assiduously sought my husband, but he as studiously avoids me -- we have not
yet met. I have repeatedly addressed him by letter -- I have expostulated,
soothed, and entreated, but without effect -- his answers are all in one
peremptory style -- he will never again see me, except my father explicitly
approbates our union. My father's admeasurement of the mind of this barbarously
mercenary man, was, it appears, perfectly just. Repeatedly did the anxious
parent assure me that his only object in seeking an alliance with me, was that
fortune which he vainly imagined could not be withheld from me. Alas! alas! at
this fearful moment, dreadfully do I realize the truth of this sentiment!
Sebastian has left this city, and is, I am informed, gone on a party of
pleasure to L --. Thither I would pursue him. Could I once more see him, I
think I should be satisfied; but I have not the means of a journey, and I have
unavoidably contracted debts which it is beyond my power to discharge. What
shall I say? In what words shall I clothe my presumptuous requests? Possessing
your address, I avail myself of your generosity -- yet, believe me, worthy
stranger, I would never have made this application -- my last breath should
have issued at the cold shrine of poverty, ere I had thus dared, had not the
tongue of information ascribed to you the first of virtues -- had not I learned
that you are wedded to a lovely woman, who possesses all your heart.

I say then, do you lend me your credence? do you admit my narrative as
authentic? Will you pay my debts? Will you hear me to the dwelling of her you
love? L -- is your native home, your seat of residence? Thither I am anxious to
proceed. Will you seek out my poor misguided husband, and endeavor to restore
him to the path of reason? Will you do all this? and on a supposition that my
earthly father refuses to accept the bill that my necessities once more impel
me to draw on him, will you be contented to look for reimbursement to the
common Parent of humanity? If you can answer these questions in the
affirmative, follow the bearer of this tedious scroll, and entitle yourself to
the everlasting gratitude of her, who overwhelmed by affliction, rests her last
hope on the honor and liberality of a stranger.

Accept, Sir, my warmest wishes for the continuance of your felicity; and
withdraw not your supporting countenance from the desolate, and truly wretched

HENRIETTA.


Adolphus hastened on the fleetest wings of philanthropy -- every thing the
injured Henrietta had requested was exactly attended to. He speedily dispatched
a letter to his lady, recounting every particular; and the gentle Anna delayed
not to address the fair mourner in those soothing strains of consolation, which
an elegant female knows to select, and which, penned by the hand of tender
pity, possess an assuasive influence, calculated to blunt the edge of the most
impressive grief. She assured Henrietta that a more welcome guest could not
pass her threshold; and she urged her immediately to fly to an abode, the value
of which would be enhanced by her presence. Adolphus having accomplished the
business that detained him, conducted Henrietta to L --, where she was received
by his amiable companion, in a manner exactly answerable to his wishes. A
series of delicate attentions were uniformly embodied, and no effort was
wanting, which it was judged might lessen the chagrin of the unfortunate
stranger. Sebastian, however, continuing to elude her pursuit, she at length
became convinced of his unworthiness; and every vestige of esteem being
uprooted from her bosom, the tender passion in a mind corrected by misfortunes,
of course subsided, and she had no remaining wish but that restoration to her
family which pardon and reconciliation could alone procure.

Adolphus meditated a voyage to England, and the wishes of Henrietta
accelerated his purpose. Arrived on the Albion shore, he procured an
introduction to a confidential friend of the father of Henrietta. This friend
was in the commercial line, and Adolphus became his customer. He made it the
interest of a person so necessary to his views, to visit him at his lodgings;
and in the course of a conversation contrived on purpose, he, as if by
accident, mentioned Mr. --; inquiries relative to his family succeeded. "How
many daughters has Mr. --, Sir? Is Miss Eliza his eldest daughter?" "Alas! no
-- his eldest daughter is a source of much anxiety to her father. -- Offending
him by an ill-judged marriage, he was for a time inplacable -- and the poor
lady has wandered, we hardly know whither. You seem moved, Sir -- surely you
are not acquainted with her story! -- yet our last knowledge of the lovely
fugitive, was her taking shipping for America -- and alas! without a protector!
Your looks are expressive, Sir -- Have you any intelligence to communicate?
Have you seen her -- heard of her? Where can she be found? Does she live? Is
she happy? Speak, Sir! for God's sake, speak."

"I will, Sir, and with happiness proportioned to your own. I left the lady at
my house in L --; she was in health, and she constitutes the dearest solace
which, during my absence, remains to the partner of my heart." This was enough
-- the inquirer, rushing from the apartment, was immediately out of sight; and,
speeding to the family of Henrietta, her kindred soon thronged about the
welcome messenger of peace -- father, mother, brothers, sisters, alternately
clasped him to their bosoms -- grasped his hands -- poured fourth their glad
orisons to Heaven, and invoked blessings on the instrument of such immeasurable
good. Now they eagerly questioned, and anon expressed the unutterable emotion
of the heart, by the big tears of pity, love, and gratitude; and their
detestation of the villain Sebastian, was only equalled by their admiration of
her humane protector. Gladly would they have endowed him with the better part
of their possessions; and the father of Henrietta, particularly, was unbounded
in his demonstrations of the rapt enthusiasm of gratitude.

Adolphus returned to America, bearing the olive branch, enriched with the
paternal benediction, and conveying letters copiously fraught with unreserved
love, returning confidence, and the most unequivocal marks of an entire
reconciliation. Reiterated invitations were also wafted over -- she was
conjured to bless once more those native haunts, to take shelter in that
paternal abode, where, from the hour of her departure, peace had been a
stranger -- and the comparatively happy Henrietta only delays her voyage to
England, until she can obtain from our Legislators a dissolution of that
contract into which she so indiscreetly entered, and which she now so deeply
laments.

The Gleaner, while engaged in the routine of office, has collected the
foregoing well authenticated narrative, and he imagines it will interest the
reader. The intelligent mind will deduce therefrom a lesson. It furnishes
another instance of the misfortunes attendant on a connection unsanctioned by
duty, of the propriety of obedience, and of the transient duration of love,
unsupported by esteem.

No. XCIII.
Steel not thy heart against the tale of woe
But wipe those tears from sorrows ^ount which flow.
-- His purposes were all by honor wrought;
His mind with blessed integrity was fraught;
But dire misfortunes every moment grew,
Like waves succeeding -- no cessation knew;
Till his possessions whelmed by ruthless (...),
Each hope engulph'd -- each prospect desolate:
Appalled he stood! and the wide waste surveyed!
Prostrate each plan, and every trust betrayed!

WHEN I do not deeply commiserate the unhappy debtor, in whose bosom probity
and punctuality are inmates, I shall be utterly lost to every recollection of
the various calamities to which my species are subjected. I do not say that the
creditor has not cause of complaint; he either loaned his property from motives
of friendship, or he parted with it, indulging an expectation, that it would
accumulate an interest which would still augment his stores; and, if he cannot
be charged with extortion, the transaction was undoubtedly justifiable: In
either of these cases, to despoil him of that which was legally his own, is a
disappointment on which he did not calculate, and which must be considered as
injurious.

Yet if the creditor is in easy circumstances, and the man in whom he confided
is the victim of misfortunes neither to be foreseen nor prevented; if it is
notorious that he has ever been upright and open in his dealings; if he
continued, to the utmost verge of possibility, punctual in his payments -- What
then? -- Why then I declare, I regard a creditor thus connected and thus
circumstanced, as in a very enviable situation. To every benevolent mind,
ambitious of accumulating good and proper actions, my reason will be obvious.
He is hereby furnished with an opportunity of calling into exercise the noblest
faculties which dignify human nature: It is at his option to embody the virtues
-- he can pour into the wounded bosom of the sorrow worn sufferer, the healing
balm of consolation -- he may even imitate Deity -- he can forgive like that
God who deals liberally, and upbraideth not.

Behold the oppressed man -- he is bowed down by calamity -- his heart is
fashioned by rectitude -- it is the sanctuary for every honest principle -- but
his best concerted efforts have proved abortive -- misfortunes have issued as a
torrent, and they have deluged his most sanguine expectations! With folded
arms, contracted brow, and features, on which is imprinted the deepest anguish,
he occupies his seat in that apartment where triumphed every refined and
virtuous enjoyment, but from which, alas! the face of pleasure seems now
forever banished! His gentle, his sympathizing companion -- but, strange to
tell, her power to soothe is no more! -- "Dear source of domestic happiness,"
he exclaims, "I have undone thee; thy manifold virtues but point the drawn
dagger to my soul -- every earthly blessing should be thine -- but he, in whom
thou have placed thy unbounded confidence, has miserably failed thee. Ruin
has overtaken me -- imprisonment awaits -- and for thee and thy dear infants,
where, amid this wide unpitying world, will ye find a place of shelter!
Gracious Heaven! reflection harrows up my soul; and I tremble on the verge of
distraction! God of compassion, vouchsafe to bestow thy consolations on these
desolate children of adversity, and calm those sorrows which it is beyond the
reach of human wisdom to assuage." The afflicted fair one clasps her hands in
speechless agony -- her eyes are raised to heaven -- she is bathed in tears --
and her inarticulated miseries affect beyond description: The affrighted
children cluster round -- they cannot develop the source of her sufferings, but
they behold her exquisitely distressed -- their little hearts are attuned to
sympathy, and they mingle their infantile cries. With a wild air she presses
them alternately to her bosom -- she pours forth the maternal benediction, and
it is conceived in all the energy of sorrow, while a more deeply agonizing
scene can hardly be imagined!

Well, Sir, he owes you many thousands -- granted -- but has he squandered
those thousands in unwarrantable indulgencies? Has he not been judicious in his
plans; industrious in the prosecution of his business; and frugal in his
expenditures? and is not this melancholy catastrophe produced by events wholly
beyond his jurisdiction? Besides, should you take the only step which can
heighten his sufferings -- should you arrest and throw him into prison -- will
this pay your debt? will it not rather put it wholly out of his power to make
those disbursements which we acknowledge are your due?

See that door -- it is more than half open; for those victims of calamity are
not solicitous to elude the pursuit of justice, or to hide from the ear of
curiosity what they cannot conceal from themselves. For the love of Heaven,
dear good Sir, step home; Borne on the wings of benevolence, you will not be
long, and prepare a writing which shall remit the debt until the time when a
more favorable turn in his affairs may enable him to discharge your demands;
and suffer me to entreat, to conjure you, by that Godlike benevolence which is
at this moment originating in your bosom the noblest purposes, to give the
heavenly emanation way -- to continue to aid his future efforts -- to assist in
building him up; and, in addition to the divine expansion which you will thus
indulge, you may yet receive more than an equivalent for every benign exertion.

But discretion whispers that you are primarily to study your own convenience,
and not imprudently place that property beyond your reach, which your own
exigencies may claim. This argument has weight; and if, my dear Sir, there are
not expenses you are in the habit of allowing, from which you can, in a small
degree, deduct, it must be considered as unanswerable. Suppose, for example,
you were to lessen the number of bumpers you swallow in the course of a day;
wine, drank in small quantities, operates as a cordial to the languid spirit --
it is a noble restorative, possessing even medicinal powers; but a too frequent
and copious use thereof, destroys its effect; and in the voluptuous embraces of
familiarity its virtues expire. Is not the angel pity an inhabitant in the
gentle bosom of your lady? does not she possess that charming benignity which
should ever stand conspicuous in the female character? and are there no
articles in her department which she can retrench? Do you go three times a week
to the theater? go but once, and appropriate the four dollars you thus rescue
to the necessities of this poor bankrupt; and I dare pronounce that the
entertainment you receive at the playhouse will possess augmented charms. In
general, it is true, that the infrequency of enjoyments enhance their value,
but the pleasures of benevolence never create satiety. A repetition of virtuous
actions becomes still more productive of the most refined, delightful and
elevating sensations; and the reason is obvious, their origin is celestial;
they will bloom immortal in the Paradise of our God.

Well, then, my good Sir, under the auspices of these deductions and
regulations, even economy enlists on the side of philanthropy. -- Bless me! how
expeditiously you have prepared your articles of enlargement! -- But let us not
delay -- the door, as I said, is more than half open, and we will enter
together -- The paper is presented -- it is seized with a trembling hand -- its
contents are read aloud -- Gracious Heaven! what an astonishing transition! But
let me briefly sketch its effects. A shock of electricity could not have been
more instantaneous, or more general: The orient beam, succeeding to a night of
darkness -- No, this will not do -- Reader, I have attempted too much -- there
are scenes, over which a skilful painter will drop the veil -- Permit me to
relinquish my design -- and let it suffice to say, that despair in one glad
moment is consigned to oblivion -- that the expression of anguish is no more --
that the cherub, Hope, throws on every feature its all radiant beams -- and the
emancipated man has now no struggles but to evince his immeasurable sense of
obligation, his consequent gratitude, and the indefatigable zeal with which he
will henceforward devote himself to the interest of his next to divine
creditor. His lovely friend more than partakes his felicity; the sudden tide of
joy seems well near to overwhelm her gentle spirit: The children cling around
the knees of their common benefactor -- intuitively they hail their guardian
friend; and they will in future be taught to place his name next to that of
Him, who is the alone proper object of religious worship and adoration! Are
there, this side the elysium of the blessed, enjoyments more exquisitely
delightful, more truly elevating than those which are to be obtained from the
contemplation of scenes like this? and, is it not true, that the character of
him who is in the habit of producing them, approximates, upon these occasions,
to the Author of every good?

The cruelty of imprisoning a man for debt, after he has yielded the last
farthing he possesses, appears to me in a very heinous point of view. It is
amazing that there should be on this globe, nations who embody in their code of
civil regulations, a legal right to commit this great evil! That decree which
ranks a man, merely because he has been unfortunate, with the malefactor who
is convicted of capital enormities, is surely detestable, and every idea of
rectitude must revolt from its impositions. Liberty is too inestimable a
blessing to be abridged, but in cases which involve offenses of the deepest
dye. If the insolvent debtor has secreted his property, the ground is then
changed -- the affair wears another face -- he becomes criminal, and must fall
into that class of men, whose degeneracy merits condign punishment. But if his
actions are irreproachable, he is only unfortunate -- he is entitled to the
utmost tenderness; and I would as soon arrest him because he had laid in the
grave the wife of his bosom, or the children with whose existence his own
seemed inseparably interwoven.

Travelers into the interior parts of our country, inform us there are many
tribes and nations on which we liberally bestow the epithet savage and
barbarous, that stand astonished at the privileges we annex to wealth, and the
consideration with which it is regarded. That gold and silver should confer
honor upon its possessor, strikes them as a great absurdity; they conceive
that an equal distribution of a commodity, commanding the necessaries of life,
would be becoming rational beings; and when they are told that a deficiency of
the glittering mischief, frequently arrests persons in the bloom of life,
separates them from all they hold dear, and hurries them away to a dreary
confinement, putting a period to those exertions that they are still capable of
making, and that might be equally for their own emolument, and the benefit of
that society, of which they constitute a part! Listening to such recitals, they
question the veracity of the narrator, and when convinced by circumstances of
the real existence of this barbarous trait, in the government of those who term
themselves the civilized part of mankind -- they, in their turn, become
accusers; they evince the strongest marks of astonishment, and horror; nor do
they hesitate in charging the authors of such an injurious institution, with an
utter dereliction of every sentiment proper to humanity.

A thought this moment occurs to my mind -- Would it not be beneficial, was it
made an act of the legislature to appropriate public funds for the relief of
the honest debtor? would not such a benevolent provision be the best calculated
to prevent fraud? and would it not strikingly pourtray that true parental
tenderness which ought to be a predominating feature in every government?
First, it would prevent fraud; for no persons but those who had demonstrably
yielded up their last farthing, should be entitled to the benefit of the funds;
and thus every sufferer would become eager to deliver up the whole of his
effects: and secondly, it would be evincive of the parental tenderness of
government, for it would hold out to its oppressed children, that last
resource, which would prevent their ship-wrecked hopes from total destruction:
And it would be well to apportion the sums appropriated, according to the
merit, previous situation, and losses of the sufferer; if he had been embarked
in enterprises calculated to promote the public weal -- if his exertions had
beautified a town or city -- if he had sunk beneath the magnitude of an
undertaking too arduous for his abilities -- if his education had been liberal
-- his habits of living, generous -- his sentiments refined, and his ideas
capacious -- if he had parted with a large property, without justly incurring
the imputation of extravagance: A man thus circumstanced should receive from
the appropriated funds, according to the wisdom of the legislature,
proportionable assistance. If we are not misinformed, the legislature of one of
our sister States, lately granted a lottery to a meritorious citizen who had
been eminently unfortunate, for the purpose of paying those just debts, which,
through a series of to him disastrous years, had enormously accumulated, and
which involved, in their consequences, many deserving individuals. I would have
purchased a ticket in that lottery, although I had been sure it would have
proved a blank.

I think it impossible to behold a deserving man suddenly precipitated from an
eminence which seemed to be his birthright, and reduced to the necessity of
mingling with those pensioners of an hour, to whom custom has rendered their
situation tolerable, without the sigh of regret, and the tear of commiseration.
What elegant building is that which rears its milk white front with modest
dignity? the surrounding prospects are truly picturesque; nothing can be
imagined more paradisiacally enchanting, more truly delightful. This well
planned and well executed model of architecture, rises on an eminence which
commands a handsome street; the views from the different wings of the building
present a sketch of both town and country; thus connecting, in idea, with its
other advantages, those social pleasures that constitute the most valuable
enjoyments of life.

"Pray, has the person, who designed and reared this commodious mansion,
continued to occupy it many years?" "Alas! no -- It is at this moment inhabited
by a stranger!!! He, who contemplated this residence as an asylum for his
children's children, borne down by a tide of misfortunes, after relinquishing
his last penny to clamorous creditors -- after continuing immured within the
walls of those apartments during many gloomy months, a close prisoner, has at
last removed with a wife, whose merits entitle her to the first distinction,
and a family truly amiable -- this oppressed and disappointed man has removed"
-- "Where, where has he removed?" -- "He now occupies, in an obscure part of
the city, inconvenient lodgings, up three pair of stairs!!!"

Alas! alas! how distressing are these vicissitudes! and how worthy the efforts
of a virtuous community, bound together by the bands of fraternity, and seeking
to promote that kind of equality which is the offspring of reason -- How worthy
the efforts of such a people, to devise for so heart affecting an evil, a
suitable remedy.

No. XCIV.
He lives too fast, who the last shilling spends;
Sickness awaits, and trembling age impends!
The harvest of our years should treasured lie,
Till winter wraps in clouds our azure sky.
The night of age is comfortless and dark --
When gathering storms assail the shattered bark;
When stern necessity demands its dues,
And poverty its woe-fraught visage shows,
A length of days their icy darts prepare;
Pursuits once glowing all congealed are;
The mental faculties, enwrapt about
In garments, by continued use worn out,
Suspend their efforts as their organs die,
And many an hour almost inactive lie!
Sure, then, it is wise, that competence to gain,
Which may the flow of ebbing life sustain.

"I SPEND no more than my own," cried Commodus -- "I regularly adjust my
accounts; and every New Year's Day I am able to say, I owe no man a shilling."
This was well -- But if Commodus could have added, that, with each revolving
year, he reserved something as the resource of accident, or by way of making
provision for those days, in which the grasshopper becomes a burden, it would
have been better. In the winter of life, how inadequate are human efforts,
either to cater for the wants of the body, or to gather in that celestial food,
so necessary for the immortal spirit, then oppressed by its connection with a
debilitated mass of matter, which, verging on dissolution, of necessity impedes
the powers it envelops. The spirit, emanating from the fountain of life, and
embodied by its clay-built tenement, must generally find the operation of its
faculties conformable to the constitution of those agents, by which it is to
effect its purposes; and hence it follows, that an enervated, or aged body,
retards, if not wholly suspends, (except in instances of uncommon energy of
understanding) the visible manifestation of those abilities, still inherent in
the soul.

I scarcely know a more melancholy object than old age, combining poverty and
disease! To depend, for our daily bread, on the caprices of those about us, is
a situation, at all times, and in every view, sufficiently painful: But it must
be peculiarly so, to those who have been accustomed, in youth, to administer to
their own necessities. I should regard dependence, even on my children, as a
painful circumstance. It is natural for a parent to bestow protection and
support; and when these benefits become retrograde, we are subjected to that
kind of shock, which an inversion of the laws of nature usually creates.

Is there, whose feelings are attuned by complacency, while a family of the
following description passes in review before him? Its principal is in the
meridian of his days; and he is supposed to have filled his part, in the
various scenes in which he has been called to act, with propriety, and with
honor -- he is rearing to maturity, a number of sons and daughters -- and he
has, besides, taken to his dwelling, the old man and woman who are the authors
of his being. Age has been denominated a state of second childhood; and,
perhaps, aged persons may be so circumstanced, as to stand in need of the
utmost tenderness.

Observe, now, the regulations in this little community. The children are
nurtured by indulgence -- their wants, and even their caprices, obtain
attention -- their infantile prattle is enchanting -- their wonderfully apt
sayings, and the strength of memory they evince, are copious themes, which
arrest the ear, and monopolize almost the whole attention, of every visitor --
their questions are never considered as impertinent -- they are commended for a
laudable curiosity, and responded to with patience -- At table, their appetites
are consulted -- mamma reserves every choice bit for them -- and the deference
they injudiciously receive, too often renders them tyrants in miniature. Does
sickness show its pale face among them? -- the distracted parents would move
the universe in favor of the little sufferers -- with unwearied supplications
they assail the ear of Heaven; and on heir restoration to health, joy rekindles
in their bosoms.

But let us reverse the picture. Behold the venerable pair! -- Mark! with what
hesitancy and manifest perturbation they make known those wishes, which involve
the smallest alteration in their situation -- their most rational requests are
characterized as unjustifiable complainings; and the utter impossibility of
pleasing old people, is expatiated on, with all the aggravating redundancy of
language. Remarks, originating in the wisdom of years, are delineated as the
tiresome loquacity of old age; and, if they attempt to retrace those scenes, in
which they passed the morning of their lives, the symptomatic garrulity is made
the subject of petulant ridicule. Neglected, and consequently desolate, they
seem as if of another, and inferior, class of beings -- or if, willing to take
a part in what is passing, they question, or remark, they are either accused of
tiresome inquisitiveness, or are heard with a contemptuous kind of silence. If
they are delicate in the choice of their viands, they are pronounced
intolerably burdensome, while every look and gesture seems to say -- " You have
occupied your stations on this globe long enough, and you should not delay
descending into that grave, on which you seem to totter." Should their
accumulating infirmities confine them to beds of anguish, even the penurious
attendance they receive, is rather the result of duty, than inclination, while
their return to a state of convalescence is marked by no soothing
congratulations; and the melancholy, the venerable sufferers, have only to
lament in concert their humiliating situation, and to regret, that the efforts
of those years, during which they possessed the ability, did not secure a
sufficiency to insure that degree of independence, which might have prolonged
their enjoyments, and continued their respectability: Yet does that son, whose
dawn of being they watched with tender parental solicitude, obtain, from the
general voice, a large share of applause, for the filial duty with which he
supports his aged, and otherwise destitute, parents.

Reader -- this is not a far-fetched or high-colored picture. The Gleaner has
witnessed instances, even more aggravated than the example he produces; and
while he is aware, that there are persons, figuring as splendid ornaments of
humanity, who have derived their highest enjoyments from " rocking the cradle
of declining age," he must, nevertheless, continue to deplore the melancholy
circumstances, to which old age and dependence are too frequently subjected.

A spirit of independence has been regarded as natal in the bosom of Americans.
We would rouse the latent spark, and stimulate our countrymen to become, as far
as a state of society will admit, consistently independent. Do not leave
contingencies to answer entirely for themselves -- cultivate habits of
industry, and combine economy. If, in the full bloom of youth, and all the
vigor of health, your abilities can no more than answer your exigencies, where
are the resources of sickness, and of age? -- It is proper you should reflect
-- and it will be well to remember, that small sums, deducted from the expenses
of every day, and judiciously laid out, may accumulate a fund, which may serve
as the richest solace to the winter of life. Europeans charge Americans with a
ridiculous, if not an unwarrantable, kind of extravagance. We are apprehensive,
the accusation is not wholly ill founded. If our information is accurate, the
Parisians, possessed of property, to an amount which would almost seem incredible
to an American ear, receive our first characters, not even excepting those in
the diplomatic line, with abundance of civility, indeed; but their
entertainments are as little burdened with expense as possible -- they consist,
generally, of soups in their variety, and such showy trifles, as stand them in
a very small amount -- and if the Londoner adds a pudding to his surloin, his
guest must be of no ordinary description. On the other hand, Europeans,
visiting an American metropolis, stand astonished at the lavish profusion every
where displayed. Our tables groan with piles of costly food,
And all is more than hospitably good.
But it is not in the provisions of the table exclusively, that we are thus
remarkably profuse. Buildings, furniture, equipage, dress, and public
amusements -- Is it not to be feared that, in all these particulars, many of
our citizens exceed their income? and are we not advanced in the arts of
luxury, whole centuries further than is proper to an infant nation, still
struggling under many burdens, and laudably solicitous to raise and equip that
navy, which may serve as a defense to our extensive seacoast?

Let not the reader imagine, we are seeking to render him niggardly penurious
-- God forbid. We would have him open as the light of heaven to the real
necessities of a fellow creature: and for this reason, he should be constantly
in the exercise of that economy, which is undoubtedly closely allied to
generosity. The consequence of American extravagance, is precisely that which
reflection would predict. Property is continually fluctuating; and it is
observed, that an inheritance, however ample and productive, is rarely found in
the same family, to the third or fourth generation. Persons, we are informed,
who are citizens either of France or Great Britain, and who possess, in their
own right, an easy competency, do not usually consider either the principal or
the interest, as the proper resource of health and vigor: The exigencies of
the day are supplied by present industry; and the funds already acquired are
reserved as the solace of that futurity, during which, it is almost certain,
they will become unequal to any arduous undertaking. Their sons and daughters
are early taught the useful arts of diligence and economy; they soon become
sensible of the value of independence, and are elevated by the consideration,
that it is, in an important sense, within their reach.

A refugee, quitting her native country, during the late contention between
England and her, then, colonies, obtained, after landing upon the Albion shore,
a commodious situation in the city of Bristol. She was a woman of observation,
and, by consequence, of information; and her remarks on the manners and customs
of the people, among which she was so unexpectedly placed, were judicious, and
worthy of that solidity and penetration, which were conspicuous traits in her
character. But, among the various observations she was from time to time
induced to make, no circumstance astonished her so much, as the frugality and
unremitted application of persons possessing property, which, in America, would
have been judged a sufficient foundation for the full indulgence of the
appendages of luxury; And among other instances of this description, which she
collected, she often mentioned with admiration, a young woman, enjoying, in her
own right, several thousand pounds sterling, which were absolutely at her own
command, who, to her great surprise, earnestly solicited the favor of being
employed as her milliner.

Captain L -- lately gratified me by a recital, for the truth of which he
pledged that honor that has never yet been forfeited. While he lay on the
river Thames, among the watermen who industriously ply on that celebrated
stream, was a Mr. Swale, who distinguished himself for his integrity,
diligence, and punctuality. He was particularly attached to my friend, taking
in his movements a decided interest, and disdaining to avail himself of those
advantages, which youth and inexperience seemed to have placed within his
reach. His demands were never exorbitant; and he took care to guard our young
adventurer against those frauds, to which he might probably be subjected from
persons less scrupulous. In short, the services rendered by Mr. Swale were many
and important; he was ever upon the wing to execute his wishes, and would
hasten with alacrity on messages of the most insignificant or trivial import.
Neither the dress nor appearance of Mr. Swale varied essentially from the
brethren of his order. He kept a kind of ordinary, whither the officers of
those ships, laying in his vicinity, frequently repaired, for the purpose of
taking those occasional refreshments that their exigencies required.

Captain L -- was surprised to find Mr. Swale often refusing, from those to
whom he professed an attachment, any compensation for the articles which he
furnished; and his fears, that the man might eventually become the victim of
his own liberality, induced him to press on him the full price for every repast
he had taken in his ordinary. Mr. Swale was a general favorite with the
American commanders, then lying on the river -- there was something clever
about the man -- and his facetious good humor, with the cheerful alacrity with
which he accommodated himself to their wishes, induced them frequently to
solicit his society when they met at the ordinary. It was at one of those
unceremonious associations, that Captain L -- expressed to a comrade his
regret, that his ship could not proceed on her voyage, until he had received
several hundred pounds, which would, at the expiration of a certain number of
days, be due on the bills in his possession. He observed, that he had fully
accomplished every other part of his business; and while he calculated the
probable damage the detention might occasion, he lamented the loss of those
favorable gales which seemed to invite his departure.

"Make yourself easy, Captain," replied Mr. Swale, "the money is at your
service -- give me the bills -- receive from me their value -- hoist your sails
-- and God send you a prosperous voyage." Captain L -- eyed the waterman with a
look of incredulity and surprise: He was at a loss how to understand him -- Was
he indulging that vein of humor for which he was so remarkable? Was his
benevolence so far interested, as to stimulate him to attempt borrowing the
money? or, could he really command the sum in question? My young friend wears
an honest countenance, and the perplexity of his mind being impressed on his
features, Mr. Swale added: "O! upon my troth, Captain, it is true -- your
waterman would advance a much larger sum, to help an honest man, impatient to
return to his family and friends: The money, as I told you, shall be ready at a
minute's warning; and we will scorn to make any words about it."

Captain L --, divided, between admiration of the waterman's generosity, and
astonishment at his ability, contented himself by expressing, in general terms,
his gratitude, and immediately went in search of a person, who had offered to
advance the money, upon a consideration which he had deemed exorbitant: Yet,
the urgency of his affairs had necessitated him to balance in his mind, the
probable consequences of acceptance or rejection; and he had determined to come
to a conclusion that very evening. He related to the usurer Swale's offer, and
the commercial gentleman replied: "Ah! that Swale has taken many a guinea out
of my pocket; he possesses forty thousand pounds sterling, independent of the
world; and he is eternally engaged in acts of this kind, for which we dealers
in money owe him little thanks." Captain L -- returned, accepted the generosity
of the waterman, who appeared overjoyed in an opportunity of obliging him,
weighed anchor, and departed, bestowing a hearty benediction upon industry and
benevolence.

And such is the order of events. Industry, consorted with frugality, prepares
the funds of benevolence; and thus we are put in possession, not only of
independence, but of the means of conferring the most essential benefits.

No. XCV.
Riches nor give, nor take intrinsic worth:
Benignity, of intellectual growth,
May bud and flourish in a virtuous breast,
Although of power and opulence possessed;
Greatness and goodness sometimes are combined,
Augmenting millions with a liberal mind;
The angel Pity, wheresoe'er she dwells,
To blessed benevolence the soul impels.

IT may be a question whether the opinion that riches necessarily contract and
indurate the heart, is the result of accurate investigation, or whether in the
first instance, hastily adopted, it has not rather, like many other positions,
obtained respectability from its antiquity and almost general reception. For
myself, I must confess that I regard the truly virtuous man as superior even to
the ensnaring blandishments of prosperity; and I have imagined his proper and
beneficent actions circumscribed only by his power.

If it is certain that riches do inevitably prostrate the best affections of
the soul, it is incumbent upon us to avoid, by every means, the accumulation of
wealth, and we should admonish our children to shun a precipice so replete with
danger.

Persons filling eminent stations, and possessing affluence, are thus rendered
conspicuous: Their good and bad deeds are the subjects of observation --
depraved minds dwell with malicious satisfaction on the latter, and every
unfeeling trait is attributed to the contagion of circumstances. But were the
different ranks of men to pass in review before us, we might find reason to
lament, in individuals of every rank, a similarity of disposition. Nature would
probably appear equal in her distributions, while we were constrained to
acknowledge that Virtue continued Virtue, even on a throne; and that, although
retired to those sequestered haunts, where the splendour of opulence darted not
even an oblique ray, Vice, nevertheless, retained its original deformity.

Applied to, on a certain occasion, by a female in distressed circumstances,
for pecuniary assistance, the state of my finances at that time would not admit
of my affording the sufferer any considerable relief; and, although I was on
easy terms with many persons in affluence, whom I felt strongly impelled to
address, yet accustomed to consider riches as steeling the heart, I conceived
that, wafted on the stream of pleasure, and marking their hours only by a
succession of enjoyments, they would hardly find leisure for a tale of sorrow.
" I advise you not to think of soliciting the great;" said Cynicus, "take my
word for it your supplications will be ineffectual; and you will besides
subject yourself to ridicule, if not to more serious reprehension." I was
before hesitating, relative to the utility of an experiment which I was
constrained to confess assumed a very unpromising aspect; and the sentiments of
Cynicus were not calculated to stimulate my efforts. Calamity, however,
pressing hard on my supplicant, the pleadings of commiseration were not to be
resisted; and I boldly resolved on an immediate appeal to the feelings of my
honorable acquaintance.

It was, I recollect, a charming morning in the month of june -- and the hours
from nine to one were devoted to the prosecution of my design. I do not know
that there is a period of my life, on which I can reflect with more rational
and complete satisfaction. The sensations consequent on an observation of those
benign propensities which occasionally operate on the human intellect, on
propensities which unquestionably emanate from the Divine Author of every good,
are immeasurably delightful. To the parlours of the opulent I found a ready
admittance, nor was I excluded even from the bed side of the invalid. If I were
at liberty to give names, and to delineate circumstantially, I could a tale
unfold, at which the lover of humanity would exult, and the heart of
sensibility be made glad. It is with difficulty I check the ardour of my
feelings -- I would emblazon deeds of worth -- I would present them to a
listening world; and thus enkindle the glow of emulation. Yet, circumscribed by
the prohibitions of delicacy, I am only permitted to say, that I narrated
particulars, and was heard with respectful attention; that the angel pity
became my advocate, and tears of commiseration streamed from many an eye; that
my application was received with acknowledgments -- every individual expressing
a sense of obligation for the opportunity afforded of relieving a child of
sorrow. Yes, the feelings of benevolence were benignly excited; exertions were
cheerful, prompt and copious; and the exigencies of a distressed and desolate
petitioner were amply supplied.

I am sensible it would be easy to produce a contrast to this successful
morning; and an instance of penurious opulence, this moment glides along the
avenues of recollection. Paucius is advanced in years -- it is beyond his power
to expend his income -- he has no child, and his accumulating infirmities must
very soon lay him in the grave. Yet Paucius has never been detected in a
voluntary contribution to the relief of the necessitous; and the annual tribute
for charitable appropriations, which the regulations of society extort from
him, is yielded with no common pangs! Some business, relative to a mortgage,
the day of redemption having expired, obliged him, on a severe morning in
January, to leave home very early. It was a critical moment -- he stepped into
his chariot without breakfast -- and, being in haste, he was not so well
guarded against the inclemency of the weather, as he would otherwise have been:
He however arrived at the destined village, felicitating himself that he was in
time to put the patrimony of a female orphan beyond her reach; and, having thus
pleasantly finished the affair, he resolved to return home by a shorter road.
But, mark the folly of human wisdom -- John, unacquainted with the new route,
lost his way; and keeping his master abroad a full hour beyond his expectation,
our poor hero was well nigh perishing with cold and hunger. Conscience, that
faithful vicegerent, ever opportune in its admonitions, forcibly impressed on
his mind the distresses of those children of penury who were doomed, with each
revolving day, to reiterate sufferings that he now found almost insupportable.
What wonders are wrought by sympathy! In a tremulous voice he addressed his
servant:

" John, it is a bitter day -- a bitter day, John; remember, when I get home,
that I send poor James's wife and children a little fuel; and, do you hear, I
will add something for a breakfast too! Heaven help us; we shall not live here
always! I say, John, you will be sure to remember!" John stared, doubted, and
replied, " Yes, Sir, I will be sure to remember;" and, lashing his horses, he
proceeded with more than usual rapidity, until he produced his master at the
gate of his own dwelling. Paucius entered -- the armed chair, the blazing
hearth, the smoking kettle, and well spread table, awaited his coming -- he
fed luxuriously. John, too, made his breakfast, and, bowing most submissively,
informed his master that he was ready to convey his bounty to the family of
James. "Stop, John -- stop, John," cried Paucius, "we will defer what we were
speaking of -- It is no matter now, child, the weather is quite moderate to
what it was, and I dare say the wind will soon be southerly."

No, I do not affirm that benevolence predominates in every instance. Would to
God that I could thus pronounce. I only contend that it is found
indiscriminately with rich and poor; and that it is neither conferred nor
diminished by wealth.

Two days since, as I was chatting with Marcella, in a little sanctuary where
she receives her supplicants, a female assistant introduced a sorrow-worn
veteran; he bowed low to Marcella; the lines of his expressive countenance were
affectingly marked; and while he addressed her, (whose patronage he solicited)
the dignity of the soldier, still strikingly visible, was strongly contrasted
by a deep sense of humiliation. "I am a poor man, Madam -- I was engaged in
defending the liberties of America -- I lost my right (...) by a cannon-ball at
the battle of Bunker Hill -- I have a sick wife, and a family of suffering
children -- my health is gone -- I am old, Madam -- there is a cold winter
coming on; and I am a petitioner to persons of ability for the means of
living." What an appeal to the feelings of an American! But Marcella is
governed by reason; she does not indiscriminately lavish the bounty of Heaven;
she made the proper inquiries; her chariot was ordered out; on that very
afternoon she visited the family of the soldier; his report was just; and both
he, and his, are entered among those who are entitled to her bounty.

I repeat, it is pleasant to record instances of benignity; and, on this
subject, thought produces thought, while many a little anecdote presses on my
memory. An interesting female, long since numbered with the dead, now meets my
view. Her figure is still before me -- tall, thin, and emaciated almost to a
skeleton -- poverty, loss of friends, and wasting sickness, had done more
toward furrowing her check, than the gently indenting hand of time. She was a
widow, and her children were all helpless; her manners were simple and
unadorned; she was altogether void of affectation; and I believe she could not
have fabricated an untruth, although she might thus have succeeded to much
wealth. It did not seem her aim to move the passions: She only observed, while
holding in her trembling hand a small parcel of powdered maize -- (and she
delivered herself in a tone of uncommon humility and resignation) " I have
worked diligently during this long day, and this is all I have gotten." There
was something in her countenance which pointed her words; and a languid beam,
escaping from her expressive eye, forcibly made its appeal to the heart. It
happened that I was, at that moment, seated in the bow window in the parlour of
Amanda, while that lovely woman, standing in the door, was giving some
directions to her gardener. The pity moving female had placed one foot on the
lower stone of a flight of steps which led to the house, when she uttered the
before cited sentence -- " I have worked diligently during this long day, and
this is all (holding up the maize) that I have gotten." "Step in, honest
friend," said Amanda, (and Heaven bless you, involuntarily exclaimed my heart)
"you seem not well able to labor; accept this glass of wine, it will do you
good."

The poor woman waited not for entreaty; with an air of genuine gratitude she
swallowed the draught. "Thank you, Madam; your wine is a cordial to which I
have not of late been used." "Take a seat," cried Amanda, " I wish to converse
with you." The patient sufferer raised her eyes with an expression of
astonishment; and, glancing on her time-worn vestments the glow of sensibility,
which instantly pervaded her features, seemed to say, "Alas! alas! I dare not
avail myself of your condescension." Amanda could read the countenance -- " No
matter," she rejoined, "I do not accept your apology; your garments are
vouchers of your industry -- I wish to know if you have any children?" -- "Yes,
indeed, Madam, I have no less than six children, and they are all young: We did
bravely as long as Robert lived and was able to labor; but he fell sick and
died, and all that we had was not more than sufficient to lay him in the
ground; yet, after a while, we did well again, until I caught a fever which
left me very low, but I am now getting better; my children, I bless God, are
all well; and I would not part with one of them, if I might gain the riches of
the world; this meal will once more satisfy their hunger: and, after all, it
might have been worse -- He that made us, will, I doubt not, provide for us;
and we shall hereafter meet Robert again in a better world." Her apparent
tranquillity and genuine piety was extremely affecting. Amanda took out her
purse -- She consulted in her benefaction her own liberal heart; while the
indigent sufferer, bursting into tears, attempted in vain to give utterance to
her feelings. Amanda continued to watch over this daughter of sorrow -- she
visited her at her cottage -- she contributed largely to her support -- her
consolatory soothings mitigated the pangs of dissolving nature, and she is
still the friend of her children.

Is it possible that the utmost malice of fortune can involve Amanda in a
situation which will deprive her of the rapturous glow of self-complacency,
while she reflects on this transaction? But the life of Amanda has exhibited
an unbroken series of well-judged charities.

I turn over another leaf, and a new scene presents: A debtor, once immured
within the walls of a prison, now hails the incalculable blessings of light and
liberty. He made application, by letter, to the teacher of a religious society,
supplicating for some small pecuniary assistance during his captivity. It was
on a Sabbath Day, just when the man of God was ascending the sacred desk, that
the address was put into his hands; and, adapting his discourse to the
situation of the prisoner, he introduced and pathetically expatiated thereon.
Every word he uttered was pointed to the hearts of his hearers; and, glowing
with benevolence, a number of those, whose abilities corresponded with the
liberality of their sentiments, assembled in the vestry, where they cheerfully
made up a sum more than sufficient to procure the enlargement of the unhappy
solicitor. The deputed committee repaired expeditiously to the prison, the
money was deposited, and the overplus presented to the captive, who, thus
unexpectedly liberated from a comfortless confinement, was suddenly restored to
a beloved family, which had been nearly overwhelmed by despair. The whole of
this business was planned and accomplished within three revolving hours; it
seems to have been conducted in the true spirit of Christianity, and is highly
worthy of imitation.

Eugenio was a principal in the affair; but to Eugenio acts of kindness are
familiar; I rejoice that he takes rank in the circle of my religious friends;
he makes it a rule to recompense injuries, as often as it is in his power, by a
pecuniary benefaction. A person, not long since, who was a stranger to his
uncommon virtues, entirely misconceived an interesting transaction, and became
in consequence his implacable enemy. It was in ^ain that Eugenio assayed to
justify himself; his foe was rude, vehement, and highly imprudent, and he lost
no opportunity of inveighing against him. Eugenio assured him that he would
embrace the first occasion of seeking revenge; and he advised him, therefore,
to be more sparing of his invectives. Thus, for some time, they proceeded; the
aggressor adding to, and aggravating his offenses, and the aggrieved as
constantly avowing his vindictive purposes. Misfortunes at length overtook the
angry man; " woes do indeed too often cluster;" he was stripped of the means of
living, and confined a close prisoner within the bare walls of a little
tenement, which alone remained to him.

Eugenio's hour of retribution was at length arrived; he immediately took in
his affairs an active part; he approached him with that kind of respect, which
true benevolence knows to pay to the children of adversity; he liberally
administered to his necessities, and he contributed largely to his
re-establishment. The first visit Eugenio paid to the dejected and deeply
humbled man was inexpressibly affecting; his resentments were all prostrated,
malice was disarmed, admiration triumphed -- and as he folded his exalted
benefactor to his bosom, tears of unfeigned contrition bedewed his cheeks. --
How noble was the revenge of Eugenio.

The subjoined letter, constituting a very proper supplement to this Essay, I
transcribe it with peculiar satisfaction.

To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
DEAR SIR,
I CONFESS myself a convert to the opinion I last evening pertinaciously
combated -- Tranquillity of mind is not necessarily either conferred or
destroyed by external circumstances. Mrs. Hamilton, with beautiful modesty,
advocated this sentiment; and although you continued silent, your approbation
of your daughter's arguments was strongly expressed in your countenance.

My morning's ramble has produced a conviction that I hasten to acknowledge;
for I am anxious to support an hypothesis, which I now conceive stamped with
truth and reason. The storm having subsided, the keen severity of the air,
operating as a bracer, gave a very high tone to my spirits, and I determined to
look in on a number of my connexions. I shall not aim at giving you a regular
detail of my visits -- two only are to my present purpose.

The first was made to an old gentleman, who for the greater part of his life
has enjoyed every thing which competence can bestow; but reduced by a series of
misfortunes to penury, after having numbered more than threescore and ten
years, he is now pennyless! he has taken shelter in a single apartment suited
to his circumstances; and I found him alone, hovering over the remains of a
coal fire, but ill calculated for a tenement much out of repair, and a season
so truly inclement. I looked around, no vestige of sustenance of any
description appeared; I suspected he was wholly destitute of the necessaries of
life; and although I felt myself incapable of uttering a syllable, my distress
was deeply marked upon my features; he read my concern, and laying his spread
hand upon his bosom, with a smile of ineffable complacency, he gratefully said
--

"Ah my friend, you are mistaken; it is true, for those three days and nights
during which the storm has continued, I have not seen a human face; it is
true, that my pitcher of water, and a small portion of bread, the last of which
I have just swallowed, has been my only sustenance; but never have I passed
three more happy days. Stretched on that little bed, or traversing up and down
this lonely recess, I have enjoyed sweet communion with my Maker; the bliss of
heaven is begun in my bosom; I have, Sir, no regrets, no apprehensions, no
impatience; I am all blessed hope, rapturous anticipation, and calm
resignation."

I was beyond measure astonished; and, solicitous still to detain the saint,
who seemed on the wing to depart, I instantly quitted his abode; and, entering
she mansion of a son of affluence, the blazing hearth triumphed over the
rigours of the season. Nature, in a variety of her most beautiful productions,
bloomed around; the birds warbled enchantingly in their gilded enclosures, and
the genial month of June seemed suddenly restored.

" Where is your master?" "He is very ill, Sir." I sighed from a double motive;
but I was admitted, on sending up my name. I found my opulent friend deeply
suffering from indisposition of body, and irrepressible inquietude of mind;
surely, thought I, Mrs. Hamilton is right. His disease was the erysipelas. "I
am sorry, Sir, to find you so much indisposed." "Oh faith, I shall never love
the name of a saint again as long as I live, this same Saint Anthony has used
me so scurvily." "It is a pity indeed you are not below, you have quite an
artificial summer there." "Yes, faith; but many honest people in this town feel
it to be a very natural winter for all that." "True, Sir; and I have this
moment witnessed a scene which corroborates your assertion."

I then gave in my little narrative; my affluent friend was benevolent and
liberal; the disorders of his mind and body seemed to suspend their progress,
and he eagerly replied, "I remember this same old gentleman lent me, when I was
a boy, fourteen pense; now I do not believe I ever paid him that little sum;
please to open that draw, take them crowns, and beg his acceptance; they may
answer both principal and interest." He instantly rung the bell -- Thomas
appeared, who was commissioned immediately to convey to Mr. -- a variety of
necessary articles, to add thereto a bottle of that old spirit, reserved for
special occasions; and he was directed to let no day pass without bearing to
the venerable man a portion of the choicest viands which his table afforded.

Our philanthropic invalid seemed now in possession of felicity, similar to
that which had become stationary in the bosom of the old gentleman; and I said,
softly, surely tranquillity is only to be found with virtuous and proper
actions. I feel complete satisfaction in thus penning my renunciation of error;
and I have, dear Sir, the honor to be your most obedient, very humble servant,

CHARLES CANDOR.


No. XCVI.
Were I at liberty my plans to choose,
My politics, my fashions, and my muse
Should be American -- Columbia's fame
Has to Columbia's meed a righteous claim:
Her laws, her magistrates I would revere,
Holding this younger world supremely dear.

HARDLY a day passes that does not furnish some new instance of the paucity of
national attachment in our country. We regret much the frequent occasions which
impel us to reiterate expressions of concern, on account of an evil so truly
alarming. The real patriot must necessarily lament the present aspect of
affairs. French men and measures -- English men and measures. These do in fact
divide the majority of the people; while those who rally round the standard of
America are reduced to a very inconsiderable party.

We are far removed from the elder world; the wide Atlantic is our barrier.
Persons of information affirm, that we possess within ourselves the sources of
independence; and it is certainly true, that the interior of our country,
reduced to a state of cultivation, would become amply productive, largely
supplying every essential article of life. Necessity is pronounced the mother
of invention -- Improvement follows; and those elegancies, or superfluities, to
which we are attached, would, by a natural process, become the growth of
America. Why then do we not radically throw off every foreign yoke -- assert
ourselves, and no longer delay to fill our rank as free, sovereign, and
independent States?

While I am writing, a circle of ladies in the next room are discussing this
very subject, and a respectable female, in an elevated tone of voice, declares,
she had rather take the fashion of her garments from an American presidentress,
than from any princess in Europe. We wish this idea was adopted, from the State
of New Hampshire, to those far distant and extensive banks, whose verdant
borders are washed by the waters of the Ohio; and that American habiliments,
politics, and sentiments of every description, might henceforward receive an
American stamp.

Perhaps our deficiency in national partiality is in nothing more apparent than
in the little taste we discover for American literature. Indigenous productions
are received with cold neglect, if not contempt, or they are condemned to an
ordeal, the severity of which is sufficient to terrify the most daring
adventurer. Mortifying indifference, or invidious criticism -- these, in their
respective operations, chill the opening bud, or blast its expansive leaves,
and the apathy with which we regard the toils of intellect, is truly
astonishing. An original genius has produced a sentiment of the following
nature: If the first rate abilities, clothed in the habiliments of mortality,
were passing through the streets of our metropolis, they would be elbowed by
the crowd, knocked down by a truckman, or rode over by a hackney coach. And we
add -- better so, than if they were consigned to the lingering tortures of the
rack, or condemned to suffer death under the axe of a mangling and barbarous
executioner.

We do not say that the office of a candid critic is not beneficial, and even
essential: But when an author, or his productions, are to be dissected, in the
name of every principle of humanity let a man of feeling preside -- let the
operation be conducted by an artist, who, possessing the abilities to
discriminate, will be governed by the admonitions of decency. An informed,
judicious, and well disposed critic, will not wholly reject the influence of
sympathy; and his feelings will induce him, when calling into view a glaring
absurdity, to produce, if possible, some pleasing selection, which may soothe
the bosom he is thus necessitated to lacerate. When a work is to be analyzed,
if the plot is deficient in conception, and in adjustment -- if the ideas are
extravagant, the events tragical, and the catastrophe improbable -- the critic,
if he is not a usurper, if he is legally invested with the robes of office,
will, however, find something to admire in the style; and if it abounds with
just sentiments, and classical allusions, he will produce them, not only with
marks of decided approbation, but with triumph.

The stage is undoubtedly a very powerful engine in forming the opinions and
manners of a people. Is it not then of importance to supply the American stage
with American scenes? I am aware that very few productions in this line have
appeared, and I think the reason is obvious. Writers, especially dramatic
writers, are not properly encouraged. Applause, that powerful spring of action,
(if we except the ebullitions of the moment) is withheld, or sparingly
administered. No incentives are furnished, and indignant genius, conscious of
its own resources, retires to the intellectual banquet, disdaining to spread
the feast for malevolence and ingratitude.

If productions, confessedly indifferent, were, from the ascendency of local
preferences, endured in their turn, and received with manifest partiality, it
would, perhaps, stimulate to more polished efforts, and the Columbian Drama
might at length boast the most finished productions. But so far are we from
evincing this predilection that even performances, decidedly meritorious, are
almost forgotten. Tyler's plays are strangely neglected; and the finished
scenes of the correct and elegant Mrs. Warren, have never yet passed in review
before an American audience. Was the American taste decidedly in favor of
native worth, the superintendants of the Drama would find it for their interest
to cherish indigenous abilities, and the influence of patronage would
invigorate and rear to maturity the now drooping plant.

To the celebrity of Mrs. Warren, it is beyond the power of the Gleaner to add:
Yet, accustoming himself to join issue with those who yield the palm to genius,
he is constrained to say, that her excellent tragedies abound with the
pathetic, the beautiful, and the sublime, and that they apparently possess
sufficient scenic merit and variety of situation to bestow those artificial
advantages which are necessary to insure their stage effect. Camps, palaces,
cities -- a view of the orb of day, just emerging from the shades of night --
assembled senators -- citizens passing up and down -- a procession of priests,
senators, and nobles, addressing, in the attitude of supplication, a Vandal
tyrant -- gardens, grottos -- a wilderness, an alcove -- shouts of victory -- a
prison, a battle -- repeated acts of suicide. A succession of these objects,
would, it is presumed, completely gratify the wishes, even of the most
visionary audience; and we should assuredly attend with heightened and
inexpressible pleasure to that energetic, beautiful, and soul affecting
actress, Mrs. S. Powell, while in the characters of Edoxia, or Eudocia in the
Sack of Rome, and of Donna Louisa in the Ladies of Castile, she delivered
sentiments truly interesting, highly wrought, and tenderly pathetic: We have
often in imagination listened to the language of Louisa, from our favorite
performer, and most admirably has she pointed every sentence.

We conceive that Mrs. Warren, while delineating Donna Maria, traced in her own
strong and luminous intellect the animated original which she presented; and,
making up a judgment from information, which we presume accurate, we have not
hesitated to pronounce our celebrated countrywoman the Roland of America. The
address of Donna Maria to Louisa, in page 119, is truly beautiful. The
character of Gaudentius in the Sack of Rome is finely conceived, strongly
interesting, and well supported; his reflections on discovering his murdered
father, are natural and highly finished; and it is impossible to read without a
degree of pensive solemnity his soliloquy in the grotto. Maximus mourning his
Aredelia dead, must command the sympathetic gush; and while the story of the
empress is replete with instruction, her accumulated woes pierce the bosom of
sensibility. Don Juanin the Ladies of Castile, exhibits virtues which announce
him the kindred spirit of his Maria; and his native independence, his valor
and his magnanimity are uniformly exemplified. The virtues of Conde Haro we
spontaneously revere; and we listen, with peculiar satisfaction, to sentiments
resulting from benevolence and a just idea of the rights of man, as they are
delivered by the adverse chief, while the woes of Don Francis and Donna Louisa
excite our tenderest feelings.

Contemplating these specimens of our drama, confessedly excellent, a very
natural inference presents -- If compositions of this description find no place
on the American stage, what can the more humble adventurer expect? Are not the
present arrangements highly impolitic? Is it not probable that talents, now
dormant, might by proper encouragement be called into action? Is it not
possible that paths, yet untrodden in the regions of nature and of fancy,
remain to be explored? and that under the fostering smiles of a liberal and
enlightened public, Columbian Shakespeares may yet elevate and adorn humanity?

The efforts of one of the most celebrated dramatic writers of the present
century are said to have originated in accident. If our information is correct,
Mrs. Cowley was both a wife and mother before she had attempted even a
paragraph for a magazine or newspaper; her pen, appropriated to the claims of
kindred or friendship, had produced only private letters, and to the toils of
genius she was a stranger. But being present at the theater, during the
representation of a very indifferent play, which from caprice or partiality
was, however, received with uncommon marks of applause, she was forcibly struck
with the insignificancy of many of the dialogues; and, conceiving that a
mediocrity of talents, with the requisite application, would be fully adequate
to similar productions, she retired from the playhouse with an irresistible
desire to enter a career, at once lucrative and honorary.

Mrs. Cowley was an early riser; and she passed the hours redeemed from the
pillow, in the nursery with her children, who were under such regulations, as
to admit of her pursuing, with pleasure and advantage, her needle, her book, or
her pen. It was on the morning immediately succeeding the evening she passed at
the playhouse, that, quitting the nursery for the breakfasting parlour, she
presented her husband with the two first scenes in the first act of her comedy,
called The Runaway. Mr. Cowley was most agreeably surprised, and not only gave
his sanction to her enterprise, but warmly urged the prosecution of her plan.
The play was accordingly finished, and entrusted to a friend who was
commissioned to enclose it to Mr. Garrick, then manager of Drury Lane Theater,
as the production of a lady. A period was fixed for Mr. Garrick's decision on
the merit of the piece, and its eligibility for the stage; at the expiration of
which period, the friend of Mrs. Cowley waited on the manager, requesting his
candid opinion. The sentiments of Mr. Garrick were instantly most flatteringly
developed, not by an answer in form, but by a number of interrogations, worded
in his accustomed energetic manner.

"For God's sake, where has that lady lived? where is she now? who is she?
cannot I see her?" etc. etc. etc. Mrs. Cowley was soon introduced to Mr.
Garrick -- their first meeting was in a beautifully romantic temple, which he
had reared to the honor of Shakespeare; and they exchanged some brilliant
compliments, which received point from their allusion to the bard of Avon.

Mrs. Cowley's play was brought forward with every possible advantage -- the
road to wealth and fame was thrown open to its fair Authoress; and we are told
that no year has since revolved on which she has not produced one, or more,
highly finished drama. Such are the fruits of judicious applause.

The Comedy of the Runaway was the last play that Mr. Garrick ushered to public
notice.

A letter, received last evening, presents a pertinent close to our subject.

To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
SIR,
THE present prevalent rage for every thing theatrical, may render the
substance of the following little anecdote, relative to a celebrated performer,
acceptable to your readers; and if your sentiments correspond with this idea,
you will give it a page in your miscellany.

Certain assemblies, y'clepped spouting clubs, in the city of London, have
frequently been sanctioned by the presence of many of the nobility, among whom
the Duchess of -- was in the habit of amusing herself, by observing, in those
nurseries of the drama, the various abilities of young persons, who, animated
by a patronage so respectable, exhibited with every possible advantage. It
happened on one of those occasions, that the Duchess saw and distinguished Mr.
Holland; and she immediately marked him down as a future ornament of the
British stage. Holland was a young man, well connected, and of decent life and
manners; nature had been liberal to him, and he was by no means destitute of
the aids of education. The stage had long possessed his warmest wishes; but the
great point was, to make his debut under an auspicious patronage; and the
Duchess, informed of his views, immediately conceived the resolution of
recommending him to Garrick; she had often conferred on this celebrated
dramatic performer substantial marks of her approbation; and it did not consist
with his interest to negative a youth, for whom her Grace had avowed a
predilection. But if we may credit report, Garrick did not always lend his
countenance to merit; it is certain he was opposed to Holland's advancement;
and, obtaining intelligence of an introductory letter to be delivered into his
own hand, he determined never to be at home to the bearer. Holland repeatedly
assailed his door, but the great man was always denied, and the youth despaired
of gaining admittance in his own character.

He was not, however, discouraged; and his ingenuity helping him to an
expedient, he obtained, at the price of half a guinea, the habit, basket and
tally of the lad who served the family of Garrick with hot rolls; when,
presenting himself before the door of him whom he regarded as the arbiter of
his future destiny, he informed the servant in waiting, that his master having
taken a new apprentice, it was necessary old arrearages should be paid off; and
that he had accordingly given him a small bill, which he had directed him to
deliver to Mr. Garrick. Garrick, ever attentive to those kind of claims,
admitted the baker's lad without difficulty; and, seated in his elbow chair, in
a morning gown of crimson damask, he received with abundance of state the
folded paper, which proving, to his great surprise, the introductory letter of
the Duchess, the redoubtable hero of the sock and buskin, caught in the toils,
sternly questioned, "Pray, young man, was there no way of presenting this
letter but in disguise?"

"None that occurred to me, Sir; I have repeatedly waited on you without
success, and I have at length embraced the expedient of serving your Honor with
bread."

"Well, it must be confessed you have a fruitful invention, and having thus
ingeniously made your entree, I presume you imagine yourself fit for any thing."

"At present, Sir, for nothing but serving your Honor with bread."

"Upon my word, you are wonderfully ready; but we wish for a specimen of your
theatrical abilities -- begin if you please." Holland, throwing himself into a
commanding attitude, immediately with great pathos and propriety delivered a
pathetic piece, apposite and striking; and the hauteur of Garrick was for a
moment suspended; but, determined not to be pleased, he threw into his
countenance a freezing quantum of frigidity, and superciliously said, "Mighty
apt, and studied no doubt for the occasion; but you will please to favor us
with an exhibition of your comic powers; you must be great in every way."

"Alas! Sir, I have at this moment no comic ideas!"

"But you must learn to assume; you are to commence actor, you know." The
youth, flinging from his hand the tally, which he had held until that instant,
tripped lightly over the floor, and, selecting from one of Mr. Garrick's best
parts a favorite passage, he suddenly became prime minister of frolic; his
attitude was that of humor -- mirth revell'd on his cheek -- Thalia molded
every feature, laughed in his eye, and played on his tongue; and even the
risibles of Garrick confessed his astonishing powers; but recollecting himself,
and assuming great solemnity, he gravely observed: "Let me tell you, young man,
there is a wide difference between reciting here, in a private apartment, and
in appearing on a British stage, before the most august audience in the world."

"Pardon me, Sir, I conceive that I am now before the most august audience in
the world."

"Yes, yes, young gentleman, this compliment may be well turned; but permit me
to remind you, the British audience is made up of the most respectable
characters, of persons possessed of power and ability to decide irrevocably
your fate; and on the drawing up of the curtain, you are immediately in the
presence of thousands, who will conceive themselves vested with full authority
to pronounce your immediate annihilation! What think you will be your feelings
at such a moment! Can you stand an ordeal so severe?"

"Excuse me, Sir, I humbly conceive I have as decent a stock of assurance as
your Honor, or any other man in existence." "By Jove," returned Garrick, " I
believe it." And, strange as it may seem, this last stroke captivating the
manager, Holland was immediately engaged, who soon becoming the favorite of
the public, always commanded full houses, and before the completion of a single
year, his stated salary was one thousand pounds per annum; he contributed
greatly to the emolument of the Drury Lane theater, and the penetration of her
Grace was held in high veneration.

I am, good Mr. Gleaner, with sentiments of esteem, your most obedient and very
humble servant,

CLEORA.


No. XCVII.
Over scenes of bliss the memory loves to rove,
Imagination spreads her plumy wing;
Tracing the wood, the lawn, the shady grove,
Her glowing hues with lavish hand to fling.
Blessed recollection! -- elevation sweet --
Humanity should woo thy bright'ning tone;
In reason's paths thy grateful ardours greet,
And pluck those flowers to apathy unknown.

To the GLEANER.
SIR,
JUST returned from visiting my friend Leonora, I sit myself down to sketch for
your Miscellany, an account of this my second excursion; and I do assure you, I
feel, while thus employed, that sort of satisfaction, which a well-disposed
woman will always experience, when she can, without doing violence to her
veracity, expatiate upon the social pleasures of existence.

But, first, it may be proper that I attempt giving you an idea of the
character of my friend. Although she was some years my elder, she continued at
the boarding-school at which I was placed, during the whole term appropriated
to my instruction; and, next to the dear woman to whom I am indebted for the
vital glow of animation, she contributed most to ^^shion and to inform my
opening mind; she cultivated my taste; and, originating in my bosom sentiments
of propriety, she taught me to esteem only those enjoyments which were
sanctioned by reason. Nature had thrown into my composition a vein of satire,
which I often reprehensibly indulged; but Leonora bestowed upon my manners the
prepossessing polish of benignity.

She is a model of true politeness; and, understanding the precise point of
good-breeding, while she is solicitous to accommodate herself to all those
circles which she graces by her presence, she is careful not to oppress by her
civilities. Her deportment is uniformly a striking exemplification of lady-like
dignity; and I have a thousand times witnessed the ineffable sweetness of her
temper. She has been at once the guide and companion of some of the happiest
moments of my life; and the tears which I shed at her departure from A --, as
they were impelled by selfish considerations, so they will be reiterated as
often as the importance of unfolding events, enforce the necessity of the
presence of my sweet and amiable monitress.

The striking exterior and rare accomplishments of Leonora, produced
corresponding effects; and, after that mature deliberation which the magnitude
of her subject required, she elected from her train of admirers, as the
companion of her future life, a young gentleman, who, born and educated in
Philadelphia, possesses a handsome property in that city. His patrimonial
inheritance was considerable; and his industry and frugality have made large
additions thereto. The marriage of Leonora has been most happy; it has
connected the highest felicity of which wedlock is susceptible, while every
pleasure has been enhanced by a lovely train of sons and daughters, who, the
probability is, will one day constitute the fairest ornaments of society.

Neither Leonora, nor her Evander, have any predilection for the dissipation,
in which a city life almost necessarily engages persons of fortune; and
Evander, cheerfully quitting a metropolis, where his ancestors had figured with
much respectability, and where he himself had snatched a thousand juvenile
pleasures, has retired with his little family to an elegant recess, upon the
skirts of a broad and extensive river. Here, surrendering himself to those
enjoyments, to which his ample income entitles him, his hours revolve, marked
by r^tional and refined tranquillity. Having never seen Leonora from the time
of her departure from A --, I was repeatedly summoned to her abode; and her
retreat from the garish and tumultuous scenes of the busy town, added new
ardour to my wishes once more to embrace her.

But a journey of some hundreds of miles was to be taken; and having no other
means of making my excursion, than in the several stage-coaches, where I had
recently endured much vexation, places for my brother and myself were again
secured; and, departing from the capital at peep of day, business still
reposing on the lap of silence, as we rattled through the streets, we
encountered not a single human being; the shops were as fast closed as in the
dead of night; and the appearance of the buildings, on either hand, seemed
descriptive of the continued slumbers which the inhabitants still indulged.
Thus passing on, we were at full liberty to observe, without interruption, that
magnificent scene, with which nature, with every returning morn, presents the
amateurs of her arrangements. I have very seldom beheld the august luminary of
day so resplendent; an uncommon degree of tranquillity pervaded my bosom; my
health was perfect; and the tone of my mind such as rendered it highly
susceptible of all those pleasures, deducible from a view of the sublime and
beautiful.

For the information of those persons who have not witnessed the progress of
the morning, from the first appearance of the dawn, to the moment when the
plastic parent of day, apparently emerging from the skirts of the horizon,
bursts in all its splendors upon the dazzled eye, I assay to sketch the gradual
development, which forcibly arrested our attention.

The death-like stillness, immediately preceding the opening dawn, strikingly
contrasts the animated picture, then pressing upon the threshold of
observation; and we began our journey at that precise instant, when the intense
darkness which enrobes the dreary night, drawing aside its intercepting veil,
gave place to the mild light of the crepuscle, which, progressing from the
horizon, whitened the whole face of that lucid curtain, that so beneficially
shades the surrounding heavens. Every succeeding moment seemed to change the
aspect of things; for the cheering influence of that circle, which had bestowed
upon the azure firmament its silver hue, advancing from the east, and embracing
the wide-extended concave of the skies, all those numerous objects that we had
scarcely perceived, thronged rapidly upon the eye -- the newborn day commenced
its progress, and the Aurora succeeded the crepuscle -- the gentle zephyrs were
abroad -- they seemed to disperse the gloomy vapors of the night -- the
condensed atmosphere became more pure -- the verdant earth assumed its most
beautiful tints -- and the breath of morn was perfumed by a variety of sweets.
We ascended a rural eminence, which commanded a pleasing view of the thrifty
hamlet, and the air resounded with the matin calls of the village chanticleer,
while birds, of various notes and plumage, warbled upon the neighboring
branches.

Business resumed its industrious career -- the husbandman, attended by the
invigorated steed, harnessed for use, appeared upon the plain -- travelers
thronged the road -- and workmen, accoutred for the day, hastened to their
respective occupations.

Mean time, the broad horizon assumed celestial dies -- the brightening crimson
streaked the blue vault of heaven -- passing clouds were tinged with the most
vivid hues -- the Aurora momently increased; and, advertised by this beautiful
harbinger, we eagerly expected the ascension to which it pointed, and nature at
length presented us with the most transcendent of her works. The orb of day
magnificently uprose; it burst upon us in all its radiance; and, as we eyed its
majestic progress, we fully acquitted those sages, who, unimpressed by the
truths of revelation, prostrated at the approach of this august " parent of
seasons" and " king of day." The splendors of a rising sun assume the most
benign aspect -- we blessed the genial orb, and marked with gratitude its
progress.

It happened that a beautiful little girl, on her way to a rural academy, who
had never before beheld the morning footsteps of the orb of day, was seated in
our vehicle. Her extacies and her astonishment were ineffable. Never shall I
forget her ingenious attempts to give language to her sensations -- Perhaps it
was the first moment she had ever discovered a want of words. With the
endearing ardour of youth, she assured her papa, who accompanied her, that she
would never again forego an opportunity of beholding a scene, which surpassed
every thing that had before engaged her attention; and if her resolution and
perseverance are equal to her sweet enthusiasm, and amiable susceptibility, I
predict that, pursuing her studies with uncommon avidity, she will become a
highly accomplished woman. Her enchanting expressions and youthful wonder, I am
free to own, augmented to me the felicity of the morning; and I embrace this
opportunity of reiterating my acknowledgments of gratitude, to this lovely
candidate for future excellence.

Fortunately for me, (that this jaunt might in every thing exhibit a perfect
contrast to my journey of vexatious memory) our party consisted only of this
charming child, her father, my brother, and myself; so that I had an absolute
command of the spacious vehicle, in which we were thus adventitiously and
pleasingly disposed: Of the front and back seats I was alternately an occupant;
for both Miss and her papa, while they too well practiced the art of pleasing,
to overpower me by the dictatorial and oppressive repetition of (...), would,
nevertheless, upon the slightest indication of my wishes, have placed
themselves in any corner of the vehicle which might have suited my convenience.
Thus charmingly we came on, enjoying delightfully the picturesque views, which
luxuriant nature, in our progress over a prodigious fine extent of country,
every where displayed before us. We breakfasted in a little tenement, that
seemed fitted up by the hand of neatness; and, bringing with us the sauce of
appetite, the healthful viands which were prepared for our refreshment, seemed
to possess a new and uncommon flavor.

So passed the first day of our journey -- and the separating from our
associates in the evening, who then reached the seminary, occasioned our first
regret. The second day, however, proved equally propitious; the stage was not
crowded; nor were we overburdened by ill-judged civilities. One old gentleman,
led by an observation of a fellow-traveller, made many philosophical remarks
upon the journey of life. He rationally said, that mankind, considered as the
work of an all-wise Architect, must have been created with an ultimate view;
and that, as the august Creator was generally acknowledged to unite wisdom and
power, and to be omnipotently and benignly good, the purpose of creation must
primarily have been, the final felicity of the creature, who was formed
precisely according to the plan of a sovereign, self-existent, and independent
Being: Nor (he added) did it appear, that the children of men were endowed with
any faculty, which conferred a capability of counteracting the original designs
of Infinite Wisdom. "I say, then," continued our christianized reasoner, " that
our being's end and aim is happiness:" We are, in the present scene, struggling
for a better state of existence. Had we not tasted what we reckon evil, we
should not have known how, properly, to appreciate the good; and the hour
cannot be far distant, when, being " born again, we shall see the kingdom of
heaven," and become the subjects of that happy arrangement, which leaves no
"pause of bliss." For the departure of my friends, therefore, I shed no tears
-- when they enter this life, it is then they are but embryoes -- they pass
through the dark valley -- and the moment of their exit from this, is their
birth into the celestial world. Hence, upon every such event, which comes under
my knowledge, I forget not to shall, by a song of triumph, the liberated
spirit; and I am confident, that my gratulations contribute to enhance the
felicity of the newborn celestial." Yes, the old gentleman was perhaps
whimsical; but we were amused, and passed the day in his society very
pleasingly: Indeed, we continued remarkably happy in our associates, until the
evening of the sixth day, when, with the setting sun, we reached the Recess of
Amity.

To do justice to the manner of my reception at the paradisaical villa of
Evander, is beyond the power of language. Leonora, whom I so immeasurably love
and honor, attended by Evander, and accompanied by her sons and daughters, (a
beautifully interesting group) met me at the outermost gate of the recess; and
I saw, at one glance, that her native elegance and urbanity had become the
inheritance of her children. As they conducted me to their mansion, the most
affectionate expressions spontaneously burst from their lips, and I was
welcomed with those demonstrations of joy, which were highly worthy our long
continued amity. Evander is informed, sentimental, and manly; he is rich in
mental resources; he is well calculated for the pleasures of a sequestered
life; and the serenity of his soul impresses upon his fine countenance strong
indications of that " peace of mind, which goodness bosoms over."

The mansion of Evander is embosomed by tall trees, which throw around its
avenues a venerable shade, and, penetrating the time-formed enclosure, upon a
gentle acclivity the well built tenement presents its snow-white front. It is
entered by a gravel-walk, enclosed on either side by a neat railing, and
bordered by a rich growth of various and beautiful flowers. The verdant plats,
too, on the right and left, are charming additions: Indeed, every thing is
highly rural; and the most pleasing expectation takes possession of the mind.
The house is spacious, and seems to unite the ideas of simplicity and opulence:
The outhouses are judiciously disposed, and admirably commodious. I have said,
that the estate of Evander, is washed by a copious and fertilizing river, and
its winding course, forming a number of indented points, most pleasingly
diversifies the view, and produces a truly enchanting effect.

The tract of land in the possession of Evander, is a location, comprising many
hundred acres; it is a patrimonial inheritance, and in a high state of
cultivation; it possesses great fertility of soil, and salubrity of climate.
Many weeks passed before I had measured it with the steps of an investigator;
for I was not precipitated over the grounds, at the pleasure of the proprietor,
but cheerfully attended when I proposed a walk. The lands, as I said, are rich,
and abundantly productive; and the air, highly impregnated with sweet fern, and
other fragrant odours, breathes an aromatic gale, while we gratefully quaff its
salutary properties. Woods and lawns, hills and dales, meandering streams, and
trees, of various growth and fruit, alternately arrest the eye. The maple tree,
among the rest, (the saccharine quality of which promises to become a new
source of independence to this continent) yields to the inhabitants of the
recess, its richest sweets. Nothing can be imagined more highly picturesque,
than many of the views upon this fine and well improved estate. The uniformity
of the verdant plains is not sufficiently extensive to offend; gentle ascents
are thrown over the grounds; these are adorned by the richest verdure, and
variegated by tall trees, which, spreading their ample foliage, lift their
green heads, delightfully finishing the scene. The groves and vistas upon the
estate of Evander, may be considered as ample and commodious aviaries, where
the birds melodiously warble; and no luckless hand, armed for their
destruction, dares to molest their operations.

There is, in agricultural life, a degree of independence, that at once
ennobles and tranquillizes the spirit; it bestows that security, which is very
congenial with the feelings of humanity. Thomson elegantly describes the
felicities of rural retirement; and Evander is, in fact, the sentimental
recluse delineated by the poet. Order and propriety preside in his family; his
Leonora is ever rationally indulgent; and her abode is the residence of harmony.

A retired apartment in the recess is consecrated to devotional exercises; it
is their little chapel; and thither, with each returning morning, and
succeeding evening, the individuals of this happy family collect, to do homage
to that Supreme Being, whom they consider as their Creator, Redeemer, and
Preserver, whom they are taught to regard as a Universal Father, and from whose
benevolent arrangements they confidently look for a state of the highest
ultimate felicity. To their morning orisons succeed the employments of the day,
and they occupy their appropriated hours.

It is the great business of Evander and Leonora, to render their children good
and happy: They are themselves their preceptors; and their abilities are fully
adequate to this important avocation. The individuals of the interesting little
group, without an exception, evince an insatiable thirst for knowledge; and, as
each valuable propensity is excited and drawn forth by their admirable parents,
it will readily be conceived, that their education advances with proportionable
celerity. They are already entered students of nature; and, anticipating a few
years, by the help of imagination, I listen to their investigations, deriving
both information and pleasure, while they trace the flowers which they collect
in their woodland walks, to their respective classes, orders, and species.
Their proficiency in music and drawing, their time of life considered, is
prodigious. They can already sketch a resemblance of the landscape which
pleases them; and never shall I forget the sweet magic of their voices, whether
they perform a solo, or join in full concert: Yet, although their abilities in
this way are unquestionable, they are not solicitous to charm you, whether you
will or not; and a degree of retiring reluctance is sufficiently manifest.

The bustle of parade, and all those ceremonies consequent on an ostentatious
display of opulence, are altogether unknown at the Recess. Genuine hospitality
assumes its most captivating garb, and real enjoyments are obtained.
Unembarrassed by ill-judged importunities, guests are permitted to make their
own elections, while, with flattering alacrity, every individual is on the wing
to gratify their wishes; and justice impels the acknowledgment, that I have
never passed days more rationally serene than at this sentimental retreat.
Tumult and disorder, of every description, are banished thence -- business and
pleasure are alike regularly arranged -- the bill of fare for every day is
stated -- the several divisions of the week present their appropriate covers --
and if the unexpected arrival of company (which, in this family, is always a
pleasing, circumstance) necessitates an augmentation of their number, the
requisite steps are taken without confusion, or the observation of the
traveller.

Evander and Leonora are the common benefactors of their necessitous
neighbors. The answer of a peasant to a stranger, inquiring who inhabited the
elegant mansion of Evander, will give an idea of the sentiments entertained of
them by the humble tenants of the soil.

Why, Sir, we does not know how it is; but if it be no offense, and if one may
speak as one thinks -- why, then, Sir, we thinks as how that a family of angels
dwells there.

Such, Mr. Gleaner, are my friends, Evander and Leonora; and I confidently
pronounce, that if happiness dwells upon this globe, she has taken up her
residence in their charming Recess.

I am, Sir, with sentiments of esteem, your most obedient, etc. etc.

HARRIOT B --.


No. XCVIII.
When simple nature tells her artless tale,
Pouring her sorrows in the listening ear,
Conviction in the bosom must prevail,
And truth in all her native charms appear.

I DO not know when I have seen a more charming evening than the last -- the
stars shone with unusual brilliancy; and the moon, in full orbed majesty,
bestowed on the scene her highest finishing. Standing in my door, I was
induced, by the delightfully impressive serenity that every where prevailed, to
indulge in a contemplative ramble, which I closed by a peep upon Margaretta,
shortening the distance, by turning my steps to a winding pathway across the
meadows, that we have fashioned for the convenience of seeing each other, with
that facility which our unalterable attachment demands. I found that lovely
woman occupied in a manner truly congenial with her feelings, and completely
worthy her character. She had employed her afternoon in preparing letters,
which she proposes to dispatch to the several emporiums in the Union, that they
may be on their way to Europe and the West Indies, for the purpose of relieving
a desolate female, whom Providence has thrown under her protection.

On entering the parlour of my daughter, I beheld her seated on a sofa with an
interesting stranger, who was clad in deep mourning. Margaretta was
endeavoring, in strains of soft commiseration, to soothe and tranquillize the
perturbed spirits of the fair afflicted, while the mingling sensations of
grief, joy, gratitude, and admiration, apparently struggling in the bosom of
the stranger, proving too powerful for a frame that had encountered severe and
repeated shocks of adversity, she was on the point of fainting, when Mrs.
Hamilton, ringing for her woman, assisted in conducting her to an apartment,
previously appropriated, to her accommodation. Wrapping my arms about me, I
waited in silent astonishment for an eclaircissement, which I doubted not would
confer additional splendour on the character of my daughter. She soon returned,
with the desired explanation on her lips; and while she recounted the substance
of the following sorrow-marked narrative, her fine eyes were lighted up with an
expression, which even surpassed their native luster -- the fervor of
benevolence communicated to her enchanting countenance a dazzling radiance --
she seemed all soul -- and the most systematic stoic must have pronounced her
irresistibly lovely.

Mr. Hamilton has thrown across an extensive piece of ground, a gravel-walk,
which he has taken much pains to level and beautify: Every day the gardener is
employed in cleaning, smoothing and polishing its surface; and, in point of
order, it is not inferior to any of our public walks. It is contrasted, on
either hand, by enamelled lawns, clothed with delightful verdure; and it is
bordered by tall trees, whose entwining branches form a gratefully capacious
shade. At the bottom of this charming vista, a glassy stream winds its
meandering course; and its pleasing murmurs produce a romantic effect. It is
separated from the grounds by a white Chinese railing, and terminated by a
gentle acclivity, the summit of which is crowned with trees of various growth.
This walk, which is properly the Village Mall, is entered by arched gates, and
it is furnished with convenient seats. Free egress and regress is allowed to
the decent villager; and, as the curiosity of the traveling stranger
frequently draws him thither, during the spring, summer, and autumn months, a
servant is stationed in the Mall, who tenders cool lemonade, wine, milk, and a
variety of fruits, and other light refreshments, which are easily prepared, and
which, to the way-worn passenger, are often highly acceptable.

Mrs. Hamilton appropriates a stated period in every fine day to this
enchanting walk; she is generally accompanied by her children; and those among
her humble or necessitous friends, who have any petition to prefer, frequently
meet her there. The morning of yesterday, being remarkably mild, she entered
the promenade at an earlier hour than usual. William, who is a sentimentalist
from the cradle, tripped by her side. She led the little Margaretta by the
hand. Mary-Augusta was borne in the arms of a rosy cheeked Hebe, who
particularly superintends the gambols of the children; and the tenderly
interested parent, thus presiding the guardian of innocence, seemed to move a
being of a superior order, while that complacency, which is the offspring of
uniform goodness, manifestly irradiated every feature. She had not advanced
many paces, when her attention was arrested by a female, clad in the
habiliments of sorrow, who, kneeling before one of the seats, was apparently
offering up her supplications to the common Parent of the universe. Her
gestures were descriptive of extreme anguish of spirit; and they were
sufficiently expressive to interest the tenderest commiseration.

Margaretta, directing the children to pass on, approached the suffering
stranger with that kind of cautious deference, and respectful veneration, with
which those, who enjoy the sunny beams of prosperity, should uniformly regard
the sons and daughters of misfortune. Far from interrupting the rites of
devotion, she spontaneously raised her hands and eyes to heaven, by a silent
ejaculation calling down from thence, that benediction which might invest the
prostrate mourner with returning peace. It was in this moment of affecting
sympathy, that the truly interesting supplicant, quitting, with heart piercing
sighs, her kneeling posture, turned suddenly round, and beholding Margaretta in
the pious attitude of petitioning the Omnipotent Creator, a crimson hue
suffused her grief-worn countenance, which was immediately succeeded by a
deathlike paleness.

Margaretta respectfully seated the trembling unknown, and placing herself
beside her, addressed her in the (...) language of consolation. The stranger,
after gazing with fixed astonishment, at length interrupted -- "Ah! Madam, I
cannot be mistaken -- your figure, your features, and, above all, your
peace-speaking and highly soothing accents, all combine to announce you: The
world cannot have produced such another. You are, you must be, Mrs. Hamilton!
Two miles from B --, I was told, the angel resided; and, impelled by necessity,
I have measured my weary steps to this abode. Speak, dear lady -- Are you not,
indeed, that Margaretta Hamilton, who is so well known to the family of the
unfortunate?" "My name is Margaretta Hamilton, Madam," replied my daughter,
"but I cannot but wonder, by what chance it is rendered familiar to you!"
"Excellent lady!" rejoined the stranger, "the trump of fame is listed on high;
and it fails not to proclaim those meritorious votaries of virtue, whose
deeds of worth, registered in immortal annals, confer an elevation, which will
endure, when every earth-born pleasure may be engulphed in oblivion!"

Margaretta, bowing, observed that, to whatever accident she might owe the
present address, she should certainly feel it incumbent upon her, to call into
action every effort, which might contribute to the relief of a person,
apparently so deep a sufferer, and that she only waited to learn her wishes, in
order to engage in the most prompt execution thereof. The stranger, now
clasping her hands, with a wild air exclaimed: "Genius of benevolence! my
spirit prostrates before thee! -- Yes, Madam, my name is Wretchedness! Fortune,
family, husband, children -- these are all buried beneath the waves of
calamity! That little parcel," pointing to an enfolded handkerchief she had
thrown on an adjoining seat, "contains my whole of worldly property! I slept
last night in an apartment, which is no longer mine; and I have not, now, where
to lay my head!"

Previous to this exclamation, the children had joined their mother; and little
William, in the true spirit of infantile philanthropy, catching the falling
hand of the pity-moving stranger, sobbed out: "You shall go home with mamma,
Madam -- papa will love you, too -- and you shall sit in my chair -- and when
night comes again, and you are tired, you shall lay down on little William's
bed, and we will sleep together -- Shall we not, mamma?"

The children of Margaretta, accustomed to a constant succession of strangers,
never shrink from a new face; and the charming sensibility, which the little
fellow so properly evinced, communicated to the bosom of his mother, those rapt
sensations that disdain the garb of language. The fair unfortunate dropped upon
his lovely face the tear of silent admiration; and Margaretta, after clasping
him to her heart, and enriching him with her maternal benediction, dismissed
him and his sisters, bidding them expect a continuation of their walk at the
close of day -- when, turning to the weeping mourner, she thus addressed her:
"And now, Madam, you may, without interruption, pour into my ear the tale of
woe, which my foreboding heart assures me, the catalogue of your sufferings
will unfold."

"Uniform benignity," replied the fair unknown, will never consider the child
of sorrow as an intruder; and, to the patient hearing of benevolence, the
pressure of calamity is a sufficient passport. I have sought you, Madam, on
purpose to lay before you my situation, to supplicate your advice and
assistance; and, the better to entitle myself thereto, I will briefly narrate
the most essential circumstances of my life. I have, I bless God, no scenes of
guilt to unfold, although I have sometimes thought that, too much elated by
prosperity, the arrogance of my elevation may have placed in my hands the
chalice of affliction.

I was born in Belfast, in Ireland. My father is, or was, a distiller of some
eminence; and his industry and frugality placed his family in a situation,
which, without doing any great violence to language, may be termed affluent. I
had the misfortune to lose my mother while young; and the indulgence to which
she had accustomed me, rendered that cold reserve, and those restraints that
were perhaps necessary, and to which I was almost immediately subjected,
painfully irksome. Girls naturally shrink from the control of a stepmother;
and, although I have known many worthy women, who have meritoriously discharged
the arduous duties of that department, yet the odium, too generally affixed to
the character, is not essentially diminished. For me, I gladly availed myself
of the goodness of my father, who placed a boarding-school education in my
option; and I was entrusted to the care of two respectable maiden ladies, who
had long been in the habit of instructing young girls.

In this seminary, while no genteel accomplishment was neglected, the pupils
were required to prepare for themselves every article of their apparel: Our
judicious preceptresses observing that, if the contingencies of life reduced us
to the necessity of calling into action any extraordinary exertions, resources
would thus be multiplied, and that, even on the supposition, we were adopted
into the family of prosperity, useful knowledge would never impede our
advancement. Often have I blessed the provident care of these venerable women:
The habits of economy and industry, to which they accustomed me, at all times
beneficial, have lately proved my only support.

At fourteen, I returned to the abode of my father, where I continued until I
had completed my seventeenth year; at which period my sister wedded Mr. James L
-- r, a portrait painter, of considerable abilities, who possessed a plantation
in St. Christopher's, to which island she agreed to accompany him. My two
brothers, and two of my maternal uncles, having long meditated a settlement in
America, embraced this opportunity of putting their plan in execution; and I
could not resist the inducement which so fair an occasion furnished, of
reputably freeing myself from the jurisdiction of an assuming and petulant
woman. I petitioned my beloved father, for leave to accompany the individuals
of our family, who were about to depart; and such was the mildness of his
disposition, that it was with difficulty he ever put a negative on the wishes
of his children: Yet he affectionately remonstrated, until, on my assuring him,
that after visiting the new world I would again return to his embraces, he
condescended to withdraw his objections, and bestowed upon me a benediction,
which was as the richest treasure to my soul.

We left Ireland immediately on the close of that war, which emancipated the
United States from the domination of Great Britain, and after a propitious
passage, we landed in Maryland. Here our family separated. My sister
accompanied her husband to St. Christopher's. One of my uncles, attended by my
youngest brother, accepted an advantageous offer of visiting Portugal, where,
it is probable, they are now doing business; and my other uncle, dissatisfied
with his situation, departed from us with an avowed intention of purchasing an
inheritance in the Northern States. My eldest brother took a house in Maryland,
the superintendence of which he committed to me; and our days passed on in
tolerable tranquillity. My brother contracted an acquaintance with several
gentlemen in Pennsylvania; and, visiting Philadelphia, we passed some happy
days in that metropolis.

It was on our return to Maryland, that I first saw Doctor M --, a young man,
who appeared to me possessed of every virtue. His extraction was French; but he
spoke English with facility. He had studied physic with Doctor -- of
Philadelphia; and he was then commencing the career of life, under the auspices
of a good understanding, much information, some property, and great benevolence
of heart. His attentions to me were marked by the tenderest assiduities, and my
prepossession in his favor augmented with every pasting moment. Dear object of
my soul's best affection! how is it that I endure a world, from which, alas!
thou art forever flown? -- But peace, my burning heart -- yet a little while,
and I shall forget to weep -- I shall rejoin, in regions of blessedness, him,
to whom my early vows were so rapturously devoted!

Doctor M --, Madam, solicited my hand in marriage; and my brother, availing
himself of the authority delegated to him by my father, conferred upon our
mutual attachment the fullest sanction. My lover possessed grounds in Cape
Francois. It was his determination to enter into business at the Cape; and my
brother had long contemplated a removal thither. We were soon established at
Cape Francois; and our nuptials were not long delayed; after which, my brother,
urged by motives of interest, once more changed his residence for a situation
in St. Vincent's.

Yet, although our family party was thus strangely dispersed, my husband
continued the assiduities of the lover. My father had written to us; and,
bestowing upon our union the most unequivocal approbation, he enriched us with
his paternal blessing, and I esteemed myself the happiest of women. Doctor M
--, eminent in his profession, was successful beyond our most sanguine hopes:
The birth of children crowned our wishes; and three promising girls seemed to
complete, for me, my sum of joy. My sister L -- r was not so happy as to become
a mother; and with much reluctance I yielded, to her frequent importunities, my
first pledge of love. I parted with my dear Amelia with floods of tears; and
she accompanied her uncle L -- r to the Island of St. Christopher's. Alas!
these eyes have never since beheld her; and I am ignorant if either she or my
sister are yet in existence! Immediately on her departure, the troubles in the
West India islands commenced. A friend, driven from her habitation, sought and
obtained shelter with us. She had not been many days our inmate, when she was
seized with the smallpox. Neither myself, nor my children, had ever passed
through that fatal disorder -- she contagion was communicated -- I was brought
to the verge of the grave -- and my babes -- my darling babes -- became the
victims of the despoiler! Yet, I bless thee, O my Redeemer! on their behalf;
for, sheltered in the bosom of their God, they thus escaped the disastrous
fate, for which their hapless parents were reserved! I mourned over the early
graves of my infants; but my dear, my affectionate husband was continued to me;
and, although the smallpox had made shocking ravages in my face, his
tenderness was in no sort diminished, and his delicate attentions were, if
possible, more marked, more uniform than before. Generous lover! friend!
husband! -- But, great and good God! he is now numbered with the dead! while I,
comfortless and forlorn, can only recount the story of my woes, and wish, in
vain, for that parting sigh, which is to waft me from this scene of
wretchedness!

Forgive me, Madam -- I will resume my narration. Months rolled on; and when,
ushering into being my fourth infant, I became the mother of a lovely boy, joy
once more revisited my lacerated bosom -- but transient and momentary was the
gleam. Upon the very evening on which my little cherub had completed his third
week, after folding him to my throbbing heart, I committed him to the care of
his nurse -- she conveyed him to his apartment -- and I saw him no more!
Doubtless, he perished in the general wreck! It was midnight, when the blacks
rushed on us -- every thing was rifled -- My husband, my adored husband, was
murdered in attempting to defend me! -- and the sword was pointed at my bosom
also! At such a crisis, it is astonishing that I recognized the very man whom I
had employed as my hair-dresser, and whom I had repeatedly rescued from
suffering. Coward nature, appalled at the fearful carnage, mechanically
exclaimed -- Is it possible? Am I to receive the stroke of death from him, who
is indebted to me for unnumbered acts of kindness? The barbarian was struck
with a sentiment of remorse -- he manifested a desire to save me -- and while
he assayed to lift me over the dead body of my murdered lord, I fainted in his
arms.

Of events immediately succeeding I am ignorant. My first recollection, after
this tremendous moment, places me on the wide ocean -- in the cabin of a vessel
-- stretched on the captain's mattress, who had humanely yielded it to my
necessities -- and surrounded by strangers of both sexes, who, like me, had
escaped the dagger of the assassin. How I came on board, I could never exactly
learn. The probability is, that the black man so far interested himself for my
safety, as to see me conveyed out of the island; and it is wonderful, that
although I was only arrayed in the robe de chamber in which I slept, my watch,
bracelets, necklace, and rings, were found upon me: But ah! Madam, at that
soul-torturing period, what was the anguish of my spirit! Stripped in one
calamitous night -- But why attempt to delineate? -- my sorrows do indeed
surpass the power of description! From the passengers and the ship's company, I
am induced to believe, I received every possible attention: But my reason
suspending its operations, I was landed in Alexandria, in Virginia, in a state
of insanity!

For five months after my arrival in America, I continued without the smallest
recollection of my former self. My alienation of mind was, as I am told, of the
most heart-affecting kind; and my lamentations were only interrupted by that
laugh of frenzy, which is deeply fraught with woe, and which strongly interests
the feelings of humanity. No lucid interval presented; and I was pronounced a
confirmed maniac. Youth, however, and a good constitution, at length surmounted
my malady, and I was gradually restored to a recollection of that extremity of
wretchedness which I had endured. It was at this period, that I deliberately
meditated putting an end to a mode of existence, which had become truly
burdensome; and it is to be imputed to the benevolent exertions of a Mrs.
THOMPSON of Alexandria, that I sunk not beneath the weight of woes, which had
so fearfully accumulated for my destruction. The extricating hand of this lady
was benignly extended; she poured into my wounded mind the oil and wine of
consolation; she new pointed my hopes, and taught me to observe an opening
heaven, and a commiserating God; nor were her well-judged efforts to soothe and
tranquillize my bosom, altogether ineffectual.

I recollected, in the first moment of calm reflection, having heard in the
West Indies, that my uncle had purchased an estate in B --; and possessing an
invincible desire to throw myself into the protection of some one of my family,
(the individuals of which, must, to this hour, imagine I suffered death in Cape
Francois) I formed the resolution of immediately proceeding to my uncle; and
parting with those vestiges of my former splendour, which had been almost
miraculously saved from the wreck of my fortune, with the money arising from
the sale, I equipt myself for the commencement of a journey, which my ignorance
in the geography of the country induced me to imagine, a day or two would
terminate. It proved, however, to a desolate and forlorn stranger, a tedious
period, the glooms of which were only illumined by the hope of soon finding
myself in the arms of an affectionate relative. Detained in New Haven by
illness, I am largely indebted to a Mrs. BROWN, who lets lodgings in that city,
and whose disinterested benevolence is beyond all praise. What shall I say,
Madam? I came on to B --. My little money (for my jewels were disposed of, much
below their value) was exhausted. No tender friend remained to receive me. My
uncle had never been heard of at B --. I was pennyless, and a stranger! For
some fearful days my efforts became prostrate! Despair, with hasty strides, was
advancing in my bosom; yet hope still struggled there; and, strange to tell, I
still continued in existence!

The Hibernian Society interested itself in my favor; and from them, and from
the Free Masons, I received small gratuities: But my mind, not sufficiently
accommodated to its situation, shrunk from the idea of lessening the fund
reserved for distressed indigence; and, moreover, a continuance of these
benefits was as little to be calculated upon, as endured. My applicato the
French and English residents in B -- was ineffectual; they declared it was
beyond their power to relieve me. I had hoped, through their interposition, to
return to Ireland, where I am entitled to an estate, independent of my father,
devised to me by my grandmother; and my patrimonial inheritance I have still to
receive. Could I reach Ireland, my pecuniary wants would know an end; but this
I have not the means of doing. I have attempted to write; but, desolate as I
am, I have no means of conveying my lamentable epistles. I have endeavored to
obtain support by my needle, and I have, in a measure, succeeded; but ill
health impedes my efforts. To your character, Madam, I am no stranger. Some
propitious spirit seemed to whisper me, that from you I should meet
commiseration and relief. From your name, from your virtues, my last hope
receives its vital glow; and toward Hamilton-Place, as my only resource, my
feet have involuntarily bent their way.

Such was the purport of the distressed lady's affecting narrative. I have
scrupulously preserved its leading features. Susceptible readers will find no
difficulty in supplying those frequent breaks and pauses, which naturally
occurred during a recital, that was delivered in a manner so unaffected and
artless, as to leave on the mind of Margaretta no doubt of its authenticity.
They will also imagine those nameless sympathies, which occasionally darted
from the benign countenance of my daughter, and which, fraught with assuaging
energy, expressed abundantly mere, than is in the power of words to utter.

With grace inimitable, and a manner all her own, she assured the
sorrow-pierced stranger of her ability and her readiness to assist her: Nor
will those, who have traced the liberal virtues of Mrs. Hamilton through the
pages of the Gleaner, consider as problematical the generous warmth with which
she will supply the present exigencies, and consult the future emolument, of
this extraordinary proficient in the school of affliction; and it is indeed
certain, that when, with becoming respect, and all the ardour of munificent
hospitality, she led, to her happy mansion, the daughter of misfortune, she
devoutly blessed a paternal God, who had thus placed within her reach, the
power of ameliorating those ills which had made such large inroads on a mind so
deeply stricken: And both Edward and Margaretta are, at this moment, busily
employed in concerting measures, by which they may gently slope, for the
afflicted sufferer, what yet remains of life.

No. XCIX.
Bright Hospitality, with garland crowned,
Wafts the full bliss of glad fruition round:
Truth, fond to spread abroad deserved fame,
To listening thousands gives her splendid name:
Mid nature's wilds, wherever the trav'ller roams,
Imagination hovers round her domes,
Measures his footsteps where her turrets rise,
Speeding the hour which every good supplies.

THE mazy dance, the festive song, the table liberally spread, the well filled
bowl, and sparkling glass -- these are all in the gift of Hospitality: Nay,
more, FRIENDSHIP resideth in her haunts, and VIRTUE loves to dwell in her
presence: The social pleasures weave a chaplet for her brow; and she may be
considered as the parent of communicative urbanity. Pleasant is the feast which
she spreads for the stranger. She looks with peculiar benignity upon him,
who, wandering far distant from his native abode, has been urged forward,
either by motives of curiosity, amusement, or profit; and the exhausted
traveller, having reposed on the bed of down, arises from the slumbers of the
night, to echo the panegyric which has been resounded by a thousand tongues.

The State of Virginia, we are informed, is classed high in the records of
Hospitality. Its extensive boundaries contain many towns and hamlets; and the
commodious villas are scattered up and down at easy distances. To the feet of
the traveller these villas are well known -- they are the mansions of
Hospitality. Often have we attended, with superior pleasure, to our very
amiable friend, Mrs. J -- of Philadelphia, while she has dilated on the
Hospitality of the Virginians. The bosom of this lady is the seat of the
virtues; and it is here is to expatiate, with enchanting energy, on the deed of
worth. She is a beautiful and a lovely woman; and her features, animated by
sensibility, are irresistibly captivating. She is in possession of affluence;
but gold, in a scattered and thinly inhabited country, will not always purchase
those requisites, which are so essential to the traveller, worn down by
fatigue, and exhausted in the want of refreshment.

Mrs J -- accompanied her husband on a tour of business, through the State of
Virginia; and her tongue will never be tired of eulogizing those hospitable
republicans. Born and educated in the regular city of Philadelphia, where
previous knowledge, letters of introduction, or many weeks probationary
residence, must authorize the claim of attention, the frank civilities, and
prompt Hospitality of the Virginians, added to their intrinsic worth the
powerful charm of novelty.

Virginian Hospitality has superseded the necessity of houses of public
entertainment. The occupation of an innkeeper is, in that State, very
unprofitable. A public house is, therefore, rarely to be met with, and they are
generally of the lowest class. Our Philadelphians do not seem to have been
perfectly apprized of this circumstance, or, if they were, it had not been in
their power to provide against its inconvenience. They entered the State of
Virginia, unfurnished with letters of introduction; and their first day's
progress was lengthened, tedious, and destitute of those refreshments, which
their necessities urgently demanded. Night rapidly advanced -- already her ebon
veil obscured the light of heaven -- they were ignorant of their route, and
entire strangers in that part of the country -- A foot passenger approached --
"Friend, can you direct us to a tolerable inn, where we may pass the night?"

" An inn! Lord bless us! we have no good inns -- not we. Some twenty miles
from hence, they say there is a sign-post; but, Measter, the like of you never
troubles themselves about that there; for these all goes to COLONEL
CHICHISTER's, [we do not omit or transpose a single letter of his name] which
is main glad to see um, and makes um right down welcome. COLONEL CHICHISTER
lives in the huge house, hard by; and I thinks as how, you cannot do better,
than to go right to un, Measter."

"What do you say, my dear?"

" Say! why, it is impossible we can think of intruding ourselves upon
strangers."

"Nay, my dear, there is no other alternative: We must either sleep in the open
air, or put the Hospitality of COLONEL CHICHISTER to the test. Coachman, drive
on -- Stop -- this is the mansion -- go in -- make my compliments to COLONEL
CHICHISTER -- let him know I am a citizen of Philadelphia, and that, as a
benighted traveller, I ask an asylum for the night."

The Colonel was almost immediately at the coach door -- blessed Hospitality was
seated on his brow -- Mr. and Mrs. J -- were ushered into his dwelling -- the
lady of the mansion was exactly suited to her situation -- not the shadow of
restraint existed -- urbanity was in full exercise -- affability presided --
every circumstance evinced that the occurrence of the evening was not a novel
event -- and our travelers seemed as if reiterating those social pleasures,
which they had so frequently indulged in the bosom of the dearest of their
friends. Plenty and elegance combined to spread the feast. Their lodging was
prepared by taste and neatness; and their rest was balmy and restorative.
COLONEL CHICHISTER urged their abode with him, during many revolving days; and,
constantly engaged in the exercise of the most liberal and extensive
Hospitality, he seemed unconscious of any extraordinary exertion. We produce
COLONEL CHICHISTER as a specimen of Virginian Hospitality. Similar acts of
kindness rendered the tour of the Philadelphians truly delightful; and their
most grateful recollection hovers round those abodes of urbanity.

Surely, every propensity, calculated to give energy to an attachment which
ought to pervade the bosoms of individuals who date their origin from the same
progenitors, should be sedulously cultivated; a mutual exchange of good offices
should designate humanity, and the powerful operations of sympathy enzone the
great family of man. Such an ameliorating arrangement would largely contribute
toward lessening the evils attendant on that depravity, which has so fatally
contaminated our common nature, and we should not be reduced to the necessity
of lamenting the prevalence of invidious reserve, envy and rancour.

The philanthropist will view, with painful regret, the disaffection which, in
many parts of America, so pointedly subsists between the natives of the town
and country. Habits, customs, manner of pronunciation, etc. etc. -- these are
made sufficiently consequential to erect barriers, that look with a very
unfriendly aspect on the mutual good understanding we would recommend; and all
the malevolence of wit is too often in exercise.

YES -- it is true, WE HAVE ENTERED A VERY COPIOUS FIELD; and, had our
attention been turned thereto, at an earlier period, from a soil so abundantly
productive, we should have GLEANED very largely: -- But being, in imitation of
our superiors, about to resign the cares of office, and take, perhaps, a long
farewell of our readers, we are constrained, by that civility which we are
seeking to inculcate, to give place to a number of claimants, whose names have
long stood foremost in our catalogue of correspondents.

To the GLEANER.
State of Massachusetts, County of Hampshire, Sept. 11th, 1796. "She rights --
she rights, boys, we are off shore."
YES, good Master Gleaner, we are now no longer a-ground. You so well lent us a
hand, do you see, that we soon cleared the rascally sands; and, warping off, and
slowly wearing round, we were once more afloat on the stream -- not but what
the wind was often in our muns; and after beating in its eye ever so long, we
were obliged to strike a hull, during many a tedious watch: But what of that?
-- it has at length veered about to the right point of the compass; we have
weathered the shoals of Disappointment; and, I assure you, Master Gleaner, on
the word of a tough old seaman, that, having shipped a large cargo of your
experience, together with the ballast of your remarks and advice, and all that
there, we once more bear a good sail.

Yes, yes, we have now got the weather-gage of sorrow; nor do we care a rope's
end for what is past. Molly took on piteously over the poor disabled Lavinia;
but suddenly tacking about, she wiped up her eyes, and throwing open her dead
lights, clapped Pride at the helm, who, do you see, soon steered her wide of the
harbor of Despair. It would certainly have been cowardly for to have laid up
for life, because as how we had made one bad bout; and to continue in the dumps
all the voyage, and all for the sake of a villainous lubber, who had given us
the slip, would have been a plaguey deal worse than a dead calm: Molly thought
so too; and after whimpering a long time, at length, as I was saying, resolved
for to steer by your compass; and taking in her drifted affections, she soon
belayed them along side of discretion, and splicing them to a good jolly
temper, we obtained a stiff gale, and, as I said, weathering the breakers, our
girl became her own woman again.

After this, Master Gleaner, we shipped a mate, who, understanding every rope
in the ship, is quite to our mind; and though I say it, that should not say it,
he is as honest a lad as ever stepped on board a ship. Well, the bargain was
struck, and having new trimmed our sails, and hoisted our colors, we are now
almost in port.

Deborah, do you see, would have clapped the whole account of our former spark,
and all that there matter, under the hatches: But avast there, says I, none of
your hugger-mugger smuggling doings for me -- all fair and above board, says I
-- and so I set myself about unquoiling the whole secret; and the young man was
not so squeamish a milk-sop, as to like us a rope's end the worse, for all that.

We have lately heard, how that our old comrade has been overhauled by a smart
sea-boat, who, throwing on board her grappling-irons, has made him a prisoner
for life; and it is said, that he will hardly hold his head above water again:
But howsomever this be, our Molly is to be married this very day se'nnight; and
I, having received shipping orders, this here letter is to pipe all hands (your
good woman, and all your family -- the Melworths, Hamiltons, Seymours, and all
them there) to the wedding. Our parson wishes hugely to see you; and you cannot
do less, than to be present when he secures the bowling-knot.

I am, honest Mr. Commodore, your true and trusty friend,

GEORGE SEAFORT.


To the GLEANER.
MR. VOLUBLE,
I TELL you plainly, your style is not liked -- I have heard a little bird sing
-- and can give a shrewd guess at people's meaning, by their gaping.

" All this is very fine," said my uncle Wiseacre, as he laid down one of your
numbers -- " this here Mr. Gleaner is very fine, to be sure; but he always puts
me in mind of a fresh water spark, who once undertook to navigate a vessel, and
who, being, one evening, (in plain English) desirous that the candle should be
put out, thought proper to give his orders in some of his high-flown gibberish.
" Extinguish that nocturnal luminary," said he. " Oy, oy," said the honest tars
-- and to work they went upon the ropes, conceiving, to be sure, that the
ship's tackling had received some newfangled name. " Extinguish that nocturnal
luminary, I say," repeated the captain. " All Is gone," replied the mariners,
still letting go the clew-lines, bunt-lines, etc. -- and still the candle
continued burning. A third time the orders were vociferated to as little
purpose, when the captain, in a bitter passion, entered his complaint to the
mate, who just then mounted the deck, storming violently on account of the
insult he had received. " O! never mind it, Sir," cried the mate, " leave it to
me -- you shall soon be obeyed;" and turning to the sailors -- " My lads,"
quoth he, " douse your glim" -- and " the nocturnal luminary was forthwith
extinguished."

Take the hint, Mr. Gleaner: If you do not study plainness of speech, egad, "
you must douse your glim." A word to the wise is sufficient. Yours --

PETER LACONIC.


MR. LACONIC is hereby informed, that we shall very speedily " douse our glim,"
and that if we should ever think proper to light it again, we will endeavor to
obtain a coal from his caboose.

To the GLEANER.
SIR,
" I KEEP no calendar of grievances," said my uncle. We believe you have too
rigidly adopted this generally good rule. You are accused of a fatiguing
sameness, and of dwelling uniformly on the light side of events. It is said,
you color too highly, and that you give your sketches from a fool's paradise.
Now I, you must know, undertake to defend you, and insist upon it, you are
always under the guidance of truth -- For, says I, two persons, setting out in
a stage-coach together, may take a resolution to keep a record, which may serve
as a memorial of their excursion: The one may commit to paper, only those
incidents from which he has derived satisfaction; while the other, on the
contrary, may keep a faithful account of every vexatious occurrence: Compare
those journals, and it is clear, they must exhibit a complete contrast; yet,
their respective writers have been equally solicitous to preserve only facts in
their collection. Thus the Gleaner seems to prefer delineating the virtues; and
I do not see that he is obliged to envelop his descriptions in a sombre veil.

Yet, my good Sir, although I thus advocate your cause, I am, nevertheless,
obliged to confess a wish, that you would give us both sides of the question;
and the sole end of this letter is, to entreat you would publish a few
invidious Gleaners; and remember, if they are highly tinctured with scandal,
they will secure the sale of your books, and the fame of their author. A few
anecdotes of private families, malevolently dished up, and plentifully
besprinkled with hints, which suggest much more than is expressed, will produce
a wonderfully happy effect.

I am, Sir, your sincere friend and well-wisher,

RACHEL PLIABLE.


To the GLEANER.
MR. GLEANER,
IT is matter of wonder, that you, who profess such an attachment to your
country, should, in your chapter upon the progress of uneducated genius, have
quite forgotten to enumerate a number of your countrymen, whose pretensions in
this line are indisputable.

Mr. W --, one of the most celebrated painters now flourishing in Europe, is
the first upon this list. His father, an honest Quaker in Pennsylvania, had
followed the occupation of a cooper, by which he had obtained a frugal support
for his family. His intention was to confine his son Benjamin to the adze; and
the education which he gave him was suited to this view: But the perseverance
of genius being generally indefatigable, young Benjamin's chalk-strokes were
oftener observed to sketch the human face divine, than to trace professional
circles; and he performed such exploits, as excited the admiration of the whole
village where he resided.

These manifestations gave his father much concern, and he seriously
remonstrated against them: "Benjamin, I charge thee to desist. I tell thee,
Benjamin, thou art in the road to ruin; and if thou continuest therein, verily,
verily, thou will be a vagabond. I must smite thee, Benjamin, if thou do not
leave these profane fooleries, and apply thyself to thy business."

Benjamin endeavored to submit to authority; but the fire of genius was not to
be controlled; and a neighbor opening a public house, he undertook, on
condition that he would provide the materials, and keep his secret, to paint
him a sign. His leisure hours soon performed his promise; and it was exhibited
with great triumph. In a country village, an event of this kind is prodigious;
and the villagers collected, not to criticize, but to wonder, and to applaud:
Among the rest, the father of Benjamin presented himself --

"And pray, friend, where did thou pick up this famous piece of business?"

"If I dared to tell you, Sir -- if I was sure it would not displease you -- "

" Nay, nay, friend -- Pray, why should thou think it would vex me? Verily,
thou have excited my wonder; and I must entreat thee to explain thy meaning."

" But thou will be angry with Benjamin."

This was enough -- the secret was out. The old gentleman was greatly
astonished; and, rationally concluding, that it was in vain to struggle any
longer against the unequivocal decision of nature, he advised Benjamin to
depart for the great city, Philadelphia, and there set up the business of
sign-painting. The lad, not waiting for a repetition of this advice, took a
hasty leave of his native village; and, proceeding to Philadelphia, his
uncommon merit drew upon him general attention. His success exceeded his most
sanguine expectations; and he speedily embarked, with strong recommendatory
letters, for England, where the rapid progress which he has made, is well known
to all those who have the smallest acquaintance with the history of the fine
arts.

You are, Mr. Gleaner, advised to collect carefully, every instance of
indigenous talents which falls in your way; and, as corresponding secretary to
the fraternity, embodied for the purpose of promoting emulation, I promise you
all the assistance which we can command.

I am, Sir, your most obedient, and very humble servant,

OLIVER HOMESTEAD.


No. C.
The sacred oracles with truths abound,
Which pour a healing balm over every wound;
So YOUNG pronounced, made by experience wise,
And sought the fount which the rich stream supplies.

To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
MY FRIEND,
YES, FRIEND; the Savior of sinners has fully reconciled me to this
appellation, and human nature again stands forth, invested with unalienable
claims to my affection. This day, the heretofore wretched, but now
comparatively happy Octavian, quitting his cottage, enters once more a world,
which he had conceived he had forever renounced -- enters it with new and
rational views, determining to devote himself, and all that he can command, to
the emolument of beings, whom he now considers of incalculable value.

Blessed was the night which led thee, my friend, to my then dreary abode; I
would say, as for that night, let it be curtained by a veil of lucid azure;
over its annual round may the stars of heaven glitter with unusual luster, and
may it rise on my memory, the splendid epoch of my emancipation from tenfold
darkness. The volume, which your second visit bestowed upon me -- alas! why was
I so long a stranger to that volume? -- it is a treasure beyond all price. The
beautiful simplicity of its language, and rich variety of its imagery -- these,
while they embellish, are, however, to be regarded as the most inconsiderable
part of its worth. How sublime is its system of ethics! and how noble the
forgiveness of injuries which it inculcates! Justly is it called the book of
God; for to it is communicated the powers of restoration. Before its refulgent
blaze my malignant passions prostrate, my resentments are all subdued, and I am
again alive to that divine philanthropy, which enkindles in my bosom the best
feelings of the heart.

What a consistent whole does this sacred book present! It displays the
Omnipotent Creator, as ruling the universe according to his righteous pleasure;
as calling into existence a nature, formed by his omnific word, and pursuing a
path which his wisdom foreknew. It exhibits this nature under a cloud, and
subjected, for reasons ^^st known to paternal Deity, to a variety of errors. It
points to that auspicious era, when our nature, emerging from the thick
darkness by which it was enveloped, shone forth in primeval splendour. It
displays before my astonished view, God the Creator becoming God the Redeemer;
and, hurrying me rapidly along through numerous intervening events, it unveils
to my enraptured perception, the final consummation of that august plan, the
influence of which pervadeth every division of time. It exhibits the period,
when crimes in their variety shall be blotted from the universe; when what we
have characterized as evil, shall serve to point and enhance the succeeding
good; when rectitude shall be enthroned in every bosom, innocence triumphant,
and peace established throughout the wide dominions of the great Source of
being. Yea, it shows me the sons and daughter of men, of every description,
(even those transgressors, who, finding their way hard, have come through much
tribulation, and washed their robes white in the blood of the Lamb) collected
in one grand assembly, and forever inaccessible to the progress of sorrow.
Finally, it shows me the Parent of the universe, wiping from every face, every
tear.

And what am I, who presume to cherish implacable indignation against those
beings, for whom Emanuel shed his blood? I shudder at myself! Has the unhappy
woman, who has cost me so dear, sinned beyond forgiveness? What though she is
lost to virtue -- Did not the God who formed her, bow the heavens and come
down, to seek and save that which was lost? and is she not the purchase of a
suffering Redeemer?

Yes, I will return to the world -- Adieu, ye sequestered haunts; ye have
witnessed those blissful illuminations, which render the vast globe a paradise.
The wandering, the lost Messalina, shall receive from my hand the book of God;
possibly, it may produce immediate reformation; but if not, she will one day be
separated from that evil spirit, and those contaminating propensities, which
precipitate her into such atrocious offenses. I shall never renew with her my
former engagements: Yet this resolution is not the offspring of resentment; but
avoiding all particular ties, I henceforth devote me to the great family of
man; seeking, by every means, to promote the felicity of individuals, who are
so dear to their Creator, God. You, my friend, to whom I am largely indebted,
will rejoice in a measure, the propriety of which you have frequently enforced.
The benevolence of my kinsman will also be amply gratified by this change -- He
will still continue my steward -- he will remain in the mansion house of our
common (...), and, at my demise, a large proportion of my possessions will
revert to him.

Mean time, I shall (...) goodness, by accepting apartments in your dwelling,
and with my bible for my companion, (...) an auxiliary, I shall begin my heaven
(...) from hence, I shall pass to that general assembly, the individuals of
which, crowned with everlasting joy, can no more be subjected even to the
shadow of regret.

Adieu, my friend -- expect me with the shades of evening, and continue to
soothe and direct your eternally obliged

OCTAVIAN.


To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
RESPECTED SIR,
GOOD minds are represented as viewing, with benign complacency, the man, who,
renouncing his errors of principle, or of practice, enters with firmness the
path of rectitude; and, under a persuasion of the truth of this sentiment, I
presume to address you, indulging a hope, that, not having bestowed a final
malediction on that Alphonso, with whom you were so righteously offended, you
will countenance the engagements which he is about to form, and permit him to
rank among those whom you direct by your council, and sanction by your
approbation.

But, that I may, in some measure, authorize my claim to your attention, I take
leave to observe, that the lovely woman whose wrongs excited your indignation,
is now perfectly restored to reason; and, that she may exemplify every benign
attribute of divinity, she has extended unto the man who has so deeply
injured her, free and unreserved forgiveness. Her venerable parent, too,
lending a condescending ear to my supplications, bestows on my ardent vows her
maternal benediction; and, for myself, when I say, that my sum of happiness
exceeds the anguish by which it was preceded, I cannot give it a higher
coloring. As it is to you, Sir, that I am principally indebted for both, I
consider it incumbent on me to present you with a brief narration of facts,
which may, in some degree, palliate errors, otherwise enormous.

My father, departing this life, while I was yet an infant, I was left wholly
under the care of my mother; and, as she had no other child, she literally
devoted the remainder of her life to her son -- she consulted me in every
thing; and she carried her blameable indulgence to a most extravagant height.
All persons who have made the early part of existence, in any sort, their
study, must have observed the marked attachment which children uniformly
discover to novelty. This propensity in me was gratified in every possible way;
my diet, my apartment, and even my preceptors, were changed agreeably to the
infantile caprice of the moment; and thus a kind of artificial inconstancy was
grafted upon a wayward humor, which should have been corrected; and I was
rendered habitually irresolute. Had I not been fond of my book, I should have
reached manhood destitute of information; but nature, in many particulars,
struggled against the ill-judged tenderness of my mother, who was, in every
other instance, the best and most rational of women. Her demise happened soon
after I had reached maturity; and the indecision of disposition, which had been
so erroneously cultivated, was in nothing more manifest, than in the
fluctuation of my mind, respecting my matrimonial election. A succession of
amiable females alternately triumphed in my bosom, until Lavinia, dispossessing
every other object, became the sovereign lady of my affections.

From a person so completely calculated to inspire love and perfect esteem, it
could scarcely be imagined my heart could ever wander; yet, my uncertainty, in
this respect, suspended a declaration which, nevertheless, the ardour of my
attachment spontaneously dictated. I had not, as was supposed, formed a plan to
destroy the peace of my beloved Lavinia; and the truth is, that, although I
entertained a hope of being able to incline her, by my continued assiduities,
to authorize my pretensions, yet, such was the consummate prudence of her
conduct, that, while I was permitted to view her as my tender friend, I never
once conceived, that an avowal of my love was necessary to her tranquillity.

Thus was I circumstanced, when the versatility of my humor once more gained
the ascendency; and I coolly relinquished a pursuit, in which I had so warmly
engaged. My attachment to Monimia was short-lived; every interview convinced me
of her inferiority to the accomplished woman I had abandoned; she was by nature
a coquette; and the hauteur of her temper was insufferable. Absence from
Lavinia, evinced the durability of her power, and I would instantly have sought
her presence, had I not believed that my coldness and neglect, had given a
fatal stab to that predilection with which I flattered myself she once honored
me.

A fixed melancholy took possession of my mind; it became a matter of
indifference to me in what part of the globe I wandered; and, urged by a hope
of dissipating the glooms in which I was enveloped, I embraced the opportunity
of embarking with a friend, for the purpose of making the tour of Europe. I had
been absent near two years, when, meeting in France with our fair countrywoman,
Madam B --, whose elegant Ruelle is the resort of every American who forms the
least pretension to taste; Columbian literature very naturally made a part of
our conversation. Madam B -- put into my hands a manuscript which she said was
to make one of a number of essays, intended for publication; and, adding, that
she had but recently received it from the Author, with whom she regularly
corresponded, she gave me permission to put it into my pocket for the amusement
of a leisure hour.

Retiring to my lodgings, I unfolded the manuscript; but no tongue can describe
my astonishment, when I traced, in the character of Lavinia, the angel whom I
conceived I had forever lost -- when, in the delineation of Alphonso, I read
the story of my own highly reprehensible conduct! It is true, I was not
conscious of a design so atrocious as was imputed to me; and yet, as I
contemplated the disastrous event of that amity which had promised so fair, the
anguish of my spirit was inexpressible.

The ardour of my attachment to my lovely friend, was rather augmented than
diminished. Time and observation had confirmed my sentiments of her
incomparable merit; and her image was indelibly impressed on my mind.

With the first opportunity, I returned to my native country. Instantly I
sought, and prostrated myself before the mother of Lavinia. She heard,
believed, and pitied. I saw, frequently I saw, my soul's treasure: But, great
and good God! how changed! On me she bestowed not the smallest attention; and
my misery was complete.

A blessed expedient, however, at length occurred to me; and, placing myself
near her, during one of those fanciful and soul-piercing dialogues, which you
so pathetically represent the dear unfortunate as holding with me, I responded
to her remarks, precisely in the manner she had the day before dictated for me.
An expression of extreme astonishment immediately pervaded her countenance;
and, bursting into a laugh of frenzy, (no words can give an idea of the
poignant anguish of which that laugh was descriptive) she turned hastily round,
and, beholding the vision which had so long floated only in the region of
fancy, with folded arms, and a statue like appearance, substantiated before her
-- recollection at that moment glimmered saintly on the disk of reason; and,
uttering a heart-piercing shriek, she fell senseless into my arms. It was with
difficulty she was restored to life -- a burst of tears succeeded -- the first
she had shed for many months -- we bles^ the copious effusion, predicting
therefrom the happiest effects; No, were we disappointed -- gradually she
returned to reason, love, and her enraptured Alphonso! and hardly will the
angelic sufferer permit me to express any part of that compunction, which, for
a time, nearly overwhelmed me.

The hour which is to complete my felicity, is not far distant; and I have to
entreat you, Sir, in the name of my venerable parent, in that of my beloved
Lavinia, and of my own, that you would act as the nuptial father of my angel
friend; and that, when I shall receive at the altar, the greatest blessing
which Heaven can confer, it may be bestowed by the man to whom I owe more than
my existence.

I am, respected Sir, your ever devoted, and eternally obliged humble servant,

ALPHONSO.


To the AUTHOR of the GLEANER.
RESPECTED SIR,
I AM one of a circle of females, who, submitting to certain regulations,
assemble once every week in rotation at our respective dwellings, appropriating
an evening to needle work, conversation, and reading. We collect winter and
summer, precisely at six o'clock, and separate at ten -- two hours are devoted
to reading, and two to conversation, etc. etc. The lady, in whose parlour we
are guests, entertains us with a book, and the choice of the author is also
referred to her. The rest of the company employ themselves with their needles,
or otherwise, at their pleasure. Our design is to ameliorate, by every probable
method, the morals, opinions, manners and language of each other; and to this
end, we are under solemn engagements to remark on the errors, and even trivial
inaccuracies of gesture, or of speech, which are observable in the individuals
of our association; but no member can be accused who is not present; we are
sedulously solicitous to improve, by every possible means; and we style
ourselves, THE PROGRESSIVE SOCIETY.

Cards, scandal, and the male sex, are excluded; and it is one of the articles,
to which we have severally subscribed, on no occasion to discuss the actions,
good or bad, of any absent person, with whom we have at any period of our lives
been conversant -- A moment's reflection will give the reason of this
regulation. The tongue of the eulogist, prone to exaggerate, too frequently
detracts from the merit of those persons who are occasionally introduced to
illustrate the virtues of a favorite; and therefore, being solicitous to shun
even the semblance of malevolence, living characters, in our confederated
capacity, never pass in review before us.

The Virtues and the Vices, abstractedly considered, with a disquisition of the
literary performances to which we attend -- these, when we are not called on to
the discharge of our reciprocal mentorship, constitute our subjects; and we
also devote a part of our time to the devising ways and means, for the
augmentation of a little fund, which we have originated for the use of
necessitous persons.

The numbers of the Gleaner have singly come under our consideration, and you
may one day learn our sentiments respecting them; at present, I am only at
liberty to say, that we read, with approbation, your sketches of celebrated
women, and that, although you did not aim at a general collection, we are,
nevertheless, surprised at your omitting two illustrious characters, whose
names I am commissioned to entreat you would insert, either by way of note, or
as you shall judge best.

The first is Margaret of Valdemar, who lived in the fourteenth century, and
who, being left a widow, assumed, during the minority of her son, the reins of
government, discharging the duties of her high station to such universal
acceptance, as to secure to herself, on his demise, by the voluntary suffrages
of a brave and martial people, a continuance of regal dignity; and who, thus
ascending the throne of a free and independent nation, subdued contending
warriors, and successively united, in her own person, by her superior wisdom
and magnanimity, the crowns of Denmark, Norway and Sweden -- who, having
gloriously vanquished her enemies, extended her benign compassion to her most
inveterate foe, and who, by her vigor, talents, decisive measures, and the
astonishing ascendency of her princely virtues, maintained, during the
remainder of her administration, throughout her extensive dominions, that
tranquillity, which was beyond the reach of those monarchs, who were her
predecessors, and of these who succeeded her.

The second extraordinary personage, whom the Progressive Society takes the
liberty to recommend to your notice, is Dorothy Schlozer, who was born on the
10th of August, 1770, and who early possessed an accurate knowledge of the
German, French, English, Italian, Swedish, and Dutch languages -- who was also
well versed in the Latin and Greek tongues, and who wrote elegant Latin verses
-- who was extensively acquainted with the various branches of polite
literature -- who was skilled in geometry and architecture, and attached to the
mathematics in general -- who was a proficient in mineralogy, visiting, in
person, the deepest mines, and bestowing minute attention on the several stages
of the work -- who was, besides, a perfect mistress of every female
accomplishment, needle work, drawing, and music -- and who danced with so much
taste and elegance, as to render every gentleman in a ball-room solicitous for
the honor of her hand -- whose knowledge of history rendered her a most
entertaining associate -- whose modesty, urbanity, and good sense, were equally
combined -- and, finally, whose astonishing genius and rare acquirements,
producing her a candidate for academical honors, conducted her to the
venerable Assembly of Professors, held at the house of the Dean, on the 25th of
August, 1790, where, submitting to a critical examination, she was, nem. con.
declared competent to the degree of philosophy, when she was presented with a
laurel wreath, with which honorary crown she returned to the arms of her
enraptured father. " Her degree was publicly conferred in the University
Church, and her diploma presented to her, on the grand day of the Jubilee,
September 17 th, 1790," when she was no more than twenty years, one month, and
seven days old.

I am, respected Sir, for myself, and in behalf of THE PROGRESSIVE SOCIETY,
your truly grateful, and very humble servant,

MARTHA STUDIOUS.


To the GLEANER.
ESTEEMED SIR,
" TRAIN up a child in the way he should go", says Solomon, " and when he is
old he will not depart therefrom." "I deny that," qu^th the caviller, "many a
well educated boy has turned out a disgrace to his family." This is granted:
But Solomon did not say, when he is in the middle of his years, he will not
depart from those good principles which he early received; but when he is old
he will (...) from them.

Now, it is a fact, that persons who run riot for a long time, often revert, in
the winter of life, to those salutary truths which were early implanted in
their young minds. The fire of affliction consumes the rubbish, which had
concealed the solid foundation that was once carefully laid; again they build
thereon the virtues of humanity, reaping consolation therefrom, and departing
in peace.

You cannot too often insist on the necessity of a virtuous education.

Enter these hints in your common place-book, and expatiate on them at your
leisure.

HEZEKIAH BRIEF.


To the GLEANER.
SAGE SIR,
I LATELY passed an evening in a large company, which unanimously agreed, that
you could not do better than to write a Gleaner on the origin and progress of
evil. You are to know, that our party was much divided in their opinions on
this subject: Some assorted the eternity of evil; others insisted, that, as it
had a beginning, it must undoubtedly have an end; and a third class positively
(...) its existence in any shape whatever!

A few of the arguments made use of, in defense of the latter, as the most
novel sentiment, I shall sketch for your information. A favorite line from a
favorite poet, was exultingly introduced: " From seeming evil still educing
good" -- and the participle seeming was emphasized with great energy. The
advocates of this opinion decisively said, that every thing was now in the best
possible situation; and this they inferred, not only from the wisdom of the
great Disposer of events, but also from the manifest inquietude produced by any
sudden change. The cobbler, unexpectedly receiving a purse of gold, suspended
his morning and evening song; care became an inmate in that bosom, once the
seat of tranquillity; nor was his mirth restored, until the glittering mischief
was reclaimed by its proper owner. It was asked, How could that be
characterized evil, which, it was acknowledged, could not be more eligibly
disposed? Persons, it was said, apparently miserable, are not, in fact, so: Ask
the man who cannot command a shilling, at what price he estimates his limbs,
his senses, his reason, his prospect of future happiness; and, if he
understands how to appreciate these blessings, properly, he will be found to
possess immense riches. Sickness, loss of friends, and even death itself -- Are
these to be considered as evils? Certainly, that is not, strictly speaking, an
evil, which is absolutely necessary to the completion of our felicity -- it is,
at most, but a seeming evil.

"How often," said an old gentleman, "does a momentary pang produce the most
exquisite enjoyment. I remember, when I was a young man, I had a brother, whom
I, at that time, loved beyond any other human being. My brother made a voyage
to the East Indies; and, after the tedious term of two years had elapsed, the
ship, on board of which he embarked, appeared in sight. Eager to embrace him, I
jumped into a boat, which was just pushing from the quay: We had not proceeded
far, when we observed the colors hoisted half mast high! and the captain and
the mate, standing in full view upon the deck, we had positive assurance of
their safety. I knew it was not customary to display colors after that sort,
except on the death of one of those officers, or of the supercargo, which
department was filled by my brother. The melancholy conclusion, therefore,
forced itself upon me -- he was undoubtedly no more -- and the anguish of my
spirit is not to be described. It happened, at that moment, that my brother,
expecting to find me among the passengers in the boat, had placed a telescope
in a direction, which brought even the features of my face under his immediate
inspection; and, observing the sudden alteration in my countenance, his
sympathetic feelings explained the cause, when, quitting instantly a situation
which so effectually concealed him, he came forward to the side of the vessel,
and, bowing most gracefully, laid one hand on his heart, extending the other in
a manner inimitably expressive. -- God knows, his figure seems, at this moment,
present to my view; and I shall never forget the exquisite transports I then
experienced: Nor, since it was productive of so much eventual happiness, can I
regard, as an evil, that affection for a common sailor, which induced his
comrades to announce his death, in a manner that was an acknowledged departure
from the rule, usually observed on these occasions."

You, Mr. Gleaner, will, I apprehend, pronounce this, strange sophistical
reasoning. We certainly ought to be very cautious, how we embrace such
subtilties: But I will not forestall judgment. An appeal to you was generally
approved, and concluded on. The matter is before you; and we expect your answer
with impatience.

I am, sage Sir, your most obedient, and very humble servant,

RICHARD WARY.


CONCLUSION.
THE GLEANER UNMASKED.
And now in my own habiliments arrayed,
I quit those scenes where I so often have strayed;
The curtain dropped, illusions are no more,
Gladly my borrowed prowess I restore;
Well pleased, resigning an unwieldy part,
To blessed reality I yield my heart.

BUT, gentle reader, in the moment when throwing aside the veil, I appear
before thee in propria persona, acknowledging myself to be that identical
Constantia, whom possibly thou may recollect, as filling some pages in the
Boston, and afterward in the Massachusetts Magazine -- In the moment, I say,
when thou art recognizing, in thy friend the Gleaner, this said Constantia, it
may be proper to render unto thee a reason, why I have endeavored to pass
myself upon thee in the masculine character; and as I now take leave of every
unnecessary disguise, it is my determination to be very explicit.

Observing, in a variety of instances, the indifference, not to say contempt,
with which female productions are regarded, and seeking to arrest attention, at
least for a time, I was thus furnished with a very powerful motive for an
assumption, which I flattered myself would prove favorable to my aspiring
wishes. I anticipate, on this occasion, the significant shrug and expressive
smile of the pedantic petit-maitres; Esop's fable of the Ass in the Lion's
skin, will be triumphantly revived; and it will be affirmed, that the
effeminacy and tinsel glitter of my style could not fail of betraying me at
every sentence which I uttered. But, having passed the rubicon, it is necessary
that I possess sufficient firmness to remain undismayed by the attacks of the
ill disposed critic. My ingenuity did not furnish me with any expedient, so
well calculated for concealment, as the envelopment in which I enwrapped
myself; and having conceived, that in my borrowed character I should become
abundantly more useful, I felt assured that this consideration was in reality
sufficient to justify the measure.

Another strong inducement to the assumption and continuance of my disguise,
was the opportunity it afforded me of making myself mistress of the unbiassed
sentiments of my associates. A few persons were immeasureably partial to my
essays; and, as it generally happens, those were the individuals with whom
alone I was intimately conversant. I had the good fortune to elude the
penetration of my best friend, and he read in my presence my first Essay,
entitled the Gleaner, without the shadow of a suspicion of its author. Thus I
went on; nor was it until my thirty-third number, which contains the story of
Eliza, that the person, to whom I am principally accountable for my conduct,
declared his conviction that I was the real author of the Gleaner. The fact,
from which the little narrative of Eliza originated, I received from my
husband; I might have predicted the consequence -- I was of course detected.

But I had yet a further reason for concealment; I was ambitious of being
considered independent as a writer; if I possessed any merit, I was solicitous
it should remain undiminished, nor did I harbor a wish that my errors should
be imputed to another; and I imagined I could effectually accomplish my views
in this particular, by suffering my connexions of every description to remain
in total ignorance of my plans; nor in I conceive myself culpable in thus
acting, since I was not seeking to wound the feelings of any human being, and
it was hardly possible I could essentially dishonor those affectionate
friends, to whom my heart has ever acknowledged the most ardent and grateful
attachment.

Rosseau has said, that although a female may ostensibly wield the pen, yet it
is certain some man of letters sits behind the curtain to guide its movements;
and, contemplating this assertion, I imagined that if those of the literati, to
whose aid either friendship or affinity might entitle me, were not so far of my
council as even to be informed of my designs, they would at least be exempted
from those censures which my folly or presumption might involve.

A celebrated writer of the present century observes, that "a woman ought never
to suffer a man to add a single word to her writings; if she does, the man she
consults, let him be who he may, will always pass for the original inventor,
while she will be accused of putting her name to the works of others;" and
surely the feelings of rectitude must revolt even at a suspicion of this kind.

Thus much I have thought proper to say, by way of responding to some invidious
remarks, which my manner of conducting the foregoing papers, particularly their
masculine character, have occasioned.

The reader is already apprized, that the numbers which constitute the first
volume of the Gleaner were ushered into the world in that very respectable
miscellany, the Massachusetts Magazine; and my original design was to continue
them in that publication. My secret was now generally known, but I had no
reason to be dissatisfied with the reception given to my humble attempts, and I
had many pages prepared for the press. It has frequently been asked, both in
public and private, "why the Gleaner was discontinued?" The very respectable
and learned gentleman, whose love of literature induced him, on the
resuscitation of the Magazine, in the spring of 1795, to become its editor,
complained, and with reason, of the paucity of original productions, which
immediately succeeded the arduous engagement into which he had entered: yet,
for myself, largely indebted to the candor of the new editor, I am free to
own, that if any consideration could have induced me to continue a writer in
that publication, my perfect confidence in the superintendent to whose revision
my sketches would have been submitted, must have furnished the motive. But
during the suspension of the miscellany so often adverted to, a serious
accusation was preferred against me, the nature of which, in my own
apprehension, effectually barred my appearance in its pages.

I have pledged myself to a public, which I do most sincerely venerate, to
render a reason, " why the Gleaner was not continued in the Magazine;" and
although I might content myself with observing, that its irregularity, and the
uncertainty of its duration, together with the years which must have elapsed,
ere the completion of my plan could have been exhibited, were extremely adverse
to my views; yet, agreeably to my engagement, I had arranged a circumstantial
detail, which developed the real cause that has produced me, in my individual
character, a candidate for the indulgence of my readers; my design, however, is
superseded; a few sincere friends, whose disinterested attachment cannot be
considered as problematical, and from whose judgment reason hesitated to
appeal, warmly remonstrating against it, rendered it incumbent upon me to
deliberate -- deliberation produced conviction -- and, certain that a
recurrence to facts, which were productive of much infelicity, can answer no
valuable purpose, I gladly consign the promised narrative to oblivion; and if a
recollection of my proposals for this publication should procure an impeachment
of my veracity, I trust, when it is known, that my original intention has been
relinquished from the fear of agita^^^g the feelings of malevolence, the
pleadings of candor will procure my absolution.

If the manner in which my dramatic essays are introduced, should require an
apology, it may be sufficient to observe that it was requisite to the
uniformity of my plan; and I have presumed that as it was my wish to promote,
by those productions, the interests of rectitude, they will not, in this
enlightened age, give offense even to the most serious and delicate mind; their
history may, in some future period, amuse the curious; and for the present, it
only remains to say, that, as I constructed them without a coadjutor, it is but
justice their errors, of every description, should rest entirely upon my own
head.

Nor are the numerous faults with which these volumes may abound, to be imputed
to any other individual. In this arduous enterprise, however daring, I have
stood alone. To the toil of writing letters to myself, I have been condemned;
and to this cause the candid will impute that want of variety of which they
have doubtless complained. The aberration of unassisted fancy, however
unwearied the intellectual research, does not always answer the wishes of its
proprietor; and, although the infrequency of original views may be lamented, it
must, nevertheless, be submitted to.

My sketches have seldom been drawn from living characters; but I will confess
I have experienced superior pleasure in once more embodying those virtues that
I have seen exemplified by persons who have bid adieu to those scenes which
they have heretofore illumined by their presence; and imagination has delighted
to produce them again in that radiant career in which it was their great
business to soothe and to bless the FAMILY OF MAN.

To my very respectable and numerous Patrons and Patronesses, I am largely
indebted. It would be my pride to enhance their pleasures. Could I, (...)
return for the liberal countenance by which they have honored me, bestow on
them tranquillity, with every attendant blessing, it would be equally my duty
and my felicity thus to do: But, although my efforts are inadequate to any
important effect, I cannot, however, suppress the fervid emotions of gratitude
with which my breast is replete. The most ardent wishes for their happiness are
wafted warm from my heart. May the good they communicate be returned a thousand
fold into their own bosoms -- and may they, when encompassed about by those
misfortunes to which humanity is incident, reflect rationally on the brevity of
the present scene, and upon the incalculable bliss which awaits them in the
regions of immortality.

Such are, and such will continue to be the fervent aspirations of

Their highly obliged, Truly grateful, And very humble servant, CONSTANTIA.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
VOLUME I.
Page 39, line 8 from bottom, for banner read banners. 44, l. 11 from top, for
reader read readers. 50, l. 11 from top, for person read persons. 57, l. 12
from top, for luxurious read luxuriant. 84, l. 21 from top, for is read was.
148, l. 10 from top, for or read nor. 201, l. 15 from bottom, for extaticly
read extatically. 212, l. 2 from bottom, for humbling read bundle. 220, l. 5
from top, for constrain read produce. 260, l. 5 from top, for system read
systems. 265, l. 1 from top, for bear read bears. 271, l. 2 from top, for shall
read should. 279, l. 3 from bottom, for inexpressively read inexpressibly. 327,
l. 17 from bottom, for appendages read appendage.
VOLUME II.
Page 4, line (...) from bottom, for responces read responses. 10, l. 1 from
bottom, for Ganganell read Ganganelli. 180, l. 4 from bottom, for terrors read
errors.
VOLUME III.
Page 90, line 8 from bottom, for contained read containing. 212, l. 15 from
top, for time read times. 226, l. (...) from top, for our read ours. ^^6, l. 7
from bottom, for affect read arc.
SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
[If there are errors in the following list of subscribers' names, it is
requested they may be imputed to a want of the necessary information respecting
names, titles, and places of abode.]

A
JOHN ADAMS, L. L. D. President of the United States, Quincy, (Mass.) 2 copies.
John Avery, Esquire. Boston. Fisher Ames, Esquire. Dedham. James Allen, Esquire. Boston.
Jeremiah Allen, Esquire. ditto. Mrs. Ruthy Andrews, do. Mr. Francis Amory, do.
Thomas C. Amory, do. Mrs. Hannah R. Amory, do. Lydia Amory, do. Catharine
Amory, do. Miss Mary Amory, do. Mr. James Andrews, do. Benjamin Austin, Esquire.
do. Mr. Azor Archbald, do. Mrs. L. Archbald, do. Miss Mary S. Allen, do. Mr.
George Athearn, do. Thomas Adams, do. Mrs. Diana Adams, do. Mr. Nath'l. Austin,
Charlestown. Giles Alexander, Roxbury Mrs. Priscilla Abbot, Salem. Mr. Jos.
Allen, jun. Gloucester. Maj. Nathl. C. Allen, New Glouc. Mr. Moses Adams,
Portland. Wm. Aldersay, Esquire. London. (Engl.) Mr. Frederick Argyle, Richmond.
(Virg.) Joseph S. Anthony, Philadelphia, (Penns.) Robert Andrews, ditto.
B
Hon. James Bowdoin, Esquire. Bost. Rev. Jeremy Belknap, D. D. do. Sylvanus Bourne,
Esquire. Consul. Hamburgh. Saml. Brown, Esquire. 4 cop. Boston George Blake, Esquire.
ditto. Mrs. R. Blake, Boston. Joseph Blake, Esquire. do. Joseph Blake, jun. Esquire.
do. Messrs. Wm. P. and L. Blake, do. 6 copies. Mr. George Bethune, do. Benjamin
Beale, jun. Esquire. do. Mr. Martin Brimmer, do. Col. Samuel Bradford, do. Samuel
Bradice, do. Dr. Thomas Bartlett, do. Messrs. Boot and Pratt, do. Mr. Benjamin
Bussey, do. Mr. P. C. Brooks, do. Capt. John Brazer, do. Mr. David Bradlee, do.
George Buroughs, do. Henry Bo^t, do. Mrs. Martha Babcock, do. Mr. Thomas
Brewer, do. Capt. Shubael Bell, do. Miss Lucy Brown, do. Capt. Benjamin
Bowland, do. Mrs. Isabella Bowland, do. Mrs. S. Blagge, do. Capt. Norton
Brailsford, do. Mr. Elisha Bangs, do. Ephraim Beaman, do. Samuel Bradl^^ do.
Nathan Bodwell, do. John Bass, do. Asa Bullard. A. M. do. Capt. Judah Bacon,
do. Joseph Barrel, Esquire. Charlestown. Josiah Bartlett, M. D. ditto. Mr. George
Bartlett, do. Thomas B^^ttle, Esquire. Cambridge. Miss S. Binney, Watertown. Mary
Binney, ditto. Mr. Thomas Burton, Biddeford. Rev. Jonathan Burr, Sandwich.
Capt. John Babson, North Yarmouth. Mrs. Susanna Barnwell, ditto. John Bowers,
Esquire. Somerset. Mr. Nathaniel Barrel, York. Jonathan S. Barrel, ditto. Mrs.
Hannah Baker, Ipswich. Mr. George Brimmer, Trenton. Berwick Academy. George W.
Burnet, Esquire. Attorney at Law. N. W. Territory. Mrs. Mary Blount, Knoxville.
(Tennessee.) Mr. William Belcher, Savannah, (Georgia.) Oliver Bowers, Esquire.
ditto. Mrs. I. S. Blount, Tarborough, (N. C.) Mr. William Brown, Richmond,
(Virg.) L. Bishop, ditto. Luke Bixby, Norfolk. Washington Bow^e, Georgetown,
(Maryl.) 2 copies Mrs. Ann Bingham. Philadelphia, (Penns.) Mrs. Breck, ditto.
Elizabeth Ball, do. Benjamin Barton, M. D. do. 12 copies. Mrs. A. Butler, do.
Mrs. Burrows, do. Mr. Ebenezer Bowman, do. Mrs. Esther Bowman, do. Mr. Thomas
W. Britton, do. Mrs. Ann Britton, do. Hannah Butler, New London, (Conn.) Rev.
Thomas Barnes, Woodstock. M^^. Nancy Brown, Norwich. Mr. Nicholas Brown,
Providence. (R. I.) Joshua Brackett, M. D. Portsmouth, (N. H.) Mr. B. Bri^sley,
ditto. William Boyd, do. Abner Blasdel, do. Abner Blasdel, jun. do.
C
Maj. Genesis Cobb, Gouldsborough. Genesis I. Cilley, Nottingham. A. St. Clair, jun.
Esquire. N. W. Territory. Rev. John Clarke, D. D. Boston. Samuel Cooper, jun. Esquire.
do. John Callender, Esquire. do. Samuel Clap. Esquire. do. A Ch^^^r, M. D. do. Dr. S.
Cobb, do. Mrs. Catharine Codman, do. Col. Thomas Cushing, do. Mr. Joseph
Coolidge, do. Stephen Codman, do. James Carter, jun. do. Samuel Cooper, do.
Capt. Jonathan Chapman, do. Mr. Henry Chapman, do. Thomas Capen, do. Joseph
Clark, do. Joseph Clark, jun. do. William Cordwell, do. Mrs. Fear Colman, do.
Mr. Roylance Child, do. Joseph Crocker, do. Allen Crocker, do. Mrs. K.
Coolidge, do. Mr. Jonathan Coals, do. William Clap, 3 copies, do. Benjamin
Cobb, 2 cop. do. Joseph Callender, jun. do. Caleb Clap. do. Miss Hannah C^iney,
do. Andrew Craigie, Esquire. Cambridge. Mrs. E. Craigie, ditto. Mr. Joseph
Creehore, Roxbury. Sam^^. Creehore, Dorchester. Nath'l Coffin, M. D. Portland.
Mr. Joseph Cross, ditto. Aaron Chamberlain, Falmouth. Jonas Clark, Wells.
Thomas C. Cushing, Salem. Miss Sally Co^^in, Gloucester. Mrs. Clark, Buckland,
(Engl.) Mr. James Christie, Norfolk, (Virg.) Mrs. Margaret Coats,
Philadelphia, (Penns.) Mary W. Clymer, ditto. Mrs. Sarah Crammond, Philadel.
Margaret Claypoole, do. Mr. Cummings, do. Miss Eliza Cuthbert, do. Col. Supply
Clap. Portsmouth, (N. H.) Mr. Peter Coffin, ditto. Peter Cowes, do.
D
Hon Thomas Dawes, Esquire. Boston. Hon. Thomas Dawes, jun. Esquire. ditto. Mr. Thomas
Dawes. tert. do. Samuel Danforth, M. D. do. Aaron Dexter, M D. do. Mr. Isaac P
Davis, do. John Derby. Esquire. do. Mr. William Doll, do. Mrs. Mary Davis, do. Mr.
Robert Davis, do. Josiah D^an^, do. Samuel Dillaway, do. Samuel Dillaway, jun.
do. John Duballet, do. John Duggan. do. Thomas Dennie. do. Robert Duncan, jun.
do. Lawson (...). do. Benjamin Dearborn, do. Isaac (...) do. Benjamin (...)
Roxbury. Samuel Dana. Esquire. Groton Elias H. Derby, Esquire. Salem. John (...). Esquire.
ditto. Col. (...) Davi^ Gloucester. Capt. William Dolliver, ditto. Mrs.
Elizabeth Dolliver. do. (...) Josiah, (...) Henry (...) Mr. Henry (...) (...)
(...) ditto. (...) Major (...). Philadelphia ((...)) Mr. (...), ditto. Miss.
D^w Atkinson, (N. H.)
E
Major Genesis Simon Elliot, Boston. Rev. John Ellot, D. D. ditto. Joseph Eckley,
D. D. do. William Eustis, M. D. do. 2 copies. C. D. Ebelling, Professor of the
Greek language and Geography, Hamburgh. Samuel Eliot, Esquire. Boston. Mr. Jacob
Eustis, ditto. Mr. Ebenezer Eaton. do. Mr. John S. Ellery, Gloucester. Capt.
Isaac Ellwell, ditto. Mrs. Nancy Ellery, do. Mr. Bulkesey Emerson, Bangor. John
Everett, Esquire. Land. (Eng.) Joshua Elliot, Esquire. Plym. ditto. Mr. John B. Evans,
Georgetown (Maryl.) Cushing ^ells, Norwich, (Conn.)
F
Rev. James Freeman, Boston. William (...), Esquire. ditto. Nathan ^razier Esquire. do.
Mr. Eben'r, Frothingham, do. William Furness, do. Richard Faxon, do. L. Filley,
do. John W. Folsom, do. 6 copies. Stephen ^ales, do. Robert Foul, do. Zado^k
French. do. Capt. Jeremiah Foster, Glouces. Capt. Joseph Foster, ditto. Mrs.
Rebecca Foster. do. Elizabeth ^udger, do. Mr. Jacob Foster, (...) Nath^l.
(...), Esquire. Portland. Mr. John Frothingham, ditto. Samuel Freeman. Esquire. do.
Major Joseph ^ry, ^^yburgh. Mr. (...) Norfolk, (Vir.) (...), ditto. (...),
Philad. (Penns.) (...), ditto. Mrs. D. W. Francis, Philadel. Sarah Fox, do.
Miss Maria Ford, New London, (Conn.)
G
His Excellency JOHN TAILOR GILLMAN, Esquire. Governor of the State of New
Hampshire, Exeter. His Honor MOSES GILL, Esquire. Lieut. Governor of the State of
Massachusetts, Princeton. Hon. Elbridge Gerry, Esquire. Cambridge. Stephen Gorham,
Esquire. Boston. Mr. Benjamin Green, jun. ditto. James Green, do. Thomas Green, do.
John Green, do. Col. Peter Green, do. Mr. John Gardner, do. Thomas Geyer, do.
Capt. Robert Gardner, do. Mr. Greenwood, do. Mrs. Catharine Gray, do. Capt.
Joseph Gleason, do. Mr. James Gridley, do. Timothy Gay, do. Capt. Henry
Gardner, Salem. Mr. John Gardner, Milton. James E. Grace, North Yarmouth. James
Gray, jun. Pepperelborough. John Godbold, Charlest. Barzillai Gannet, Esquire.
Pittston. Mr. Thatcher Goddard, Wells. Mrs. Catharine Gibbs, Plymouth, (Engl.)
Major I. S. Ganoe, N. W. Territory. T. Goudy, Esquire. Attorney at (...), ditto.
Mrs. Sarah Goudy, 2 copies, do. Mr. George Gerdin, do. T. Gibson, Esquire. do. Mr.
William H. Gibbs, S. Carolina, 2 copies. Mr. Samuel Galt, Richmond, (Virg.)
Frederick Gauvain, Philadelphia, (Penns.) P. A. Grotian, ditto. Mrs. E. Gordon,
do. Col. Nicholas Gillman, Exeter, (N. H.) 2 copies. Wm. Gardner, Esquire.
Portsmouth. Mr. John Goddard, ditto. John Greenleaf, do.
H
Rev. Simeon Howard, D. D. Boston. Thaddeus M. Harris, Dorchester, 2 copies.
Tuttle Hubbard, Esquire. Boston. Mr. Henry Hubbard, ditto. 2 copies. Henry Hill,
Esquire. do. Mr. Samuel Hunt, do. Mrs. Hitchborne, 2 copies, do. Mr. John Hancock.
do. Thomas Hancock, do. M. M. Hayes. 2 copies, do. Mrs. M. M. Hayes, 2 copies,
do. Mr. Joseph Hayes, 2 copies, do. John Heard, Student at Law, do. Robert
Hallowell, Esquire. do. Mr. Joseph Head, do. Jonathan Harris, do. Benj. Hodgdon,
jun. do. Robert Haswell, do. Mrs. Margaret Hall, do. Mr. Jonathan Hunnewell,
do. Samuel W. Hunt, do. Augustus Hunt, do. Andrew Homer, do. John C. Howard,
do. Moses Hall, do. Frederick Hartman, do. John Hunting, do. Robert Homes, do.
Stephen Hills, do. David Hyslop, Esquire. Brooklyn. Jeremiah Hill, Esquire. Biddeford.
Daniel Hooper, Esquire. ditto. John Hobby, Esquire. Portland. Mr. Walter Hatch, ditto.
Joseph Hiller, Esquire. Salem. Mr. Rob't. Hooper, Marblehead. Benj. Hurd,
Charlestown. Joseph Hurd, ditto. Jonah How, Esquire. Shrewsbury Mr. Crowell Hatch,
Roxbury. Dudley Hubbard, Esquire. Berwick. Mrs. Sophia Hubbard, ditto. Abigail
Hutchins, Glouces. Mary Hayes, ditto. Mr. Aaron Hall, do. Benjamin K. Hough,
do. William Hubbard, Wells. Rich'd. Hunnewell, Esquire. Castine. Mr. Tho's.
Hastings, Newtown I. Hammond, Belfast, (Irel.) 2 copies. Capt. W. H. Harrison,
N. W. Territory. Mrs. Harrison, ditto. Mr. John Hitchborne, South Carolina.
John Hutchins, Norfolk, (Virg.) Joshua Hodges, ditto. Col. Samuel Hodgdon,
Philadelphia, (Penns.) Mr. George Harrison, ditto. William Heart, Seabrook,
(Conn.) Mrs. Eu^ce Huntington, Norwich. Hannah Huntington, ditto. Miss Sally
Hyde, do. Betsey Huntington, do. Richard Heart, Esquire. Portsmouth, (N. H.) Mr.
Samuel Hill, ditto. Joseph Haven, do. George Ham, do. Capt. Gilbert Horney, do.
Mr. Stephen Hardy, do.
I
Mr. Thomas P. Ives, 2 copies, Providence, (R. I.) Mr. Daniel Ingalls, Boston.
Benjamin Ingersoll, ditto. Enoch Ilsley, Portland. Israel Israel, Philadelphia.
Abraham Isaac, Portsm. (N. H.)
J.
Genesis Henry Jackson, Boston. Patrick Jeffrey, Esquire. ditto. Benjamin Joy, Esquire.
do. Mr. John Jackson, do. Nathaniel Johnson, do. Thomas K. Jones, do. Edward
Jones, do. Mrs. Catharine W. Jones, Trent. Mr. John Joy, Richmond, (Vir.) Mrs.
Elizab. Jackson, Philadelphia, 6 copies. D. Jackson, ditto. Mr. Jasper M.
Jackson, do. Gershom Jones, Providence, (R. I.) Clement Jackson, Portsmouth,
(N. H.)
K
Genesis HENRY KNOX, Boston. Mrs. Lucy Knox, ditto. Rev. John T. Kirkland, do. Mr.
Jeremiah Kahler, do. Jacob Kendall, do. Mr. Thomas P. Kettell, do. Eph'm.
Kendall, A. M. Ipswich. Mr. Job Knights, Falmouth. Miss Mary Kimball,
Gloucester. Lemuel Kollock, M. D. Savannah, (Georgia.)
L
Genesis BENJAMIN LINCOLN, Hingham, (Mass.) Rev. John Lathrop, D. D. Boston. Mrs.
Frances Little, do. Mr. Joseph Lee, do. Joseph Loring, do. Levi Lane, do.
Thomas Lamb, do. Mr. Andrew Leach, Boston. Andrew Lopaus, do. William Leach,
do. Nathan Lock, do. Joseph Lock, do. 2 copies. Amos Lewis, jun. do. John W.
Langdon, Charlestown, 2 copies. Col. Wm. R. Lee, Marblehead, Mr. Thomas Lee,
Salem. Capt. George Lane, Ten Hills. John Lee, Esquire. Castine. Mr. John Lucas,
Brookline. Isaac Lane, Falmouth. Joseph Lovis, Portland. John Low Wells.
Ephraim Lock, Coxhall. Mrs. Charlotte C. Ludlow, 2 copies, N. W. Territory. J.
M. Lovell, Brig. Maj. United States Army, ditto. Mr. Thomas G. Langley,
Richmond, (Virg.) Mrs. S. Levy, Philadel. (Penn) Mary Lewis, do. Miss Eliza
Leaning, do. Christopher Leffingwel, Esquire. Norwich, (Con^.) Mrs. Eliza Lathrop,
do. Hannah Lathrop, do. Hon. John Langdon, Esquire. Portsmouth, (N. H.) Woodbury
Langdon, Esquire. do. Edwards ^.Livermore, Esquire. do. Col. George Long, do. Mr.
Samuel Larkin, do. Portsmouth Library.
M
Rev. Jedidiah Morse, D. D. Charlestown. (...) Morton, Esquire. Boston. Mrs. Sarah
Morton, ditto. Thomas M Donough, Esquire. (...) do. (...), do. Mrs. Ann (...), do.
Mrs. (...), do. Mr. Christopher Minot, Boston, Eph'm. May, 2 copies, do. Col.
Joseph May, do. Mr. Samuel May, do. Mrs. A. May, do. Mr. Alexander Mackay, do.
Mungo Mackay, do. 2 copies. Capt. William R. Miller, do. Mrs. Anna Marston, do.
Mr. John H. M^r^kell, do. Major Samuel Moore, do. Rev. Joseph M'Kean, Milton, 2
copies. Mr. Archibald M'Neal, Charlestown. Joseph Marquond, Newburyport. John
Mycall, Esquire. ditto. Mr. Joseph Moody, Wells. Dr. John Manning, Gloucester. Mr.
James Mansfield, ditto. Thomas Motley, Portland. William Martin, Northby. James
H. M'Clary, Epsom. Hugh M'Lellan, Portland. Joseph M'Lellan, Gray. Phineas
Miller, Esquire. Savannah, (Georgia) 2 copies. Mrs. Joanna Mackie, Philadelphia,
(Penns.) W. Montgomery, ditto. Mary Morris, do. Sarah M'Cor^^ck, do. 2 copies.
Mr. Benjamin Moore, do. Samuel Mi^llin, do. Henry M^llen, Esquire. Dover, (N. H.)
Capt. Thomas Martin, Portsm. Mr. (...) Massey, ditto. John M^^^her, do. Capt.
Thomas Manning, do.
N
Mr. F. Nichols, Boston. Andrew Newhall, ditto. James Noble, do. Mr. Thomas
Neil, Boston. Ebenezer Niles, do. James Norwood, Gloucest. Capt. Timothy
Newman, New buryport. Mr. B. Nicholson, Plymouth. (Engl.) Col. Thomas Newton,
Norfolk (Virg.) Miss Mary Nevens, Norwich (Conn.) Mr. George Nutter,
Portsmouth, (N. H.)
O
Hon. Harrison G. Otis, Esquire. 2 copies, Boston. Mr. John Osborne, ditto. A.
Otheman, do. Mrs. Eliza Orr, Philadelphia, 2 copies.
P
Rev. Sam'l. Parker, D.D. Boston. William Powell, Esquire. ditto. Mrs. Catharine
Powell, do. Mr. Samuel Parkman, do. Mr. Gorham Parsons, do. Mrs. Sarah Parsons,
do. 2 copies. Mrs. Eliza Prince, do. Capt. Edward Preble, do. Mr. Thomas H.
Perkins, do. John Proctor, do. Mrs. E. Preble, do. Mr. George Pain, do. John
Page, do. Samuel Prince, do. John Perkins, do. Thomas Pons, do. Jacob Porter,
do. John Peck, do. Capt. William S. Plummer, do. Mr. John Pingree, do. Samuel
W. Pomeroy, Esquire. Cambridge. William Pickman, Esquire. Salem. Benjamin Pickman, Esquire.
ditto. Mrs. Catharine Prescott, do. Mr. Joseph Perkins, Attorney at Law, Salem.
Mr. David Plummer, Gloucester. Capt. David Pierce, ditto. Capt. William
Pearson, do. Mr. Henry Phelps, do. Mrs. Judith Parsons, do. Miss Susan Pierce,
do. Mr. John Phillips, Andover. Mr. George Pierson, Biddeford. Samuel Pierson,
do. Geo. Partridge, Duxbury. Rev. Samuel Pearce, Birmingham, (Engl.) Mr. Wm.
Pearce, Plymouth, do. Mrs. Anna M. Patridge, do. Miss Patridge, Stonehouse, do.
Mrs. Mary Pilgrim, Hampstead. do. Mr. Stephen Parham, Norfolk, (Virg.) Benjamin
Pain, ditto. Miss Mary Pleasants, Philadelphia, (Penns.) Wm. Palmer, Esquire. New
York. Frederick Phillips, Esquire. ditto. Mr. John D. Perkins, Plainfield, (Conn.)
Mrs. Lucretia Perkins, New London. The Hon. Oliver Peabody, Esquire. Treasurer of
the State of New Hampshire, Exeter. John Pierce, Esquire. Portsmouth. Mr. Martin
Parry, ditto. Charles Pierce, do.
Q
Josiah Quincy, Esquire. Boston.
R
Joseph Russell, Esquire. Boston. John M. Russell, Esquire. ditto. 3 copies. Mr. Daniel
Russell, 3 copies, do. Major Benjamin Russell, do. Mrs. Lydia Russell, do.
Capt. Josiah Roberts, do. Mrs. Rowson, do. Capt. John Roulstone, do. Mr. John
Risbrough, Boston. John Row, Esquire. Gloucester. John G. Rogers, Esquire. ditto. Miss
Sarah Rogers, do. Miss Mary Rogers, do. John Row, Esquire. Newburyport Mrs.
Abigail Rogers, do. Parker Russ, M. D. Ipswich. Mr. John Rand, Portland Jacob
P. Rust, Salem Miss Susan A. L. Ridley, North Western Territory. David Ramsay,
L. L. D. South Carolina. Col. James Ramsey, Norfolk, (Virg.) Mr. William Reins,
ditto. John Randall, do. Thomas Robins, do. E. W. Roots, Richmond. James
Rowland, Esquire. do. Col. Jonathan Remington, Lansingburgh. Daniel Rindge, Esquire.
Portsmouth. Mr. Daniel R. Rogers, Esquire. do.
S
His Excellency INCREASE SUMNER, Esquire. Governor of the State of (...), Roxbury.
Mrs. Elizabeth Sumner, ditto. Hon. James Sullivan, Esquire. Boston. Don Juan
Stoughton, Esquire. Spanish C^nsul, do. Rev. Samuel Stillman, D. D. do. Capt. James
Scott, do. Daniel Sargent, sen. Esquire. do. Mrs. Mary T. Sargent. do. Mr. Daniel
Sargent, jun. do. John T. Sargent. do. Henry Sargent, do. Fitz Winthrop
Sargent, do. Lucius (...) Sargent, do. Miss Mary T. Sargent, do. James Swan,
Esquire. do. William Smith, Esquire. do. Mr. Ab^^l Smith, do. Standfast Smith, do.
Barney Smith, do. Mr. William Shattuck, Boston, 2 copies. William Shattuck,
jun. do. Benjamin Sumner, do. David (...), Esquire. do. Mr. William Stackpole, do.
William S^^^on, do. William Sawyer, do. Andrew Sigourney, do. Daniel Scudder,
do. 2 copies. Edward Staples, do. Mrs. S. Smith, do. Mr. Joseph Smith, do. Mr.
Simmons, do. Edward Stoddard, do. John Southark, do. Micajah Sawyer, M. D.
Newburyport. Mr. Enoch Sawyer, ditto. Mrs. Elizabeth Sawyer, do. Capt. John
Somes, Gloucester. Capt. Fitz William Sargent, do. Mrs. Anna Sargent, do. Mrs.
Judith F. Saunders, do. Susanna F. Somes, do. Mr. Zachariah Stevens, do. Miss
Nancy O. Saunders, do. Mr. Epos Sargent, jun. do. James Saville, do. William
Stearns, Salem. Mrs. Elizabeth Saunders, do. Mr. Daniel Scott, Charlestown.
David Stearns, do. John Soley, do. Samuel Soley, do. Mrs. Hannah Spring,
Watertown. Ebenezer (...), Esquire. Roxbury. (...) Stoddard, Esquire. Hallowell. Mr.
James Scobie, Marblehead. Holder Slocum, Esquire. Dartmouth. Mr. Paul D. Sargent,
jun. Sullivan. Hon. Thompson J. Skinner, Esquire. Williamstown. Mr. Isaac Story,
Sullivan. Mr. Joseph Storer, Kennebunk S^th Spring. Biddeford Walker Simonton,
Portland. Major Joseph Swasey, Ipswich. Dr. (...) Smith, Bennington. Mr.
Clement Sharp, London (Eng.) John Saunders, Plymouth ditto. C. Smith, Judge
Advocate, United States Army. N. W. Territory J. Smith, Sheriff, ditto. Mrs.
Eliza Sellman, do. Eliza Symms, do. Capt. B. Shaumburgh, do. Mr. Nathaniel
Seldom, Richmond, (Virg.) James Strawbridge, Philadelphia, (Penn.) Benjamin
Simes, ditto. Mrs. D. Stewart, do. Rachel Shepperd, do. Maria Stoughton,
Bordentown. Elizabeth Saltonstall, New London. (Conn.) John Samuel Sherburne,
Esquire. Portsmouth (N. H.) Jacob Sheafe, Esquire. ditto. Mr. James Sheafe, do. Clement
Storer, do. William Stavers, do. Reuben Shapely, do. Joseph Simes, do. Stephen
Sewall, do.
T
His Excellency Sir John Temple, Bart. New York. Grenville Temple, Esquire. ditto.
William (...), Esquire. Boston Rev. Peter Thatcher D. D. ditto. David Townsend, M.
D. do. James Thwing, Esquire. do. Mr. Samuel Thwing. jun. ditto. James Tisdale, do.
David Tilden, do. Mr. Jacob Tidd, Boston. Mrs. Eliza Tilden. do. Mr. David
Townsend, do. C. Tuckerman, do. Nathaniel Tucker, do. Isaac Townsend, do.
Abraham Touro, do. Elias Tuckerman, do. Hon. George Thatcher, Esquire. Biddeford.
Joshua Thomas, Esquire. Plymouth. Capt. John Tucker, Gloucester. Capt. Israel
Trask, do. William Towner, Esquire. Williamstown. Mr. Daniel Twombly, Falmouth.
Joseph Thomas, Kennebunk. Spencer Tinkam, Wiscasset. John Thomas,
North-Yarmouth. Capt. John Thorlo, Portland. Mrs. Eliza Tailor, Quebeck Mr.
Edward Trescot, South Carolina. Daniel Tracy, Norfolk, (Virg.) Ebenezer Thomas,
ditto. John Thompson, Richmond. Capt. Frederick Tracy, Norwich, (Conn.) Elisha
Tracy, ditto. Mr. Samuel Tyler, do. Mrs. Lucretia Thomas, do. Miss. Nancy
Turner, do. Capt. George Turner, Portsmouth, (N. H.) Mr. Thomas Thompson,
ditto.
V
Mr. John Vose, Principal of the (...) Academy, Atkinson, (N. H.) Henry
Vern^^l, Music Master, 2 copies, Boston. Nathaniel Volentine, do. Josiah Vose,
do. James Vila, do.
W
GEORGE WASHINGTON. late Commander in Chief of the American Forces, and
President of the United States, Mount Vernon, (Virg.) Mrs. M. WASHINGTON,
ditto. Rev. Those. Walter. D. D. Boston. Samuel West, D. D. do. John Warren, M.
D. do. Thomas L. Winthrop, do. Arnold Wells, jun. Esquire. do. John Winthrop, Esquire.
do. Mrs. Abbey Wells, do. Hannah Willard, do. Martha Walker, do. Mr. Timothy
Williams, do. Col. Marston Watson, do. 2 copies. Maj. Isaac Winslow, do. Mr.
Thomas Welsh, do. Samuel Wheelwright, do. Thomas Walley, jun. do. Samuel
Whitney, do. Abraham Wild, do. Capt. William Williams, do. Mr. Moses Wheeler,
do. Thomas Williams, jun. do. Isaac Walker, do. Daniel Wheaton, do. William
White, do. James White, do. W. Charles White, do. Joshua Witherle, do. Daniel
Woods, do. Samuel Webber, Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy,
Cambridge. Mrs. Mary Warren, Plymouth. Artemas Ward. jun Esquire. Weston. Rev.
Joseph Warren, Portland. Mr. Peter Warren, do. George Warren, do. P^^eg
Wadsworth, do. William Wakefield, do. Mr. Samuel Weeks, Portland. Maj. Thomas
B. Wait, do. Mr. Daniel Wi^e, Wells. Moses Wheeler, Gloucester. Nathl. Ware,
Wrentham. David Wood, Charlestown. Jonathan Winship, Little Cambridge. Geo.
Wakefield, Dedham. John Wilks, London, (Eng.) Rober Watts, Savannah. Capt.
William Westwood, Norfolk, (Virg.) Mr. Richard Wiseham, do. Hez. L. Wight,
Richmond. Mrs. Wescott, 2 copies, Philadel. Mr. David Walker, do. George
Walker, do. Mrs. Mary Weed, do. Esther Waters, do. Miss Jane Willing. do.
Francis B. Winthrop, Esquire. New York. William Winthrop, Esquire. do. Mrs. Sarah
Wheat, New London, (Conn.) Miss Lucy Woodbridge, Norwich. Charles de Wolf, Esquire.
Bristol, (R. I.) Mr. Rufus Waterman, Provid. Jonathan Warner, Esquire. Portsmouth,
(N. H.) Mr. Thomas Wharton, do. Daniel Wentworth, do. John Wendall, jun. do.
Col. Moses Woodward, do. Mrs. Olive R. Watts, do. Charles Walker, Esquire. Concord.
John Wingate, M. D. Chester, (N. H) Mr. Josiah Webster, do.
Y
Mr. Thales Yeaton, Portsmouth.

