THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM ORR, AT CARRICKFERGUS ASSIZES, FOR BEING An United
Irishman; WITH HIS DYING DECLARATION, etc. etc. etc.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY J. CAREY, No. 19, CARTER'S-ALLEY, FOR G. DOUGLAS, No.
2, SOUTH THIRD-STREET. 1798.

LATELY PUBLISHED, and now selling by G. DOUGLAS, MR. GRATTAN'S ADDRESS to the
Citizens of Dublin, On his retiring from Parliament.

ALSO, MR. ERSKINE'S SPEECH in the Trial of J. Williams for publishing "PAINE'S
AGE OF REASON."

TO THE READER.
IT is necessary to premise, that the following Account is taken from a Paper
under the command of the British Government -- (there is now no free Press in
IRELAND) -- and all the minute and leading circumstances of Mr. ORR'S
melancholy case have been prevented from appearing in print -- The cruel and
unmerited fate of this persecuted man, however, has excited the grief and
indignation of a vast majority of the people of both Ireland and England -- as
such, it cannot pass unnoticed, and unfelt, by every Irishman, and by every
friend of Liberty in AMERICA, of whatever country.

CARRICKFERGUS ASSIZES. BEFORE THE RIGHT HON. BARON YELVERTON, AND JUDGE
CHAMBERLAIN. MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 18, 1797. TRIAL OF WILLIAM ORR, FOR
ADMINISTERING UNLAWFUL OATHS.
THE first witness called was Hugh Wheatley, soldier in the Fifeshire
Fencibles. -- He said, that in April 1796, he returned from Scotland, where he
had been on furlough. On going by Antrim, to join his regiment at Derry, along
with othertwo soldiers, one of them named Lindsay, they went into a
public-house, where they met with a person named Campbell, and another named
Orr, not the prisoner. After leaving that house, they went along a road, where
Campbell introduced the witness to Orr, the prisoner, who was in a field sowing
flax. He came out of the field, and they all went to a house, where a number of
people soon assembled, and they put a vote among themselves, whether they
should put the Constitution book into the prisoner's hands. They agreed to do
so, and the prisoner, acting as president, held out a book to the witness to
swear on. The witness at first refused to swear, but afterward did so, being
told his life was not worth a farthing, if he did not come into their way of
thinking. The oath was, to keep the secrets of United Irishmen, and not, for
any reward, to discover on them. They said, they wanted a Reform in Parliament,
and, if they did not get it by fair means, they would overthrow the
Constitution; and that they meant to have as many military or armed men on
their side as to effect it. They gave him, the witness, a Constitution book to
take his directions from, with orders, that as soon as he joined his regiment,
he was to swear in as many as he could; and when seven were made, they were to
form a Committee, and then the book would direct them what to do. That while
the witness and his companions were in Antrim and the neighborhood, they were
supported in the house of John Hyndman, and paid nothing for it; and when they
left Antrim, they got five shillings from the prisoner, and sixpence from
another man. After the witness had been sworn a United Irishman, the persons
who were in the room gave him certain signs by which to know United Irishmen,
and explained them to him. -- The first sign was, "Lift the right hand, and
draw it down over the right side of the face -- 2d, Lift the left hand, and
draw it down over the left side of the face -- 3d, Shake hands by the left
hands -- 4th, Say, What do you know? I know U. -- What do you know more? I know
T." or some other letters of the word UNITY or UNITED. -- Campbell invited him,
the witness, and Lindsay, to his house, a little way from Antrim, where they
were shown arms, and a paper called the Northern Star; and in his garden they
were shown a draw well, which, they were told, would be a nice place to put the
Aristocrats.

Cross-examined by Mr. Curran.
Q. Did you ever say to a young man, If you are a friend to Mr. Orr, go to the
prison, and ask him to give me a little money, and I Will desert?


A. No; I was offered money by a person in Belfast to desert, but I would not
do so -- I did not know him.


Q. Did you ever send any cartridges to be given to Mr. Orr in prison, as a
token that it came from a soldier?


A. I believe not.


Q. Did you ever say to any person, that you took the test in a manner that
suited your own mind, and that you was dissatisfied as a soldier?


A. I never did, unless it might be to some of the United Irishmen, before I
knew what they meant.


Q. Did you ever say any thing about tools of Government?


A. What kind of tools are they? I don't know what you mean.


Q. Did you ever say you was enlisted when drunk, and intended to desert?


A. I never said I intended to desert? I probably might have said I was drunk
when I enlisted.


Q. Had you ever any conversation with one Walker, a soldier, about being Up?


A. I never advised him to be up, but I endeavored to learn what he knew about
it.


Q. Did you ever say he might take the oath of secrecy, without going farther?


A. I told him I would show him all that was in my pocketbook, which was only
a parcel of old letters.


Q. Did you ever tell him about powder coming over to Ireland in flax-seed
hogsheads, and about a smith making pikes?


A. I never told him any thing about powder, but I might have mentioned
something about pikes, by way of a whim.


John Lindsay, soldier in the Fifeshire Fencibles, said that when he and
Wheatley came from Scotland, and were returning to Derry by Antrim, they saw
the prisoner, who gave Wheatley a book, and swore him not to discover the
secrets of the United Irishmen for any see or reward, or to give evidence
against any of them. There was a society there, which they called the Baronial
Meeting, and Campbell and the prisoner were there. Wheatley got a Constitution
book -- he, the witness, did not get one, and does not know the object of the
United Irishmen, but took the oath of secrecy administered by the prisoner in
Hyndman's house.

Mr. Curran, in behalf of the prisoner, addressed the Court as to the
construction of the act of Parliament upon which the prisoner was tried. He
took notice of the various acts of the Legislature which had been passed from
time to time, for suppressing and preventing tumultuous risings, prohibiting
the-administering of unlawful oaths, etc. etc. He remarked, that the act 36th
of the king, upon which the prisoner was now tried, made the penalty death. He
contended, that if the two witnesses who had been examined were to be believed,
their evidence amounted to a proof of High Treason, and surely the crime of
High Treason could not be tried by any other law than that which applied to it.
The objection, therefore, which he had to the present trial, was this; that the
body of crime contained in the evidence, was not a crime of the nature laid in
the indictment, but a crime of High Treason. It follows, then, that if a person
be charged with a crime amounting to High Treason, he ought to be tried by the
law which relates to High Treason, and then he will be entitled to all the
advantages which that law gives him.

The abilities of Mr. Curran are sufficiently known, and stand in no need of
encomium. Upon this occasion they were exerted with all their force and energy;
and he went over an extensive field of argument, to show that the indictment,
in its present shape, ought to be quashed.

The Attorney General said a few words in reply to Mr. Curran -- He remarked
that notice had been taken of the procedure of the Crown in some trials, as
tending to show that such procedure had been rigorous and severe. But he said
he could challenge any one to point out a case where the prisoner had not
received every indulgence consistent with the due administration of justice;
and he thought that any remarks thrown out, tending to impress the minds of the
people with a contrary opinion, were equally unjust and improper. The Attorney
General was proceeding to answer some of Mr. Curran's arguments, when

Judge Yelverton said, that he had listened with patience to hear every
argument that could be suggested for the prisoner; and he had discovered that
it all went to call upon him to quash the present trial. He thought, however,
he could not be justifiable in complying with this -- He thought too, the
objection was ill timed, it ought to have been made at a much earlier stage of
the business, and and not reserved till now, when the whole evidence on the
part of the Crown had been divulged.

Mr. Curran proceeded to call

Evidence on the part of the Prisoner.
Charles M'Claverty said he knew the prisoner and also Wheatley, the soldier.
About January last he, the witness, had a conversation with Wheatley, whom he
overtook with Sergeant Miller on the road from Ballyclare to Carrick -- They
all went into a house on the road side and had a glass of spirits. There was a
man lying in a bed in the room were they were; he spoke to Miller, having been
formerly in the service with him. After one half pint was drunk another was
called for, and before it was drank Wheatley called the witness out and they
went on the road together -- Wheatley asked him if he knew Mr. Orr, who was in
prison, and if he would go into the jail to serve him -- He, the witness, said
he could not get into the jail and did not then know Orr -- Wheatley said "you
must try to do it, and tell Orr if he will put a different colored coat upon
me and some money I will desert; and if he will get another coat and two
guineas, I will get Lindsay to desert also, for Lindsay was as ready to go as
himself." Wheatley then added, they had slogged him in Ballymoney for his
principles, and when taking off his coat had destroyed papers about the United
Irishman, which he was sorry for, and that he had persevered in several towns.
Soon after this Wheatley again said you must go into jail to be of service to
Orr, but the witness replied as he did not know Orr, he would not believe him;
then said Wheatley, "here is a sacred note," holding up his right hand with a
cartridge in it. He added that it was not he but Lindsay that had sworn against
Orr, and that Lindsay would swear the Hill of Howth in Scotland was no larger
than a pound of candles in a chandler's shop. -- At this time Sergeant Miller
came up with them and they dropped the conversation. When the witness arrived in
Carrickfergus, he applied to a Magistrate who gave him a line to get into the
prison, where he saw Orr, who did not know him, but one Story who was there
knew him and introduced him to Orr, to whom he delivered the message from the
soldier. When Orr heard it he stared, would not believe it and said he was a
villain -- The witness returned soon after to Wheatley, who was waiting for an
answer -- They went together into a Mr. Anderson's, where they got some porter,
and Wheatley urged him to go into the jail again but he would not do it.

Cross-examined by the Attorney General.
Witness said, when he met with Wheatley, he was going to Carrick, to enquire
after a guinea which had been sent there to a Free-mason, because he was not
certain if it had been delivered. He had never spoken to Orr before seeing him
that day in prison.

John Young said, he once heard Wheatley say he was enlisted in Scotland when
in liquor, and that he took the test-oath in his own mind to answer himself.

Cross examined. --

Q. Was Orr considered as a leader among the boys?


A. I don't know what boys.


Q. Did his being taken up make a great noise in the country?


A. It did.


Sergeant Miller, called by the prosecutor. Witness said, that he recollects
that on the road to Carrick along with Wheatley, a young man overtook them, and
they all went into a house, where they had a glass. -- They remained some time,
and then all of them came out together, and walked on till they came within a
quarter of a mile of Carrick, when he, the witness, stepped aside a short time,
and then went on. No conversation took place on the road, but what he heard.

Cross-examined. --

Q. Don't you think it possible they might have said a few words which you did
not hear?


A. They might.


Rev. Mr. Foot Marshall said, M'Claverty lived in his service for a year, and,
from what he knows of him, is convinced he would not tell a lie.

Here the examination of the evidence was closed.

Judge Yelverton then charged the Jury, and recapitulated the evidence that had
been adduced on both sides. His Lordship took notice of the witness Wheatley,
who, he said, had given his evidence in a very clear and distinct manner, and
in a style of language which convinced him he had received an education far
superior to what generally falls to the lot of men in his station of life. With
regard to Lindsay's evidence, his Lordship said, that so far as it went, it
supported that which had been given by Wheatley; and, upon the whole, those two
witnesses were, in their evidence, consistent with themselves and with each
other. It was true, some witnesses had been adduced to disprove what Wheatley
had said, but these witnesses differed materially with each other. M'Claverty
says, that the conversation between him and Wheatley, relative to his going
into prison to request Orr to give money, etc. to him to desert, took place
immediately after they came out of the house where they had been drinking on
the road to Carrick, and that Sergeant Miller was then left behind; while
Sergeant Miller says, that they all came out of the house together, and no
conversation of the nature mentioned could have taken place without his hearing
it: he admits, however, that when about a quarter of a mile from Carrick, he
stepped aside, and Wheatley and M'Claverty walked on together, so that, if any
conversation took place, it must have been then, and not at the time mentioned
by M'Claverty.

His Lordship, after making a few more remarks, left the whole case with (...)
Jury, requesting that if they had any doubts, they would lean to the side of
mercy.

The Jury were then enclosed, and remained so from seven o'clock in the evening
till six o'clock in the morning, when they returned a verdict of GUILTY, but
recommended the prisoner to mercy. Judge Yelverton said, he would transmit
their recommendation, which his Lordship accordingly did that same morning by
express.

WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 20.
Mr. Curran, in a speech replete with great elegance of language, force of
reasoning, and brilliancy of thought, argued for several hours in support of a
motion he made to the Court, for an arrest of judgment in the case of Mr. Orr.
Various law authorities were resorted to, and many ingenious inferences drawn,
both from the construction of law and of language.

The Court took the whole into consideration, and were of opinion, that the
motion ought to be set aside.

THURSDAY, SEPT. 21.
William Orr, for administering unlawful oaths to two soldiers, and found
guilty on Monday, was sentenced to be hanged on the 7th of October next. -- It
is much to the honor of Baron Yelverton, that we have to observe, that in
pronouncing the awful sentence on this unhappy man, he was so deeply affected
as scarcely to be able, articulately, to conclude a very impressive address.
The tears gushed from his eyes, and covering his face with both his hands, his
Lordship, greatly agitated, remained in that situation for several minutes. In
this address, the Baron told Mr. Orr, that though recommended to mercy by the
Jury, he thought it would be the greatest cruelty to flatter him with any hopes
of a remission of the sentence, which it had been his painful office to
pronounce, and strongly recommended to him to make the best use of his time in
making his peace with God, and in preparing for that atonement, which he was
destined to make to the offended laws of his country.

[Mr. Orr is a very respectable farmer, and a man of property in the
neighborhood of Antrim, where he has resided all his lifetime with a fair and
unblemished character. He appears to be about thirty or two and thirty years of
age -- remarkably good looking, and much the appearance of a gentleman. He has
six children by a very amiable prudent wife, who has been his constant
companion in prison, and who is at this moment far advanced in pregnancy. Her
distress may be felt, but it cannot be expressed.]

Mr. ORR (immediately after sentence) begged leave to say a few words: -- "My
Lord," said he, "that Jury has convicted me of being a Felon; my own heart
tells me that their conviction is a falsehood, and that I am not a Felon: if
they have found me so improperly, it is worse for them than for me, for I can
forgive them -- I wish to say only one word more, and that is, to declare upon
this awful occasion, and in the presence of God, that the evidence against me
was grossly perjured, grossly and wickedly perjured."

A SHORT SKETCH OF MR. CURRAN'S SPEECH:
When Mr. Curran contended for an arrest of judgment, he argued with all that
brilliancy of imagination and force of reasoning, for which this gentleman is
so justly celebrated -- He said, That the jury should be discharged of the
indictment, and that they should be directed to acquit the prisoner; if the
testimony of the informer was true, the guilt which it proved was not a crime
of Felony under the Insurrection Act, but a crime of High Treason under the
Statute of Edward III. A man charged with High Treason in Great Britain, has
advantages of defense which make it almost impossible for an innocent man to
fall a victim to the mere malice of persecution: he must have a copy of the
indictment; the overt-acts must be expressly charged; the blasted breath of one
venal Informer cannot destroy him. In that country there must be two witnesses
at the least. Even in Ireland, where life does not seem to be of so much value,
the man accused of Treason has advantages peculiar to his situation; he is
entitled to an exact copy of his charge, and a full defense by his Counsel in
point of law and in fact. The State must avow itself as the prosecutor; it
cannot wage a piratical war against his life, under false colors; and if it
prosecutes him maliciously, he is authorized by his Counsel to display every
circumstance of his case to his Jury, and of appealing to every sense of their
duty, their justice, their humanity, and their danger, for his protection. To
try him, therefore, under this Act, which gave him none of those advantages,
was to try him without hearing him, and was an oppression unwarranted by the
Law of the Land. This objection, it was said, might appear at first sight to be
novel and hazardous. As to its novelty, it was the first time that such a
proceeding, was ever attempted, and the objection to it must be therefore new.
It might certainly be thought desperate to seek a refuge from a charge of
Felony under the Law Treason; and it was only to be lamented that the
melancholy state of the Country so fully justified such a conduct.

EXECUTION OF MR. ORR.
BELFAST, OCTOBER 16.
On Saturday morning early the Rev. Mr. Stavely and the Rev. Mr. Hill visited
Mr. Orr, by his own desire, in prison. They remained with him all the forenoon;
and about half after one o'clock Mr. Orr left the prison and went into a
chaise, accompanied by these gentlemen. A considerable number of military,
consisting of part of the Fifeshire Fencibles, the Monaghan Militia, the Reay
Fencibles, the Carrickfergus Invalids, a party of the 22d Dragoons, and the
Carrickfergus Yeoman Cavalry, as also a party of the Artillery, with two pieces
of cannon, were attending. The High Sheriff, on horseback, preceded the
carriage. The Sub Sheriff, also on horseback, followed it. The whole proceeded,
in solemn, flow procession, from the jail to the place of execution, about
three quarters of a mile from Carrickfergus. Mr. Orr and the two clergymen,
then alighted from the carriage, and the prisoner having asked permission of
the High Sheriff to allow a few of his friends to be near him, it was instantly
granted.

About an hour was spent in devotional exercises, which Mr. Orr joined with
much servency, and during the whole period of time, and amid the awful
solemnity, he preserved a degree of calm fortitude, and when the fatal moment
arrived he drew from his pocket a few printed papers, to which his name was
adhibited, containing his dying declaration, these he distributed among the
persons who were near him. This done, he shook hands with his surrounding
friends, and very affectionately bade them farewell -- He then mounted the
scaffold with a firm step, and the apparatus of death being adjusted, he was
launched into eternity about three o'clock. -- After hanging three quarters of
an hour, the body was taken down and delivered to his friends, by whom it was
conveyed away on a hearse.

The DYING DECLARATION of WILLIAM ORR, of Ferranshane, in the county of Antrim,
Farmer TO THE PUBLIC.
My Friends and Countrymen,
IN the thirty-first year of my life, I have been sentenced to die upon the
gallows, and this sentence has been in pursuance of a verdict of twelve men,
who should have been indifferently and impartially chosen; how far they have
been so, I leave to that country from which they have been chosen, to
determine; and how far they have discharged their duty, I leave to their God
and to themselves. -- They have, in pronouncing their verdict, thought proper
to recommend me as an object of humane mercy; in return, I pray to God, if they
have erred, to have mercy upon them. The Judge, who condemned me, humanely shed
tears in uttering my sentence, but whether he did wisely in so highly
commending the wretched Informer, who swore away my life, I leave to his own
cool reflection, solemnly assuring him and all the world, with my dying breath,
that that informer was forsworn. The law under which I suffer, is surely a
severe one; may the makers and promoters of it be justified in the integrity of
their motives and the purity of their own lives -- by that law, I am stamped a
selon, but my heart disdains the imputation. My comfortable lot and industrious
course of life, best refute the charge of being an adventurer for plunder; but
if to have loved my Country, to have known its wrongs, to have felt the
injuries of the persecuted Catholics, and to have united with them and all
other religious persuasions in the most orderly and least sanguinary means of
procuring redress: -- If these be selonies, I am a selon, but not otherwise.
Had my Council (for whose honorable exertions I am indebted) prevailed in
their motion to have me tried for high treason, rather than under the
Insurrection (...), I should have been entitled then to a full defense, and my
actions and intentions would have been better vindicated, but that was refused,
and I must now submit to what has passed.

To the generous protection of my Country, I leave a beloved wife, who has been
constant and true to me, and whose grief for my fate has already nearly
occasioned her death. This unhappy woman, in the seventh month of her
pregnancy, died on the day of her husband's execution.
I leave five living children, who have been my delight -- may they love their
Country as I have done, and die for it, if needful.

Lastly, a false and ungenerous publication having appeared in a news-paper,
stating, certain alleged confessions of guilt on my part, and thus striking at
my reputation, which is dearer to me than life, I take this solemn method of
contradicting that calumny: -- I was applied to by the high sheriff and the
Rev. William Bristow, Sovereign of Belfast, to make a confession of guilt, who
used entreaties to that effect; this I peremptorily refused; did I think myself
guilty, I should be free to confess it; but on the contrary, I glory in my
innocence.

I trust that all my virtuous Countrymen will bear me in their kind
remembrance, and continue true and faithful to each other, as I have been to
all of them; with this last wish of my heart, nothing doubting of the success
of that cause in which I suffer, and hoping for God's merciful forgiveness of
such offenses as my frail nature may have at any time betrayed me into, I die
in peace and charity with all mankind.

WILLIAM ORR.
Carrickfergus Gaol, Oct. 5. 1797. N. B. The above Declaration was made and
read by William Orr, in the presence of the Rev. Mr. Savage.



TO THE PUBLIC.
IT is with extreme reluctance that we address the public on so distressing a
subject -- but having seen a printed paper, signed William Orr, which was
delivered by him yesterday, as his dying declaration, at the place of
execution, in which was this assertion, viz. "I was applied to by the high
sheriff, and the Rev. Wm. Bristow, Sovereign of Belfast, to make a confession
of guilt, who used entreaties to that effect: this I peremptorily refused."

We think it a duty we owe to ourselves and to the public, to state precisely
the purport of our conversation with the unfortunate man, on the subject
alluded to in his declaration, and the circumstances that led to it.

Being at Carrickfergus on Wednesday the 27th ult. to attend an election of an
Alderman and Burgesses for that Corporation -- the sheriff expressed an
intention of going into the jail, for the purpose of seeing if the prisoner
(Mr. Orr) had every reasonable accommodation that his unfortunate situation
would admit of, and requested Mr. Bristow to accompany him. -- After some
enquiries from the prisoner to that effect, and some observations on a
religious book which Mr. Orr had been reading, Mr. Bristow said to him, "Sir, I
have seen a paper which your brother and another gentleman brought to the
sheriff on Monday last, with your name annexed to it, in which you acknowledged
the justice of your sentence, and cautioned others against being led into bad
practices by wicked and designing men." Mr. Bristow added, that it was
expected, from what your brother and that gentleman told the sheriff, that it
would have been published in last Monday's Belfast paper. "I am confident, said
Mr. Bristow to Mr. Orr, that this acknowledgement, which you had for some time
withheld, must now afford you great comfort." Mr. Orr replied, "Yes, Sir, it
has relieved my mind very much." -- Mr. Bristow then said to Mr. Orr, "As you
are conscious of your guilt, it is your bounden duty, if you know of any
conspiracy against the State, to make a discovery of any circumstance you may
know, which can throw any light upon it, as the only reparation you can make to
your injured country." Mr. Orr replied, "I can recollect none at present." The
sheriff then said -- "Mr. Orr, if, upon reflection, you should hereafter
recollect any circumstances of that nature which you would wish to communicate,
I will, upon your application, immediately attend you; or Mr. Bristow, I am
certain, will do so, or any other magistrate of the county." Mr. Orr replied,
"I thank you, Sir.

This we affirm was the whole substance of what then passed between us and the
unfortunate William Orr, and, as nearly as we can recollect, the exact words --
and that we never had a conversation with him on that subject at any other time,

The truth of this whole statement we are ready (if necessary) to attest in the
most solenm manner.

C. SKEFFINGTON, High Sheriff of the County of Antrim. WILLIAM BRISTOW,
Sovereign of Belfast.

Belfast, Oct. 15, 1797.
Thus far the account, printed by permission, except Mr. Orr's Dying
Declaration, which was not allowed to appear, and to counteract the effects of
which upon the public mind, the Counter-declaration of the Sheriff and
Sovereign was made and published.

But it is necessary for the better understanding of Mr. Orr's unfortunate
case, to state some circumstances, which, in the minds of all humane and
impartial men, must have great weight, and make them still more deplore his
unhappy catastrophe -- viz.

It appears, that two of the jurors voluntarily came forward and solemnly made
oath, That when they retired to their room to deliberate upon the evidence
given against Mr. Orr, liquor was introduced, and instead of deliberately and
impartially weighing every circumstance, they proceeded to drink, and to such a
degree, that there was almost a general intoxication! -- Even in this state
there was doubt and hesitation, when one of the jurors [the foreman] used
threats to intimidate the rest; he charged them with harboring disloyal
principles, and should they refuse to join him in finding Mr. Orr guilty, he
denounced vengeance against them. -- It was under this intimidation that the
jury, at length, assented to the verdict. And these jurors also swear, That
even the (...) their person, and dwellings, nor (...) they had so plentifully
drank, could (...) from them such an assent, but that they were imposed upon by
(...) persuasion that Mr. Orr's life was in no danger, as their recommendation
to mercy, accompanying their verdict, would procure him the (...) of
Government. They conclude by swearing (...) That in their minds the case is a
doubtful one, "which doubt they (...) in the verdict itself."

Such is the substance of an affidavit duly and solemnly made in open Court by
two of the jurors The following extract from the London account of the Trial
will show upon (...) we (...) this very extraordinary circumstance. (...) Mr.
ORR was remanded, his Counsel stated, that a most (...) had just come to their
knowledge, and of which they (...) duty to apprise the Court: two of the JURORS
had made (...), "that on the night of the trial, a considerable quantity of
(...) was (...) into the Jury-room, and drank by the (...) many of whom were
greatly in (...), when one of the (...) the two Jurors who made the affidavit,
and who admitted, (...) of a state of (...), to prosecute them as United
Irishmen, if they did not concur in a verdict of Guilty; and that, at length,
(...) and drink, and (...) by (...), they did, contrary to their inclinations,
concur in that verdict"

Here the Counsel, (...) interrupted by Mr. Justice CHAMBERLAIN, who (...)
ought not to be permitted; that it was (...) upon the verdict, and could not be
(...) motion to the Court!

(...) they did not mean to make it the ground of a motion (...) intend, had
the Court permitted it, to move that the (...) for their misconduct: that as to
diserediting (...) could discredit it, it was only (...) that it should be
discredited; that as to (...) had discharged their duty to the best of their
judgment; and submitted.


-- But, if further matter could be (...) to induce the Lord Lieutenant, who is
(...) the form and spirit of the Constitution, "to (...) justice in mercy," to
stay the arm of the executioner, it offers in the confession of Wheatley, the
principal (...) in the persecution -- This instrument of persecution deposed on
oath before a Magistrate, That he felt great compunction of conscience, not
only for the crime which he had committed against Mr. Orr, but for other
crimes; and that what he had alleged against Mr. Orr was false. --

It further appears, that Mr. Orr had received a respite of some days, which
the public gladly hoped was a preparatory measure to his general pardon -- It
was during this respite, that attempts were made to persuade him "to confess
his guilt." -- The house-breaker, the robber, and even the murderer, has
frequently experienced the Royal elemency -- In this case, a mere difference of
opinion, at most a political error, was deemed a more heinous crime than any
that could be committed! -- Accordingly, when it was found that Mr. Orr
persisted in declaring his innocence, he was finally sent, by the vengeance of
an unrelenting Viceroy, to die by the hands of the public executioner!

LIST OF THE JURY.
1 Arch. Thompson, 2 George Crooks, 3 James M'Naughten, 4 Geo. Pentland, 5 John
Bell (of Prospect), 6 Geo. Dickson, 7 Sam. Hemphill, 8 Wm. Laughlin, 9 Geo.
Casement, 10 Arthur Johnston, 11 John Hall, 12 Geo. Patterson.

