THE CHARTER AND BYE-LAWS OF THE GENERAL SOCIETY OF MECHANICS AND TRADESMEN OF
THE CITY OF NEW YORK.

ALSO -- THE RULES OF ORDERS WITH A CATALOGUE OF MEMBERS NAMES.

Published by Order of the Society.

New York: Printed by Geo: Forman, No. 64, Water-Street, between Coenties and
the Old-Slip. 1798.

An ACT to incorporate the SOCIETY of MECHANICS and TRADESMEN of the City of
New York, for Charitable Purposes. (Passed the 14th of March, 1792.)
WHEREAS Robert Boyd, and others, Mechanics and Tradesmen, of the City of
New York, associated as a Society, under the style of " The General Society of
Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York," for the laudable purposes of
protecting and supporting such of their brethren as by sickness or accident may
stand in need of assistance, and for the relief of the widows and orphans of
those who may die, leaving little or no property for their support, by their
petition, presented to the Legislature, have prayed to be incorporated, to
enable them more beneficiently to carry into effect their charitable
intentions: Therefore,

Be it enacted by the People of the State of New York, represented in Senate
and Assembly, That the said Robert Boyd, together with Nicholas N. Anthony,
Thomas Allen, William Allen, Jacob Arden, Francis Arden, John Amory, Allard
Anthony, Jacob I. Arden, Thomas Ash, Elbert Anderson, Jacob Arnold, John
Burger, John Burger, jun. William Bryar, Michael Brooks, Abraham Bloodgood,
Francis Bassett, David Barclay, Walter Bicker, Gardner Baker, James Brown,
James Bramble, John P. Bessonett, John Brower, Thomas Brewen, James Byrne, John
Brown, Peter Bertine, John Bingham, James D. Bissett, Thomas Brown, John Banks,
Isaac Boyea, Caleb Boil, John Campbell, Joseph Cheeseman, John Commendener,
John Cole, Peter Cole, Richard Cunningham, Samuel Campell, Francis Child's,
William Croleys, William Carman, John Clitz, Seabury Champlain, John Croleus,
Isaac Coulthard, James Culbertson, Richard Davis, John De la Montayne, Walter
Degraw, James Van Dyck, John Van Dyck, William I. Elsworth, John Elsworth,
Jacob Fisler, Gabriel Furman, Jacob Fee, William Forde, George Gosman, William
W. Gilbert, John Goodeve, John Gilmore, Robert Gosman, Alexander Gibson, Caleb
Haviland, Thomas Hazard, Robert Hodge, Peter Hulick, Hercules Heron, William
Hopson, Daniel Hitchcock, Jabez Halsey, Jacob Hallett, Aaron Howel, Obadiah
Helmes, Thomas Ivers, Joseph Jadwin, Seth Kneelen, George Lindsey, Robert
Lilburn, Thomas Le Foy, John Moore, John McComb, sen. Dennis McCready, John
Mills, Malcom McEwen, George Meserve, William Meserve, William Mooney, White
Matlack, William Mooney, Peter R. Maverick, David Mann, Andrew Morris, James
Moore, John McBaine, Robert McDowell, John Ming, Isaac Moore, Peter McCartey,
John McComb, jun. Joseph Newton, Isaac Nicoll, John Norman, Anthony Ogilvie,
Andrew Otterson, Anthony Post, Abraham Polhemus, Jotham Post, John Perrian,
Edward Patten, George Pake, George Peck, Alexander Peacock, William Philips,
William Parker, Abraham Russell, James Robinson, Frederick Resler, Thomas Ross,
John Ross, Abraham Riker, John I. Richie, Daniel Ruckel, John Stagg, Thomas
Stevenson, John Sidell, Daniel Stansbury* John Striker, Gerardus Smith,
Frederick Stymets, Stephen Smith, Anthony Simmons, Jacob Sherred, George Seal,
George Speth, Henry Snyder, William Stymets, Peter Shackerly, Cornelius
Sebring, Andrew Thompson, James Tylee, James Teller, Ahasuerus Turk, Thomas
Timpson, Daniel Tooker, John Utt, John Wylley, Henry Will, Edward Watkeys, Hugh
Walsh, William Wright, George Warner, Henry Wolf, James Warner, Nathaniel
Woodward, Benjamin Williamson, John Wood, John Wright, Andrew Wright, and John
Young, and all persons being Mechanics or Tradesmen, and resident within the
City and County of New York, who hereafter shall be members of the said
Society, shall be, and hereby are ordained, constituted and declared to be, one
body corporate and politic; in fact and in name, by the name of " The General
Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York," until the first
Monday of April, one thousand, eight hundred and twelve; and that by that name,
they and their successors, for the term aforesaid, shall and may have
succession, and shall be persons in law, capable of suing and being sued,
pleading and being impleaded, answering and being answered unto, defending and
being defended in all courts and places whatsoever, in all manner of action and
actions, suits, complaints, matters and causes whatsoever; and that they and
their successors may have a common seal, and may change and alter the same at
their pleasure. And also, that they and their successors, by the name of " The
Geneneral Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York," shall be
in law capable of purchasing, holding and conveying any estate, real or
personal, for the public use of the said corporation.

Provided, That the lands, tenements and hereditaments, which it shall be
lawful for the said corporation to hold, shall be only such as shall be
requisite for the purpose of erecting a house or hall thereon, in which to meet
and to transact the business of the said corporation, or such as shall have
been bona fide mortgaged to it by way of security, or conveyed to it in
satisfaction of debts previously contracted in the course of its business, or
purchased at sales on judgments which shall have been obtained for such debts.

And, Provided also, That the amount of the real and personal estate, which the
said corporation are hereby enabled to hold, shall not at any one time exceed
the sum of fifty thousand dollars.

And be it further enacted, That the officers of the said corporation, shall be
a President, Vice President, and a second Vice President, a Treasurer and
Secretary, who shall hold their offices for one year, and shall be citizens of
this state, and be elected on the first Tuesday in January in every year, at
such time of the day and at such place in the City of New York, as shall be
fixed and ascertained by the bye-laws of the said corporation. That all
elections of the said officers or any of them shall be by ballot, and such
person who shall have at any election the greatest number of votes given at
such election as President, shall be the President; and in like manner the
person who shall have the greatest number of votes as Vice President, shall be
Vice President; and in like manner the person who shall have the greatest
number of votes for second Vice President, shall be second Vice President; and
in like manner the person who shall have the greatest number of votes as
Treasurer, shall be Treasurer; and in like manner the person who shall have the
greatest number of votes as Secretary, shall be Secretary: And the said
officers shall hold their respective offices for one year, and until others
shall be chosen in their places: That if any vacancies shall happen among the
said officers by death, resignation or removal, such vacancies shall be filled
for the remainder of the year in which they may happen, by a special election
for that purpose, to be held in the same manner as the annual elections are
made, at such times and places as shall be provided for and determined by the
bye-laws of the said corporation: That Robert Boyd shall be the first President
of the said corporation, Anthony Post, Vice President thereof, Daniel
Hitchcock, second Vice President thereof, Thomas Le Foy, the Treasurer thereof,
and John Elsworth* the Secretary thereof: who shall hold their offices
respectively until the first Tuesday in January next, and until others shall be
chosen in their places.

And be it further enacted, That in case it should at any time happen that an
election of officers should not be made on any day when pursuant to this act it
ought to have been made, the said corporation shall not for that cause be
deemed to be dissolved, but it shall and may be lawful on any other day to hold
and make an election of officers, in such manner as shall have been regulated
by the laws and ordinances of the said corporation.

And be it further enacted, That all elections and all meetings of the said
corporation, shall be made and held in a place certain to be fixed and
determined by the bye-laws of the said corporation; and that at all such
elections and meetings of the said corporation, so to be held as aforesaid,
twenty five members thereof, including the President, or in his absence the
Vice President, or in his absence the second Vice President, shall be
considered as a quorum of the said corporation, and shall have full power to do
and transact all the business thereof.

And be it further enacted, That the said corporation and their successors,
shall have full power to make and prescribe such bye-laws, rules, ordinances
and regulations, as to them from time to time shall appear needful and proper,
touching the management and disposition of their stock, property, estate and
effects for the purposes aforesaid, and touching the meetings of the said
Society, both special and ordinary, except the first Tuesday in January in
every year, which is hereby declared to be the annual meeting of the Society,
and touching the duties and conduct of the officers of the said corporation,
and touching the election of officers and all such other matters as appertain
to the business, ends and purposes, for which the said corporation is by this
act instituted, and for no other purposes whatsoever.

Provided, That such bye-laws, rules and regulations, be not repugnant to the
constitution or the laws of the United States or of this state.

And be it further enacted, That all persons being Mechanics or Tradesmen, and
resident within the City and County of New York, desiring to become members of
the said corporation, shall be proposed by at least two members, one meeting
previous to his or their election, which shall be by ballot, and determined by
two-thirds of the members present at such election; that then he or they so
elected, on paying into the hands of the Treasurer such sum as the corporation
by their bye-laws shall direct: Provided, the same shall not exceed the sum of
ten dollars, shall have his or their names inserted in the general register,
and shall be entitled to all the privileges and benefits arising therefrom.

And to the end, that the funds of the said corporation may never be diverted
to any other than the charitable purposes for which the institution has been
expressly made and created;

Be it further enacted, That the said corporation shall, within twenty days
after the passing of this act, exhibit to the Chancellor of this state a full
and particular account of all the estate, real and personal, then vested in the
said corporation, attested by the oath of the Treasurer thereof, that the same
is a true and perfect account: And shall also, in every year thereafter, during
the continuance of this act, and between the first and last days of May in each
year, exhibit to the Chancellor for the time being, a like account together
with a particular and detailed account of all moneys by the said corporation
expended in the preceding year, specifying the several purposes to which it has
been applied: And if it shall appear to the said Chancellor that any moneys,
except for the necessary repairs of any buildings which may belong to the said
corporation, or for the payment of the Treasurer or Secretary thereof, or for
other charges expressly incidental to the management of the funds thereof, have
been applied by the said corporation to any use other than for the support of
indigent members of the said corporation, or the widows or children of any
person having been a member thereof, he shall direct the Attorney General of
the state for the time being, ex officio, to file an information against the
said corporation in the Supreme Court of this State; and if upon the traverse,
the said corporation shall be found guilty, and judgment shall pass thereupon,
that thenceforth the said corporation shall cease and become null and void, and
the estate, real and personal, which it may then possess, shall vest in the
people of this state.

And be it further enacted, That this act be, and hereby be declared to be, a
public act; and that the same is construed in all courts and places, benignly
and favorably, for every beneficial purpose therein intended.

The preceding act is a true copy of the original, examined and compared
therewith this 23 d day of March, 1792. By me, ROBERT HARPUR, Deputy Sec'ry.

BYE-LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
A LAW concerning the meetings of the Society, and the election of Officers.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That the annual meetings of this Society shall be held at the
dwelling house of the late Mary Amory, in the sixth ward of the City of
New York, until a more suitable place be provided.

And be it further ordained, That when the members are met as aforesaid, the
President (or in case of his absence, death, or removal from office) the
Vice President, or in case of his absence, the second Vice President, shall,
before the hour of eleven A. M. call the members to order, who shall thereupon
proceed by ballot to the choice of their officers for the ensuing year; and
that such persons who may have a majority of votes, shall (by a committee of
three, to be previously elected by the Society, to canvass and estimate the
same) be declared duly elected, and shall thereupon enter on the duties of
their respective offices accordingly.

Nevertheless, it is here to be understood, that when a new Treasurer is
chosen, his predecessor in office shall be allowed (not exceeding) thirty days,
to adjust and settle all such affairs of the Society as come within the duties
of his office, previous to his delivering his trust into the hands of his
successor.

And be it further ordained, That it shall and may be lawful for this Society
to meet on the first Wednesday in every month, at half an hour after the
setting of the sun, at the place aforesaid, for the purpose of balloting for
such persons who have been proposed, and may wish to become members of this
Society, and to initiate those who have been elected members; and also to do
and transact all such other matters and things as the interest of the Society
shall from time to time require.

And be it further ordained, That whenever seven members shall deem it
expedient to have a special meeting, the same shall be signified by them in
writing to the President for the time being, whose duty it shall be to call the
same, by directing the Secretary to give at least three days notice in three of
the public newspapers printed in this city.

And be it further ordained, That if any vacancies shall happen among the
officers of this Society, by death, resignation or removal, such vacancies
shall be filled for the remainder of the year, in which they may happen, by a
special election for that purpose, to be held in the same manner as the annual
elections are; that the time for such election shall be at one of the stated
meetings of the Society, not less than two, or more than three months after
such vacancies shall or may happen; that one weeks notice thereof shall be
given by order of the presiding President, in two, or more of the public
newspapers printed in this city.

A LAW to regulate the admission of such persons as may apply to become members
of this Society.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That every person who may be hereafter chosen a member of this
Society agreeable to the charter, the President, who may then fill the chair,
shall, in such mode and form as the Society shall direct, receive such person,
and on his paying into the hands of the Treasurer Five Dollars for the purpose
of establishing a fund, to be applied to such purposes as the charter directs,
shall thereupon insert his name in the Register of this Society, and he shall
be entitled to all the privileges and benefits arising therefrom.

And be it further ordained, That every person who may hereafter be elected a
member of this Society, shall within three months thereafter, apply for the
purpose of being initiated; and in case any person so elected, shall neglect to
apply within the time aforesaid, in order to be initiated, the election of
every such person, shall by such neglect become void.

And be it further ordained, That every person who may hereafter be proposed to
become a member of this Society, and on whose election upon counting the
ballots or balls, it shall appear that more than one third were against his
admission, such person shall not within six months thereafter be again proposed
for the purpose aforesaid.

And be it further ordained, That the art or trade of every person hereafter to
be proposed as a member of this Society, shall be entered by the Secretary on
the minutes of the meeting at which such proposition is made; and the Society
shall in no case proceed to ballot for any person as a member until he is
recommended by at least two members speaking to his character, as it relates to
industry, honesty and sobriety, and unless one of the persons who proposed him,
be present.

And be it further ordained, That all foreigners previous to their admission,
shall become citizens of the United States; and no person shall be admitted,
unless he resides within the City and County of New York, and shall have
arrived at the age of twenty-one years.

A LAW to regulate the Monthly Contributions.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That every member of this Society shall pay into the hands of the
Treasurer, one-eighth of a dollar monthly, for the purpose of establishing a
general fund, to be appropriated as the charter directs.

And be it further ordained, That if any member shall neglect or refuse to pay
his monthly contributions for six months successively, he shall be waited on by
the Treasurer, who shall give notice thereof to the Society as soon after as
possible. If in the opinion of the Treasurer he be in indigent circumstances,
the Secretary shall then hand his name to the overseers of the poor, who shall
wait on the member so reported, to know the cause of his delinquency, and if it
appears (to their satisfaction, and to the Society, before whom the overseers
shall lay his case at the next stated meeting) that his circumstances would not
permit his paying his monthly contributions, then the Secretary shall note it
in the Society Book for their future consideration; but if it appears that the
deficiency arises from any other cause, and that he the said member declines
paying his monthly dues for three months longer, then his name shall be struck
off the register of this Society, and he be expelled and debarred from any of
the privileges belonging to the members thereof.

And be it further ordained, That if any member removes from this city, and
does not cause his monthly contributions to be paid in twelve months
thereafter, the Treasurer shall then report him to the Society, and his name
shall be struck off the register, and he be debarred the privileges belonging
to the members thereof.

A LAW to direct the appropriation of the funds of this Society.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That as it is a leading motive of this Society, to relieve the
distressed of its members that may fall in want by sickness, or other
misfortunes; every such person having previous to such sickness or misfortune,
been a regular member for the space of two years, shall be entitled to receive
such sum or sums as the Society shall direct, by an order, signed by the
President, or one of the Vice-Presidents, who may preside at the time the order
is made.

And be it further ordained, That in the event of the death of any member of
this Society, the widow, orphan or orphans of such member, shall be entitled to
receive assistance from the Society, agreeable to the same regulations by which
members themselves receive it.

And be it further ordained, That four members of this Society, shall at every
annual meeting be elected as overseers of the indigent of this Society, whose
business it shall be to inspect into the circumstances of every member, or of
the widow, orphan or orphans of any deceased member who may apply for relief,
and report such cases in writing to the Society for their consideration.

A LAW respecting the Seal and Plate for Certificates of this Society.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That there shall be a seal provided by the Society, emblematical
of its institution, with such device as shall be agreed on by the Society; the
same to be kept by the Secretary, for the purpose of sealing all certificates
of admission, and other transactions whereunto it is proper a seal should be
affixed, in order that the whole of its acts and proceedings may be regularly
authenticated.

Be it further ordained, That the seal of this Society shall not be affixed to
any instrument of writing for any purpose whatsoever (except the certificate of
admission) at any other time or place, than at a regular meeting of this
Society.

Be it further ordained, That there shall be a plate engraved for the purpose
of striking off the certificates of admission; that each member shall be
entitled to a certificate, which shall be presented to him by the Secretary,
dated from the commencement of his membership, free from any cost or expense,
at any time, not exceeding two months, from the time he was initiated.

A LAW to ascertain the duties of the Treasurer.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That it shall be the duty of the Treasurer, from time to time, to
receive all the initiation fees, and collect all the monthly contributions; and
also, such donations that may at any time be presented to the Society. He shall
pay all specific orders drawn on him by the Society and signed by the presiding
President; he shall suffer no unnecessary delays in payment to the discredit of
the Society; he shall keep all the accounts relating to this business, fair and
accurate; he shall at every quarterly meeting report a state of the finances
and funds, and subjoin his account thereunto, which shall be for the inspection
of the Society.

And be it further ordained, That whenever a Treasurer is elected, he shall
before he enters on the duties of his office, give bond with two sufficient
sureties, in the sum of two thousand dollars for the faithful performance of
the duties of his office.

And be it further ordained, That the Treasurer shall be allowed for his
services, five per cent. on all initiation fees, on all monthly contributions,
and on all interest: -- which five per cent. shall be considered as a full
compensation for his services, and which it may be lawful for him to retain in
his hands.

A LAW to ascertain the duties of the Secretary.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That it shall be the duty of the Secretary to attend every meeting
of the Society (except he be sick or out of town) he shall keep minutes of all
their proceedings, and regularly record the same; he shall provide and keep a
book wherein each members name shall be inserted, in their order, and in such
manner, that it may at first view appear when each member was admitted,
expelled, or when he died; which book shall be the register of this Society.

And be it further ordained, That it shall be the duty of the Secretary, to
cause notice to be given of the annual and quarterly meetings of this Society,
in not more than three of the public newspapers printed in this City, three
days previous to each meeting.

And be it further ordained, That the Secretary shall be allowed for the
aforesaid services, Twenty Dollars per annum.

A LAW to ascertain the duty of the President in the absence or inability of
the Secretary.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That in the absence or inability of the Secretary, it shall be the
duty of the President for the time being, to appoint a member to officiate in
his place.

A LAW to regulate the loaning of the money of this Society.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City
of New York, That the Society shall at every annual meeting elect, by ballot, a
committee of five members, whose duty it shall be to attend to the loaning of
the money of this Society. That when application is made to the Society for
money, a majority of the members of the committee on examining the property
offered to be mortgaged, and finding it agreeable to the regulations in the
following clause, shall have power to loan the same.

And be it further ordained, That no money shall be loaned out by the Society,
unless the borrower lives (and the real property to be mortgaged be situated)
within the City and County of New York; and unless the real property offered to
be mortgaged, be twice the value of the sum to be loaned.

And be it further ordained, That in case there should be more than one
applicant at the same time, for any sum that may be in the hands of the
Treasurer, it is hereby made the duty of the President, to determine by lot
which of the applicants shall have the preference; but the members of this
Society, shall have the preference of all other applicants for any money to be
loaned.

And be it further ordained, That on the first meeting after the loaning of any
moneys, this committee shall report to the Society a regular account of their
proceedings.

RULES OF ORDER.
I.
ON the appearance of a quorum, the President shall take the Chair, and the
members shall be called to order.

II.
Immediately after the President shall have taken the Chair, the minutes of the
preceding meeting shall be read by the Secretary, that any mistakes therein may
be corrected by the Society.

III.
The President shall preserve order and decorum, and decide questions of order,
subject to an appeal to the Society.

IV.
The President shall not vote in any case, unless the Society be equally
divided.

V.
When the Society adjourns, the members shall keep their seats until the
President leaves the chair.

VI.
Every member wishing to speak, shall rise from his seat and address himself to
the President: and unless conscientiously scrupulous, shall be uncovered.

VII.
When two or more members rise at once, the President shall name the member who
is first to speak.

VIII.
No member shall speak more than twice to the same question, until he shall
have obtained leave from the Society.

IX.
No motion shall be debated or put, unless the same be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the President before debate, and every such
motion shall be reduced to writing, if the President or any five members desire
it.

X.
After a motion is stated by the President, it shall be deemed to be in
possession of the Society; but may be withdrawn at any time before decision or
amendment.

XI.
When any question is under debate, no motion shall be received, unless to
amend it or to postpone it to a certain day, for the previous question or to
adjourn.

XII.
The previous question until it is decided, shall preclude all amendment and
debate of the main question; and shall be in this form -- Shall the main
question be now put?

XIII.
A motion to adjourn shall be always in order, and shall be decided without
debate.

XIV.
No member shall speak more than once upon a previous question.

XV.
Petitions, memorials, and other papers addressed to the Society, shall be
presented by the President, or by a member in his place.

XVI.
Whilst the President is putting a question, no member shall walk out of, or
across the room; nor when a member is speaking, shall any one entertain private
discourse, or pass between him and the chair.

XVII.
Every bill shall receive three several readings, previous to its being passed;
the second and third reading shall be at different meetings, unless the Society
unanimously direct otherwise.

XVIII.
All questions in the Society, shall be put in the order they were moved;
except that in filling up blanks, the largest sum and longest time shall be
first put.

XIX.
When a bill passes the Society, the President shall sign the same, with the
date thereof, at the foot of the bill, and the Secretary countersign it.

XX.
The order of the day shall have preference to any motion before the Society.

Passed the 4 th day of APRIL, 1798. JAMES TYLEE, President.
(ATTEST.) WM: WHITEHEAD, Sec'ry.

MEMBERS NAMES.
JOSEPH JADWIN, William Allen, * Dennis McReady, Anthony Post, John Burger,
John Stagg* Thomas Ivers, William I. Elsworth, Robert Hodge, John Moore, Joseph
Cheeseman, John Sidell, James Brown, John Goodeve, Jacob I. Arden,
George,Messerv^, David Man, * Jacob Arden, George Warner, Gerardus Smith, John
Campbell, James McCullen, Abraham Russel, Nicholas N. Anthony, George Gosman,
George Lindsay, Caleb Haviland, James Tylee, John Mills, * Frederick Stymets,
Malcom McEuen, Edward Watkeys, * Jacob Pozer, Abraham Polhemus, * John
Cammerdener, Walter Bicker, William Bryar, Thomas Allen, Thomas Stevenson,
James Robinson, Peter Cole, Thomas Hazard, Francis Child's, Michael Brooks,
Jotham Post, * Daniel Stanbury, John Striker, N. B. Those marked thus * are the
names of deceased members.
Frederick Resler, William Wright, Edward Patten, Richard Cunningham, Abraham
Bloodgood, * Anthony Ogilvie, John Burger, jun. Joseph Newton, Richard Davis,
John Elsworth, Thomas Greenleaf, Gardener Baker, Thomas Lefoy, James Warner,
John Utt, Stephen Smith, Daniel Hitchcock, Anthony Simmons, Peter R. Maverick,
Jacob Sherred, James Teller, James Van Dyck, * Walter Degraw, John McComb, jun.
George Peek, John Brower, Thomas Bruen, James Moore, George Seal, Andrew
Morris, James Byrne, * George Speth, Ahasuerus Turk, John Clitz, Peter Bertine,
Thomas Timpson, Seabury Champlin, John Crolius, jun. Nathaniel Woodward,
Cornelius B. Sebring, George Pick, Benjamin Williamson, James D. Bissett, John
Gilmore, Gabriel Furman, John Van Dyk, Elbert Anderson, John McBain, Jabez
Halsey, Thomas Brown, Alexander Peacock, John Wright, John Ming, Aaron Howell,
Jacob Hallett, * Daniel Ruckel, Seth R. Kneeland, Robert McDowel, Robert
Gosman, William Foord, Obadiah Helm, James Culbertson, Peter McEachan, Daniel
Tooker, John Banks, John Norman, Andrew Wright, Alexander Gibson, Jacob Arnold,
James Hays, Evert Bush, Philip K. Lawrence, John W. Hardenbrook, Garret
Walgrove, Kamp Ayrs, John Harrisson, John Minuse, Edward Ming, Leonard Rogers,
Henry Ackerman, Cornelius Timpson, Frederick Maybie, Henry Burtsell, Charles
Warner, John Patten, John P. Room, Owen Jones, * Josiah Furman, Henry Ortly,
Jacob P. Room, Jeremiah Wool, Abraham Brower, Edward Day, * George Stanton,
jun. Peter Garbrance, Peter Amerman, Israel Haviland, Benjamin Benson, Joseph
Lions, John Miller, John Fawpell, James Brard, John Day, Adam Fink, Alexander
Fink, jun. John Post, John Read, Abel W. Hardenbrook, Samuel Wright, Robert
Cocks, * Jeremiah Wood, Jonas Utt, William Gilbert Miller, Samuel Burling,
Edward Wade, Eleazer Little, John Slidell, James Hallett, John Peshine, Charles
Hedenberg, John B. Dash, jun. Christopher Halsted, Jacamiah Akerly, Samuel L.
Whitlock, Timothy Nostrand, James Weeks, John Lent, William Weeks, * Henry
Whitfield, Theodorus Deforest, William Humphreys, Robert Johnston, Gilbert
Brush, James Scott, Robert Brown, James McCready, jun. Simeon A. Bayley, *
Garret Schanck, William Dally, Cornelius King, Stephen Allen, Andrew McCready,
Philip Dally, David Baker, James Woodruff, Isaac Varian, John Moffit, Sampson
A. Myers, Daniel Van Voorhis, * John Robertson, John Waldron, William H.
Ireland, Robert G. Giles, John Rose, William Rollinson, William Kumbel, Judah
Myers, Simon Van Antwerp, Garret Cozine, Mathias Valentine, Abraham Child,
Benjamin Haight, John Elliot, William Brown, Augustus Wright, Peter Bourdet,
jun. Stephen Hitchcock, Richard Furman, William Quick, Garret De Bow, Samuel
Delamater, Thomas Ferdon, Anthony Brown, Peter Walker, John Ashfield, Albert
Smith, * Ahasuerus Turk, jun. Samuel Machett, Abraham Lazalere, Nathaniel
Harned, Isaac Ketchell, James Jinkins, Elias Billington, George Ritchie, Philip
Ruckel, James Duffie, Jacob Keyser, William King, Stephen Carpenter, John
Gould, William Wendover, George McKoy, William Rutledge, John Bogart, Francis
Many, John Morris, Samuel Brown, Henry Couenhoven, James Ronalds, William
Willess, Paul Van Der Voort, William Wood, Augustus Crygier, Isaac Tor-Boss,
Mott Hicks, Jonas Humbert, Henry Mitchell, Joel Post, Jonas Mapes, * James
Aymar, jun. Nathaniel Brown, Archibald McIntire, Evert Duyckinck, Christopher
Gollow, Matthew West, Hazel Myers, John Cheeseman, Jacob Morris, * Josiah G.
Pierson, John Burt, Abraham Labagh, Peter H. Wendover, John Brown, Jacob
Germond, Andrew S. Norwood, Nicholas Morris, John Sproson, Abraham C. Brower,
William Robinson, Samuel St. John, John J. Wilmurt, Paul Gallaudat, William
Heyer, Thomas Demilt, Oliver Cromwell, Frederick Pentz, Thomas Garson, William
Peterson, Benjamin Cady, Thomas Smith, John Garlock, Nathaniel Hawxhurst,
Timothy Wood, Theophilus Pirson, Henry Sanders, Michael Parker, George Dally,
Oliver Showet, David Skaats, John P. Haff, Joel Davis, Cornelius Crygier, jun.
William Vincent, Godfrey Kant, * Rinier Skaats, jun. Daniel Ravo, William Pers,
John Haskin, William McKenny, William P. Room, Nicholas Meade, Reuben Bunn,
Duncan Phyfe, Nathaniel Furman, Andrew Durham, Joseph Morrison, Ware Branson,
Anthony Steenback, Thomas B. Whitlock, David Heckle, Daniel Betts, Ebenezar
Stevens, James Alner, William Rowlenson, William Peck, William Barton, Jabesh
Pell, Andrew Mer^in, Thomas Dodds, John Leveridge, Philip Lockwood, Peter
Conrey, John Campbell, * James Egbert, Christian Tupper, Edward Meeks, Harman
Montanye, James Riker, Daniel Van Antwerp, Henry Vandewater, John Auchincloss,
Joseph Watkins, Stephen R. Cooper, Francis A. Marschalk, Andrew Newel, Charles
Jos. Field, Francis Cooper, Lawrence Heyer, James Bussing, Silas Barber, James
Willet, John Crygier, Walter McBride, Peter Sebring, James Armstrong, John I.
Room, Thomas Tant, James Van Duyne, Richard Robertson, John Connor, John
Cunningham, Robert Provost, jun. David Mersereau, Nicholas Carmer, Robert
Carter, Michael White, Michael Fach, Hugh McDougall, Henry Hillman, Thomas
Fardon, Gerard I. Bancker, Abijah Abbot, Alexander Campbell, Isaiah Valleau,
Abraham Van Gelder, William Irvin, John Burger, Caleb Pell, Jonas P. Eddo,
James Stewart, Lewis Harway, Isaac Van Dyck, Lot Merkel, Stephen Rudd, Jacob
Grim, Joseph Board, Thomas F. Kip, Barant Deklyne, Peter Vanderhoef, jun. Asa
Stanton, Abraham Rich, * John McGowan, Samuel Campbell, Edward Sarles, Ezekiel
Robins, Daniel Bowen, Christian Nestill, George Dieterich, James Harrison, John
Hyde, John Cummings, Richard Moore, James Bertine, William Astrander, John Van
Houter, John Ruckel, Henry Simmons, Benjamin Ay^rigg, George Shimeall, Matthew
Lattimore, Thomas White, Benjamin Stephens, David Pearc^lock, Jeronemous
Alstyne, jun. William Bussing, William Ketcham, Philip Arnold, Nicholas
Roberts, Peter R. Sprainger, Thomas Pry^r, Duncan McEuen, William A.
Hardenbrook, Jacob Lorillard, Leonard Warner, John Videto, Simeon Deming,
George Ireland, Thomas Whitlock, Charles Craft, John Campbell, Francis Lynch,
Peter Valleau, John Baldwin, Ebenezar C. Kilborn, William Ballard, Samuel
Borrowe, Cornelius Brinckerhoff, John West, Jacob Van Wagenan, jun. Abraham
Kip, Peter Coruth, Benjamin Sullivan, Isaac Kip, jun. George James Warner,
James Bayley, Adam Pentz, James Norris, Charles Dobbs, Cornelius Rutan, Ephraim
Baylis, Abraham Fardon, Reuben Odell, John Parker, William W. Galatian,
Napthali Judah, John Elting, Peter C. Schuyler, Elias Hatfield, John W.
Elsworth, Joseph Dederer, William Parker, Bartholomew Skaats, Edward Meeks,
sen. John Forsyth, William Frobisher, Joseph Earl, Benjamin Gallahar, James
Hallett, jun. Henry Monro Dobbs, Charles Smith, Thomas James, William
Whitehead, Thomas Ryan, John Buel, Solomon Pancoast, John Fitzpatrick, Ezra
Weeks, Lewis Randolph, Richard Chalk, John Schanck, Archibald Whaites, Richard
B. Davis, George Collis, George Arcularius, Jacob Bierman, Alexander Saunders,
Andrew Morrell, George Knox. Kenneth McKintzie, Nicholas Lozier, John Randall.

