REPORT OF THE CASE IN THE COURT OF ERRORS, FOR THE STATE OF NEW YORK, BETWEEN
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, Plaintiffs in Error, and Louis LeGuen,
Defendant in Error.

ALBANY: PRINTED BY CHARLES R. and GEORGE WEBSTER, At their Bookstore, in the
White House, corner of State and Pearl-streets. -- 1798.

Extract from the 32d Article of the Constitution of the State.
That a Court shall be instituted for the Trial of Impeachments and the
Correction of Errors, and to consist of the President of the Senate for the
time being, and the Senators, Chancellor, and Judges of the Supreme Court, or
the major part of them; except that when a decree in equity shall be heard, the
Chancellor shall inform the Court of the reasons of his decree, but shall not
have a voice in the final sentence: And if the cause to be determined shall be
brought up by writ of error on a question of law on a judgment in the Supreme
Court, the Judges of the Court shall assign the reasons of such their judgment,
but shall not have a voice for its affirmance or reversal.

REPORT, etc. IN THE SUPREME COURT. LOUIS LE GUEN, US. ISAAC GOUVERNEUR AND
PETER KEMBLE.
City and County of New York, ss.
LOUIS LE GUEN complains of Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, in custody,
First count in the declaration.
etc. for that, Whereas the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, on the
thirteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-five, were and long before had been, and ever since have been, and now
are, merchants and factors (to wit) at the city of New York, at the first ward
of the said city, and in the county of New York, and during all that time have
carried on there the business of factors under the firm of Gouverneur and
Kemble, and as such factors have been used to receive from diverse persons,
goods, wares and merchandise, to be sold and disposed of upon the account of
such persons respectively, and the same goods, wares and merchandise, to sell
and dispose of upon such account, in consideration of certain rates of
commission or factorage to them allowed upon the amounts of the sales by them
made of such goods, wares and merchandise, according to the usage and custom of
the business of factors aforesaid, in the city aforesaid. And whereas the said
Louis on the said thirteenth day of April, in the year aforesaid, at the city,
ward, and in the county aforesaid, was possessed of two hundred and fifty-seven
thousand one hundred and twenty-nine pounds of cotton-wool, and twelve thousand
nine hundred and ninety-five pounds of indigo, as of his own proper goods and
chattels; and he the said Louis so being thereof possessed, it was then and
there agreed by and between the said Louis and the said Isaac Gouverneur and
Peter Kemble, that the said Louis should deliver the said cotton-wool and
indigo to the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, to be by them sold and
disposed of upon his account, and that they the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter
Kemble should sell and dispose of the same upon his said account, and should
advance and pay, or become bound as sureties, for the freight, duties, and all
other lawful and reasonable charges and expenses of and concerning the said
cotton-wool and indigo, and for so doing should be allowed a commission of two
and a half per centum upon the amount of the sales thereof, and such further
commission as according to the course of their agency therein, and the usage of
merchants and factors in the city aforesaid, in the like cases they might be
entitled to have as a reward for their pains and trouble therein. And whereas
the said Louis, in pursuance of that agreement, afterward, that is to say, the
same day and year aforesaid, at the city, ward, and in the county aforesaid,
delivered the said cotton-wool and indigo to the said Isaac Gouverneur and
Peter Kemble, to be by them sold and disposed of as aforesaid; and the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble then and there received the said cotton-wool
and indigo, to sell and dispose of the same as aforesaid. And whereas the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, after the said delivery to them of the said
cotton-wool and indigo (to wit) the same day and year aforesaid, at the city,
ward, and in the county aforesaid, sold and disposed of the said cotton-wool
and indigo, by the description of "upwards of six hundred bales of cotton in
the gross weight," and "about twelve thousand weight of Isle of France indigo,"
to Abraham R. Rivera, Isaac Gomez, jun. and Moses Lopez, of the city aforesaid,
merchants, for the account of the said Louis LeGuen, upon the terms and
conditions following (to wit) that they the said Abraham R. Rivera, Isaac
Gomez, jun. and Moses Lopez, should pay to them the said Isaac Gouverneur and
Peter Kemble for the said cotton-wool, by the description aforesaid, at and
after the rate of three shillings current money of the state of New York, for
each pound thereof, and for the said indigo, by the description aforesaid, at
and after the rate of sixteen shillings of like current money aforesaid for
each pound thereof; and toward that payment should make and deliver to the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble their joint notes in writing, commonly
called promissory notes, thereby promising to pay to them the said Isaac
Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, or their order, twelve months after date, the
amount of the said cotton-wool and indigo, at the rates or prices aforesaid,
with interest thereon for the term of ten months, at and after the rate of six
pounds upon every hundred pounds for a year, and should cause the said
cotton-wool and indigo to be, on or before the twenty-fifth day of May next
ensuing, laden on board a certain ship called the White-Fox, then being in the
port of the said city of New York, to be carried in the said ship to Havre de
Grace in France, or Hamburgh in Germany, in parts beyond the seas, one or both
of the said places, to the intent to sell and dispose of the same there; and
should also cause the said cotton-wool and indigo to be fully covered by
insurance, and the policy or policies of such insurance should deposit with the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, by way of collateral security toward
securing the payment of the amount of the said notes in case of the loss of the
said cotton-wool and indigo in the voyage aforesaid, and in case of and after
the landing of the said cotton-wool and indigo in some foreign port, should
cause the certificates, documents and proofs required by the laws of the United
States, to ascertain the said landing, in order to the obtaining of the
drawback of the duties thereupon allowed by the said laws, to be forwarded and
sent to the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, to the end that, they the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble might obtain the said drawback for their
benefit, and also should cause to be applied the proceeds of the sales of the
said cotton wool and indigo in France, or elsewhere, as soon as the moneys
arising therefrom could be received and remitted to the said city of New York
toward the payment of the duties aforesaid, to abate the growing interest
thereof from the time or times of and in proportion to such payment, but that
nevertheless the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, should have a right to
elect to receive the whole or any part of the amount of the said notes at Havre
de Grace aforesaid, or any other port in Europe where the said ship might
discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo, to be paid by the said Abraham R.
Rivera, Isaac Gomez, jun. and Moses Lopez, to them the said Isaac Gouverneur
and Peter Kemble or their agent, out of the proceeds of the sales of the said
cotton-wool and indigo, together with a premium thereupon, at and after the
rate of five pounds for every hundred pounds thereof for receiving the same in
Europe, and to be paid in coin, that is to say in Spanish milled dollars, at
and after the rate of one hundred cents lawful money of the United States for
each dollar, or in French crowns at and after the rate of one hundred and ten
cents of like money aforesaid for each crown; and that the said Isaac
Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, when advised of such payment or payments, should
make endorsements thereof upon the said notes, which said sale and disposition
upon the terms and conditions aforesaid, are expressed in and appear by a
certain agreement in writing, the date whereof is the aforesaid thirteenth day
of April, in the year aforesaid, made by and between the said Abraham R.
Rivera, Isaac Gomez, jun. and Moses Lopez of the one part, and the said Isaac
Gouverneur and Peter Kemble of the other part, and now in the possession of the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, whereby also the said parties for the
true performance thereof, bind themselves each unto the other in the penal sum
of twenty thousand dollars; and the said Louis does aver, that the said sale
and disposition were made, and the said agreement therefore entered into by the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, by the immediate direction, and with
the immediate privity and consent of the said Louis, and that all and singular
the matters and things in and by the said writing agreed to be performed to the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, and particularly that the right by them
thereby reserved, to elect to receive the whole or any part of the amount of
the said notes, at Havre de Grace aforesaid, or any other port in Europe, where
the said ship should discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo, together with
the said premium of five per centum, were intended for the special benefit and
advantage of the said Louis, subject only to the lien and right of the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, to have and receive the general balance of
their account, with the said Louis, and to be secured for and concerning such
further and other claims and demands, as they might and should be entitled to,
and have by reason of their agency and undertakings, for and on behalf of the
said Louis, as his factors, to wit, at the city, ward, and in the county
aforesaid. And the said Louis does also aver, that afterward and before the
aforesaid twenty-fifth day of May, in the year aforesaid, that is to say, on
the twenty-fourth day of May, in the year aforesaid, at the city, ward, and in
the county aforesaid, the said cotton-wool and indigo were by the said Abraham
R. Rivera, Isaac Gomez, jun. and Moses Lopez, laden on board the ship
aforesaid, then being in the port of the said city of New York, and the said
ship with the said cotton-wool and indigo on board, forthwith thereafter set
sail from the said port of the said city of New York, to proceed on her said
voyage immediately to the port of Havre de Grace aforesaid; by reason whereof,
they the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble were in duty bound to pursue
the direction and request of the said Louis as touching the exercise of the
right, so as aforesaid reserved, to receive the whole or any part of the amount
of the notes aforesaid at Havre de Grace aforesaid, or at any other port in
Europe, where the said ship should discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo,
together with the said premium thereupon; that is to say, within the limit and
to the extent of the sum which would be due to the said Louis, upon the amount
of the said notes, after reserving and deducting thereout so much as would be
necessary and sufficient to satisfy the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble
for the general balance of their account aforesaid, and also to secure them for
and concerning such further and other claims and demands, as they might and
should be entitled to and have, by reason of their agency and undertakings, for
and on behalf of the said Louis, as his factors, and were also in duty bound,
upon the request and direction of the said Louis, to give to the said Louis,
power and authority to receive from the said Abraham R. Rivera, Isaac Gomez,
jun. and Moses Lopez, the residue of the amount of the said notes, after such
deduction and reservation as aforesaid, together with the said premium
thereupon, at Havre de Grace aforesaid, or at any other port in Europe, where
the said ship should discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo, out of the said
proceeds of the sales thereof. And in consideration thereof, they the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble afterward, to wit, the same twenty-fifth day
of May, in the year aforesaid, at the city, ward, and in the county aforesaid,
undertook, and then and there faithfully promised the said Louis, to exercise
the right, so as aforesaid reserved, within the limit and to the extent
aforesaid, pursuant to his request and direction, and to give to him, if by him
requested and directed, the power and authority aforesaid; and the said Louis,
in fact faith, that afterward, to wit, the same twenty-fifth day of May, in
the year aforesaid, and often afterward, at the city, ward, and in the county
aforesaid, he requested and directed the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble
to elect to receive the amount of the said notes, or at their option, so much
thereof as would be due to the said Louis, after deducting and reserving
thereout so much as would be necessary and sufficient to pay and satisfy the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, for the general balance of their
account aforesaid, and also to secure them for and concerning such further and
other claims and demands, as they might and should be entitled to, and have, by
reason of their agency and undertakings, for and on behalf of the said Louis,
as his factors, at Havre de Grace aforesaid, or at any other port in Europe,
where the said ship should discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo, out of
the said proceeds of the sales thereof; and after such deduction and
reservation made, to give to the said Louis power and authority, to receive
from the said Abraham R. Rivera, Isaac Gomez, jun. and Moses Lopez, the residue
of the amount of the said notes, together with the said premium thereupon, at
Havre de Grace aforesaid, or at any other port in Europe, where the said ship
should discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo, put of the said proceeds of
the sales thereof. And the said Louis, further, in fact faith, that after such
deduction and reservation as aforesaid made, there would remain due to him the
said Louis, as for the residue of the amount of the said notes, a large sum of
money, to wit, the sum of seventy thousand pounds current lawful money, of the
state of New York, of which the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble then and
there had notice. Nevertheless, the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, not
regarding their said promise and undertaking, according to their duty as the
factors of the said Louis, so as aforesaid made, but contriving, and
fraudulently intending, craftily and subtly to deceive and defraud the said
Louis in this behalf, although often requested and directed thereunto as
aforesaid, have not elected to receive the said amount of the said notes or any
part thereof, at Havre de Grace aforesaid, or any other port in Europe, where
the said ship should discharge the said cotton-wool and indigo, nor have they
given to him, the said Louis, the power and authority so as aforesaid by him
requested of them, as they ought to have done, but have wholly refused so to
do. Damages.
Damages seventy thousand pounds.

General Issue. Plea.


The jurors upon their oath say, Special verdict.
that on the thirteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and ninety-five, at the city and ward, and in the county
aforesaid, the above named Louis LeGuen was the true owner and proprietor of
sundry goods and merchandise, to wit, of six hundred and eighty-seven bales of
cotton, and twenty-four casks and thirty-eight cases of indigo, which had
before that time been there placed and delivered by him in the hands of the
above named Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, copartners in trade, by the
style and firm of Gouverneur and Kemble, as his factors and agents, to sell and
dispose of the same for his best advantage, and upon the commission usually
there allowed to such factors and agents for the transaction of such business.
And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further say, Direction
of Le G. to G. and K. to sell to G. L. and R.
That by the intervention and express consent and direction of the said Louis
LeGuen, the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, as his factors or agents,
did on the said thirteenth day of April, at the city and ward, and in the
county aforesaid, sell the said goods and merchandises to Isaac Gomez, jun. and
Moses Lopez who were then and there copartners in trade, under the firm and
style of Gomez and Lopez, and to one Abraham R. Rivera, upon the terms and
conditions contained in a certain contract or writing under the hands and seals
of the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, Isaac Gomez, jun. Moses Lopez
and Abraham R. Rivera, which was produced in evidence to the said jurors, was
duly executed, and is in the words and figures following, that is to say,

Whereas Gomez and Lopez, Contract between G. and K. and G. L. and R.
and Abraham R. Rivera, have agreed with Gouverneur and Kemble, to take upon
themselves the charter of the Hamburgh ship, White Fox, Captain Haberstrok, on
the same terms which were made with Mr. Dorhman, for her to proceed from the
port of New York to Havre de Grace and Hamburgh, for the consideration of two
thousand pounds sterling payable in London, conditioned that there shall be
fifty running days allowed to load and unload the said ship, and that every day
over and above that time the ship may be detained, demurrage of five pounds
sterling per day shall be allowed for such detention. And whereas they, the
said Gomez and Lopez, and Abraham R. Rivera do further agree to purchase (and
load in the said vessel) from the said Gouverneur and Kemble, upwards of six
hundred bales of cotton in the gross weight, at three shillings New York
currency per pound, and about twelve thousand weight of Isle of France indigo,
at sixteen shillings said currency, the net proceeds payable in their joint
notes of hand in this city twelve months after date, with ten months interest
thereon at the rate of six per cent per annum, subject to the following
conditions, viz. 1st. That the said Gomez and Lopez and Abraham R. Rivera will
have the property all covered by insurance, and the policies for such insurance
shall be lodged with Gouverneur and Kemble as a collatteral security to the
payment of the notes. 2 d. That whatever property may be first received from
the sales of these goods in France or elsewhere, shall be applied to the
payment of the notes as soon as the money can be received and remitted here to
abate the growing interest, any time within the twelve months. 3 d. The
purchasers obligate themselves to return the necessary depositions and
certificates of the goods being landed in a foreign country to enable the said
Gouverneur and Kemble to recover the drawback of the duties for their benefit,
which they the said Gomez and Lopez and Abraham R. Rivera relinquish any
interest therein, and they engage the said cargo of cotton and indigo, shall be
on board on or before the 25th of May proximo. 4th. That the said Gouverneur
and Kemble may have it in their option to receive the whole or a part of the
amount of the said notes at Havre de Grace, or at any port the ship may
discharge at in Europe, which they the said Gomez and Lopez and Abraham R.
Rivera engage to pay them the said Gouverneur and Kemble, or their agent, out
of the proceeds of the sales of the cotton and indigo, together with a premium
of five per cent. thereon for receiving it in Europe, which is to be complied
with in specie, either in Spanish dollars valued at one hundred cents, or in
French crowns at one hundred and ten cents, and the said Governeur and Kemble
on their parts will make endorsements on the notes, when advice shall be
received of such payments being made. For the true performance of all which
covenants hereunto subscribed to, the parties bind themselves each unto the
other in the penal sum of twenty thousand dollars. Witness our hands in
New York, this thirteenth day of April, 1795, and seals.

GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE BY J. GOUVERNEUR.
ISAAC GOMEZ, Jun. MOSES LOPEZ. AB. R. RIVERA.
Witnesses,
A. CARROL. NIC. OGDEN.


And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further find, That the
said six hundred and eighty seven bales of cotton, and twenty four casks and
thirty eight cases of indigo, were thereupon, to wit, on the said thirteenth
day of April one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, Goods delivered to G.
L. and R. and shipped.
delivered to the said Isaac Gomez, jun. Moses Lopez and Abraham R. Rivera, who
afterward and before the thirtieth day of May, in the same year, loaded and
shipped the same on board of the said ship White Fox, and gave to the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, their joint promissory notes for the sum of
forty eight thousand nine hundred and sixty-six pounds and six shillings, being
the amount for which the said cotton and indigo sold as aforesaid, payable as
in the said contract or writing is specified. And the jurors aforesaid, upon
their oath aforesaid, do further find. That the said cotton and indigo were
entered for exportation at the custom-house, in the district of the city of
New York, that is to say, at the city and ward, and in the county aforesaid. G.
and K. receive the debenture.
And that thereupon the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble received at the
said custom-house, a debenture for the sum of four thousand eight hundred and
thirty-four pounds and fifteen shillings, payable on the fifteenth day of
August in the same year, and then and there as agents and factors of the said
plaintiff, but in their own names, executed a bond to the United States of
America in the penalty of twelve thousand and eighty-six dollars and
eighty-seven cents, and in the usual form, for the landing of the said cotton
and indigo in some foreign country, and to produce the regular certificates of
evidence thereof, within twelve months from the date thereof. And the jurors
aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further say, That the said Isaac
Gomez, jun. Moses Lopez and Abraham R. Rivera, did on the fourth day of May in
the year aforesaid, sign, seal and deliver a certain deed or charter party of
affreightment, which was produced and shown in evidence to the said jurors, and
is in the words and figures following (that is to say)

This charter party of affreightment, indented, Charter party.
made, concluded and agreed upon this fourth day of May, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, between Diederick Kohne,
sailing master of the ship or vessel called the White Fox, of the burden of
one hundred and sixty two Hamburgh lasts, or thereabouts, acting for and in
behalf of Berend Edward Haberstrok, master, and the owners of the said vessel
of the one part, and Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera of the city of
New York, merchants of the other part, Witnesses, That the said Diederick
Kohne, acting as aforesaid for the considerations herein after mentioned, has
granted, and to freight-letten, and by these presents does grant, and to
freightlet unto the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, the whole and
full tonnage, reach and run of the said ship White-Fox (the cabin and
sufficient room for the crew, ship's stores, water and provisions excepted) for
a voyage intended to be made from this port of New York to Havre de Grace, and
from thence to Hamburgh, upon the terms and conditions following, And thereupon
the said Diederick Kohne does hereby for himself, the said Berend Edward
Haberstrok, and the owners of the said ship White-Fox, his and their heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns, covenant, promise and agree to and with
the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns, that the said vessel is now and shall be maintained
and kept by her owners during the term of this charter party, tight, staunch
and strong, well and sufficiently manned, victualled, tackled, apparalled, and
furnished fit for merchants' service, and shall be ready to receive on board
whenever tendered along side by the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R.
Rivera, their factors or assigns, a full and complete cargo, or lading of such
goods, wares and merchandises (contraband goods, naval and military stores
excepted) as the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their factors
and assigns, shall think proper, and being so laden and dispatched by the said
Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their factors or assigns, the said
vessel shall, with the first good opportunity of fair wind and weather then
next presenting, set sail from this port of New York, and as wind and weather
shall serve, proceed with the said cargo to the port of Havre de Grace, and
after arrival, deliver in good order and condition (the dangers of the seas,
and the restraints of princes and rulers always excepted) to the said Isaac
Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their factors or assigns, the said cargo, or
any part thereof they shall think proper to be unloaded there, and in the place
of such goods, the said vessel shall be ready to receive on board, whenever
tendered along side by the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their
factors or assigns, such other goods, wares and merchandises (contraband goods,
always excepted) as the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their
factors or assigns, shall choose to ship on their own account, and being so
laden or dispatched from Havre de Grace aforesaid, by the said Isaac Gomez jun.
and Abraham R. Rivera, their factors or assigns, the said vessel shall, with
the first good opportunity of fair wind and weather then next presenting, set
sail from thence, and as wind and weather shall serve, proceed with the said
cargo to the port of Hamburgh aforesaid, and on arrival there, deliver the said
cargo in good order and condition (the dangers of the seas and the restraints
of princes and rulers always excepted) to the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and
Abraham R. Rivera, their factors or assigns, they paying freight for the same
as herein after is stipulated. And the said Diederick Kohne acting as
aforesaid, does further covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said Isaac
Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, that they may send one or more supercargoes,
who shall have their passage free, during the whole of the said voyage, and
part of the cabin to lie in, and make use of as they shall have occasion, as
well in as out of port. That the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera,
their factors or assigns, shall be allowed fifty running days, for the loading
and discharging the said cargo at this port of New York, and the ports of Havre
de Grace and Hamburgh, and that the crew of the said vessel shall render every
convenient and customary assistance to the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham
R. Rivera, their factors or assigns, and so end the said intended voyage. In
consideration whereof, the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, do
hereby for themselves, their heirs, executors and administrators, covenant,
promise and agree, to and with the said Diederick Kohne, and the owners of the
ship White Fox, his and their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns,
that they will lade, employ and dispatch the said ship as herein before
mentioned, and that they will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the
said Diederick Kohne, his factors or assigns, for the freight or hire of the
said vessel and cargo for the said entire voyage, the just and full sum of
fourteen hundred pounds of sterling money of Great Britain, and if they ship
any goods at Havre de Grace for Hamburgh, that they will pay an additional
freight for the same at the usual rates of freight from Havre de Grace to
Hamburgh, exclusive of the aforesaid sum, the said freight money to be in full
of all primage, hat money, pilotage, and port charges belonging to the said
vessel, and to be paid in manner following, that is to say, if she discharges
any goods at Havre de Grace, an equivalent proportion of freight to be paid for
such goods in good bills of exchange on London at two usances, after delivery
of the same at Havre de Grace, and the remainder of the freight at Hamburgh, or
if entirely discharged at Hamburgh, the whole freight to be paid there in like
manner on delivery of the said cargo to the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham
R. Rivera, their factors or assigns; and the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham
R. Rivera, do hereby further covenant, promise and agree, to and with the said
Diederick Kohne, that in case the said vessel shall by the order, or through
any neglect or delay of them the said Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera,
their factors or assigns, be detained longer than fifty running days for
loading and discharging the said cargoes at this port of New York, and the
ports of Havre de Grace and Hamburgh, the same to commence the day of the date
of these presents, and continue until the said ship White Fox is dispatched by
them from hence, to commence again twenty-four hours after her arrival at Havre
de Grace, and continue until she is dispatched from there, and to commence
again at Hamburgh upon her being duly entered there, and continue until the
vessel is wholly discharged and the freight paid, that they the said Isaac
Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera, their factors or assigns, shall and will,
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said Diederick Kohne, his
factors or assigns, for such demurrage (if any there be) at and after the rate
of five pounds of sterling money per day, daily and every day as the same shall
grow due. And for the true and faithful performance of all and singular the
covenants, agreements and conditions herein before contained, and which are by
the said parties respectively to be performed, fulfilled and kept, they the
said parties to these presents, do severally bind and oblige themselves, and
their several and respective heirs, executors and administrators, goods and
chattels, (especially the said Diederick Kohne, acting as aforesaid, the said
ship White Fox, her freight and appurtenances, and the said Isaac Gomez, jun.
and Abraham R. Rivera, the merchandises to be laden on board the said vessel)
each to the other, and to the executors, administrators and assigns of the
other of them, in the penal sum of two thousand eight hundred pounds sterling,
firmly by these presents. In witness whereof, the said parties hereunto have
set their hands and seals, to three parts of these presents, the day and year
first herein written.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of AD: HENRY DORMAN, SAM. G. OGDEN.
DIEDERICK KOHNE. ISAAC GOMEZ, Jun. AB. R. RIVERA.

It is agreed between the charterers, and the master of the within mentioned
vessel, that twenty-three days have been expended in the port of New York.

DIEDERICK KOHNE. ISAAC GOMEZ, Jun.



Received from Arnold Henry Dorhman, two hundred and ninety pounds sterling, of
Great Britain, being the amount of several disbursements, and cash advanced me,
on account of the freight of the ship White Fox, from here to Havre de Grace
and Hamburgh, and which Mess. Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham R. Rivera are to
deduct out of the first moneys to be paid me, at the place of delivery of the
cargo. In witness whereof, I have signed three receipts of the same tenor, the
one fulfilled, the others void.

(Sterlg. L290.)

DIEDERICK KOHNE.
New York, 27th May, 1795.
And the jurors aforesaid, upon their said oath, do further say, that the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, on the fourth and twenty-eighth days of May,
in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, executed
their two joint and several bonds, to Diederick Kohne, and Arnold H. Dorhman,
in the words and figures following, to wit:

Know all men by these presents, That we, Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble,
Bond from G.andK. as guarantees respecting the charter party.
of the firm of Gouverneur and Kemble, of the city of New York, merchants, are
held and firmly bound unto Diederick Kohne, sailing master, of the ship or
vessel, called the White Fox, now in the port of New York, in the sum of two
thousand and eight hundred pounds of sterling money of Great Britain, to be
paid to the said Diederick Kohne or his certain attorney, executor
administrators or assigns, for which payment to be well and faithfully made, we
bind ourselves, jointly and severally, and our joint and several heirs,
executors and administrators, and every of them, firmly by these presents,
sealed with our seals, dated this fourth day of May, in the year of our Lord
one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five.

The condition of the above obligation is such, that whereas, the said
Gouverneur and Kemble, having previously to, and at the time of the execution
of a certain charter-party of affreightment bearing equal date with the above
obligation, and made between the above named Diederick Kohne, by the name and
description of Diederick Kohne, sailing-master of the ship or vessel called the
White-Fox, of the burden of one hundred and sixty-two Hamburgh lasts, or
thereabouts, acting for and in behalf of Berend Edward Haberstrok, master, and
the owners of the said vessel, of one part, and Isaac Gomez, jun. and Abraham
R. Rivera, of the city of New York, merchants, of the other part, agreed to be
and become a guarantee or security for the performance of the covenants,
stipulations, payments and agreements therein contained, and which, on the part
and behalf of the said Isaac Gomez and Abraham R. Rivera, and each of them,
are, is and ought to be performed, accomplished, kept, observed, made and
performed. If, therefore, the said Isaac Gomez and Abraham R. Rivera, and each
of them, their and each of their heirs, executors and administrators, do and
shall, in all things, well and truly observe, perform, accomplish, fulfill, pay
and keep all and singular the covenants, articles, clauses, stipulations,
provisions, payments and agreements whatsoever, which, on the part and behalf
of the said Isaac Gomez and Abraham R. Rivera, and each of them, their and each
of their heirs, executors and administrators, are or ought to be observed,
performed and accomplished, paid, fulfilled and kept, comprised or mentioned,
in and by the above mentioned charter party of affreightment, then the above
obligation to be void and of none effect, or otherwise to be and remain in full
force and virtue.

GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE, By J. GOUVERNEUR.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of JOHN WILKES, SAM. G. OGDEN.

Know all men by these presents, That we, Bond from G. and K. to guaranty the
freight.
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, of the firm of Gouverneur and Kemble, of
the city of New York, in the state of New York, merchants, are held and firmly
bound unto Arnold Henry Dorhman, of the said city, merchant, in the sum of
eighteen hundred pounds of sterling money of Great Britain, to be paid to the
said Arnold Henry Dorhman, or his certain attorney, executors, administrators
or assigns, for which payment, to be well and faithfully made, we bind
ourselves, jointly and severally, our joint and several heirs, executors and
administrators, and every of them, firmly by these presents, sealed with our
seals, dated this twenty-eighth day of May, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five.

The condition of this obligation is such, that whereas the said Gouverneur and
Kemble, having previously to and at the time of the execution of a certain
indenture or deed of covenant, touching certain payments to be made concerning
the chartering of a certain ship now at the port of New York, called the White
Fox, of which Diederick Kohne is now master, bearing the same date with the
above obligation, and made or mentioned to be made between Isaac Gomez the
younger, and Abraham R. Rivera, both of the city of New York, Merchants, of the
one part, and the above named Arnold Henry Dorham of the other part, agreed to
become a guarantee for the performance of the covenants, stipulations, payments
and agreements therein contained, and which on the part and in behalf of the
said Isaac Gomez, and Abraham R. Rivera, are and ought to be performed, kept,
observed, made and performed; if therefore the said Isaac Gomez, and Abraham R.
Rivera, and each of them, their and each of their heirs, executors, and
administrators, do and shall in all things well and truly observe, perform,
fulfill, accomplish, pay, and keep all and singular the covenants, articles,
clauses, provisoes, payments, conditions, and agreements whatsoever, which on
the part and behalf of the said Isaac Gomez, and Abraham R. Rivera, and each of
them, their, and each of their heirs, executors and administrators, are or
ought to be observed, performed, fulfilled, accomplished, paid and kept,
comprised or mentioned, in and by the above mentioned indenture or covenant,
according to the purport and true intent and meaning of the same indenture or
deed of covenant, then the above obligation to be void and of none effect, or
otherwise to be and remain in full force and virtue.

GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE, By J. GOUVERNEUR,
Sealed and delivered in the presence of JOHN WILKES, SAM. G. OGDEN.

And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further find, That
after the sale and delivery of the said cotton and indigo as aforesaid, to wit,
on the thirtieth day of May, in the year last aforesaid, being Saturday, at the
city and ward, and in the county aforesaid, the said Louis LeGuen wrote and
delivered to the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, a letter in the words
and figures following, that is to say.

New York, May 30th, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I had the honor of waiting upon you this morning, to advise with you
respecting the steps to be taken to ensure the payment of the sales of cotton
and indigo, which you made on my account to Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera;
that object, so essential to me, ought not to be encumbered with any
difficulty. I observe, however, and see it with pain, that we do not agree on
the means and precautions to be taken. I presume that it is for want of
understanding one another, being unfortunate enough not to speak your language,
and an interpreter not being able to express the true meaning of a phrase which
perhaps he does not understand perfectly. But this business being extremely
important to me, and until we can agree upon this point, it is my wish, and I
desire, 1st. That you insist on the conditions of the deed of sale, which
relate to the insurance being performed, and require that the amount of the
sale be entirely covered as well as the premium, that in all cases the recovery
of the insurance be sufficient for the payment of what is due to me. 2 d. That
you do not give any order for the disposal of the proceeds of this shipment
without my knowledge and consent, that I may, if I think proper, avail myself
of the fourth article of the contract, to receive the money in France or
Hamburgh; and that we may come to a determination on this subject, be so
obliging as to point out, and let me know the hour and place at which we may
meet. I shall provide an interpreter, to avoid any loss of time.

I am, Gentlemen, Your very humble servant, L. LE GUEN.


And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, Conversation between LeG.
and G. and K. 30th May.
do further find, That the said Louis LeGuen, did likewise on the same
thirtieth day of May, after the writing and delivery of the said letter to the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, at the city and ward, and in the county
aforesaid, in a certain conversation which he then and there had with the said
Isaac Gouverneur, demand of him to suspend the departure of the said ship White
Fox, until the insurances upon her cargo were entirely completed, to furnish
him with a copy of the said contract or writing, respecting the sale of the
said cotton and indigo, with an authorization to receive in France the amount
of the engagements of the purchasers, and to give him an extract of the account
of the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, that he might pay it to their
entire satisfaction and discharge; to which demand the said Isaac Gouverneur,
then and there in the presence of the said Isaac Gomez, jun. replied that the
sum wanting to complete the assurances, was not of sufficient consequence to
delay the departure of the vessel, and that he would provide for the deficit,
and turning to the said Isaac Gomez, observed that it was his property, and
that he had a right to depart with the said vessel when he pleased, and that he
would on the next Monday, deliver to the said Louis LeGuen his account current.
That the said Louis LeGuen, then and there represented to the said Isaac
Gouverneur, that the proceeds of the cargo were specially liable for the
payment of the money due from the purchasers, that he could not be burdened
with the amount of the freight and premium of insurance, and demanded that the
purchasers should give security for the payment of these objects, independent
of the proceeds of the cotton and indigo, and that the said Isaac Gouverneur
thereupon repeated to the said Isaac Gomez, jun. that the cargo was his
property, and that he could dispose of it. And the jurors aforesaid, upon their
oath aforesaid, The departure of the ship with the cotton and indigo on board,
31st May.
do further find, That the said ship White Fox, proceeded upon her said voyage
to Havre de Grace, with the said cotton and indigo on board, on the
thirty-first day of May, in the year last aforesaid, and that the said Isaac
Gouverneur and Peter Kemble did cause insurances to be made upon the said
cotton and indigo, laden on board of the said ship, from the said port of
New York, to two ports in Europe, at different premiums and in their own names,
and paid the said premiums, amounting in the whole to seven thousand three
hundred and sixty-seven dollars, in which said policies was a note as follows:
Insurance on the cotton and indigo, made by G. and K.
"The vessel is neutral, and the property warranted American, proof of interest
to be made here only, and not to be bound by the adjudication of any foreign
court." And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further find,
That after the sailing of the said ship White Fox, to wit, on the sixth day of
June, in the year last aforesaid, at the city and ward, and in the county
aforesaid, the said Louis LeGuen, wrote and delivered to the said Isaac
Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, a letter, also produced in evidence to the said
jurors, which is in the words and figures following, to wit, (that is to say.)

New York, June 6th, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I had the honor on the 29th of last month to request of your Isaac Gouverneur,
on behalf of your house as my agents, that the Hamburgh vessel the White Fox,
Capt. Van Berend Edward Haberstrok, might not depart till the insurance to be
made, pursuant to the contract with Messrs. Gomez, Lopez, and Rivera, was
entirely completed as we had agreed, nor before the requisite dispositions were
made to secure the application of the proceeds of the cargo of cotton and
indigo sold them on my account to the payment of what was due to me, having
elected as I had a right to do, to receive the amount at one of the ports of
discharge. Toward this end, I requested that my account with you might be
prepared, in order to be adjusted, and that I might be enabled by the
possession of the notes, or some competent authorization, and an authenticated
copy of the contract of sale, to receive the sum which was coming to me out of
the proceeds of the cargo, and informed him that it was my intention, thus
provided and enabled to go in person to Europe, to attend the progress of the
affair and receive the payment to which I was entitled, that I had accordingly
engaged a fast sailing vessel to carry me, and that the necessary arrangements
being made, I should depart the third or fourth instant, to give my personal
attention to the course of an affair of primary importance to me, and thereby
perhaps prevent any disastrous consequences which might otherwise arise. These
desires, intentions and expectations were afterward reiterated by me, but not
being met as I could hope, I, on the 30th of May, wrote the letter of which a
copy is herewith transmitted, and to which I received no answer. To my
surprise, I learnt the next day that the vessel had sailed, and I am this
moment ignorant that any adequate means have been attempted, to secure the
application of the proceeds of the cargo, according to the wish which I
communicated, and the right reserved me by the contract, and I remain
unfurnished with any documents or means by which I might take the measures that
might appear to me advisable. Even the precaution which I urged of addressing
the house of Le Conteulx and Co. of Rouen, an authenticated copy of the
contract of sale, to the end that they might take care of my interest, was at
that time refused, and as far as I know has been omitted. To increase the
inconvenience of my situation, I am left with the embarrassment of having on my
hands the vessel I had hired to convey me to Europe, and may be exposed to loss
from that source. In this situation I am sorry to be obliged to think that your
house has failed in observing toward me a conduct corresponding with my rights
and interest, and I conclude that it has made itself responsible for whatever
losses may ensue. Desirous of obviating, however, as far as may still be
possible, eventual misfortunes to any party, I offer myself to cooperate with
you in concerting, without loss of time, such measures as may still be
practicable to give effect to the operation according to the true intent, and
the rights of each party. To this end we may avail ourselves of such legal or
other advice, as the nature of the case may render it useful. But this offer is
made upon the express condition, that the proposed cooperation shall not
derogate in the end, from any claim upon your responsibility for consequences
which may at this time exist, and that I shall retain the same rights and
remedies that I might have if no such cooperation had taken place. With great
consideration, I have the honor to be,

Gentlemen, your obedient servant, L. LEGUEN.


And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further find, That the
said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, did on the same sixth day of June in
the year last aforesaid, write and deliver to the said Lewis Le Guen, a letter,
also produced in evidence to the said jurors, and which is in the words and
figures following, that is to say.

New York, 6th June, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire SIR,
We enclose you herewith, an account sales of the goods that were placed in our
hands, which render L54,196 11 10 for their net proceeds. We also hand you a
statement of our account current, and when we are in the receipt of all the
money resulting from the sales of these goods and the drawback of the duties,
there will be coming to you a balance of L47,544 15 6. We further state, there
will be coming to us L6256 2 6, to cover the present advances, etc. besides
which we are responsible for the charter of the ship White Fox, in L3733 6 8,
on your account. Under these circumstances we have grounded an objection to
give you an authorization to receive the money in France for the sales of the
goods, until we are first reimbursed and made secure. We have no objection to
cooperate with you for the ultimate security of the property upon fair
principles of justice and equity. And if you have separated your self from us
with a view to entangle or make us in any respect liable for the sale to
Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, we trust you will find a disappointment; such
an idea is too ridiculous to admit of a moment's serious consideration. In
justice to those gentlemen, who have become the purchasers of the goods, we
think proper to observe, that they are men of property and fair characters, and
that we are disposed to treat them with a degree of delicacy throughout this
unfortunate transaction, which will evidently end in a considerable loss, and
prove a gross deception by their not having a competent knowledge in the
article of cotton, it would therefore be with reluctance that we should
undertake any thing that might operate to their prejudice or injury. Still we
are not unwilling to devote ourselves to your interest, nor do we see any
reason for all the difficulties and anxieties your imagination is apparently
troubled with, without sustaining any real cause of alarm.

We are with respect, Sir, Your most obt. humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and
KEMBLE.


And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further find, That the
account of sales, and the statement of the account mentioned in the said letter
of the 6th June, are in the words and figures following, to wit.

LeGuen, in account with Gouverneur and Kemble
1795 Cr. May 30. By net proceeds of sundries, received per the ship Cleopatra,
Captain Bear, from the Isle-of-France, as per sales herewith, L54, 196 11 10
By amount of duties on 150 bales cotton, delivered by his order to Capt. Bear,
which we credit him because the whole stands charged in the account sales,
being 1852 29 dollars, 740 18 4 54, 937 10 2 1794. Dr. July 11, To his order in
favor Mr. Bear, L200 21, To cash paid him, 800 August 23, To cash paid duties
on some ship's stores, and freight of a small box from Philadelphia, 6 3 9
September 10, To 1 bag sugar, 0. 3. 21lb. at 112s. 5 5 0 12, To cash paid him,
400 0 0 To freight of a box from Philadelphia, 17 3 October 3, To postage of
sundry letters, 2 4 6 To cash paid him, 1000 0 0 Jan. 20, To postage of sundry
letters, 1 7 0 23, To cash paid him, 200 0 0 February 23, To do. 200 0 0 26, To
do. 1600 0 0 April 7, To do. 200 0 0 4,615 81 6 May 18, To 1 Matt ^. 3. 5 net
SUGAR. 96s. 3 16 3 50 casks 235. 2. 21 do. 1131 6 0 86 bags 62. 3. 13 do. 301
15 2 1,436 17 5 Balance estimated to be due to Louis LeGuen, when the
outstanding debts are received, and the drawback of duties recovered which are
credited in the sales, 47,544 15 6 53, 597 11 5 To our commissions on the above
sums when received and paid to him. at 2 1-2 p. ct. 1,339 18 9 54, 937 10 2 To
amount of Isaac Gomez, Moses Lopez and Abraham R. Rivera's notes, received in
payment for cotton and indigo, per agreement, which was executed at the
particular request and with the approbation of Mr. LeGuen, 48, 966 3 0 To
amount of drawback of duties credited in the sales but not yet received,
dollars 12,086 87, 4, 34 1^ 0 53,800 18 0 By amount of Mr. LeGuen's balance
brought down to show Gouverneur and Kemble's advance, 47, 544 15 6 Balance
first coming to Gouverneur and Kemble, 6,256 2 6 53,800 18 0 To balance brought
down, 6,256 2 6 Gouverneur and Kemble have also guaranteed the charter of the
ship White-Fox, at the request of Mr. LeGuen, which is payable in France, with
bills on London, L2000 sterling, at 5 pr. ct. premium, 3,733 6 8 9,989 9 2

[ For a Statement of the Account Current, see a separate Sheet hereunto
annexed.]

And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further say, That upon
the said sixth day of June, the said Louis LeGuen was indebted at the city and
ward, and in the county aforesaid, to the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter
Kemble, in the sum of four thousand seven hundred and ninety-five pounds, six
shillings and three pence, and the defendants held in their hands a custom
house debenture, the property of the plaintiff, Balance of L.21 0 3 due from
LeG. to G. and K.
payable in the month of August one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, for
four thousand eight hundred and thirty-four pounds, and fifteen shillings, out
of which the defendants were entitled to a commission of sixty pounds, eight
shillings and ten pence, which would, after the receipt of said debenture,
leave a balance due by the plaintiff to the defendants of twenty-one pounds and
three pence upon the general balance of their account as his factors and
agents, and that he continued so indebted until and after the month of August
aforesaid. And that they were bound and engaged for him and on his account as
herein before stated. G. and. K receive the amount of the debenture.
And that the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble received the amount of the
debenture aforesaid when it became due, and that the bonds which they had
entered into, Bonds at the custom-house cancelled.
to the United States Custom-House as aforesaid, for and on account of the said
Louis LeGuen, were cancelled on the first day April, 1796.

And the jurors aforesaid, G. and K. charge Gomez and Co. with the premium of
insurance and receive their notes for the same.
upon their oath aforesaid, do further say, that the said Isaac Gouverneur and
Peter Kemble did charge the premiums of the insurances aforesaid to the said
Isaac Gomez, jun. Moses Lopez and Abraham R. Rivera, and on the tenth day of
June, in the said year, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, received
their joint promissory note for the same, payable in six months from that time.

And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do further find, That the
following letters were written and delivered by the plaintiff to the
defendants, and by the defendants to the plaintiff, on the several days herein
after mentioned, at the city, ward, and in the county aforesaid.

New York, June 9th, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I received yesterday your letter of the 6th inst. with the accounts mentioned
in it, which to my surprise takes no direct notice of my letter to you of the
same date. I pass by the singular insinuation which it contains, and confine
myself to the real business in question between us. I observe with regret, that
(though you have dropped one of the items which originally composed your claim,
the premiums of insurance) you persist in the idea of retaining exclusively in
your command and disposition, the whole of my property on the ground of a lien
upon it, arising from your agency, which according to your own statement
amounts to little more then one fifth of its value, and adhere to your
objection, to give me an authorization to receive any part of it. It was ever
my intention, and as I conceived imported in my original propositions, to
provide for your payment and security to the extent of your just claims, as the
condition of the authorization, I demanded of you to receive what was
rightfully coming to me. This was equally the intention of the cooperation
proposed by my letter of the sixth, and I continue disposed to enter into that
co operation upon this principle. It is true there are several items in your
account about which we differ in opinion; yet I was and am ready to make
suitable reservations and arrangements toward a right adjustment of them, but
I cannot imagine that this ought to have prevented, or ought now to impede
precautions and measures tending to secure a due application of the proceeds of
the cargo, and to put me in possession of the funds to which I am indisputably
entitled, and according to the election which was reserved for my benefit in
the terms of the contract. On this ground of putting me in a situation to
possess without delay, that to which I am indisputably entitled, and of leaving
your just and legal claims upon the property, and otherwise, unimpaired, I am
still willing to cooperate. But as I conceive there were pretentions and
omissions in the first instance, which render you responsible for consequences,
as it may now be too late to repair the deficiency, as every moment's delay
increases the risks, I still make the offer of cooperation, on condition of
holding you in the same state of responsibility in which you were prior to that
offer. At the same time it will be explicitly understood, that in acceding to
the cooperation on this condition, you do not incur any new or additional
responsibility. With this explanation, I urge an immediate and positive answer
whether you will concur in an arrangement on this base. Moments are precious.
That which might be useful now, may quickly become useless by procrastination.
The nature of the cooperation will be an after consideration. The terms to be
settled between us, according to our mutual opinions, and the advice we may
mutually take.

I am Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 10th June, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
Your favor of yesterday is received. It is not our wish to throw any
embarrassments in your way, but the magnitude of our claims, and our
engagements in your behalf, render it proper that we proceed with caution. To
stop the ship until the insurance was completed, was not in our power. Messrs.
Gomez, Lopez and Rivera stipulated to make insurance, but this might be done,
as well after, as before the vessel sailed; and if neglected altogether, it
would amount to a breach of contract only, for which the vessel could not be
detained. With respect to the premium for insurance paid by us, although we
omitted it in our last account, we do not assent to the force of your objection
to the payment of it. The insurance being effected for your benefit and
security, it is more reasonable that you should run the hazard of recovering
back the premium than we, who act only as agents. To remove however every
impediment to a settlement, and manifest a spirit of accommodation, this charge
has been for the present dropped. We cannot forbear remarking, that
notwithstanding your solicitude to obtain the authorization in question, you
constantly uphold a claim upon us for certain consequences, without pouring out
in what manner we may have rendered ourselves responsible. Although we are not
conscious of any act which can give you this claim, and are therefore easy on
this head, yet you cannot but perceive the impropriety of our admitting, that
we have incurred this responsibility, which we should do, were we to come to a
settlement upon the terms proposed by you. As to our lien on the notes, and
other documents relating to this transaction, we never had any doubt of our
right to withhold them, and also to refuse you any authority to act, until the
whole of our demand was satisfied, and we satisfactorily secured against
contingent claims. Indeed as the contract is in our name, and we are bound
under a penalty of 20,000 dollars to endorse on the notes, which are also in
our favor, the payments as they are made, we might insist (were we disposed as
you insinuate to create difficulties) upon all the the moneys passing through
our hands, or those of an agent chosen by us, and for that purpose keep
possession of every paper until the transaction was finally closed. But we are
sincerely anxious to put an end to a controversy, which did not originate with
us; for this purpose we beg leave to refer you to our letter of the 6th
instant, in which we were so explicit as to the terms upon which we were
willing to give you the authority you desire, and to cooperate with you, that
nothing remains to be added. To give you, however, a further proof of our wish
for a speedy and amicable arrangement, we are willing, if these terms are not
agreeable to you, to submit the whole matter to arbitration.

We are respectfully, sir, your very humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, June 11th, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble. Gentlemen,
I acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday. Though in my opinion,
it confirms my pretensions upon your eventful responsibility; yet as I am
willing to consider it in other respects as a step toward meeting me on the
ground of some reasonable accommodation, as this is entirely my wish, so far as
it may be practicable, and as I learn that you are about to dispatch to Havre,
a vessel, which it may be important should be the bearer of some final
arrangement, it is my intention immediately to make to you propositions in
writing, for the adjustment of the affair; saving to myself, in the mean time,
all my rights against you, from what has heretofore passed.

I am respectfully, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, June 12th, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
Agreeable to the contents of my letter of yesterday, I have the honor to
transmit you here enclosed proposals which would set aside all altercations
respecting our respective pretensions, until the time when the result of the
payments of Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera shall be known, saving the
settlements of our accounts which might take place immediately. If your desire
for an arrangement is as sincere as that which actuates me, I flatter myself
that you will acquiesce to those proposals; proposals agreeable to the fairest
principles of justice. As moments are precious, I earnestly desire that you
favor me with an immediate answer.

I have the honor to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant. L. LE GUEN.


Exposition of the claims of Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, according to the
account current, and the post scriptum that follows:
1st. L6,256 2 6. Balance in their favor, exhibited by the drawback, which will
be paid them by the customs, in the term of three months -- L4, 834 15 Their
commission of receiving and paying, charged in Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble's
account on L53, 597 11 5. at 2^ per cent, which according to the regulations of
the chamber of commerce, appears due only on the returns from this state to any
part of the United States, L1, 339 18 9 A deficiency of about 7,200lb. sugar of
Mr. Beares' parcel, and which ought to be made good to me, 370 L6,544 13 9
which would present an overplus exclusive of my other claims upon sundry
charges, the missing of two bales of cotton, etc

2 d. L3,733 6 8. Their guarantee for the amount of the freight, assenting to
the freight being paid out of the first proceeds of the cargo (saving my claim
on whoever it may concern) this guarantee becomes void, or nearly so.

From this exposition it appears, that all the claims of Messrs. Gouverneur and
Kemble ought to be confined to that arising from the bond, they have given at
the customs, for the due return of the certificates of the landing of the said
goods in a foreign port, amounting to dols. 12,086 87. Desirous of disposing of
my property, and being determined to make use of the right which has been
reserved to me, in the second and fourth articles of the contract of sale made
to Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, enabling me to receive part of their
obligations or the whole of their amount in France, I decide on making the
following proposals to Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, which will convince them
of my dispositions to come to an arrangement.

1st. To give me an authenticated copy of the contract of sale, and
authorization to receive one hundred thousand dollars, in part of the
obligations of Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, out of the proceeds of the
cargo, after the freight will have been paid, and immediately after that
payment only, enabling me fully to receive that sum.

2d. To keep at their disposal the balance of the above mentioned obligations,
amounting to dollars 22, 415 37/100 for their bond to the customs, saving to
myself the disposal of this balance when the landing certificates are arrived,
and after the final settlement of our account.

3d. To drop for the present all alterations, respecting the responsibility
which I have a right to exercise against Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, if the
delay of the necessary dispositions in France should be productive of some
injury to me in the recovery of the obligations of the purchasers of my goods.

I presume that Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble will be so much the more disposed
to acquiesce to the above proposals, that they have ever intimated the high
opinion they had of the honesty and solvability of Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and
Rivera, and as the obligations of those purchasers of dols. 22,415 37, are only
designed to insure in the course of twelve months the arrival of the
certificates of the due landing of the said goods, which certificates cost them
nothing, and which Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera have engaged to return, by
one of the articles of the contract.

New York, 12th June, 1795. Louis Le Guen, Esquire SIR,
Desirous as we are of coming to an accommodation with you, we cannot,
consistent with a regard to our own security, accede to the propositions which
accompanied your favor of this date. We deem ourselves entitled to a
re-imbursement out of the first proceeds of the cotton and indigo. If therefore
we authorize you to receive one hundred thousand dollars, it may exhaust the
whole of the proceeds -- in which case our security will be considerably
diminished, as we could have recourse only to Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera,
on their notes.

The proposals we have already made and repeated, are those to which we must
yet adhere, they being such as the nature of the transaction and our own safety
naturally point out. We also beg leave to remark to you, that we are desirous
of some prompt decision to the business, as it becomes irksome and unpleasant
to us to magnify so many words about it under any imaginary pretensions, and as
it becomes necessary for our I. G's. health (who has the principal management
of it with you) that he should go into the country, we acquaint you that he
will remain but a few days more in town, before he will set off on a jaunt that
will occupy him some weeks abroad -- We are therefore desirous of hearing from
you immediately, in point, upon this serious question, to understand finally
any determination that is to be made.

We are, with respect, Sir, Your most obedt. servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, June 15, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I cannot easily express my chagrin at your reply of the 12th to my letter of
the 12th instant. I had hoped that my propositions would have appeared to you
entirely reasonable, or at least that you would have made me such others in
return of a specific nature, as you did yourselves approve. But instead of
this, you merely refer me to your former propositions, of which I know not of
any except a reference to arbitration -- I am obliged to conclude still more
firmly than heretofore, that it is your determination at all events to retain
my whole property in your disposition, till the final winding up of the
speculation by Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, and the receipt by you in this
country of the proceeds of my cargo. Thus depriving me of the election which
was referred by the terms of the contract, to receive the money coming to me in
Europe, and disappointing all the measures I had taken and projected on that
basis. I protest once more against this mode of proceeding, and all the
consequences of it, and I demand for the last time, that you forthwith furnish
me with an authenticated copy of the contract of sale, and with a competent
authorization, to receive at the port of discharge, whatever sum shall remain
of the proceeds of the goods sold on my account to Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and
Rivera, after first deducting and reserving at your disposal, such sum as shall
be completely sufficient to cover you for the general balance of your account,
and for all that you have made yourselves accountable for on my account, also
for the commissions you claim as well on the receipt as on the sale, and even
for damages in case of protest of the bill of exchange to be drawn for the
freight or charter money, and for insurance of the money which you claim to
cover you for your advances and responsibilities to the United States. This
nevertheless is not to be understood as a final admission of any claims on your
part, which may not be according to law, and the usage of trade; but as a
preliminary arrangement for your eventual security. I further declare, that any
other security you now rightfully possess is to remain unimpaired by your
compliance with this demand. As I am not less anxious than you can be, to
terminate this discussion, I hope for your immediate answer, agreeing or
refusing to comply with this my demand.

I remain, with due consideration, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 15th June, 1795. Louis Le Guen Esquire Sir,
Upon reviewing our late correspondence, we cannot but think that we have
manifested every disposition to bring the controversy between us to a speedy
and amicable determination. We have offered, and again repeat the proposal,
that we will deliver into your hands, all the papers and notes which regard
this transaction without delay, upon your giving us satisfactory security in
this country, to pay us in a reasonable time our commission, and such sums as
we may have disbursed, or made ourselves responsible for, on your account, and
also sufficiently secure us against the payment of such sums as we may
eventually be called upon by reason of our interference in this business. When
it is considered that we have a right to insist upon immediate payment of the
balance of our account, as the condition of our delivering up these papers, you
cannot deem this proposition as unreasonable. We are certainly not obliged to
receive payment in France, especially at a time when so many difficulties
attend getting money from that country, and was we to accede to the terms held
out by your favor of this date, we should be obliged to wait the event of an
application for the money to Mess. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera in France, before we
could have recourse to you. Much more has already been said upon this subject
than was necessary; to conclude, we conceive ourselves entitled to keep all the
securities we have at present, and were we disposed to be litigious, we might,
even now, apply to you in a judicial way for payment of our demand. This being
our situation, we have no hesitation in rejecting your offers of this day as
inadmissible. If you are so solicitous of having authenticated copies of the
contract and an authorization to receive the money, we are willing to give them
upon the terms herein before mentioned, or upon any other which three
indifferent Gentlemen shall point out. We hope this proposal will not only be
deemed fair, but that it will remove the chagrin occasioned by ours of the
twelfth instant.

We are with respect, Sir, Your most humble servants GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, June, 16th, 1795. Messrs, Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I have received your letter of yesterday. Well satisfied that the pretensions
which you advance (as far as I recollect for the first time) in that letter, as
the condition of delivering into my hands the papers and notes which regard the
transaction in question between us, are not warranted by the usage of trade, as
relative to the course of business; I will only remark to you, that whatever
might have been the case, prior to the departure of the cargo, and if you had
then been willing to come to a proper adjustment of the affair with me, has
been rendered impracticable by the change of circumstances. By your not meeting
me duly when I demanded of you my account, to the end that it might be adjusted
and settled to your entire satisfaction and full discharge, by your refusing to
permit any intervention of mine in the affair, by your declaring that you took
all upon yourselves, and engaging or encouraging the buyers to depart with the
cargo immediately, you have placed me under the impossibility of putting into
execution any of the dispositions I had meditated, and now that I am deprived
of my property as the mean of engaging the aid and interpositions of friends, a
demand is made which for its indefiniteness alone is altogether exceptionable.
I confine myself therefore to demanding of you without delay, an authenticated
and certified copy of the contract of sale made with Mess. Gomez, Lopez and
Rivera, and to declaring to you, that in as much as you have by the
circumstances which preceded the departure of the cargo, and in addition
thereto by refusing to comply with all the propositions and demands I have made
you since, entirely deranged my plans, and deprived me of the power of
commanding my funds in France, and of all the advantage from the employment of
them there, I hold you responsible, and shall insist upon your responsibility
for all losses, damages and disadvantages which may ensue, including
anindemnification for the derangement of the measures I had adopted for
proceeding in person to France, to possess myself of my property.

With consideration, I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient servt. L. LE GUEN.
P. S. If you will revise ray last propositions, you will observe that it
leaves untouched all your securities and resources whatever.




New York, 1st October, 1735. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
Mr. Frs. Barretto, who had promised to me to furnish the certificate of
landing at Havre, of a parcel of sugars per ship White Fox, having presented me
one, which did not appear to me to be drawn in due form, I advised him to call
on you and request the necessary informations to procure another from Havre,
told me in answer that that business was settled as it was, and you had
credited my account with the drawback on the above said parcel of sugars.
Fearing he should have misunderstood you, I now request to know of you
gentlemen, if Mr. Gomez has sent you the necessary certificate, and if it hat
been admitted at the custom-house to annul your bond for returning the said
certificate.

I have the honor to remain, Gentlemen, Your obt. humble servt. L. LE GUEN.


New York, 17th Oct. 1795. Louis Le Guen, Esquire Sir,
We have received a letter from you this day, dated on the first of the month,
wherein you make an enquiry respecting a certificate Mr. Barretto presented to
us to cancel our bond for some sugars exported in the White Fox. We wanted Mr.
Baretto to leave us the certificate, to see if it could be made to answer that
purpose, as it was irregular; but he objected to it before he had seen Mr.
Cherriot. Since then we have heard nothing further about it -- if it is in your
possession, it would be well for you to send it to us, and we will see what may
be further needful. We have received from the custom-house the debenture of
duties on your goods, which we shall account for; but we must be indemnified
for our bonds, or the needful papers must be returned to us to procure them
cancelled. Directions were given Mr. Gomez for that purpose respecting the
goods under his care, but the sugar question he never had any thing to do with.
That unfortunate adventure of Mr. Gomez, as we were well aware of, is like to
turn to a ruinous account. After waiting some time at Havre, he has been
obliged to expose it to further risks and expenses, by proceeding to Hamburgh
for a market. Under all these disagreeable circumstances, attending so
respectable a property, we cannot help regretting that you have withdrawn
yourself from us, and the steps you have been pursuing, which must ultimately
operate to your prejudice, while it appears to us so needful you should nave
associated with us, to have concerted all necessary means for its preservation
and security, which we have at all times held ourselves open to cooperate with
you in, still no endeavor will be wanting on our parts, at least so far as we
remain unrestricted.

We are, with considerations of respect, Sir, your very obedient servants,
GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 20th October, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, New York,
Gentlemen,
I have received the letter you have addressed me on the 17th instant; Mr.
Barretto has not explained himself well to me, if he had, I would have sent you
the certificate in question; it is annexed with this letter and you will see
that they have drawn it in the name of John Richard, jun. as if he had been the
shipper. I wish it could be admitted at the custom-house, to cancel your bond.
The declaration to recover the drawback has been made either in your name or in
that of Mr. Gomez, jointly with the cotton and indigo, as it appears by your
having received the debentures for the duties paid.

In case that certificate could not answer the purpose, I beg you would send me
a copy of the declaration made when the goods were shipped, to enable me to
write at Havre accordingly, and have a declaration made in support of the above
certificate; you will oblige me to send it as soon as possible, to use the
first opportunity to write for that purpose; as to the latter part of your
letter, I must refer you to the correspondence heretofore had between us for an
answer; with this single observation in addition, that the suggestion of
cooperation at [this] time of day after the obstacles to it, when it might
have been a means of security, appears to me rather out of season. If however
you have any specific thing to propose, in which I can be useful without
impairing my pretensions on your responsibility, I shall be ready to pay due
attention to it.

I have the honor to remain, sincerely, and with respect, Gentlemen, Your most
obt. humble servt. L. LE GUEN.


New York, 4th November, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
We acquainted you a few days since, that the certificate transmitted to us had
been found sufficient at the custom-house to cancel our bond that was given on
the sugar shipped to Havre-de-Grace. Yesterday we received from Mr. Gomez, at
Hamburgh, the certificate relative to the cotton and indigo, which is not made
conformable to the directions given to him, and consequently will not answer
for the bond which was given on that, as the collector has refused to accept
it. We herewith enclose it to you, together with copies of a letter from Mr.
Gomez to us, and one to Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, for your government, to adopt
such steps as you may think proper, to the end of preserving your property.

Sir, Your very humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


Hamburgh, 12th August, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I herewith enclose the certificate of the landing of the cargo here, to enable
you to recover the drawback, according to your desire. Markets being in a most
miserable situation in France, induced me to bring the cotton and indigo here,
which proves as bad, as it will not yield the amount of invoice and expenses
attending it, by at least sixty per cent. of which I have by this opportunity
informed my house, who will confer with you on the occasion. In my next I shall
advise my house for the payment of insurance, and amount due H. Dorhman on
account of charter-party.

I have the honor to be Your very humble servant, ISAAC GOMEZ, Jun.


New York, 7th November, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
With your favor of the 4th inst. I received the certificate which Mr. Gomez
has sent you of the landing at Hamburgh of the cotton and indigo per ship White
Fox, which not being drawn conformably to the instructions you had given him,
has been rejected by the collector of the customs. Not being myself well
acquainted with the forms prescribed, and not knowing the instructions you may
have given Mr. Gomez, I cannot judge in what point it is deficient, but I think
there is yet time enough to have it corrected; and I return it with this
letter, so that you make of it what use you think fit. The same letter covered
also copy of a letter from Mr. Gomez to your house, dated at Hamburgh the 12th
of August; with another copy of a letter which the same gentleman wrote the
same day to his house of Gomez, Lopez and Rivera. I am sorry to see that affair
turn out so unfavorably, and the loss which those gentlemen are likely to
suffer from it. It is one of those accidents to which every speculation of that
kind is exposed; and I am yet in hopes that the result will not be so
unfavorable as Mr. Gomez, seems to apprehend, by the start of the price of
cotton in the London market, and a little patience. However the business may
turn out. I should hope that you have taken every precaution to insure to
yourselves the whole amount of the obligations of Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and
Rivera, and should be very sorry if you were to suffer on account of the issue
of that operation. For my part I can do no more than to refer you to what I
proposed in my preceding letters, and repeat again to you, that I am yet
disposed to cooperate with you, and ready to take the measures which might
appear most advisable for the preservation of that property: provided always.
that that cooperation shall not in the least impair my claim to your
responsibility; reserving to myself at the same time all my rights to it, as if
such a cooperation had not taken place.

I have the honor to remain sincerely, Gentlemen, Your most obedt. humble
servt. L. LE GUEN.


New York, 7th Nov. 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
Your favor of this date has been duly received. While we regret the great loss
which Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera are in danger of sustaining by this
unfortunate speculation, and that you may eventually be a sufferer, we think it
incumbent on us to repeat to you, lest our silence might be misconstrued, that
we do not in any event hold ourselves responsible to you for any thing beyond
what shall be actually received on the notes of those gentlemen. The sale was
concluded under your immediate direction, and you well know that no security
was received in payment but the notes of the purchasers; we are at a loss
therefore, what you can mean, by hoping that we have taken every precaution to
ensure the whole amount of these obligations. We know of no measures necessary
to pursue for the preservation of the property, having received no intelligence
of its being in any other danger than that of not finding a good market. But if
you think any thing can be done for your interest, we shall cheerfully pursue
such reasonable directions as you may give us as your agents on the subject. We
thank you for your expressions of sorrow on our account; but on a review of our
conduct, we find no room for charging ourselves with any neglect or inattention
to your concern, and see no occasion therefore, as far as we are personally
concerned, to be alarmed at the issue of this business.

We are with respect, sir, Your very humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 7th December, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
As a vessel will sail in a day or two for Hamburgh, we take the liberty to
inform you, that we are willing, if it will meet your approbation, to authorize
the American consul residing at that port, or any other gentleman we can
mutually agree upon, to receive from Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, payment
on account of their notes, agreeable to the fourth article of their contract
with us. If you deem any other authority necessary, we shall have no objection
to join in it, if the same shall be consistent with our safety and security. As
Mr. Gomez is at Hamburgh with the cargo, it is probable such authority will
find him there, and that he will he disposed to treat with our agent upon fair
and equitable terms. The money we propose to remain in the consul's hands,
subject to our draft, or subject to your own order; provided you will either
pay, or give us good security, for our demands against you. In case of any
difficulty in adjusting our account, we will submit the same to the monthly
committee of the chamber of commerce, or to any other indifferent persons.

We are respectfully, Sir, Your very humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 8th December, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
We addressed you the last evening on the subject of your concerns with Mess.
Gomez, Lopez a and Rivera, and have now to communicate, that we this morning
received the enclosed letter from them, containing proposals for a compromise,
which is submitted to your consideration, that you may inform us how far it
will be agreeable to you for us to treat with them on that head, and we shall
wait your instruction.

We are with due respect, Sir, Your very humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 9th Deember, 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I have received your two letters of the 7th and 8th instant, the last
enclosing one from Mess. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera of the 7th. You are perfectly
apprised of the ground on which I conceive myself to stand. I have made a
contract upon a definite price, and I have legal advice upon which I rely, that
you are my guarantee in case of disastrous consequences; looking to your
responsibility, I feel tranquil for the event, and I cannot be expected to
abandon or weaken so good a ground. With this saving, which I make once for
all, as to what I now add, or may hereafter say upon the subject, I reply, to
your first letter, that I think it would be for the interest of all concerned,
that the proceeds of the cargo in Hamburgh should be paid into the hands of,
and deposited with some person or house, of unquestionable responsibility. Not
being acquainted with the mercantile standing of the American consul, I can say
nothing, but I have entire confidence in either of the houses of Mest. Bernherd
and Nootnagal, Lubbert and Dumas, and Matthuson and Silem. To your second
letter, that were I in consideration of the probably unfortunate issue of the
adventure (rendered so however, as I conceive, from ill management) disposed to
make a voluntary sacrifice, the proposition of Mess. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera is
too far short of any thing that could reasonably be thought to be listened to.

With due consideration, I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, L. LE
GUEN.
P. S. Concerning the arbitrage you have proposed for the settlement of the
account you have remitted me, you will always find me disposed to submit my
claims respecting said account, to the decision of experienced and
disinterested merchants.




New York, 11th December, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
We wished for your sake to pursue such joint measures, with respect to the
property fold Mess. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, as the interest of all parties
naturally pointed out, and under this impression addressed you on the 7th and
8th instant. Your answer satisfies us that you have no other object in view,
than to induce us to take some steps that may place us in a situation of
responsibility, which we do not think proper to incur. As to our having already
rendered ourselves answerable for the amount of the sales, we do not believe
you seriously entertain the idea yourself, and therefore think it unnecessary
to waste much time in exposing the futility of such a pretension. The only
definite terms upon which you ever demanded the authorization, which is made
the pretext of a misunderstanding between us, and which are contained in your
letter of the 12th June, are such as we conceived ourselves warranted in
rejecting at that time, and have had no reason to change our opinion. The
reasons which influenced us have already been detailed, and are too obvious to
require repetition. To discuss this point further will neither be pleasant nor
useful. We are prepared to meet the question in any shape you may choose to
bring it forward, in full confidence of having discharged our trust with
integrity, and every proper attention to your interest, and a perfect reliance
on those tribunals which must ultimately decide between us. Under a conviction,
however, that it is your wish that we may assume a discretion which may
eventually render us liable, we think proper to inform you that we shall not
empower any house in Europe to receive any payment on the notes we hold,
without an express authority from you in writing for that purpose. Unless we
receive explicit directions from you on this head, we shall think it our duty
to wait until the money is remitted to this country, or until we receive advice
that it is placed in Europe, so as to be commanded by us without any risque.
Your answer respecting an arbitration, is not less evasive than other parts of
your letter; but it is not surprising that such should be your language, so
long as you "feel tranquil about the event," and while you rely with so much
confidence on our guarantee in case of disastrous consequences. We have only to
add, that although a further correspondence will probably be productive of no
salutary consequences, yet we shall ever continue ready, until the final
settlement of this business, to listen to such instructions as you may have a
right to give, and we can consistently with our own safety and interest pursue.

We are, Sir, Your humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 11th December, 1795. Mess. Gouverneur and Kemble, New York,
Gentlemen,
I have received your letter of this day. I will only reply to one point of it;
you mistake in supposing I wished to draw you into any new responsibility; my
only intention is not to release you from any to which you are now subject. I
thought I had sufficiently explained myself on the subject of the deposit of
the proceeds of the cargo at Hamburgh; but since I have been misunderstood, I
will add, that I entirely approve of the idea, that if the deposit be made with
either of the houses I have indicated, or with any other we may agree upon, I
will take the risks of it to the extent of the sum deposited, and it shall in
no wise be deemed to implicate you in any new responsibility. But I consent to
this only on the ground that I cannot obtain from you an authorization to
receive the proceeds myself, which I should prefer, and if obtained, would
immediately depart for Hamburgh. The sum I shall receive will be in deduction
for the one I claim, preserving at the same time, all my right for the
remaining balance, which I mean to maintain in either case.

I have the honor to remain, With consideration, Your most humble servant, L.
LE GUEN.


New York, Dec. 11, 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
Agreeable to the request contained in your letter of this date, we lose no
time to inform you, that we are ready to execute the necessary powers to either
of the houses which you mention in your letter of the 9th inst. in such form as
our counsel shall jointly agree upon, for the purpose of receiving the proceeds
of the cargo sold to Messrs. Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, in this case it is
understood, that you secure us for all our claims, and against all the
contingent demands which may be made against us on account of our agency, which
in case of any dispute shall be immediately adjusted, if you agree, by the
monthly committee of the chamber of commerce, or by any three merchants we can
fix upon. This is not only reasonable, but perfectly consistent with our last
offer, as whatever confidence you may have in the houses alluded to, they are
entire strangers to us, and it cannot be expected that we should permit you to
leave this country, and consent to this property being placed in the hands of
persons unacquainted with us, without having our just rights secured. We shall
be ready to carry into effect these proposals as soon as you can attend to the
business. And are, sir,

Your very obedt. servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 15th Dec. 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I am willing to concur in the proposition made by your letter of the 11th
inst. upon condition that you will enter with me into an agreement to be
adjusted between our counsel, which shall leave you in the same state of
responsibility in which you may now be neither adding to nor diminishing it. I
connect with this the idea of leaving to three merchants, to be agreed upon
between us, to determine the particular items of your account about which we
differ in opinion.

I am, gentlemen, Your obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 18th Dec. 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
Enclosed is a draft of a letter of attorney to Messrs. Lubert and Dumas of
Hamburgh. If it meets your approbation, we will execute and forward it without
delay.

We are respectfully, sir, Your obedient servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 19th Dec. 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
Your letter of the 18th inst. has been received; as you do not notice mine to
you of the 15th, I enclose a copy of it, left by accident it should not have
come to hand. On the supposition that you have received the original, I can
understand your last letter in no other sense than as a refusal to consummate
your own propositions of the 11th inst. to which my letter of the 15th accedes;
with only the addition of a precaution necessary to my safety and not injurious
to yours. Thus understanding it, I must submit to the alternative, as the best
thing which is left in my option. I accordingly consent to your authorizing the
deposit in the hands of the house you name. But I cannot forbear observing,
that if the deposit is to be with a single house, that I should have preferred
that of Messrs. Matthuson and Silem, or if with two houses, that of Bernherd
and Nootnagel, or at least a division of the deposit between these two houses,
as the deposit will be at my risk; is it unreasonable to expect that the one or
the other will be done? I repeat that in consenting to this particular
operation at my risk, it is not my intention to wave my general claim, upon
your responsibility heretofore intimated.

I am, gentlemen, Your obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 21st Dec. 1795. Louis LeGuen, Esquire Sir,
We have this morning received your letter of the 19th inst. accompanied with a
copy of that of the 15th inst. We have already expressed, that we are averse to
that sort of indefinite correspondence your letters of late seem to occupy; and
however secure you may conceive yourself in the idea of your pretended
responsibility against us, we feel altogether indifferent whether the
controversy between us is decided in a judicial way, or entirely submitted to
the arbitration of discreet merchants. The rectitude of our conduct will then
appear, which of us merit the fair reflection of having exercised attempts to
embarrass or throw difficulties in the way of providing any possible or
necessary precautions.

We are with respect, sir, Your very humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 22nd Dec. 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I have received your letter of the 21st inst. I can make no particular answer
to it, because it is altogether vague, and to me unintelligible; all I can say
is, that my letters of the 15th and 19th appear to me very explicit, and that
in not complying with them, I have the greater reason to complain, and you to
reflect seriously on the consequences.

I am, gentleman, Your Obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 23d. Dec. 1795. Louis Le Guen, Esquire Sir,
To demonstrate a further proof of our disposition to take all imaginable care
of your interest, we enclose to you a copy of our letter to the house of
Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas of Hamburgh, and as another security to the property,
if you think proper we will write them in addition to remit a part or the whole
of what they may receive to the Banking House in London of our friends, Messrs.
Smiths and Atkinson, in whom we have implicit confidence as men of
unquestionable property. We shall take care to forward three copies with their
enclosures of our letter to Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas, and we hope it may
answer your sanguine desire.

We are sir, Your obt. humble servants, GOUVERNEUR and KEMBLE.


New York, 26th, Dec. 1795. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I have been favored with your letter of the 23d inst. therewith enclosed a
copy of that one of the 22d inst. you wrote to Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas in
Hamburgh, I am surprised you do not notice mine of the 22d. I do accept the
proposal, concerning the deposit, as the only one left in my power, and
referring to my letter of the 19th inst. that as you are unwilling to agree
with my proposal to divide the deposit between two houses, I consent it be paid
into the hands of Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas, as the deposit is at my risk, I
expect it shall not be disposed of, in any case without my consent, I keep for
my own use the copy of your letter to Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas, but if you had
some addition or alteration to do in it, I hope you will be so good as to let
me know of them; it is necessary you send a copy of the sale contract to
Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas. I repeat, that in consenting to this particular
operation at my risk, it is not my intention to wave my general claim upon your
responsibility heretofore intimated.

I am, gentlemen, Your obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 2d January, 1796. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I confirm to you my last of 26th inst. to which I have not been favored with
any answer. Having been informed since by Messrs. Lopez and Rivera, that Mr.
Gomez, their copartner, was at London taking some measures to get there the
cargo of cotton and indigo, I fear the powers transmitted to Messrs. Lubbert
and Dumas of Hamburgh, will not effect the desired purpose. I now request of
you, gentlemen, you will let me know, whether you have received any information
concerning that determination, and whether you meditate any further means for
securing the proceeds of the cargo, for the benefit of whomsoever it may
concern.

I am, gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 2d January, 1796.
Gouverneur and Kemble's compliments to Mr. LeGuen, and acquaint him, that they
are in possession of the information respecting the operations of Mr. Gomez in
England, which makes it necessary the power should go forward to Messrs. Smiths
and Atkinson of London, instead of Messrs. Lubbert and Dumas of Hamburgh, which
is prepared ready for the purpose, and they will take care to forward it. It Is
probable from their information the property will be removed from Hamburgh to
London, part of the cotton was actually on its way. They will therefore pursue
the necessary steps to touch as much of the money as can be done in Europe, not
doubting of his approbation.


New York, 6th January, 1796. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I have received your note of the 2d instant. The principal aim of the enquiry
in my last, was to ascertain what your note verifies. Though I will not
disapprove of any measures you may take to secure the proceeds of the cargo for
whomsoever it may concern; yet it must be understood, that I assume no special
risk upon the subject, and that I look more and more to your eventual
responsibility. The going with the cargo from the port of discharge at
Hamburgh, to London, changes essentially the nature and effect of the contract.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient servant, L. LE GUEN.


New York, 25th March, 1796.
Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble's compliments to Mr. LeGuen, and they transmit
to him herewith the copy of a letter they have just received from Mr. Gomez,
relative to the cotton and indigo sold Gomez, Lopez and Rivera. Also an extract
of a letter relative to it, from Messrs. Smiths and Atkinson of London; and
after he has perused them attentively, Gouverneur and Kemble would be glad to
receive his directions respecting it, if he wishes any thing to be done on
their parts.


New York, 28th March, 1796. Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble, Gentlemen,
I have received your note of the 25th inst. with copies of letter of the 5th
and 6th of January last, from Mr. Gomez, and Messrs. Smiths and Atkinson. In
answer, I refer you to mine, to you of the 6th of January last; and have only
to add, that situated as the affair is, I have no directions to give.

I am, gentlemen, Your very humble servant, L. LE GUEN.


And the jurors aforesaid, upon the oath aforesaid, do further find, That by
the custom of Normandy, in which province the port of Havre de Grace is
situated, the vendor of a cargo of goods and merchandises has a privilege or
lien upon the said cargo, for the price of it until it is sold by the
purchaser, and actually delivered to another person. And that in consequence of
such lien or privilege, such vendor, if he thinks himself in danger of losing
his security, may apply to the consular tribunals for redress, and that such
tribunals, proceeding upon principles of equity and good conscience, would
interpose to prevent the removal of such cargo by the purchaser to another
place, unless upon good security being given to the vendor it appeared that it
would thereby be subjected to great danger or deterioration, and this, even if
there was a clause in the contract of sale allowing the going to another port;
but that in the last case very strong proof would be required that the
purchaser was in real danger of suffering by the removal.

And the jurors aforesaid, L'G citizen of France.
upon their oath aforesaid, further find, That the said Louis Le Guen always
was and yet is a citizen of France.

And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, G. and K. elect to
receive the proceeds first at Hamburgh and afterward at London.
do further find, That the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble, did not at
any time previous to the first day of December, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, elect to receive the proceeds of the
said cotton and indigo at the port of discharge, nor give to the said Louis
LeGuen any authorization to receive the proceeds of the sales of the said
cotton and indigo in Europe or any part thereof, and did on or about the
twenty-second day of December aforesaid, elect to receive the said proceeds at
Hamburgh, and afterward did on the second day of January, in the year one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-six, elect to receive the said proceeds at
London.

And the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, L'Guen demands from G.
and K. an authorization to receive etc.
do further find, That in the month of June, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-rive, a demand was made by the plaintiff of the defendants, for an
authorization to receive from the said Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, agreeably to
the terms of the contract aforesaid, at the port in Europe where the said ship
White Fox should discharge her said cargo of cotton and indigo, such sum or
sums of money as should be due to the plaintiff on account of the same, after
deducting therefrom and leaving subject to the control of the defendants, a
sum sufficient to reimburse them for the balance due the defendants on
adjustment of their accounts, and also a sufficient sum to indemnify the
defendants against engagements they had entered into on account of the
plaintiff in the course of their said agency, with which demand the defendants
refused to comply.

And the jurors aforesaid, G. and K. make offers and proposals to LeGuen to
resign the agency on his paying and securing, etc. which he refuses to comply
with.
do also find as aforesaid, That the defendants, when such demand as last
aforesaid was made, offered and proposed to resign up all the papers, notes,
and other documents relating to the said agency into the hands of the said
plaintiff, and give him a competent authorization to conduct the said business,
on his the plaintiff's paying the defendants the balance of their said account,
and on the plaintiff's securing the defendants in this country against any
engagements they might have entered into, or responsibilities to which they had
exposed themselves in consequence of said agency, with which offers and
proposals the plaintiff neglected and refused to comply; but whether by reason
of the premises the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble became liable to the
said Louis LeGuen, Doubt of the jury.
as is stated in the first count of the declaration, the said jurors are
ignorant, and they pray the advice of the court in the premises. And if the
court of the people here, shall be of opinion, that the said Isaac Gouverneur
and Peter Kemble, by reason of the said premises, have made themselves liable
to pay the plaintiff the amount agreed on by the said contract as the price of
the said cotton and indigo, then the said jurors do say, upon their said oath,
that the said Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble did undertake and promise, in
manner and form, as the said Louis LeGuen has, in and by the first count of
his said declaration, above alleged; and they assess the damages of the said
Louis LeGuen, by reason thereof, over and above his costs and charges by him
about his suit in that behalf expended, to one hundred and nineteen thousand
three hundred and two dollars and sixty-six cents, and for those costs and
charges to six cents; but if the said court shall be of opinion, that the said
Isaac Gouverneur and Peter Kemble did not, by reason of the premises, become
liable as aforesaid, then the said jurors find that the said Isaac Gouverneur
and Peter Kemble did not undertake and promise, in manner and form as the said
Louis LeGuen has, in and by the said first count of his said declaration,
above alleged.

Judgment for the plaintiff, January term, 1798, by Mr. Justice Hobart, Mr.
Justice Lansiag and Mr. Justice Benson, Judgment.
against Chief Justice Yates and Mr. Justice Lewis.

IN THE COURT OF ERRORS. ISAAC GOUVERNEUR and PETER KEMBLE, Pltffs. v. LOUIS
LEGUEN, Defendant.
THE following was, by consent of parties, to be deemed a part of the record,
equally as if it had been a formal bill of exceptions, viz. On the trial of
this cause, the counsel for the defendants insisted, Bill of exception.
that the plaintiff had not sustained any special damage; and, to show that,
they offered evidence, and produced a witness to prove, that the cargo of the
ship White-Fox went to Havre de Grace; that finding the market bad they
proceeded to Hamburgh, where the market being also bad, the cargo was carried
to London, which was the best market in Europe, and there sold for a higher
price than could have been had in either of the other ports; which evidence was
overruled by the court.

Reasons of their judgment in the court below, assigned by Mr. Justice Lansing
(in the intermediate time appointed Chief Justice) and Mr. Justice Benson --

Chief Justice LANSING. This action was bro't by the defendant in error, Chief
Justice Lansing's opinion.
against the plaintiffs, as his factors, substantially --

1st. For not electing, pursuant to his instructions, to receive the proceeds
of certain parcels of cotton and indigo in Europe: And

2dly. For not giving to the defendant authority to receive at the port of
discharge, so much of the proceeds of the sales of such cotton and indigo as
remained, after deducting a sum sufficient to cover the plaintiffs for the
general balance of their account, and other claims and responsibilities, in
consequence of their agency.

This action, in its consequences affecting private interests, of uncommon
magnitude, has been strenuously contended between the parties, in every stage
of its progress which would admit of urging their adverse and totally
irreconcilable pretensions.

In the ardor of controversy they have however conceded these points, which
without their concession would not admit of a doubt -- That in ordinary cases a
factor is bound to comply with the instructions of his principal, in the
disposition of the subject entrusted to his care -- That the factor has a lien
on it, for all his advances, commissions and responsibilities; and that he is
not compellable to part with the subject or its production, if not converted
into cash, until those demands are completely satisfied; for, if the subject is
converted into cash, the reason for pledging the whole for the security of the
factor ceases; as by retaining the sum he is entitled to, or responsible for,
he can incur no farther risk of failing in an ultimate satisfaction.

No doubt could arise respecting the application of these principles to this
case, while the subject remained to be disposed of in the customary mode of
sale, at the place it appears both parties originally contemplated a
disposition of the subject.

But the parties having by a contract, to which they all assented, made an
arrangement to convey the subject to Europe, their situation was by that means
varied as to the local exercise of their respective rights -- which, I take it,
by that contract they reciprocally agreed to modify, so as to carry it into
effect in all its parts, preserving their mutual relations and rights, as
principals and factors.

The questions which arose on the contract were:

1st. Whether the plaintiffs were bound to elect to receive the proceeds of the
subject of factorage in Europe?

2dly. Whether the defendant had a right to exact payment of the surplus from
the plaintiffs in Europe, after satisfying the whole amount of their
commissions, advances and responsibilities? and

3dly. If the plaintiffs were bound to make such election and were subject to
make such payment, what ought to be the measure of damages?

As to the first point -- the subject of factorage was evidently entrusted to
the plaintiffs for the benefit of the defendant -- his interest was the primary
object to be attended to in the conduct of his factors, and every instruction
given by him, not incompatible with their rights, it was their duty to conform
to and carry into effect -- the election reserved to the plaintiffs by the
contract with Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, must of necessity be considered, as for
his benefit and emolument, as inseparably incident to the trust confided to
them -- for every disposition of the subject, pursuant to the instructions of
their principal, could only be for his advantage exclusively; unless positive
contract detracted from, or made a different modification of his interests.
From the most attentive examination of the contract given in evidence at the
trial, I could discover no traits in it, to satisfy my mind that it was the
intent of the parties that this obvious principle should be departed from --
the reservation of the rights of election to receive the proceeds of the cotton
and indigo, either at New York or in Europe, and the premium to be received by
the plaintiffs, if they should elect to receive in Europe, were, in my opinion,
clearly intended and ought to enure solely for the benefit of the defendant --
if so, the plaintiffs could not, after consenting to export the subject, avoid
a compliance with the instruction of their principal as to the exercise of the
right of election, without violating their duty.

As to the second point it appeared to me that though the plaintiffs were not
compellable to part with the subject confided to them as factors, to be
disposed of at New York, so as to permit its exportation, without being
satisfied for the whole amount of their commissions, advances and
responsibilities; yet, that by assenting to the exportation, they virtually
stipulated to exercise the rights they had acquired, as factors, at the port of
discharge in Europe; by that means relinquishing the locality of their agency
and consenting to leave it at large and thus attaching their rights and duties
to the subject, to be exerted and exercised at whatever place it might be
transmitted to, in pursuance of the contract, to which they were parties, and
thus placing themselves in the same situation, and preserving the same
relations at the port of discharge, as they were placed in, and as subsisted
between them at New York, previous to the arrangement contemplated by the
contract.

If this is a legal and consistent exposition of the contract, it would result,
that though the plaintiffs might retain the control of the property of their
principal, either personally or by substitution of others, whom they supposed
trust worthy, and for whose conduct they were content to be responsible, until
it was converted into money; yet the instant it was so converted in their
hands, or those of their agent, it was their duty, after retaining the amount
of their commissions, advances and responsibilities, to pay the surplus to the
defendant, at such port of discharge, if he should require it, and that as
their agency was indispensible to enable the defendant to avail himself of his
rights, under the contract in question, by becoming parties to it, they
expressed their readiness to do, and submitted to the obligation of doing every
thing in their power, and which could be reasonably expected from them as
factors, to facilitate the arrangement they had acceded to, so as to produce
consequences most advantageous to their principal, not impairing their own
rights.

In this case the contract was made with, and in the names of the plaintiffs;
the defendant must rely upon their agency, or on authority received from them,
to enable him to exert any power in controverting the destination, or obtaining
any part of the proceeds of the subject; if they refused their aid to effect
both or either of these objects, they were unattainable by the defendant. I
hold that he had a right to exact from the plaintiffs this aid, so far as to
enable him to receive the surplus of the proceeds of the subject, after
satisfying the demands of the plaintiffs at the port of discharge -- that their
refusal to authorize him to receive such surplus, was a violation of their
trust, which amounted to full evidence of an intent to convert the whole to
their own use, regardless of the interests or instructions of their principal;
and that for such violation they became liable as in cases where the factor had
contrary to the instructions of his principal credited, or credited for a
longer period than that limited by such instructions -- In both these cases it
has been held, that the giving such credit is evidence of a disposition by the
factor on his own account, and that he is answerable for the amount to his
principal, whatever may be the result of such sales.

In giving this opinion, I lay out of the case, as totally inapplicable to its
real merits, the various propositions reciprocally made and rejected by the
parties -- as propositions made by one party which the other was not obliged to
accede to, they could not influence a decision on the questions which arose in
the cause -- The demand made by the defendant in his letters of the 15th of
June, is such an one, as I think, the defendant had a right to exact a
compliance with, and that the refusal on the part of the plaintiffs to comply
with it, was in effect a dereliction of the relation in which they had placed
themselves as factors to the defendant, of which he might avail himself, to
hold them accountable for the whole subject, by substitution, instead of Gomez,
Lopez and Rivera.

As to the third point --

All the facts respecting this transaction in Europe, were of a nature
incapable of being developed in the course of legal investigation here, till
several months after the vessel sailed from New York -- The defendant's right
of action, however, accrued upon the refusal of the plaintiffs to comply with
his demand. If we depart from the subject, and do not consider its value as
settled by the contract to which the plaintiffs were parties, I know of none,
to which a resort could be had for the measure of damages; and I have, when
this cause was first presented for my judicial determination, sought it with a
considerable degree of solicitude, arising from the important consequences of
that opinion, as affecting the plaintiffs. I could not, however, satisfy myself
that any other measure could be resorted to on this occasion; and if the
withdrawing the subject from the control of the principal -- if assuming an
absolute and uncontroled disposition of it, amounted to a conversion of the
property of the principal by the factors to their own use, the amount of the
sales to Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, deducting the amount of the plaintiffs'
demand, appears to me, to present not only a reasonable, but the only rule of
damages in this case.

These are the reasons which induced the opinion I have given in this cause. I
refrain from saying any thing respecting the state of the pleadings as the
opinion of the Supreme Court was not particularly required relative to them. It
will therefore suffice merely to observe, that I supposed the plaintiff had
sustained his action.

Mr. Justice BENSION. Mr. Justice Benson's reasons.
The question in this cause is, whether the trust which the plaintiffs in error
took on themselves for the defendant in error, was such, as that he had a right
to demand from them what he did demand in his letter of the 15th June, 1795?
The facts from which this right is to arise, are those only which preceded, and
including, the sailing of the ship, with the cotton and indigo on board, on the
31st May; none of the subsequent facts, or matters found by the verdict, have
varied or in any manner aflected the trust, as it then was, and are therefore
no further material or useful to be considered, than as some of them may serve,
in the nature of circumstantial proof, to give a more full and distinct
knowledge of the preceding facts; hence it will be perceived, that the question
does not depend on the law of principal and factor, as to the rights of the
latter to retain; the rules of law on this subject, generally, are acknowledged
to be, that the factor has a right to retain the property of the principal
until his legal demands against him are paid; that however small the amount or
the demands, and however great the amount of property may be, the factor is not
held to deliver up any parcel of the property, but may retain the whole; that
he has a right to retain, not only until he shall be reimbursed such sums as
he may have paid, but also until there shall be deposited with him a sum,
competent to answer whatever he may have become liable to pay on account of his
principal, as well contingently as absolutely; and that he is not held to
accept of a security of any kind instead of a deposit, nor a deposit of goods
instead of a deposit of money; but these rules being applicable to cases only
where the principal demands the property to be delivered up to him, are
inapplicable to the present case; in which the principal, so far from demanding
to have the property or any part of it delivered up to him, demands only a mean
to enable him to receive in another and distant place, where the the same is
payable by the vendees of the property, the sum which may remain after the
factors shall have deducted and reserved at their disposal, a sum completely
sufficient to cover them for the general balance of their account, however
claimed; and according to this statement of the question, it will also be
perceived, that to seek for particular rules or for adjudications precisely and
throughout apposite to it, would be fruitless and unnecessary; and that for a
decision on it, there must be a reliance wholly on judgment or discernment, in
applying to the case, in its peculiar and appropriate circumstances, the
universal maxim, that with the END the MEANS also must be intended to be
granted. In this view of the controversy, and of the grounds on which it rests,
it necessarily divides itself into the following enquiries: 1st. Is the
stipulation in the fourth article of the contract, reserving an option to the
vendors to receive the whole, or any part of the consideration money for the
goods, in Europe, in preference to leaving it to be receivable in this country,
to be adjudged to have been intended for the interest or benefit of the
defendant, the principal, instead of being for the interest or benefit of the
plaintiffs, the factors or substitutes; or in other words, is the interest or
benefit of the defendant, so to be separated from, or paramount to, any
interest or benefit of the plaintiffs, as to be deemed the end to have been
intended to be answered by that stipulation? If so, then -- 2dly. Was what the
defendant demanded from the plaintiffs, in his letter to them of the 15th June,
1795, a fit and reasonable mean to that end?

With respect to the first of these questions, it would appear to me that a
mere statement of it precludes the necessity of proof, or demonstration of the
truth of the affirmative; if the stipulation specified in the question, is for
the interest or benefit of the plaintiff, I do not see a reason for not
supposing every other stipulation in the contract equally so -- I cannot even
imagine a rule or test by which the stipulations intended for the interest or
benefit of the party principal are to be discriminated from those which were
intended for the interest or benefit of the party factors; so that the
reasoning, as I view it, to prove that the stipulation under consideration was
for the interest or benefit of the plaintiffs, must terminate in a conclusion
that the whole contract was intended for their interest and benefit. The sale
of the goods, the persons to whom, and the terms on which they were sold, were
by the "express direction" of the defendant; the plaintiffs accept and submit
to the direction; they are mere instruments to effect what he had determined
was for his own, not what was for their, interest and benefit -- The sale was
of the unsold residue of the cargo of the ship Cleopatra, received by the
plaintiffs to be sold on account of the defendant; had the plaintiffs a
different or a greater interest or benefit in the last sale than they had in
the preceding sales? In their accounts, their commissions are the only interest
or benefit they claim. On a calculation of whose profit or advantage was it to
be, to elect having the consideration money for the goods made payable in
Europe, instead of leaving it to be payable in this country? Was it to be on a
calculation of profit or advantage to the plaintiffs? To whose use was the
premium, or in effect additional price, of five per cent. on the goods to be,
in the event of the option to receive the money in Europe; to the use of the
plaintiffs or to the use of the defendant? Most certainly to the use of the
latter; and that consideration alone appears to me to furnish an argument
decisive on the point; and I will only add, that the truth of the proposition,
that the sale in question, and every term and condition of it, is to be
considered as intended for the interest or benefit of the defendant, primary
to, and exclusive of, any interest or benefit to the plaintiffs, except their
commissions, is so evident to my mind, that it is not without difficulty I can
persuade myself that I have rightly understood the plaintiffs' counsel, when I
suppose they meant to contend for any thing different from or contrary to it.

With respect to the second question also, I think the truth is not less
obvious, and that it ought almost to suffice merely to state, that to suppose
the right to elect to have the money receivable in Europe, should be reserved
for the interest or benefit of the defendant, and consequently that the
plaintiffs were bound in virtue of their trust, to exert this right for him,
whenever he should require them, and that they should at the same time have a
right to refuse to enable him to receive the balance there, but to withhold it
from him, until, after having been received there by them or their agent, it
should be remitted to this country, is to suppose two rights in one and the
same subject, claimed by opposite parties against each other, and which can
never be made to consist together. Where was the inconvenience or grievance of
which the plaintiffs could complain, if they were to be held to pay the
defendant his balance in Europe? The business of receiving the money from the
vendees of the goods, of making out and settling the account with the
defendant, and paying him the balance, could have been done by an agent; not so
conveniently to the plaintiffs, it may be admitted, as if done in this country;
but was the inconvenience of doing these acts by another instead of themselves,
or abroad at a seaport in Europe instead of at home, such as the law must
intend the hazard of it not to have been within the trust or agency? Surely the
law must intend the reverse -- Waiving, however, the general intendment of law,
it might still be asked, what would be the particular intendment in this case,
from the express, and as it were special provision in the contract, that the
money, if the option should be to receive it abroad, should be payable also to
the agents of the plaintiffs? The objections to the demand of the defendant for
an authorization to receive his balance in Europe, as declared by the
plaintiffs themselves in their letter, in answer to the demand, are, that they
were not obliged to receive payment in France, especially at a time when so
many difficulties attended getting money from that country, and that if they
were to accede to the terms held out by the defendant, they would be obliged to
wait the event of an application for the money to the vendees of the goods,
before they could have recourse to the defendant for the payment of the balance
of their account. I have already expressed the reasons of my opinion, that the
defendant had a right to demand from the plaintiffs to declare an option to
receive the money in Europe; and it is only requisite in addition to state,
that this right of the defendant could never depend on a greater or less degree
of difficulty, if any, to the plaintiffs in getting their portion of the money,
their commissions and disbursements, from that country; and further, that if
the plaintiffs had at any time brought a suit against the defendant, or as they
have expressed it, had recourse to him, or applied to him in a Judicial way,
for the payment of their demand, it is not possible he could have availed
himself of the authorization from them, to receive his balance in Europe, to
any possible purpose of defense whatever. Let the fact that the plaintiffs had
furnished him with the authorization, and on the terms as contained in his
letter, be put in the form of a plea, and it will instantly be discovered to be
scarcely better than a nullity.

These are the reasons for my judgment, that the defendant, as plaintiff in the
court below, had maintained his issue on the first count of the declaration.

The remaining question is, as to the rule by which the jury have assessed the
damages, and which from the record appears to have been "the amount agreed on
by the contract as the price of the cotton and indigo," Damages, whether the
assessment of them is by the court as their immediate act, or by a reference to
a jury, are to be according to definite rules; but where there can be no
definite rule in the case, as for instance, where exemplary or implied damages
would be warranted, still the assessment is not to be wholly without rule, it
is to be according to legal discretion or arbitrament. The case of a returned
protested bill of exchange, is a case of a definite rule; the damages are to be
twenty per cent. on the amount of the bill, with interest from notice of the
protest, and the costs of the protest, without any enquiry, and consequently
without any addition or diminution, in consideration that the plaintiff has or
has not sustained more or less, or any special or indeed any actual damage
whatever -- Suits in trover and in trespass for carrying away goods, are also
so far usually cases of definite rule, as that the damages are to be at least
the value of the goods at the time of the conversion or trespass, or in other
words, at the time when the right of action accrued, without regard to any
subsequent deterioation, however casual -- I state at least the value of the
goods, for the damages may be made to exceed that amount where the withholding
or taking the goods was aggravatedly injurious -- The case now before the court
is within the reason, and therefore within the rule, in the cases of trover and
trespass. I have already mentioned such of the rights of the factor as can have
any relation to the questions between the present parties, I now briefly state
his duty generally to be, that he is to follow the orders of his principal, and
for a breach of the orders he is to answer in damages to his principal; if the
breach is merely PARTIAL, and as to certain parcels or particulars only, he
shall not be held to answer further than as to such parcels or particulars; but
if the breach is such as to involve the whole of the property entrusted to him,
he shall then be held to answer for the value of the whole of the property, and
as such value was, at the time the breach of orders took place; and if the
property consisted in credits, to answer to the amount of the credits -- The
principal may from that moment abandon to him the whole of the property.
Whenever the principal, in order to a suit against the factor for not
delivering up the property when ordered or required, tenders a sum for
commissions and other demands, the principal tenders and the factor refuses at
their peril respectively; for if it should appear that the sum tendered was
sufficient, the principal will recover the value of the property at the time of
the tender; and the rule is the same, whenever the factor refuses to do an act
which the principal was entitled to demand, and which affects the whole of the
property of the principal. If such are the duties of the factor, and if such is
the measure of the damages or retribution to the principal for his injury,
where these duties have been violated or departed from, the conclusion, that
the damages were duly assessed, in the present suit, is obvious.

I close with remarking, that the controversy between the parties may be
satisfactorily resolved in this as its cause, that the plaintiffs have accepted
an agency, and bound themselves to execute it in a foreign country, if their
principal should at any time elect it to be most for his benefit, without
previously calculating and providing for their own profit and security, if it
should then come in competition with his; and that afterward and when too
late, under apprehensions, either mistaken or founded, and as to the justness
of the remark, it is immaterial which, of danger or disadvantage of some kind,
they refuse to execute it, unless they can have every benefit both of profit or
security, and even convenience, equally as if they were to execute it at home.

Cases delivered into court by the parties respectively, omitting the
recapitulation of the facts found by the special verdict.

Case on the part of the plaintiffs. Case on the part of the plaintiffs in
error.
The Supreme Court having given judgment for the defendant, who was plaintiff
below on this verdict (three judges to two) the plaintiffs (the defendants
below) have prosecuted a writ of error, returnable into this honorable court,
and assign the following reasons, why the said judgment should be reversed --

I. Because no good cause of action is stated in the defendant's declaration,
the principal averment of which is directly contrary to a written contract
under seal, and most probably contrary to the sense and meaning of the parties
to the suit. The averment alluded to is, that the right to receive payment in
Europe, out of the proceeds, was intended for the special benefit of Mr.
LeGuen. It is an established rule of law, that no averment shall be admitted,
to contradict a deed under seal.

II. Because, the jury have not found that this right was for the special
benefit of the defendant. The court, therefore, cannot presume this was the
case, especially as it is opposed to another part of the verdict, which states,
that the contract, as it appears on record, was made by the intervention and
express consent and direction of Mr. LeGuen; and being an averment essential to
the defendant's recovery, it ought to have been proved as any other fact, and
might have been proved as such, if it had really been the case by producing an
agreement in writing for that purpose from the plaintiffs.

III. Because, it is repugnant to every rule of construction, to admit any
interpretation of a written contract, directly opposed to the latter of it. To
receive the money in Europe might have been a principal inducement to the
plaintiffs' lending their names to this transaction. Whether it was so or not,
it is sufficient to say, that by the terms of the contract, they are to have
the election, and they are to appoint an agent to receive the money.

IV. Because, no good consideration is stated for the promise alleged to be
made by the plaintiff, in the first count of the declaration. It is said it was
their duty to pursue the direction and request of the defendant, touching the
exercise of this right, and that in consideration of this duty, they agreed so
to do. The consideration here stated, is subsequent to the sale, and precludes
every idea of an antecedent agreement on the part of the plaintiffs, to pursue
such direction and request; such agreement is not even pretended to exist. To
determine it was their duty so to do, the court must first get rid of a
contract, which so far from imposing it as a duty on them, left it at their
option to make the election or not as they pleased, and left to them alone, and
not to Mr. LeGuen, the choice of an agent. The words of the contract are, they
may at their option receive, etc.

V. Because, the declaration is altogether uncertain and contradictory. In one
part it avers, that the right reserved to receive the proceeds in Europe, was
for the advantage of Mr. LeGuen, subject only to the lien and right of the
plaintiffs, to have and receive the general balance of their account, and to be
secured for such other claims and demands as they might and should be entitled
to and have, by reason of their agency for the said defendant. Thus admitting,
without any qualification, and in its fullest latitude, the lien for which the
plaintiffs contend. But by another averment it is stated, that the plaintiffs
were bound to give him an authority to receive these proceeds, after certain
reservations and deductions, that is, as he explains it, after leaving in the
hands of Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, a sum sufficient to satisfy them for their
general balance and the claims aforesaid. Which two averments are. directly
repugnant to each other, the one admitting, and the other destroying every idea
of a lien.

VI. The declaration is uncertain in another respect, and therefore also had.
The defendant avers, that he requested the plaintiffs to elect to receive the
proceeds of the property, or so much as would be due to him, after certain
reservations and deductions. But it does not appear what was the amount of
those reservations and deductions; on the contrary, it results from the verdict
that these very sums were matters in dispute between the parties. It became,
therefore, impossible to give the authority in the way it was demanded.

VII. The declaration is defective in another respect; the action being brought
for a refusal to give the defendant a power to receive the price of the cotton
and indigo in Europe, after certain reservations, it was necessary to aver, as
the very gift of the action, that the property was sold in Europe. This
averment is neither found in the declaration, nor is the want of it supplied by
any part of the verdict; and unless such sale took place, the power became
nugatory, and no damage could ensue from a refusal to give it.

VIII. The declaration is also had, because all the inferences and deductions
made by the defendant, in the first count, are contrary to the known and
established laws which govern relations between principals and factors.

IX. But if the defendant's construction of the contract be just; if the right
to receive the proceeds in Europe was reserved for his special benefit, it does
not at all weaken the plaintiffs' defense; because, as factors, they had a
valid lien, or a right to hold all the notes and securities of the defendant in
their hands, and also to keep at their control and disposal the price of the
goods, until actually received by them or their agent, not only as a security
for the general balance due to them, but for all their incidental charges and
advances, and also for their indemnification against all engagements and
responsibilities which they had come under on the defendant's account. They had
also, in virtue of this lien, a right to refuse the defendant possession of any
of the papers, and every facility toward obtaining his money, until it was
actually received by them or their agent in Europe, or until they were paid,
their advances, and satisfactorily indemnified against every claim, however
contingent or remote.

The doctrine of the court below was, that they had a right to insist on actual
payment, not only, for their balance, but for every eventual engagement
whatsoever.

The following is a summary of the advances and resposibilities of Messrs.
Gouverneur and Kemble, on the 15th June, 1795.
1. Mr. LeGuen owed them a balance of L4,795 6 3 2. They had executed a bond to
the United States, for the landing of the cotton and indigo abroad, in the
penalty of 4, 834 15 3. They had executed two bonds to guarantee the payment of
the freight, the two penalties of which were in our currency 8,141 4. They were
bound for the true performance of their covenants with Gomez, Lopez and Rivera,
in the penalty of 8, 000 5. They had paid for insurance 2,946 16 Total. L28,717
17 3

X. Because the plaintiffs' lien, if any they had, which is admitted by the
declaration, extended to the whole subject; not to a portion or residue of if,
as it is pretended; and therefore they were not bound to listen to any
proposal, however plausible, which in the smallest degree impaired their
security. A lien is defined to be, That hold or tie which a man has upon goods,
or other things in his custody, or on the price of goods in the hands of
buyers, and by which he has a right to retain them until he is paid what is due
to him, and also the sums for which he may have become surety for his
principal. This is the only true and natural definition of a lien; a lien in
the qualified and restrictive sense of the defendant was never heard of until
this day. If a single authority, out of any hook whatever, can be produced in
support of this novel and unheard of doctrine, the plaintiffs will abandon this
ground of their defense as desparate and untenable.

The Judge who delivered the opinion of the Supreme Court in this cause,
admitted that a factor may retain for his disbursements and responsibilities
entered into on account of his principal; and the defendant admits that by his
proposal of the 15th June, it was implied that the plaintiffs should be paid
and indemnified, as a condition on which only he was to receive the
authorization required.

It is also contrary to the understanding of Mr. LeGuen, as expressed in his
letters.

XI. If the plaintiffs had this lien, they say they were not bound to accede to
any one of the offers of the defendant. These offers will be examined at large
in the argument on their part, and it will be shown that every one of them went
to the total destruction of their lien as factors.

XII. But if the plaintiffs' lien was only of the partial kind admitted in one
part of the defendant's declaration, they contend that all his offers were
inadmissible, as any one, if acceded to, would have put it in the defendant's
power to have defeated the operation of it altogether, even within the limits
he admitted it to exist. This will be also clearly shown in the course of the
argument.

XIII. The plaintiffs maintain there is nothing in this transaction which
differs it from the common cases of principals and factors. If any clauses were
inserted in this contract of sale for the benefit of the principal, is not this
the case in every sale by a factor? Have not all such sales in view, as a
primary object, the principal's benefit? But was it ever before heard that the
particular terms of the sale, or the mode or place of payment, controled the
lien of the factor who negociated it? Suppose Mr. LeGuen had wished to receive
his money in Lapland or Peru, would it not be absurd to say that Messrs.
Gouverneur and Kemble would also be bound to follow the purchasers to those
countries? Would it not on the contrary be a strong reason for their insisting
on payment here, before they gave their principal any authority to receive what
was coming to him abroad. The truth is, the terms of a contract between a
factor and purchaser have nothing to do with the rights of the former as
against the principal -- Innumerable and various as such contracts must have
been in this country and in Europe, such a proposition was never heard of
before. Here again the plaintiffs require but one solitary legal authority in
support of this doctrine, and they will give up the controversy. A lien is a
right so attached to and inherent in a factor, as to be paramount to every
claim of his principal -- It is a right conferred on him by law, not depending
on the will of the principal -- No agreement is necessary to give it efficacy
-- no mode in which the principal may choose to vend his goods -- no way in
which he may fix the payment -- no country to which the purchasers may be going
-- no nation of which the principal may be a citizen -- no inconvenience to
which he may be exposed -- no terms for his benefit which may be engrafted into
the contract of sale, can alter, diminish or destroy those rights to which his
factor becomes entitled, according to the usage of trade, the moment he steps
forward in that capacity to assist in or lend his name to the sale. Doubts and
perplexities, incessant and endless, as the nature of contracts, would result
from a contrary doctrine, in the place of that simple and uniform rule which
now prevails. At present, every merchant knows he has a lien or hold on the
goods of his employer, for the balance of his account and his collateral
undertakings. It matters not whether he is directed to takenotes payable at
Havre-de-Grace or at the bank of New York; his lien in either case is precisely
the same: In the former case, indeed, the lien of an American factor should be
more highly favored and protected, because his risque, where payment is to be
made abroad, is considerably enhanced.

XIV. But if the plaintiffs were bound to receive payment in Europe and to
pursue the purchasers thither -- they contend that their lien extended to the
whole price of the goods in that country, and that they were not bound to give
a power to the defendant to receive any part of these proceeds until they were
actually received by an agent of their appointing, in whose hands they might
make the reservations and deductions which the defendant allows they were
entitled unto.

XV. If the plaintiffs had no lien whatever, they were not bound to give the
defendant the authority he demanded without an indemnity which has never been
offered.

1st. Because the contract being in the name of Gouverneur and Kemble and
containing a heavy penalty, no suit could be brought upon it, but in their
name; if then they had given Mr. LeGuen the authority he asked, and when he
asked it, and he had abused it, they might have exposed themselves to the
penalty of the contract, or at least to an action of covenant for damages. That
he might have abused it, appears from what is stated to be the custom of
Normandy.

2dly. They were not bound to give the authority until a sale, because the
property being warranted American, and Mr. LeGuen being a French citizen, such
authority in case of discovery would have exposed the cargo to capture and
condemnation, and thus have vitiated the policies which in case of loss were
the plaintiffs only security. If by such an act the plaintiffs had exposed the
cargo, the purchasers also would have had a claim on them for damages.

XVI. The defendant ought not to recover; because, if the plaintiffs have been
guilty of a neglect or breach of duty, the defendant sustained no injury, and
therefore is not entitled to any damages. The jury refer it to the court to say
whether the plaintiffs have made themselves liable to pay the amount agreed on
by the contract, as the price of the property. This sufficiently shows,
whatever arguments may be urged to the contrary, what rule the jury observed in
assessing damages, and precludes every idea of any special injury. -- From the
whole verdict it manifestly appears none was proved or sustained.

Every action on the case ex contractu, is brought to recover "pecuniary
satisfaction for the damage sustained." It does not follow that an injury is
the necessary consequence of every misconduct in a factor -- cases can and will
be put in the course of the argument to illustrate this position, and even to
show that a principal may sometimes be benefited by a palpable breach of orders
in the factor; in which case it would be absurd to, say the latter should make
him any compensation. That in an action on the case, grounded on contract, the
plaintiff is entitled to a compensation commensurate only with the damage
actually sustained, is one of those self evident legal axioms which almost
precludes the possibility of demonstration; cases however, numerous and in
point will be produced.

The following are the words of Sir William Blackstone on this subject:

A promise is in the nature of a verbal covenant, and wants nothing but the
solemnity of writing and sealing to make it absolutely the same. If therefore
it be to do any explicit act, it is an express contract as much as any
covenant, and the breach of it is an equal injury. The remedy indeed is not
exactly the same, since instead of an action of covenant, there only lies an
action upon the case, for what is called the undertaking of the defendant; the
failure of performing which is the wrong or injury done to the plaintiff, the
damages whereof a jury are to estimate and settle -- as if a builder promises
to build a house and fails, the party has an action on the case against the
builder for this breach of his express promise, and shall recover a pecuniary
satisfaction for the injury sustained by the delay. [3d vol. p. 157.]

A few pages further on, he proceeds: Every one who undertakes any office,
employment, trust or duty, contracts with those who employ or entrust him to
perform it with integrity, diligence and skill, and if by his want of either of
those qualities, any injury accrues to individuals, they have therefore their
remedy in damages, by a special action on the case. If an officer of the public
is guilty of neglect of duty, or a palpable breach of it, as if the sheriff
does not execute a writ, or willingly makes a false return, in both cases, the
party aggrieved shall have an action on the case, for damages to be assessed by
a jury. If a sheriff suffers a prisoner during the pendency of a suit to
escape, he is liable to an action on the case. An attorney who betrays the
cause of his client, by which it miscarries, is liable to an action on the case
for a reparation to his injured client. [ P. 263.]

In actions of covenant, to which he has likened a special action on the case,
the same author remarks, the proceedings set forth with precision, the
covenant, the breach and the loss, which has happened thereby, whereupon the
jury will give damages in proportion to the injury sustained by the plaintiff,
and occasioned by such breach of the defendant's contract. [ P. 156.]

Can language be more forcible, or intelligible!

Professor Wooddeson also, in his view of the law, declares that such actions
are for the breach of a promise, to recover pecuniary satisfaction for the
damage thereby sustained. If the court can bring themselves to believe contrary
to the whole tenor of the verdict, that the defendant has sustained damage by
our negligence or default in not giving him a power to receive the proceeds of
certain property in Europe, which certainly if they ever existed sell far short
of the amount of the notes -- if, we say, the court can possibly bring
themselves to believe that the plaintiffs are liable and that the defendant has
actually suffered damage to the amount of the notes, then and then only can
they affirm this judgment -- their undertaking being, as stated on record and
as implied by law, not to pay a certain specific sum, but the damages which may
have accrued to their employer by their default, with which damages the amount
of the notes has no connection.

Even in actions on the case for a deceit, although ever so gross a fraud be
practiced, it is necessary that some injury be sustained, or no action will
lie; the rule in this case being, and it has been settled for centuries past in
England, that "fraud, without damage, gives no cause of action." In such cases,
says Wooddeson, it is necessary to remember that the ground of complaint be,
that there be actual detriment injuriously sustained. If this be the case, in
actions where fraud has been practiced, how much more strongly does the rule
apply in actions on the case where misconduct or negligence only and no fraud
is alleged; where difference of opinion on a point of duty, but no wilful
deception, has occasioned a controversy between the parties.

XVII. Because the rule of damage contended for in the present case is directly
opposed to the defendant's declaration. The action is brought for the
plaintiffs' refusal to give an authority to the defendant to receive "the
proceeds" of certain property in Europe after certain deductions. He then
avers, and which averment was material, that after such deduction there would
remain due to him a large sum of money. But why make the averment, if the
plaintiffs became responsible to pay the whole amount of the notes, the moment
they refused this authority, whether the property was ever sold in Europe or
not? For the decision of the supreme court warrants the strange principle that
the plaintiffs would have been liable for this enormous sum, even if the
property had been sunk or captured, the moment it left the wharf, in which case
it is evident the defendant would have been injured by crossing the ocean in
quest of a property which as to him no longer existed.

On a close examination of the special verdict, and the evidence stated in it,
nothing appeared to enable the court to judge whether the property was sunk at
sea, burnt in port, or sold at the best market in Europe; they refused to admit
evidence to enlighten them on this point; as appears hereafter. If the vessel
had sunk the day after she left New York, which may have been the case for
aught that appears to the contrary, Mr. LeGuen's security was in his policy of
insurance, which it was agreed should be made for that express purpose; but the
decision of the court inverts this rule: their language is, that whether the
property was sunk, burnt, or sold at a high price, in all events LeGuen is to
be paid the whole amount by Governeur and Kemble, and they are to look to the
purchasers and underwriters for their reimbursement.

XVIII. Because, this being an action on the case, for a misconduct in the
plaintiffs as factors, would be no bar to a new suit against them for money had
and received, when the price of this property is recovered, if ever that be the
case, from the purchasers. The defendant's council have taken care therefore to
let it appear by the verdict, that no evidence was given in the present action
on the count for money had and received; thus after paying fifty thousand
pounds to a man who has not been injured by their act a single cent, they may
hereafter be compelled, in an action which is now pending against them by Mr.
LeGuen in the supreme court, to refund to him the sum which may be actually
received by them from the purchasers. The sum recovered in this action must be
as a compensation for the special damage sustained by the agent's default,
which cannot deprive the principal of his right to receive the real amount of
sales of his property, or the whole sum, if they are able to pay, on the notes
of the purchasers; nay, nothing can prevent his compelling the agents to
surrender him those notes for prosecution either before or after the
termination of this suit.

Such strange inconsistencies will ever be the consequence of a departure from
plain and known rules.

XIX. To place in a more striking view the illegality of the judgment, as it
respects the damages, let us again recur to the nature of the action. It is
brought for an injury the defendant is presumed to have received by the refusal
to grant him a certain authority. Hence if he had been injured at all, he ought
to have recovered something as damages, over and above and independent of the
price of the property -- because the price he was always entitled to, when it
came into the hands of the plaintiffs, whether they had been guilty of a
misconduct or not; so that if this judgment is to conclude the parties, and
Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, were solvent, the plaintiffs pay no damages at all for
their misconduct, and the defendant is compelled by their act to receive his
money in this country, without even the five per cent. premium, or any other
equivalent for the disadvantage which is imposed upon him by the plaintiffs.
This shows both that the judgment is not conclusive between the parties, and
that factors, by substituting themselves as paymasters, can always compel the
principal to receive his money where they reside, without any compensation for
their misconduct, although it be expressly agreed that he shall receive it
elsewhere.

XX. The only cases in which a factor can be liable for the whole price of the
goods, are, where he has sold contrary to his instructions, or where he has
received the whole property, or it has been lost by his default, such as
releasing the debt to the purchasers, or neglecting to prosecute for it when
due; but even here, he would be permitted to go into circumstances, to induce
the jury to give other and less damages; at any rate the factor would be liable
for the real value of the goods only, not for any nominal or ideal value at
which they might have sold on credit, or by deception. In the present case, it
is not pretended that any part of the property or its price has been lost by
our default, but only that the defendant has been injured by not receiving the
proceeds of it, after certain reservations, in Europe. Suppose these proceeds,
after the reservations mentioned, had only amounted to one hundred dollars, and
it will be shown presently that they did not amount even to that sum, will this
honorable court say, that it is possible any man by refusing to give another a
power to receive one hundred dollars in Europe could injure the latter to the
amount of fifty thousand pounds, or substitute himself to the person who was to
pay that sum? This would be saying in other words, that forty pounds in Europe,
are worth fifty thousand in this country. This would be turning a special
action on the case, into a penal one; it would be inflicting a fine by way of
punishment on the defendant, instead of compensating the plaintiff for the real
injury which he might have received. The truth is, it matters not in what
country money is to be paid, the party failing, wherever he be sued, must pay
the sum only with interest. Bills of exchange alone form an exception.

XXI. It was said on the trial, that the default of the plaintiffs extended to
the whole subject, and that therefore there could be no other criterion of
damages than the value of the whole property. This is not just as an argument:
in point of fact it is untrue, and directly against the record. It is not
correct reasoning, because a default may often take place as to the whole
subject, and yet the factor not be liable for the whole sum. If an insurance
broker is directed to make insurance on property for one hundred thousand
dollars, and neglects so to do, he is certainly responsible, but for what? If
the vessel arrived safe, he would be liable for nothing; if lost he would be
liable only for the actual value of the property. Other cases will be mentioned
in the argument.

But it is untrue in point of fact, that the default here extended to the whole
subject. The plaintiffs are sued for not giving the defendant an authority to
receive in Europe the proceeds of the cargo, after keeping at their disposal a
sum sufficient to pay and guarantee them against certain claims. To these
proceeds then, after the reservation, and no farther, did the default extend.

Admitting however for a moment, that the agents in this case became liable for
the whole amount of the subject. By the subject must be meant that precise
object, to which the authorization related. What was that? The authority
demanded was "to receive whatever sum shall remain of the proceeds of the goods
sold," after deducting certain sums. The plaintiffs refuse this authority. What
then is the subject? Certainly the proceeds in Europe, and not the amount of
the notes. Nevertheless the court did not require the defendant, and refused to
permit the plaintiffs to prove what the amount of those proceeds were. To show
that this argument is correct, let us suppose that the authorization had been
given; the defendant admits that in such case he could only have been entitled
to receive by it in Europe the balance of the proceeds, after deducting certain
sums. Withholding the authorization, was therefore in effect only withholding
that balance, what ever it was. -- Hence it is clear, that to receive the
balance of the proceeds in Europe, was the subject of the demand, and of the
refusal. This was the subject of the controversy, and the subject for which the
plaintiffs were liable, if for any thing. What the amount was, does not appear.
It will be remembered, the plaintiffs offered, but were not permitted to show
it; a tolerable estimate however may be formed.

Gomez, when at Hamburgh, expected to lose sixty per cent. All agree the
markets were bad, and the speculation ruinous. Deduct sixty per cent from
L48966, the price of the cotton and indigo, and there will remain, rejecting
fractions, only L18587. -- The plaintiffs advances and liabilities on the 15th
June, 1795, were L28718 17 3. Thus then the proceeds, if any there were, fell
short of what the defendant was willing to leave at our disposal, the sum of
L10131 17 3. Where then were the moneys which the defendant was to have
received? How is the plaintiffs' default as to the whole subject made out, when
it applied, if at all, to an object which had no existence.

XXII. It was also contended on the trial, that the price of the property being
fixed and ascertained, every other measure of damage was uncertain, and liable
to difficulty. But are not damages uncertain in their very nature? Why are a
jury summoned, but to render them certain? Is not this the case in actions of
covenant, trover, detinue, slander, assault and battery, and in every special
action on the case? If in all these, damages are uncertain, why should a
certain measure, never before heard of, be applied to this case? Even if the
factors had sold of their own head, the price of the property would not form a
certain measure of damage. It might not be worth as much as it sold for, and
other circumstances of mitigation would be listened to. How comes it, that the
defendant's counsel have not stated in his declaration, that by reason of their
default, the plaintiffs became liable and assumed to pay to the defendant the
amount of the notes? The truth is, such an extravagant idea never occurred to
them. With all their talents, they did not dare to hazard a declaration in such
form; and yet such a declaration would have been good, or this judgment must be
bad.

Notwithstanding all this pretended uncertainty, which is always more or less
the case, never did an easier or more familiar measure for ascertaining damages
present itself than in this case. The plaintiffs refuse to give the defendant
an order to receive the proceeds of certain property in Europe. Where then lays
the difficulty of ascertaining their amount? They either exist or do not; if
they do not, there could be no injury; if they did, their amount might easily
be known; the plaintiffs offered to ascertain it. This sum, with interest,
after large deductions, should have been the utmost extent of the recovery.

XXIII. From the reasoning in the last article, it also appears, that the
supreme court did wrong in rejecting the testimony offered by the plaintiffs,
to show there was no special damage. In actions on the case, every circumstance
which can assist the jury in forming an estimate of the extent and nature of
the injury, ought to be admitted. The action is with propriety termed a special
action on the case; that is, the plaintiff is to recover according to all the
circumstances of his case. If the wrong he complains of has been attended with
any injury, he recovers accordingly; if not he recovers nothing, or only
nominal damages. Thus in actions on the case, for escapes against sheriffs, and
for misconduct in attorneys, they are not bound, the sheriffs, to pay the whole
sum due to the plaintiff in the original suit, nor the attorney, the whole sum
due to his client. This will be exemplified by several very strong cases. The
court on such occations, after the default is established, permit the defendant
to prove every circumstance which may tend to show either that the party has
not been injured at all, or to an inconsiderable degree. Yet all this was
denied to the plaintiffs here: They are able, if permitted, and would have
proved, if their evidence had not been overruled, most conclusively, that
their refusal to give the power in question, had not only worked no injury to
Mr. LeGuen but had proved beneficial to him.

XXIV. Because by rejecting the testimony, which is made the ground of the bill
of exception, the court precluded the plaintiffs as factors, from every
defense, which even the purchasers themselves might have availed themselves of.
A man is not always held to pay the price agreed upon: Thus the purchasers may,
and no doubt will, in the action brought against them on their notes, endeavor
to prove, in avoidance of the contract altogether, that they were grossly
deceived and imposed upon in the purchase of this cotton and indigo; that they
were warranted of qualities very different from the truth. If they make out
this proof, nothing is clearer than that they will be relieved against the
payment of these notes; or that they will have to pay only the real value of
the property. How iniquitous then may be the result? Gomez, Lopez and Rivera
may have a verdict against the factors, on the ground of fraud or deception,
and yet the latter may be compelled to pay the whole amount. If in both cases
there be special verdicts, it is to be hoped they will be published together;
they will reflect singular credit on the judicial annals of this country. If
any fraud was practiced, as is contended by the purchasers, it was by the
defendant himself, who negociated the sale; yet as the notes are in the names
of the agents, the relief will be against them: Thus may innocent factors be
punished for the fraud of their principal.

The case of a horse which was sold for a barley corn, a nail doubling every
nail, is well known; the animal at that rate came to 500 quarters of barley;
the jury however gave only eight pounds, which was his real value. Yet if the
sale had been made by the intervention of a factor, and he commits a single
mistake or default, he must pay the contract price, however exorbitant or
unconscionable that may be. Thus if Mr. LeGuen had sold a single horse, for as
much as he was to have had for the cotton and indigo, no one can doubt the
purchaser would have been relieved against such a hard bargain. Yet if the
proceeds of the horse was to be paid in Europe, and his agent should refuse him
an order to receive these proceeds, which in all probability would not exceed
one hundred guineas, nothing could exempt him, if this judgment be affirmed,
from paying to his principal the last farthing of the contract price. For aught
that appears, the purchase of the cotton and indigo was almost as hard a
bargain. To lose L30,000, as may fairly be inferred from the verdict, the
purchasers did, was no trifle.

XXV. There is no evidence, nor is the fact found, that after certain
deductions and reservations, there would remain due to the defendant, for the
residue of the amount of the said notes a large sum of money, which is another
material averment in his declaration, and ought to have been proved. It is
true, it is stated there would be due a residue on the amount of the notes; but
this, like several other allegations in the declaration, is inaccurate. The
purchasers being only bound, as appears from the declaration and contract, to
pay the notes as far as the proceeds extended, the defendant could not demand,
nor they give a power to receive any moneys beyond the amount of these
proceeds. It should therefore have been stated, that there would remain due to
the defendant in Europe, for the residue of the proceeds of the said cotton and
indigo, a large sum, etc. of this we say there was no proof.

XXVI. The consideration stated in every declaration ought to be some certain
act; matter or thing by which the defendant may be benefited, or the plaintiff
incur some trouble or inconvenience, that is, either a damage to the plaintiff,
or an advantage to the defendant. The declaration ought also to aver, that the
plaintiff has on his part, fulfilled the terms on which the promise was made,
or that he has offered to fulfill them, and shown that readiness and willingness
to do it which the law requires. To apply this law; the consideration stated in
the present declaration, is, that Gouverneur and Kemble were to be allowed a
commission of two and an half per cent. upon the amount of the sales, and such
other commission as the course of their agency and the usage of trade might
entitle them to. But in no part of the declaration is it averred, that this
commission was paid or tendered unto them, although it is evident from the
declaration itself, that this payment was considered by the defendant, as a
condition precedent to his receiving the authority in question; nor is there
any proof to supply the want of this essential averment.

XXVII. Another very material and essential part of the defendant's declaration
is not only without proof, but the testimony and finding of the jury completely
and entirely disprove it. The declaration states, that the defendant requested
us to elect to receive the amount of the notes, or, at our option, so much as
would be due to him, after deducting and reserving thereout certain sums at
Havre, or at any other port in Europe, where the ship should discharge, out of
the proceeds of the property; and after such deduction and reservation made, to
give to him power and authority to receive from the purchasers, the residue of
the said notes out of the proceeds. It might be inferred from this, that no
authority to receive the residue was required until after this election was
made, and Gomez, Lopez and Rivera had actually paid to us, or to our agent, the
moneys which were to be thus deducted and reserved. The correspondence between
the parties, all the proposals of Mr. LeGuen, the finding of the jury, and the
several times of making his demands of the authority in question, evidently
show, that the reservation to be made was not out of the proceeds when actually
paid to our agent, but that this sum, which by the bye was never ascertained
between the parties, was to be left in the hands of the purchasers, subject to
our order.

Mr. LeGuen's first request is to have an authorization to receive in France,
the amount of the engagements of the purchasers, without any reservation
whatever to the plaintiffs. He next demands an authenticated copy of the
contract, with an authority to receive, after payment of the freight, one
hundred thousand dollars. It would have been fortunate for all parties, if the
property had produced only half of this sum. He lastly demands an authenticated
copy of the contract, with a complete authorization to receive whatever sum
shall remain of the proceeds of the goods (not of the amount of the notes, as
artfully stated in the declaration, and from which the proofs so essentially
vary) sold to Gomez, Lopez and Rivera, after deducting and reserving at our
disposal certain sums for our indemnification; nor is there any proof in the
whole verdict, that he ever requested us to make the election which he stated
in his declaration; although it abundantly appears, that the election to
receive the proceeds in Europe was made by us, and, for any thing that is found
to the contrary, with effect.

Again -- The time of making the request explains the ideas of Mr. LeGuen. The
last demand was only fifteen days after the departure of the White Fox. How
could we make the election in so short a time, before it was possible it could
be known where the property would be sold? Were we to send to every port of
Europe? It is plain then, that instead of our making an election pursuant to
the right reserved to us, the defendant wanted an authority and the contract,
to pursue the purchasers and get the whole of the property from them. This
appears farther, from the pains he has taken to establish on record the customs
of Normandy. It is difficult to see any connection between these customs and a
power to receive the proceeds. It was the property he was in pursuit of, and
not a balance of the proceeds. There is a material variance too between his
declaration and his letter of the 15th June. In the former he says, he asked
for an authority to receive immediately from Gomez, Lopez and Rivera; but in
his letter he artfully demands a power to receive at the port of discharge,
without saying from whom; this variance we deem essential and fatal. The court
below were inconsistent in the admission of testimony. The defendant was
permitted to prove the customs of Normandy, with a view no doubt of inducing
the jury to believe he had been injured by not receiving the authority
demanded, and yet we were not permitted to show any thing in mitigation. If the
rule be just, that we ipso facto, the very instant the default if any took
place, put ourselves into the shoes of the purchasers, without the possibility
of protecting ourselves against such an enormous penalty, and that the price of
the article was the only rule of damage, the court should have excluded this
testimony altogether.

The court rejected the testimony offered on our part, that no damage had been
sustained, on the ground, that the law in this case having fixed the amount of
the damages to a precise definite sum, it could be neither more nor less; it
was therefore improper to receive evidence to show that a less, or any
particular damage was sustained. They admitted this evidence on the part of the
plaintiff, to show that he had sustained particular damage, and refused it to
the defendants. The court have therefore certainly been in an error in
admitting one, or refusing the other.

It is true the custom of Normandy makes considerably in our favor, as it
discovers the defendant's true object, and the injury he contemplated doing to
us, by taking the whole property under the pretense of a lien, into his own
hands. We have a right however to complain of its admission, as being directly
contrary to the rule which the court enforced with respect to us. If
circumstances of aggravation were admitted on the one side, surely matters in
mitigation ought to have been received on the other.

XXVIII. That the rule of damage was erroneous may be further illustrated from
actions which are brought on contracts containing penalties. If it be an action
of debt for the penalty, it might be said the party has ascertained the sum he
is to pay for the breach of his contract, and that every other rule is
uncertain. Yet every one knows that the actual damage sustained is all the
plaintiff can eventually recover, and that this must be ascertained by a jury.
Let us admit as strong a case as can be put for the defendant -- Suppose
Gouverneur and Kemble immediately after making the sale to Gomez, Lopez and
Rivera, had covenanted under the penalty of fifty thousand pounds to give him,
in the course of a week, authority to receive the proceeds in Europe, and that
they had no demand whatever against him. They however refuse, without assigning
any reason whatever, to give such authority. In an action of debt for the
penalty, or in an action of covenant, the penalty would be disregarded and the
rule of damage would be the injury actually sustained -- that is the amount of
the proceeds with interest. Shall they then be in a worse situation because
they did not comply with an implied promise, and refused to give an authority
in a case where, to say the least, it was doubtful whether the defendant was
entitled to receive one, and where they assigned at least a plausible reason
for their refusal, and could certainly not have complied, without very eminent
hazard to themselves?

XXIX. The finding of the jury, as it respects the damages, is illegal, and
therefore the judgment ought to be reversed. Instead of assessing them as
customary, they refer it to the court whether the contract price shall be the
rule. If the court be of that opinion, then they find such a sum. While
attaints were in force, such a verdict would not have been permitted, as the
party must have been deprived of his remedy against them for excessive damages
-- for no attaint would lie on a verdict, where the quantum of damage, as well
as the law, were referred to the court. It is a dangerous innovation on
established precedents -- assessing damages is emphatically the duty of jurors.
Referring it in this way to the court, if not a violation of trust, is
destroying those barriers between the provinces of courts and juries, in the
preservation of which, separate and distinct, consists the great excellence of
this mode of trial. -- This is at once surrendering their prerogatives in which
the party has an interest not to be defeated by pusillanimity, or a mistaken
deference for the opinion of others. They are to enquire what injury the party
has sustained, not to leave the quantum to be determined by the court. If
jurors are thus permitted to evade adjusting the very object for which they are
convened, their attendance may as well be dispensed with altogether, as an
useless expense, and questions of damages as well as of law be at once
submitted to the court. If this honorable court shall think the defendant
entitled to recover, but that the jury have neglected, from a diffidence in
their own judgment, to exercise that discretion respecting the damages, with
which they are peculiarly entrusted, they may, and no doubt will, order a
venire facias de novo in order to admit further light, and to have the question
of damage definitively settled by the proper tribunal. It is much however in
favor of the plaintiffs that the jury have expressed no opinion against them
either as to their liability, or to its extent. It would have been impossible
to induce a jury of merchants to subscribe to so dangerous a doctrine. It is a
matter of public notoriety, and ought to be mentioned, that the first jury who
were selected, from the most respectable merchants in the community,
determined, that Messrs. Gouverneur and Kemble had incurred no responsibility
whatever.

Lastly. The judgment ought to be reversed, because it is an attempt to punish
the plaintiffs for the insolvency of the purchasers, without a particle of
proof that they have in any degree contributed to such insolvency. Although
their failure is not stated on the record, it may fairly be inferred from the
defendant's conduct. Why look to the plaintiffs for the contract price of the
cotton and indigo, and that in so questionable a form of action, if the
purchasers were able and liable to pay? An action on their notes would be more
certain and expeditious. The buyers must then be either unable to pay, or have
good reasons for resisting payment. If their bankruptcy cannot be attributed to
the plaintiffs, why should they become their substitutes? If the buyers have a
defense, we ought in no event to be answerable for any part. The defendant's
motive to this suit also appears from the time of its being bro't. If he really
intended to recover damages for the actual injury sustained by our default, why
not immediately abandon to us the whole property, and commence the action
without delay? Instead of this he waits more than a year to discover how the
speculation would terminate. If the issue had been prosperous, and the buyers
had stood their ground, no recourse would have been had to us; and yet our
liability and its extent were precisely the same, whether the purchasers were
able to pay or not. It was a liability for the "disastrous consequences," as
the defendant himself well expresses it, occasioned by our default, not a
liability to pay the amount of the notes. This preposterous notion never
occurred to him. Let him point out a single disastrous consequence occasioned
by us, and we will compensate him an hundred sold.

After all that will or can be said on the subject, into what narrow limits may
its real merits be comprised? It is a dispute between a principal and his
factors -- The former complains of not being furnished with a power to receive
the proceeds of certain property in Europe, or in other words certain moneys.
-- The factors say: We have a lien on all your papers and on the price of your
goods for our advances and responsibilities. This lien the law gave us the
moment the sale was made -- as they are very considerable we only ask you to
secure us in this country, and you shall have every thing you want. This lien
is not a chimera of the factors own brain. The principal himself admits it, but
insists, that as the property was to be paid for in Europe, as far as the
proceeds extended, the factors were bound to take payment there also, and to
look to a portion of these proceeds, in the hands of the purchasers, for their
indemnification. In support of this perfectly novel idea of a qualified lien,
the court are apprized that not a single authority from any book will be
produced. The principal's counsel will rely upon nice and subtle distinctions,
which splendid talents will readily suggest, and upon a train of reasoning so
refined as to require faculties, equal to their own, to be able fully to
comprehend. The factors, in opposition to such a limited lien, assert, That it
is of no importance to them, upon what terms the principal sold his property,
or where it was to be paid for. That the rights of factors are clearly defined
by law -- that they never before heard, that some factors had one kind of lien
-- and others, a different one, or that the liens of factors vary according to
the contract between them and the purchasers -- but granting, say they, that
our lien was thus restricted, and that we were bound to go to Europe for
payment, we insist we had a right to keep the whole property under our
control, until actual satisfaction in that country, and not to look only to a
remnant of it, which might be wasted by the purchasers, or wrested from them by
the principal himself -- If neither happened, and the buyers by misfortunes,
become insolvent, our security will be much impaired, as in such case our
dividend on their estate would not pay our demand.

On the question of damages, the controversy is, if possible, yet more simple.
The principal brings his action for damages, or a compensation for an actual
injury, which he alleges he has sustained by a breach of duty in his factors.
The factors say, if we have been guilty of a breach of duty, it has been
attended with no loss or damage whatever to our employer, and that therefore he
is not entitled to any recompense or equivalent whatever. The principal,
knowing that he had sustained no loss, and of course that he could not prove
any, abandons the attempt (for his counsel certainly had in view the necessity
of proving special damage, when they drew the declaration) and insists upon our
paying the whole sum which the purchasers had contracted to give. The factors,
to this extravagant pretension, oppose this plain answer. If, say they, we
erred in not giving you an authority to receive these proceeds, surely their
amount with interest, can be all which you are entitled to from us. It matters
not where your money was to be paid; if we were engaged by bond to pay you a
certain sum on the royal exchange of London, and we fail, you can only, if you
sue us in America, make us pay the same amount with interest here. Why then did
you not show the amount of these proceeds? this would have been easy. One of
the purchasers, and the very person who sold the property in Europe, was
attending the trial. Nay, why did you not permit us to show their amount? What
possible reason can be assigned for your solicitude to keep out of view these
proceeds, other than that they were so inconsiderable, that you wished the
court and jury to be kept in ignorance of them? For aught that appears on
record, the property never was sold in Europe; if so, how are you injured? Why
should we take the place of the buyers? Did we guarantee their responsibility?
Did you not sell the property to them yourselves? If they have failed, who
occasioned their bankruptcy? Was it not bro't upon them by the extravagant
price they were to give for these articles? If they have been ruined by no
agency on our part, why are we to make good their engagements? Show us that any
loss whatever has been occasioned by us, and you shall be compensated to the
utmost farthing. Is not this the language of common sense? -- Is there any
sophistry in it? -- Does it require eminent abilities or any ingenuity to
illustrate or to comprehend it? -- Does it not accord with every case that has
been cited on the subject of damages, and does it not consist with reason and
justice? Is not the adverse doctrine pregnant with ruin to every agent, and
mischievous in the extreme?

To conclude. The court perceive they are to determine on a case of no common
magnitude. They must by this time be satisfied, that it is not without reason
the plaintiffs consider themselves aggrieved, by the judgment from which they
have appealed. In this honorable court they have no doubt the cause (...) be
examined (...) every possible (...), and determine (...) principles of law and
justice. The law ought to be very clear indeed with the defendant, to induce an
affirmance of this judgment. If it be a case which admits of a single doubt,
the judgment should be reversed, because the defendant will suffer no injury by
it, inasmuch as he will remain in statu quo, without any of his remedies
against the purchasers being impaired. From them he will receive what he ought
to have; whereas an injury, extensive and irreparable, will be done to the
plaintiffs, in case of affirmance. They will have to pay an immense sum which
has never come to their hands, and for which they have a remedy against no one.
But if the law be clearly against them, they must submit. They appeal, however,
with great confidence, to every professional gentleman present, whether they
have advanced any thing not warranted by the laws of their country. They
appeal, with equal boldness, to every member who may have been engaged in
commercial pursuits, whether their conduct has not been strictly mercantile and
consonant to the known and established customs of trade. They appeal to every
man of candor, probity and feeling, whether, if they have erred, they deserve
to have this heavy fine inflicted on them? They cannot yet believe they are to
be consigned to poverty and ruin; that an ample patrimony, the produce of many
years of honest industry, is to pass from them to the defendant, to compensate
him for an ideal injury; that they are to be punished to the extent of an
immense fortune, to make good a loss which the defendant has never sustained.
They cannot persuade themselves that any member will think such a sentence
legal or conscientious. In fine, they look with trust and confidence to the
virtue and understanding of this high tribunal, for a decision in their favor,
and for that redress to which they humbly think themselves entitled by the laws
of their country, and the real and substantial merits of their case.

Case on the part of the defendant. Case on the part of the defendant in error.
The counsel for Louis LeGuen will urge and maintain --

1. That every contract made by a factor for the sale of goods is for the
benefit of his principal, and forms a contract between the principal and the
purchaser; and that every contract made by a factor for his own benefit, with
the property of the principal, is a violation of his duty, and a fraud against
the principal.

2. That every factor is bound generally to obey the orders of his principal,
and particularly to use his endeavors to carry into effect any contract by him
made for the benefit of his principal.

3. That, therefore, if a contract should stipulate an advantage, to depend on
an election to be made, that election being itself a privilege or benefit, is
to be exercised for the principal, and is subject to his control and direction.

4. That in the present case, the right of election to receive the purchase
money in Europe, was a right which G. and K. ought to have exercised for the
benefit of their principal, according to his direction and request, especially
as he was thereby to receive a premium or advance of price of five per cent.
equal to 6,12032/100 dollars.

5. That this position and inference are the more obvious in the present case
-- Because, the factors could neither have stipulated nor exercised such a
right without the consent of their principal -- Because, the contract was made
by the intervention and express direction of LeGuen -- Because, it was his
avowed object to transfer his property to France, of which country he was a
native and citizen -- Because, at Havre-de-Grace, to which port the ship was
bound, he would have had a lien on the property, which would have enabled him
to have taken precautions important to his security; and, because it is absurd
to suppose that all these advantages could be defeated, at the mere pleasure of
the factors, and in defiance of the direction of the principal.

6. That the acknowledged lien, which a a factor has on the property entrusted
to him, for his advances and responsibilities, can form no objection to the
demand of LeGuen in the present case -- Because,

That lien, like every other right, is liable to be modified or abolished, by
the agreement of the parties, either express or implied --

That it is not in its nature local, but depends wholly on the place of payment
--

That G. and K. by becoming parties to a contract for the benefit of LeGuen,
containing a right of election to receive in foreign parts the moneys to arise
from the proceeds, virtually agreed to give effect to this right, and to
exercise his lien at the place of payment --

That if payment had been positively stipulated at Havre or Hamburgh, no doubt
could have arisen but that, after reserving enough to cover their advances and
responsibilities, they would have been obliged to pay the overplus there to
LeGuen; and in such case, to have contended that they would have had a right to
bring back the whole amount of the sales to New York at his expense and risk,
to cover themselves for a sum which might not amount to one thousandth part of
it, would be an absurdity too glaring to be endured -- that a right of election
to receive in a foreign port, brings the matter to the same issue -- when that
election was made, the Foreign port became the place of payment, and there only
could the lien of the factors be exercised.

That it is an invariable maxim in law, that he who agrees to an end agrees to
the MEANS. G. and K. might have refused to enter into the contract on such
terms, but having assented, having executed the contract, they were bound not
to impede the performance of it.

That G. and K. could have given the authority required of them by LeGuen, in
so special a form and with such cooperation of an agent named by themselves,
as would have secured to them the full benefit of their lien,

And lastly, it will be demonstrated that upon the construction contended for
by G. and K. they and their agents may keep the whole property in their hands
forever.

With respect to the measure and amount of damages, for the respondent, it will
be contended,

1. That the rules of law prescribe the measure of damages in all cases in
which they are not merely contingent -- Thus in promissory notes and other
liquidated demands, the legal interest -- on foreign bills 20 per cent -- on
inland bills 5 per cent; without any enquiry into the special damage which the
party may have actually sustained. Thus in actions of trover, however slight
the damage, the party is compelled to pay the whole value of the subject of
which he has made an improper use. Thus, finally, in every case of a factor or
trustee, the damages are invariably the whole value of the property which may
have been affected by his neglect or misconduct; as in a case of acknowledged
authority, if a factor be instructed to sell at a credit of thirty days, and he
sell at a credit of thirty-one, he is instantly liable for the value of the
whole, although the purchaser prove insolvent within the thirty days; because a
violation of his duty relating to the whole. If he had sold a part only, he
would in like manner have been liable for that part. So if a trustee be
directed to put out money on real property, and lend it on personal security,
however competent, be is instantly answerable personally for the whole. No
enquiry is made or would be allowed as to the actual or probable damage
sustained; the factor and the trustee are deemed to have taken the
responsibility upon themselves.

2. That the application of this obvious principle is peculiarly necessary in
the present case, because of the impossibility of ascertaining or calculating
the events which may have affected the views and interest of the parties; that
if LeGuen should prove on the one part that he could have made half a million
of dollars by the receipt of his money in Havre, and by his presence in aiding
the sales, could have also ensured a profit to Gomez and Co. and G. and K. on
the other part should prove, that they had reason to believe that a better
market could be had at Hamburgh -- a court ought to pronounce, as has been done
by the supreme court, that all such proof would be irrelevant, and could tend
only to introduce confusion and uncertainty; the only object of enquiry being,
have G. and K. neglected or disobeyed the orders of their principal? If so,
does their neglect or misconduct relate to the whole or a part only of the
property; if to the whole, they are liable for the whole -- if to a part, for
that part only. No other evidence was admissible to extinguish or mitigate the
damages, but that the price in the sale was fraudulent -- that the property had
been lost before the default -- that the principal had released the whole or
part, or had been wholly or partially compensated; neither of which points was
in any sort attempted to be proved.

3. That a default, which gives a right of action, necessarily carries with it
the rule of compensation or damages, as an incident, and which cannot therefore
in any degree depend on future events and contingencies.

4. That as the default in the present instance related to the whole property,
and defeated the essential part of the sale, G. and K. thereby substituted
themselves to the purchasers, and took upon themselves the risk of future
contingencies: That the amount for which the property sold is the proper and
only standard of value and of damages; and that on any other principle there
could be no rule of damage in the present case; the events which took place
subsequently to the default offering only a field for vague and unlimited
conjecture.

5. That in the cases mentioned under the first head, and in many others, the
law fixes the rule of damages, which will regulate and control the verdict of a
jury -- That when the parties agree the value, this value is the rule -- That
where an agent, by his assumption or default puts himself in the place of
another, with whom he has settled the value, the value so settled shall govern
as against him.

6. That consequently the amount for which the goods were sold to Gomez, Lopez
and Rivera, together with five per cent. for receiving in Europe, is the
principal sum for which G. and K. became liable, for their default.

The foregoing general propositions will be illustrated by arguments and
analogies, which it is hoped will fully evince their soundness, and the
propriety of the judgment of the supreme court.

The objections in point of form, with which G. and K. may attempt to embarrass
the cause, would not be worthy of notice in this state of the business, even if
they could, be anticipated. They will, without difficulty, be disposed of in
the couse of the argument.

Gouverneur and Kemble to LeGuen, DR. Amount of sales to Gomez and Co. L48,966
6 0 Five per cent for receiving in Europe 2,448 0 0 L51, 414 6 0 Deduct L20 0
3, being the balance due G. and K. on 15 Aug. '95, in case they are allowed a
commission on the debenture. 20 0 3 L51, 394 5 9 To interest at 6 per cent per
annum, from 13 June '95, to 13 April '96, 10 months, 2,569 14 0 To interest
from 13 April 1796, to 13 March, 1798, one year and 11 months, at seven per
cent, 7,240 1 9 L61,204 1 6

Equal to 153,010 dollars 18 cents.

Calculated agreeably to the opinion and directions of the Supreme Court.

Judgment of Affirmance, 15th March, 1798. Judgment of affirmance.
For Affirming,
Mr. Bronck, Mr. Clark, Mr. Coe, Mr. Frey, Mr. Haight, Mr. Hatfieid, Mr. Jones,
Mr. L'Hommedieu, Mr. Mathews, Mr. T. Morris, Mr. Nicol, Mr. Phelps, Mr. Sands,
Mr. Schenck, Mr. Strong, Mr. Tappen, Mr. Ten Eyck, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Tillotson,
Mr. Vail, Mr. Watson, Mr. Cantine, Mr. Gold, Mr. Gordon, Mr. Hitchcock, Mr.
Myers, Mr. Russell, Mr. Van Schoonhoven.
For Reversing.
Mr. Gansevoort, Mr. Graham, Mr. Spencer, Mr. Silvester, Mr. Savage.

ACCOUNT SALES Of SUNDRIES received by the Ship CLEOPATRA, LUKE KEEFE, MASTER,
From the ISLE OF FRANCE, And sold for Account of LOUIS Le GUEN, Esquire viz.
To whom sold. When payable. 703 bales 137 half do. Cotton. 14 casks 38 cases
Indigo. 507 bags 55 casks 38 cases Sugar. Weight. Price. 1794 C. q. lb. C. q.
lb. C. q. lb. C. q. lb. days. June 18 Abraham Ogden, 7 2 1 tare 0 3 17 00 1 6 2
18 128 s L42 12 7 24 John Fisher, 8 1 18 7 0 14 15 2 14 tare 1 3 13 2 ^ ^ 19
134 s 9^ 19 July 7 Samuel About, tare 0 0 5 per cent. 12 9 3 24 112 s 55 16
(...) (...). (...) (...) Sands, 5 3 17 tare 0 1 13 1 5 2 4 122 s (...) Robert
T. Kemble, 1 2 1 11 120 s 14 1 9 ^ Daniel Bowie, 90 3 6 1 8 do. 37 18 6 Oliver
Cromwell, 3 5 1 16 do. 33 17 1 30 Jacob Conklin, 13 mats 11 1 6 tare 0 0 5
permat. 13 10 2 25 112 s 60 1 Ditto, a cases 5 1 14 ^ casks 6 2 14 4 3 14 5 3
21 12 3 7 tare 2 2 25 2 2 20 0 10 128 s 118 11 5 David Stibblos 1 case 6 3 21
tare 1 0 4 60 1 5 3 17 do. 37 13 5 31 Cash, 1 1 0 8 112 s 6 Ditto. 1 1 3 2 120
s 10 12 1 Aug. 16 Isaac Riley, 3 bags 5 2 24 tare 0 1 2 60 3 5 1 21 do. 32 13 7
21 Daniel Ludlow and Co. at 2, 4 and 6 months, viz. No. 29 5 0 10 No. 14 6 3 14
No. 11 5 3 10 No. 24 5 1 0 33 7 1 3 15 5 0 24 10 5 1 8 35 5 1 10 26 5 0 24 31 7
2 0 7 5 1 0 36 5 0 3 16 5 3 0 13 7 0 10 12 5 0 0 21 5 3 21 17 7 1 10 35 6 0 0
23 6 0 10 6 7 2 0 27 7 0 7 9 6 3 7 8 5 3 18 5 6 0 0 38 6 3 24 20 5 1 0 1 5 3 10
3 6 0 3 30 5 2 14 2 5 3 0 22 5 3 3 19 1 3 24 25 5 3 14 4 6 3 21 Gross weight
205 2 22 tare 15 per 30 3 12 34 174 3 10 115 s 10^5 6 6 Ditto, 638 bags, 1074 a
26 tare 10 per bag 56 3 24 638 1017 3 2 do. 5157 14 9 23 Isaac Gouvcrncur, juu.
tare 10 1 2 1 2 do. 14 15 8 31 Cash, tare 5 per mat. 2 1 2 3 112 s 8 11 Sept.
10 Louis LeGuen ditto 1 0 3 21 do. 5 5 30 Cash, ditto 1 0 9 6 do. 5 4 5 Oct.
Di^^o ditto 1 0 3 10 108 s 4 10 7 Nov. 12 Samuel Abbot, ditto 60 ^ 7 4 22 112 s
43 2 ^ 30 Cash, ditto 2 2 0 1^ 110 s (...) Dec. John Duncan, ditto 4 3 0 7 108
s 15 10 9 Delivered Capt. Bear, in payment of freight, 150 bales and half
bales, and 3 bales taken to fill up tbose damaged. 153 1795. May 26 Louis
LeGuen, tare 5 1 0 3 5 96 s 3 16 ^ Ditto deliverd Mr. Cherriot, to casks and 86
matt suar, 4 1 5 5 0 14 5 1 0 6 1 26 5 0 0 5 3 18 5 2 9 4 2 14 4 1 12 4 1 16 3
2 11 (...) ^ 0 7 4 2 ^ 4 ^ ^ 6 2 14 5 0 26 5 1 0 4 3 4 4 2 3 9 0 0 5 3 12 5 1
14 4 3 14 4 2 14 4 2 21 5 1 7 6 2 11 4 2 21 5 3 14 6 3 4 5 1 14 4 3 7 4 1 20 5
2 21 6 2 21 4 2 16 6 3 3 4 1 7 6 0 0 8 1 7 5 0 14 5 2 21 4 2 20 4 2 14 5 0 14 5
0 14 5 0 7 5 0 14 4 0 20 Gross weight 267 3 9 tare 12 per 32 0 16 is net 50 235
2 21 96 s 1131 ^ Ditto, 86 bags 65 3 21 tare 4 each 3 0 8 is 86 62 3 13 96 s
301 15 ^ Isaac Gomez, jun. Abraham R. Rivorn, and (...) viz. 807 55 38 3 3 7 3
3 26 3 0 22 2 1 11 3 3 12 3 2 22 3 2 18 3 2 2 3 3 0 2 1 23 3 3 12 3 2 4 3 2 9 3
3 18 3 3 0 4 0 0 3 3 0 3 3 12 3 3 18 3 2 19 3 3 4 3 2 11 3 2 24 3 3 9 3 3 5 3 3
7 3 2 0 3 2 10 3 3 14 3 1 24 4 0 18 3 3 6 3 3 0 3 3 8 3 3 10 3 3 12 3 3 26 3 3
21 3 3 16 3 27 3 1 3 3 3 8 3 2 2 18 3 3 21 3 2 18 3 2 18 3 3 8 3 2 22 3 2 8 3 3
18 3 3 7 3 3 26 3 2 21 3 3 0 3 3 0 3 2 6 3 2 16 3 2 7 4 0 0 3 3 0 3 2 21 3 2 0
3 30 3 3 26 3 3 1 26 3 1 21 3 3 6 3 3 24 3 2 1 3 2 0 37 2 17 37 2 11 36 1 18 36
2 5 37 2 17 36 1 1 36 3 26 3 2 24 1 2 12 1 3 7 3 2 24 3 3 22 3 1 10 3 3 24 3 2
0 3 2 7 3 3 0 3 2 18 3 2 0 3 2 4 3 3 3 3 2 0 2 0 0 3 2 24 3 3 0 3 2 1 3 2 25 3
2 24 3 2 18 3 3 14 4 0 7 3 2 10 3 3 10 3 2 21 3 2 24 3 3 17 2 0 9 3 3 7 3 2 21
4 0 3 3 3 12 3 ^ 22 3 2 0 1 3 16 3 2 24 3 2 28 3 3 10 3 3 10 3 ^ 24 3 2 21 3 3
22 3 1 21 3 2 24 2 0 20 3 2 11 3 2 6 3 2 0 1 3 5 3 3 8 3 3 12 3 3 3 3 2 24 3 3
3 2 0 10 3 2 19 3 3 7 3 0 4 3 1 18 3 3 9 3 2 20 3 3 12 1 3 3 3 2 14 3 3 12 3 3
4 3 3 0 3 2 18 35 0 0 26 0 24 35 2 6 36 2 13 35 3 7 37 0 14 37 0 0 3 1 18 3 3 2
3 3 12 3 2 7 3 2 18 3 1 25 3 2 6 3 2 18 3 3 10 3 3 12 3 3 10 3 2 0 3 2 20 3 2 3
3 1 23 3 3 0 3 3 4 3 2 18 3 3 18 3 2 18 3 3 21 3 3 0 3 2 16 4 0 4 3 2 21 3 3 2
2 3 20 2 3 24 3 2 24 3 2 18 3 2 20 3 3 7 3 2 12 3 3 17 3 2 14 3 2 18 3 3 ^ 3 3
10 3 2 21 3 3 18 4 0 0 3 2 1^ 3 3 11 3 3 18 3 3 ^ 2 3 ^ ^ 0 ^ (...) (...) 3 2
24 3 2 10 3 2 8 3 2 18 3 2 7 3 3 ^ 2 3 14 3 3 11 3 2 10 3 2 15 3 3 11 3 2 24 3
2 10 2 3 24 3 1 14 3 3 0 3 2 24 3 3 12 3 1 21 3 2 14 3 0 0 36 3 3 37 2 2 37 1
25 37 2 3 36 1 8 36 2 10 33 3 2 2 3 24 3 3 14 3 2 21 3 3 10 3 0 0 2 0 0 3 2 18
3 2 10 3 0 0 3 3 5 3 3 24 3 0 0 3 0 0 3 3 26 3 2 19 3 0 0 3 0 0 3 1 24 3 1 26 3
3 10 3 2 24 3 3 11 3 3 0 3 2 5 3 3 12 3 2 22 3 1 18 3 2 18 3 3 12 3 2 12 3 2 17
3 3 1 3 3 24 3 2 24 3 2 11 3 1 18 3 0 0 3 2 18 3 1 18 3 3 18 3 2 24 3 3 4 3 3
18 3 3 14 3 1 22 3 3 5 2 3 19 3 3 3 3 3 0 3 2 17 3 3 0 3 3 0 3 3 0 3 0 0 3 3 4
3 0 0 3 1 17 3 9 25 3 2 11 3 0 0 3 3 18 3 3 4 3 3 24 3 0 20 3 2 26 3 2 12 3 2
26 3 2 18 3 0 0 6 0 9 36 3 16 34 2 14 35 3 2 18 2 18 34 3 5 35 0 3 Carried
forward, 153 24 38


