AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED at NORFOLK, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE, Fourth of July, 1798.

By AUGUSTUS PETTIBONE.

Published by Request.

PRINTED AT LITCHFIELD, BY T. COLLIER, 1798.

AN ORATION.
IN compliance to the wishes of a number of my fellow-citizens, I rise to
address this Audience, and join with them to celebrate the glorious date of our
National Independence. Nothing, but a strong desire to promote the welfare of
my country, together with the approbation of my friends, could have induced me
to appear in this public place* -- here to act the part of an Orator, and
proclaim the joys of the day. -- I flatter myself, that any inaccuracy of
composition, or defects of oratory* by which an assembly like this, might
condemn the Speaker, will meet with the most favorable respect; -- as my
admiration for the cause, rather than vanity, led me on to the stage. --
Decency and gratitude demand of us, that on the Fourth of July, we call to mind
those venerable sages, who scorned the chains of impending servitude, and
taught us their children, the road to freedom.

If we reflect a moment, upon the vast and complicated designs of Providence,
through all the administration of time, -- we shall revere the Great Arbiter of
nations, who causes one empire to rise from the smallest beginning, to the
highest importance; -- and at the same time, plunges other kingdoms from the
summit of glory, into the great sink of the world.

This anniversary, is the birth day of these United States, when they flung off
the heavy yoke of Britain, and assumed the rank of empire among the nations of
the earth. May it be wafted down the stream of time, to the remotest ages of
posterity, to commemorate the important events of our national existence.

How are we drowned in admiration, when we review the conduct of those American
patriots and heroes, who dared, in defiance of those potent and bloody foes,
who beset us with all the horrors of war, and strewed our land with carnage and
devastation, to declare, "That we are, and of right ought to be, Free and
Independent States." -- I shall pass, in silence, those grand encomiums, which
long have echoed from stage to stage, to praise the virtues of our former
worthies, and leave you to turn the historic page, there to read the deeds of
our wise politicians and bravest Generals.

After deploring with you the slaughtered thousands of our fathers and friends,
who fell by the sword in the field of Mars, to gain our liberty, that golden
prize; under what obligations are we placed, to remember the Great Ruler of
Nations, who has rescued us from our enemies, and given us a government
established on the broad basis of liberty.

With what emotions of joy, ought we to exult, when we consider the happy
manner, we were bro't to unite in our Federal Constitution! Are not the annals
of history replete, that in violence, in usurpation, and in conquest, most
governments have originated? And rarely can it be said, that any nation ever
renounced tyranny, without civil wars and bloodshed. But you Americans have
been victorious over your enemies, -- victorious over yourselves: For it was
here, out of the discordant materials which composed our empire, the important
acquisition was made, without any great struggle or violent emotions. -- Our
emancipation, from vassalage to Independence, was the price of much blood and
treasure; but our free constitutions of government, all harmoniously uniting in
a general one, were the result of free debate and mature deliberation; and by
reason and argument alone was it effected. This grand palladium and instrument
of our National Union, was constructed by the most eminent sages of America;
which so happily combines energy with wisdom, that experience has proved it to
be the master piece of human policy. It is not in the scope of imagination, to
conceive of more equal privileges, civil or religious, than are here
established. With what assurance may we say, What other nation, ancient or
modern, has been equally fortunate and happy?

When we consider the respectable figure we make on this Western continent,
among the kingdoms of the earth, we have reason to adore the God of our
fathers, who led them to this happy land. -- Hail, Columbians! hail, happy
land! What a precious legacy have you to transmit to posterity; a country
producing all the necessaries and conveniences of life, -- which was acquired
by our ancestors, who braved every danger, and overcame every difficulty, to
procure it from Savages nursed in blood, trained up in fraud, revenge and
idolatry.

How happy does our situation appear, when we look abroad, and see the wasting
miseries, which affect so many nations of the earth? -- There, the lives and
the fortunes of the lower classes in community, are at the disposal of a few
rulers, favorites, and pensioners; who, with lawless sway, devour the fruits
of laborious diligence. -- Under arbitrary and despotic governments, how many
millions of our fellow creatures, sigh for the blessings, which we enjoy,
without the most distant hope of obtaining them? -- There, without cause,
subjects are driven from their families and possessions, into solitary
banishment, or hurried into dungeon and places of cruel confinement, -- and
secluded from all the comforts of life.

Our situation affords a pleasing prospect for reflection, when we look into
France, and see them drowned in anarchy and confusion, walking in the broad
road of infidelity; -- the streets of their capital drenched in blood, and
paved with heads, which have fallen from the Guillotine. May we not, with the
greatest propriety, this day, rejoice and congratulate each other, with the
bounties of Heaven, which has, for a series of time, crowned these States, with
the balm of peace? so that our empire has risen like the tide of the ocean, and
taken large strides toward perfection. Yet such is the misfortune of the
world, that prosperity and adversity succeed in their turns. The malignity of
man, that bane to happiness, has waked a jealous eye in the realms of France,
which, like the subtle serpent, watches our unguarded moments, in order to
seize us for a prey. Alas! my Countrymen, it is a melancholy truth, that this
is a day big with events; when dangers threaten the peace and prosperity of
these United States, and foreign influence has deeply wounded our national
honor, and injured our lawful commerce. And this by our Gallic foes, who are
intoxicated with victory, and have an avaricious thirst to drink the blood of
millions; and like Lucifer, that fallen Monster, are plotting the destruction
of the world. -- But may we not hope, that there is a Joshua yet on earth, who,
as a humble agent of favoring Heaven, shall halt the planets in their orbits,
and confound their armies in a day? -- Are not the principles, which actuate
the French government toward us, principles equally hostile to all liberty and
righteous government? -- Behold a French Directory, the most detestable! who
have originated, and exist, from venality and corruption. -- While we, under
our government, have endeavored to walk in the strictest principles of
neutrality, they, -- like the pestilence, walk in darkness; suck the treasures
of our continent; seize the property of individuals, -- and under the shadow of
legal adjudication, appropriate it to their own use. Such conduct is
unspeakable meanness; -- infamous perfidy: -- It outrages the annals of piracy.
Can we be calm under such provoking injuries, insults, and robberies? -- Our
moderation has been known, our patience tried. We wish for peace, -- we too
well know the horrors of war. -- But there is a point, beyond which, our
forbearance will not extend; -- when a war becomes a blessing, and will be
favored by the Great Ruler of Nations.

When I consider the threatening aspect of our national concerns, and the
imminent danger of entering into a foreign war, -- this consolation charms me;
-- to behold myself surrounded by a band of soldiers, clothed in arms, and
inured to military discipline: You, my Friends, Citizens, and Fellow Soldiers,
are the pride of your country, and bulwark of freedom. If, in order to settle
the unhappy differences, which exist between these United States and France, we
should be compelled to have recourse to arms -- prove yourselves the model of
heroes, the heirs of your fathers who upheld America through the late
revolution. Cultivate your minds with military skill -- Fan in your breasts the
martial fire -- Be ever ready to defend your country -- Chastise with the sword
-- Thrust with the bayonet, -- and conquer in the field. In the alternative of
peace or war, let the sword and the musket be your daily companions; for in
them depends the strength of a nation. May the officers and generals who
command you in the field, unite in them the fortitude and wisdom of the
immortal WASHINGTON, -- and cause our enemies to declare, That America is as
terrible in arms, as in former times. -- Yes! the noble sons of America, who
are inured to exercise, hale, robust, with an ardent love of Liberty, ready to
face danger and death, are able to crush a Buonaparte, with his victorious
army, -- and bring them into terms of submission: -- And you will learn them,
as Britain has been taught, to pile their arms on the field of submission, and
their navy to retire with infamy from our shores.

May I not address myself to this Audience in general, and say, the time has
come, we must protect our dear bought privileges. -- Let us show, that we not
only have the spirit to resent the insolence, but the energy to correct the
perfidy of those ferocious Frenchmen. Does not the voice of those departed
heroes, who devoted their lives to obtain the liberties which we enjoy,
strongly admonish us with sword in hand, to secure them from all hostile
invasion.

If the powers of Europe united, have not been able to protect the Hollanders,
the Italians, the Venetians, and the Swiss from the rapacity of the marauding
French, -- let us not boast of safety from an intervening ocean. -- How much is
our danger heightened, since we are not united, and have parricides, who wish
to sap our national prosperity, -- stop the wheels of government, and be
connected with a nation, which ought to be considered as a blank upon the
world? -- "Whose citizens are mad to fury, seeking some miserable victims to be
sacrificed to their rage, by an Atheistical tribunal, -- who give judgment
without mercy, and inflict death without justice." -- O Liberty! how has thy
name been perverted, by our Democratic disorganizers, -- who are the leaders of
faction, and would overspread America with discord and slaughter, or destroy us
in the insidious embraces of foreign fraternization. -- May Gallatin, Nicholas,
Giles and others, meet with the just indignities of the people, whom they have
attempted to deceive, and feel their influence annihilated, on the discovery of
their plots and designs. -- How frequently do we hear of their audacity, by
their declaiming, in Congress, their attachment to liberty, and stiling
themselves the Patriots of their country? You need not be informed, how
assiduous they have been in the arts of intrigue, and aiding the wicked designs
of our most implacable enemies, in plotting our ruin, and sowing the seeds of
discord and separation, between the people and their government. May they, with
Bache, that secret emissary, whose press has teemed with abuses, and poured
forth a flood of calumny against the guardians of our nation, be learnt and
learn, the Diplomatic Skill of France, -- that our federal soil will not
nourish their felonious practices. But what can be more acceptable to every
true American, than to see the spirit, which prevails in the majority of our
National Council, who view with just indignation the tame and perfidious temper
of the opposers of our government; and by their unremitted exertions, have
saved us from ruin, in contests which have been long and dubious, -- and the
final success, the seeming effect of mere accident?

What nation, what kingdom, what empire, can boast of a better Executive
Department, than the United States of America? Great ADAMS, the illustrious
Chief of that noble order, shines like a star of the first magnitude, and may
justly be compared with the Sun, in the political world. Thou great Guardian of
Freemen, and Chief of millions! who art placed like a watch upon our political
walls, to guard them against the invidious designs of those Demons of France,
-- who artfully plot to sow the seeds of sedition around our seat of
government: Yet such is thy prudence, and such thy wisdom, that instead of
wishing to draw the sword of vengeance, or unsheath the dagger, thou have sent
Envoys extraordinary to France, -- Pinckney, Marshall and Gerry, -- those
Ministers of Peace. But with what cold disdain, and with what black
ingratitude, have they been treated! -- Let our weekly Gazettes, Courants and
Monitors declare.

My Friends and Fellow-Citizens, -- while our national rights are in danger of
being arrested from us, it behooves us to prepare for the means of defense, and
be in perfect readiness to meet every invasion. I conjure you, in the name of
our common country, as you value your own sacred honor, and the rights of
humanity, to discountenance the disorganizing principles, which have been too
prevalent among many of our citizens, and have corrupted our national councils.
Give not occasion for posterity to say, that at the close of the eighteenth
century, the conquerors of Britain suffered themselves to be deprived of an
ocean of privileges, and cast into a gulf of misery and wretchedness. I pray to
Heaven, that our conduct be such, that a century from this, we have the praises
from an hundred millions of American tongues, which will chaunt forth this
sentence, That we were the able defenders of our liberty and government, which
were procured, at the expense of thousands of life.

May the time speedily arrive, when it shall be said by our enemies, Randolph,
Munroe and Genet, that we are actuated with patriotic views, and are determined
to support our public men and measures, in the lawful administration of our
government. -- Then an ambitious, unprincipled nation, which is fired with the
rage of universal dominion, will be taught that America will never become
tributary; and should she demand it in a hostile way, she will rue her folly,
and learn, that the warlike sons of America are unconquerable: And then we
shall roll on to the summit of national felicity and happiness, and look down
on the nations of Europe with an eye of indifference.

While we stand prepared to defend our rights, let us not forget to promote
piety and peace. For these blessings our progenitors toiled, watched, bled and
died. In their councils they animated and presided; in their wars they inspired
and overcame; in their government they influenced and blessed; and in their
families they ruled and trained up for endless life. Most unnatural children
shall we prove, if with the combined force of such glorious examples, and in
the possession of such hard-earned happiness, we neglect any means, or refuse
any efforts, to discharge this duty.

It cannot be too frequently inculcated, and too deeply impressed upon our
minds, at this particular crisis of our national affairs, that the men, whom we
appoint to public offices and trust, be such as will perpetuate our privileges;
so that millions yet unborn may live under our free republican government, and
sit under their own vines and fig trees, enjoying the fruits of their labor. --
May the conduct of our rulers be such, as to exhibit to the world, that the
liberty, the order, the peace, the learning, and the Religion of our land, will
be preserved secure and inviolate.

With what a sense of gratitude, ought we to be impressed, when we see the
means of education promoted and established, by the Legislature, within our
State? I will undertake to predict, that, when the arts and sciences, which now
prevail in the State of Connecticut, shall pervade the general Empire, then
shall we avoid the poisonous seeds of domestic discord and dissension. --
Literature prepares the mind for free and candid discussion, and compromises
the only means, within the reach of human abilities, of forming the minds of
the young to act their parts, with propriety and dignity, when they shall
succeed their predecessors.

Ye Matrons and Fair Daughters of America! consider how much the wealth and
prosperity of our nation depend upon your frugality and economy. -- Much is in
your power, by the weight of your example, and the influence of your charms, to
polish our manners, correct our vices, and inspire our hearts with the love of
virtue. Yours is the noble employment to cultivate the tender minds of your
children with useful knowledge, and impress them with the importance of
industry and morality -- And, ye Maidens! support your natural character; --
kill with your frowns the unprincipled libertine; -- discountenance by your
conduct dissipation and idleness; and your influence will be increased, -- not
only that of your beauty and accomplishments, -- but the influence of your
virtues, whose dominion controles the evils, and multiplies the blessings of
society.

When we notice the local situation of our country, we shall readily be
convinced of the expediency, that the arts of Agriculture should be studied and
pursued, since we have a large and an extensive country, producing all the
necessaries of life; which is intersected with navigable rivers and inland
waters, to facilitate commerce, -- so that in a commercial point of view, we
have become the second nation of the world. -- Our population has rapidly
increased; the Savages in the Western wilds have ceased their cruel
barbarities, and are retiring from the unsettled lands within our boundaries;
so that the den of the tiger, and the haunt of the Savage, have become the
peaceful abodes of wealth and industry.

But, finally, taking into consideration the vast field which is here opened
for improvements, in science, in government, in religion, and in morals, -- the
Philosopher will felicitate himself with the prospect of discoveries, favorable
to arts and happiness; -- the Statesman will rejoice, that here is a retreat
from the vassalage of Europe; -- the Divine will bless God, that a place has
been reserved for an uncorrupted church; -- and the Philanthropist, who
compares the yeomanry of America, with the peasantry of Europe, will
congratulate himself, with an event, which has removed millions of his
fellow creatures, from the ambition of princes, and a participation of the
vices which mark the decline of nations.

May our land continue to be the nurse of Freemen, the region of peace, remote
from tyranny and oppression. -- May a spirit of philanthropy actuate the rulers
of America, and hasten the coming of that day, when the lion shall lie down
with the lamb.

FINIS.

