Mr. Quincy's Oration.

AN ORATION Pronounced, JULY 4, 1798, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF American Independence.

BY JOSIAH QUINCY.

THE inroads upon our public liberty, call for reparation -- The wrongs we have
sustained, call for -- JUSTICE. That Reparation and that Justice, may yet be
obtained, by UNION, SPIRIT, and FIRMNESS. But to divide and conquer was the
maxim of the Devil in the garden of Eden, and to disunite and enslave has been
the principle of all his votaries from that period to the present.

Observations on the Boston Port-Bill, etc. p. 78. by the late J. QUINCY, Jun.

BOSTON; PRINTED BY JOHN RUSSELL.

1798.

Town Vote.
AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the town of Boston,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting, assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, the 4th day of July, A. D. 1798.

ON MOTION, Voted, That the Selectmen be, and hereby are appointed a Committee
to wait on JOSIAH QUINCY, Esquire. in the name of the town, and thank him for the
elegant and spirited ORATION, this day delivered by him at the request of the
town, upon the Anniversary of the Independence of the United States of America,
in which, according to the institution of the town, he considered the feelings,
manners, and principles, which led to that great National Event -- and to
request of him a copy for the press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

JULY 5, 1798. GENTLEMEN,
I CANNOT give you the customary notice of my acquiescence in the request of my
fellow-citizens, without expressing my gratitude for the indulgence, with which
the ensuing sentiments were received. If they have any merit, it results from
strict and anxious regard, to what appeared to me truth and duty. The times
require union, decision, virtue. With them, Americans are invincible. Without
them, they are, and deserve to be, slaves -- and what is more -- slaves to the
worst of masters.

I am gentlemen, with every sentiment of respect, your most obedient humble
servant JOSIAH QUINCY.
The Selectmen of Boston.



An Oration, etc.
HAD this day, AMERICANS, returned auspicious as former anniversaries, I
should, after the example of my predecessors, restrict myself to discharge the
tribute due to the past glories and future prospects of our country. But at a
time, when dark and gloomy clouds hang over the hopes of our nation, when
hostile passions attribute this aspect of public affairs to various causes,
when through the false opinions of some, and the artful misrepresentations of
others, the principles of our revolution have been abused as precedents, or
dreaded as instruments, of factious enterprise; higher duties are added to the
ordinary obligations of this day and institution. Not only to extract from our
ancient history the principles, feelings and manners, which led to that
glorious event; but also to compare them with those of our day, thereby to
vindicate that period, and illustrate the events of the present.

THE principle, which stimulated, the feelings and manners, which made
successful our revolution, are in nothing different from those, on which our
country must, at this day, rely for salvation. And that system of oppression,
which made our declaration of Independence necessary, originated in the same
malign passions, which, in our time, have produced distress to the United
States.

THE principle of our revolution was simple; a passion for Independence; a high
sense of the eternal right of a great people to govern themselves after their
own choice and manner. However assiduous our ancestors were to hide it from
Great Britain, perhaps fortunate enough to conceal it from themselves, their
emigration, their struggles in defense of their rights and soil, their
sentiments of civil freedom and subjection were dictated by the genuine spirit
of Independence. That to this dignity the genius of our fathers aspired, is
evident from the principles and manners adopted in the earliest, and
pertinaciously pursued to the latest periods of their history. Records of a
memorable spirit exist. A spirit always vigilant and active, ever constructing
barriers against European influence, cementing opposition to it into a
principle of patriotism, spurning every concession remotely implicating the
independance of their establishment, and hazarding, at all times, every thing
dear, to preserve for their offspring a pure, and unincumbered inheritance.
Even to us, accustomed as we are to hardy avowals of right, their favorite
maxims are objects of equal pride and admiration. That subjection terminated
with removal. Hutchinson's hist. Mass. Bay, 1 vol. 230 p.
That the duty of allegiance did not follow them to the ends of the earth.
Hutchinson's hist. Mass. Bay, 1 vol. 230 p.
That, not this principle but the compact contained in the Charter, was the
source of the powers of the crown, which it had no right to extend or resume.
Ibid. 231.
That the sovereignty of the soil was in the aboriginal princes, whose
prerogative purchase had transferred to them. Ib. 230.
That the rights of self-government resulted from the actual compact of
freemen. Ib. 45.
From whence they deduced the qualities of an Independent government, free
trade, Ib. 179.
peace, if it pleased with the enemies of England, Letter of Mass. Genesis Ct. to
Oliver Cromwell, Ib. 166, 452.
Independence from control in elections, Petition of Genesis Ct. to Parl. 1651,
Ib. 448.
from the embarrassments of judicial appeals, Gen Courts Declaration of Rights
in 1661, Ib. 456.
and the binding force of acts of parliament. Ib. 2 vol. 12.


THE operation of these principles approximated the old Charter government to
an Independent Commonwealth. Hut. hist. Mas. Bay 2 vol. 10.
Judicial processes in the name, not of the king, but of the Colony, Ib. 1 vol.
163.
the oath of allegiance unadministered, Ib, 289.
laws of trade slighted, Ib. 290, 2 vol. 12.
refusal, at the instance of the crown, to renew or yield their Charter, Ib.
163.
holding it treason in their General Court to speak of appeals to the king, Ib.
64.
are symptoms of an high sense of Independence, and precursors of national
sovereignty. They sprang up under the old Charter, and were nourished by the
moral, civil, religious, and military character of our ancestors. The new
charter, imposed after the restoration checked, but did not destroy the seeds
of national freedom. They are discovered bursting forth on all sides in
opposition to the kings governors and parliamentary influence, in disregard of
acts of trade, Ib. 83.
in declarations of the invalidity of taxation without representation, ( r) in
securing the control of the Treasury, Ib. ^66.
and grasping under every favorable pretense the claims of prerogative.

THIS bold sentiment and practice, so inconsistent with the principle of
monarchy and the Colonial relation, could not fail to touch the pride of
Britain. Fortunately she did not anticipate the importance of the Colonies,
until age and morals had given energy and character to their establishment, nor
commence her aggressions, until the evils* in presence and prospect of European
control had roused the spirit of our ancestors; whose most precious legacy to
their descendants is the exemplary, discernment and vigor, with which the
designs of their enemies, open and concealed, were penetrated and opposed. The
political history of our country exhibits scarce any other prospect than the
work of Independence gradually advancing under cover of assertion of natural
rights and resistance to regal aggression; successive assumption followed by
successive irritation; materials for explosion collecting: till at length the
attempt to tax without actual representation, "instinct with fire and nitre,"
convulsed and separated the new world from the old.

THE evils, which provoked this spirit of Independence to the solemn
declaration, which gives this day celebrity, were produced by external luxury,
avarice and lust of domination, cooperating with an internal, depraved,
ambitious, disappointed faction. To support the pressure of her massive debt,
Britain naturally looked to the aid of her colonies. Their wealth, industry and
enterprise promised a rich resource of revenue. And these hopes were fostered
by a small discontented party, which had existed among them from their first
settlement, the leaders of which, having no resort in talents or virtue, could
alone quench the thirst of ambition at the fountain of foreign supremacy. By
falsehood, by misrepresentation, by appealing to her avarice, and exposing the
nakedness of the land this party encouraged and invited the aggressions of
Britain. And by insidiously sowing dissensions between the Colonies, by
striving to dissever their interests, by malicious ^^^^^^tives against their
chief patriots, by every (...) through which grovelling intent captivates gross
understandings, they attempted to scatter discord and disunion among the
people. As early as 1646, the serpent faction, which fattens in a free soil,
lurked at the root of our republic. Petitions for rights and privileges,
hostile to the inclination or interest of the people and its representatives,
were preferred, accompanied by the memorable threat of appealing to parliament
if denied Hutch. vol. 1, p. 1^8
The government of the Colony replied to their complaints, but as their
expressions had been contemptuous and seditious, they were reduced to reverence
by the bitter, but wholesome, New England regimen. Fine, suretyship and
imprisonment avenged the dignity of the government and the majesty of the
people, insulted in their rulers. There is this remarkable of the complaints to
parliament of these first American malcontents upon record, that none of their
successors have materially deviated from their path. They complain of the
government of the people and the pulpit. Of government, because, it was not
managed by them. It must of consequence be ill managed. Of the people, that
they were so ignorant, or so obstinate, that they would have confidence in
their rulers, and would have none in the complainants. Of the pulpit, that it
"sided with government and denounced the judgment of heaven against such as
were going to Europe with evil intentions against the country."

THESE powers, operating without and within the colonies, produced those
aggressions, which led on our revolution. One saw in the control of our
revenues a rich resource for luxury and necessity. The other sought to supply
the deficiency of their ambition by external patronage. The machinations of
both rendered the colonies so contemptible in the eyes of foreigners, and so
weakened the ties of domestic union, that the hopes of the people had well nigh
been frustrated. But the spirit of Independence triumphed. The genius of
America rose slow, but terrible in wrath, and burst those chains, which foreign
vice had forged, and domestic treachery attempted to impose.

THE design of this institution is to enliven and record in our bosoms, those
sacred and pure principles, manners and feelings, to which our country is
indebted for the high and happy rank she holds among nations. A duty, at all
times pleasant and useful, is, at this day, peculiarly incumbent. Passions are
abroad and operating in the land similar to those, against which our fathers
struggled. External luxury, avarice and lust of domination have again grasped
at the sovereignty of our nation, and supported internally, by a depraved,
ambitious and disappointed faction, had well nigh effected its intent. The
spirit of our ancestors, which had slumbered too long, is roused from its
repose. Like trials threaten us. We have duties equally solemn to fulfill. Much
is due to ourselves. Much to a government the work of our hands, and which
secures to us all the right of man, and all the blessing, of the social
compact. More to posterity, of whose hopes, we are trustees and guardians. But
to the memories of our forefathers, to those principles, which wrought our
Independence, whose truth and value they sealed with their blood, not to
tarnish their glories, nor fall behind them in virtue, we owe an eternal
obligation.

IT does not need a nice eye to mark the similarity between the principles and
duties of past and present periods. Measures and objects, means and ends are
the same. Names and nations have changed. But foreign and domestic tyrants, the
enemies of public liberty and social order, providence, in mercy to man, has
restricted to one system of schemes, with power only to vary the composition
and application of their poisons, according to the varied sanity and disorder
of the public mind. The projects of Andross, and Randolph, and Dudley, and
Hutchinson, and Barnard are revived in our day. Those projects are confined
neither to time nor place. They are universal as human passion, and eternal as
the nature of man. Whenever ambition and luxury unite in the supreme power of a
potent nation, it will never fail to invade the rights, and under some pretense
or other to attempt the control of its neighbors. And real republics always
open a wide field for 'diplomatic agencies.' In that species of government, a
party ever has arisen, and ever will arise, hostile to the interests and
liberties of the people. In the strife for popular favor all cannot be
gratified. Disappointment will seek revenge. Envy pursue its rival. Lust of
power pant for elevation. There will ever exist ignorance to be misled, and
vicious hopes to be pampered. If the nation in itself do not afford these
passions means of gratification, they will seek satiety from foreign
connections and influence. The union of these has been always fatal to
republics.

THE factious spirits, whose intrigues have produced such losses and distress
to the United States, and forced our federated stars from the pathway of peace
and heaven, are servile copiests of those ancient enemies of Colonial
Independence. They have neither the claim of originals, the merit of ingenuity,
nor the charm of novelty. It is not a mere general resemblance. It is the old
piece in a new position. The same in character and attitude, in expression and
passion, in drapery and design. The tories and royalists of old time, compared
with the true friends of America, were a small and weak party; unable to
acquire the confidence of the people. Ambition, which cannot be gratified by
honorable means, has a sure resource in intrigue. Their invitations stimulated
and encouraged aggression. They marked out the plan for our enemies. Divide and
conquer. Insert your influence amid the parties of the State. Corrupt the
avaricious, frighten the weak, vilify virtue, turn talents to ridicule, weaken
the obligations of morality, destroy the influence of religion, make men worthy
to be slaves, and they will sue for fetters. How minutely the opponents of the
will of the people have adhered to these principles in our day is too obvious
to remark. We shall find the likeness not less striking, if, keeping our own
times in view, we call to recollection the arts by which the tories and
royalists formerly played this eternal game of tyranny. To encourage and unite
the inhabitants of the old world, they every where proclaimed us a divided
people; that embarked in a common cause, we refused to bear our share of
expense; that reared under their wing, in our strength, we were unmindful of
our patrons. In America different changes were rung. They attempted to set at
variance the southern and northern colonies; to make the orders of state
contend; to render the poor suspicious of the rich; the rich fearful of the
poor. They told the people of fleets and armies; of the power of the adversary,
and their weakness. The arms and victories of a nation, then styled terrible to
her enemies, and generous to her friends, were painted in colors best suited
to alarm. The sin, the crying sin of ingratitude, to a nation, who had fought
our battles, the bones of whose warriors were mingled in the same plains with
ours, was blazoned in terms designed to make us odious and contemptible at home
and abroad. Every man of talent and virtue was designated as an object of the
most attrocious slander. Our Clergy, -- God ever preserve to them the glorious
prerogative! -- calumniated by the enemies of their country. Our patriots,
loaded with every insult, which abandoned minds could invent. Otis the spirited
and eloquent statesman; Mayhew, the man of wit, learning and piety; Adams, the
equal pride of past and present times. Vid. the series of Political Essays in
Newspapers for 10 years preceding the Revolution, particularly the writings of
Novanglus, in Edes and Gill's Gazette, commencing January, 1775. and those of
Massachusettensis in the Boston Chronicle about the same period.


This is history. May we not say, it is also prophecy? Exchange Britain for
France, monarchical for republican forms of control and corruption, instead of
a British Governor, place a French Envoy at the head of the party; in the room
of rebel and traitor let them be furnished with the offensive epithets,
Aristocrats and Englishmen, give them new weapons and new cloaks, and the
tories and royalists of Seventy Five are the Jacobins and Exclusive Patriots of
Ninety Eight Since this performance was pronounced, it has been suggested to me
that justness and accuracy require a discrimination in favor of those who in
former and present times were mistaken followers of arch tories and Jacobins.
It cannot be expected that a work, necessarily of a general nature, should
include minute shades of character. I owe it however to truth to remark, that
on the one hand, as the mystical names of loyalty and allegiance, as well as
the venerable ones of order and good government, form an apology for many
enemies of our revolution, so on the other, names equally mystical, gratitude
and fraternity, and those equally venerable, liberty, equality, and rights of
man, are no less a palliation for the aberration of good men into paths, which
terminate in the utter destruction of all that is sacred and venerable on earth.
. The resemblance between these periods results from the uniformity of the
passions, by which despotic design is necessitated to operate. Notwithstanding
the infinite shapes it assumes, its hopes exist on two resources only; to
deceive, or to debase the people. To the former, ignorance and falsehood are the
ready paths, and all vicious projects are advanced by demoralizing man. For
moral sense once destroyed, and confidence in virtue shaken, the people,
deprived of chart or compass, will commit the charge of the vessel to every
bold adventurer, who will seize upon the helm. Let us not then deceive
ourselves. But instead of loose execrations, examine the evil, and apply the
remedy.

SOME men exclaim, "The vile spirit of party is our ruin. Corruption has gained
ground among us. These insults and aggressions are fruits of their
encouragement." It is doubtless true that such influence exists in our country.
Against ours, as against all preceding republics, corruption and faction are
leagued. But the attempts of these, although they produce inconvenience, can
never, without other aid, destroy our national independence. Others cry, "the
perfidy and avarice of the ruling powers in France have laid a deep scheme,
against our sovereignty." It is not to be doubted that in the career of victory
and crimes, such plans are drawn, and even now executing. But schemes like
these, though formidable, cannot alone sap our establishment. The government of
the United States, extending protection to its citizens, showering blessings
around the people, rich and strong in their affections, cannot be uprooted by
such enemies, however powerful. The danger lies nearer home. It exists --
pardon the reflection, not such as are pleasant, but such as are useful, belong
to this period -- it exists -- I fear you will think me too presumptuous -- it
exists, Americans, in our own bosoms. It is the indolence, with which we have
supported government, the calmness, with which we have heard it calumniated,
the feeble, and sometimes doubtful, support, we have yielded to it, that have
given strength and spirits to destructive design, internal and external.
Immersed in private interests, and personal projects, we have not been
attentive enough to those establishments, which can alone give permanent value
to acquisition or improvement. While each man has been shifting off the burden
of supporting government, on his neighbor, all have viewed, with surprise and
indignation, at one time, a domestic insurrection threatening its infancy; at
another, an insolent foreigner seizing the dearest attributes of sovereignty;
and now, sacrifices equally derogatory to national honor and interest demanded
from us. But could we reasonably expect the reverse? An individual is thought
to merit insult, if he suffer it with impunity. Want of spirit to resent, not
only invites injury, but is among the marks of its desert. Yet we, Americans,
the descendants of Sires renowned for their justice and spirit, have heard
daily a government of our own choice and creation ridiculed, vilified,
calumniated, we have seen every art exerted to propagate the tale of falsehood,
not only without punishment, but almost without reproof. If a people will not
take the trouble to rescue its government from infamy among themselves, have
they right to complain, if it be not respected by foreigners? If in the full
bloom and vigor of youth, while profusely scattering around us rich fruits, it
cannot interest us enough to protect its character from obloquy, and its
existence from attack, is it not natural for our enemies to expect its utter
dissolution, when, checked by embarressments, it cannot yield such luxuriant
bounties? And how certainly do they already rely on its destruction, when, by
the necessities to which it has been iniquitously reduced, it shall apply to
the direct contribution of the people!

AGAIN; the rulers of our nation were selected by the people from amid
themselves, for their talents, virtues, and patriotism. Emanating from the
common mass, returnable into it at stated periods, with interests, views and
feelings, which could not be hostile to those of their constituents; above all,
for the most part, leaders and pride of our Independence, what other requisites
could exist to ensure the attachment and confidence of the people? Yet what has
been the result? From the adoption of the Federal Constitution, a current of
calumny and abuse, replenished from sources the most vile and wicked, has never
ceased to pour upon our rulers. While we, high spirited republicans, in full
exercise and boast of the energy of virtuous, and the foresight of intelligent
minds, have listened calmly to these invectives; and without reflecting, that
the keenest of all insults against the people is that, which holds up its
representatives to dishonor, this language has been submitted to from men, the
loudest, on all occasions, in their pretended veneration and care of the
people. Need I call you this day to the disgusting recollection of the
calumnies and falsehoods, which have been propagated concerning our best and
most virtuous citizens; our clergy; the majority of both houses of Congress;
the heads of all the departments of State; the present head of our nation; or
shall I point you, to that injured hero, who, like the departing sun, looks
through the shades of Mount Vernon, on this western world, refulgent with his
glories?

THIS practice and forbearance we have not learnt, Americans, of our ancestors.
They were well apprized that such abuse is treachery the most malignant against
the republic; in as much as it destroys the moral qualities of the people;
breaks down the barriers which separate and distinguish vice from virtue;
diminishes the greatest security of the people in a ruler, by making one event
to patriots and traitors. Of these facts, and of the spirit, which has gone
forth to lay principle and character low, none of us are ignorant. The
evidences are before and around us. They meet us in the street. They follow us
into our houses. They infect the purity of the country; and disturb the
tranquillity of the town. Americans are every moment witnesses of the malignity
of their virulence. Yet, strange infatuation! the manufacturers and venders of
these poisons are supported and encouraged among us. And there are many, who
give credit to their intentions, or in charity, transfer the guilt, from their
hearts, to their understandings. But have not the people a dear property in the
virtues of their rulers? Will they look on unconcerned spectators, while that
property is violated? Are men of talents and integrity of such spontaneous and
abundant growth, that we can afford to trample on them rudely, or make them
abhor our favors? To what will these things lead? Experience daily gives the
answer. Men of talents retire, or refuse your proffered honors. True spirit
cannot long bear to be a butt for the shafts of calumny. If the justice of
their country will not secure the fame of good men, they will seek, in
retirement, consolation for its injustice. And who will succeed? Bold and hardy
ambition, that seeks his own emolument, not the welfare of the State; from
whose brazen front, the darts of just reproach leap back, blunted; that will
sacrifice his country, and take care to recompense upon the people, -- Ah!
keenly to recompense, their unjust suspicions of virtue, or thoughtless
indolence in its defense.

MERCIFUL and righteous have been the ways of Providence to our nation. It had
crowned our cup high with bounties. The United States walked forth, among the
people of the earth, in the bloom and majesty of youth and freedom. Prosperity
began to obliterate the principles of our forefathers, to corrupt their simple
and pure manners, and to weaken that attachment to country, which was their
distinguishing attribute. Like the other chosen people of the most high, we
began to run after strange deities, the idols of other nations; to forsake his
altar, for the new temple of liberty, which has NO GOD; to look with less awe
on constitutions, resting on religion, the rock of ages, cemented by the blood
of our fathers, upheld by morals, venerable by early habit and recent
obligation. The black whirlwind, which spreads disorder and desolation over the
face of Europe, curls threatening toward our shores. The impending evil has
hastened us back to ourselves, to the principles and feelings of our ancestors,
to a right and high sense of our duties. Our coasts ravaged from the Missisippi
to the St. Croix, the blood of thousands streaming again for Independence, a
century of war is a cheap price for this renovated temper and unclouded vision.

BUT on this spirit alone, we must not rely for salvation. The day of trial
will require higher energies and severer duties. Let no man persuade himself
that this state of things will cease, or Independence be preserved without
arduous conflicts; without conflicts of blood. Look around you, my countrymen,
and burst those films with which faulty love and momentary interests,
heretofore darkened your vision. Recollect the obstinate perseverance, with
which every agent of republicanized France has striven to grasp your
sovereignty; to revive ancient antipathies; and, by ostentatious display of
love, to create a claim for dangerous reciprocity. Recall to your minds the
venom, with which her missionaries, principal and subordinate, open and
concealed, have corroded your first Patriots and Virtues, and with what rancour
they continue to this hour, shameless, their infamous falsehoods and calumnies.
Turn your eyes to the other side of the atlantic, and shake off that indolence,
and love of ease, into which peace and delusive security have sunk you. Behold
in Europe, a new Empire, like the Macedonian and Roman, progressing forward, in
the same paths, and by the same means, to universal dominion. See it, under
specious pretense of giving liberty and rights, entailing slavery and
wretchedness, on prostrate man. And learn, that in all this, there is nothing
new either in project or execution. When Phillip aspired to seize the
sovereignty of Greece, think you that he proclaimed his designs to the world?
He Travels of Anarcharsis the younger by the Abbe Barthelemi, vol. 5, chapter 61.
vol. 7. chapter 8^
too first interested the zeal of the Grecians, by pretended concern for their
religion and rights; by splendid successes over distant nations, he exalted
their admiration; and by professions of pure and virtuous intent, excited their
enthusiasm. While he was securing the surrounding kingdoms, some by conquest,
others by alliance, and while the true patriots and statesmen of Greece were
striving to rouse the people from their lethargy, before he became invincible,
his "diplomatic agents" were composing their fears, weakening the influence of
all the friends of their country, calling them mercenaries of the Great Persian
king, the ancient enemy of Greece, painting the blessings of peace and the
horrors of war, and notwithstanding one nation after another was falling victim
to his arms, by these arts, they rocked the people into such fatal repose, that
they collected not their force, until it was too late. Greece like her
neighbors, sunk into subjection. And under a feigned alliance, became a
tributary stream to that Macedonian torrent, which desolated the Asiatic world.

THE same projects on a broader scale made the Universe pass under the Roman
yoke. Hear one of their historians. "By affecting moderation in victories, ( a)
by appearing only solicitous for the interests of their allies, ( a) by
disclaiming all ends but the prosperity of the people, ( b) by proclaiming
themselves generous to their friends and terrible only to their enemies, the
Romans hastened to universal dominion. In all their successes, reserving
nothing to themselves, besides the power of giving away entire kingdoms and
provinces; or in other words, they reserved nothing but the power of seizing
the whole, at a proper time, and for the present, the supreme ascendant over
all the conquered provinces, that were given away, and over those who received
them. Taking care so to balance Ib. 215.
the parties in the State, to which they had given a nominal Independence, that
no formidable combination could be formed against their sovereignty, and if one
or a few parties should presume to withstand their power, many others were
ready to join the cry of ingratitude; and to treat opposition to them, as an
unworthy return to those, who had so generously espoused the cause of mankind."
Shall I insult your understandings by a formal application of this history?
Look at Italy and Holland, plundered, prostrate, and enslaved; paying their
whole wealth for their freedom, and their liberties, yet at nurse, under the
bayonets of Fifty Thousand Frenchmen. See Venice given away at a bargain; and
Swiss mountains, whose bare and icy breasts upheld liberty to the heavens,
penetrated, vanquished and chained. Behold an hundred thousand warriors, with
swords encrusted with blood, ready to pass into Britain. Into Britain did I
say? Into America, into any land, that opposes obstacles to their ambition, or
offers plunder for their rapine. We have allowed ourselves too long to be
deluded, Americans The fear of that abuse, which in ours, as in all countries,
is the inheritance of virtue and patriotism, has kept truth too long in the
shade. But the day of apology is passed. It is in vain; it is treacherous now
to palliate the iniquitous design. Our government has declared, and the people
from one end of the continent to the other are echoing the disgraceful truth.
That Independence, for which our fathers so long and ardently strove, and to
which they waded through blood and peril, has been assaulted; our rights
invaded; the liberty of deciding on its own interests denied to our government;
its most solemn acts insidiously represented as the work of a faction; and you,
yes, you, my countrymen, been incited to plunder your constituted authorities
of your choicest delegated powers, and under the plausible pretext of assuming
your natural rights, to open an opportunity to foreigners to seize your
liberties by your divisions. Praise be to him, who rules among the passions of
the human heart, the insidious appeal of foreigners to the people has been
answered to their confusion. With an holy indignation, worthy the chiefs of the
revolution, worthy their descendants, the people have vindicated their
Independence, they have scorned to be cheated out of their rights, have broken
the shackles of too partial an affection, and dissolved the charms of
gratitude, under which, too long for their honor or interest, they had
slumbered. Thanks to the firm and stern texture of our constitution; thanks to
the bold Independence of the head of our nation; to the firm and manly conduct
of our envoys; above all, thanks to the spirit of our forefathers, descended
again to bless their posterity, we have escaped the snare. Instead of gloom, it
is a day of exultation. Instead of despondence, joy should penetrate and
enliven our countenances and hearts. Americans have returned to their
government; they have returned to the principles of their revolution; to the
influence of their best and most virtuous citizens, from whom, by dark policy,
they had been estranged. We had drank deep of the cup of her love, brimmed with
principles, noxious to morality, as well as to Independence. At the moment,
when the last dreadful draught was mingled for us, it is stricken from her
hand* and the swords of millions of freemen gleam half sprung from their
scabbards, indignant at the insult. Think you Americans, that the spirits of
our departed patriots and heroes, from amid the band of the perfect and just,
look not down complacent on the events of our day? Yes, surely; and on their
thrones exult, "THESE ARE OUR CHILDREN."

Laudable is your zeal, my countrymen; just your indignation. What! Americans,
with your knowledge, habits, and virtues, rich in governments, and rulers of
your choice, fortified by morality, inspired by the hopes of religion, shall ye
be placed on a level with the gross and restless slaves of ancient despotisms?
Shall ye be dupes of the same hacknied arts as they? Shall your governments,
the result of your calm investigation, filled with pure, guarded by youthful
blood, be drugged by the same gross opiates as have drenched in death, aged,
corrupt European fibers? With the records of your ancestors in your hands,
their maxims on your hearts, shall ye be frightened into disgraceful
sacrifices, or descend to try liberty by arithmetical process, open accounts
between Independence and submission, strike balances, and make nice
calculations, how much it will cost to be freemen, and what you may hope to
keep, and be slaves? The tombs of your (...), alas! untimely reared; the
bleached bones of your warriors, which the plough share, in industrious
progress, upturns to the sky, excite different sentiments, rouse to other
duties. Not a paltry tax, less than the necessities of all governments require,
not burdens incumbent, but threatened, prompted their struggles, pointed them
to glory. It is better to die, than be slaves. And to their high sentiment,
payment of a pepper-corn on principles derogatory to their rights or their
honor was slavery* worthy to be repelled at the risque of life and of all that
is dear to man. They also were tempted by the fair names of peace and of
plenty. But, what security for peace, except national spirit and power? And
what can the sword take away, which rapine will spare? Away then, with these
fallacious hopes, which delude our hearts and weaken our vigor. With no common
voice our country commands us to shield her from disgrace; from devastation,
this land, the delight of freemen; from destruction, those dwellings now the
abode of peace and of joy; from defilement, these altars, where reason unites
her incense with devotion; and from pollution, those fair bosoms, native
mansions of purity and truth.

THE ark of liberty is, among the virtuous, union invincible. Guard, therefore,
against faction, the viper. Guard, as the bulwark of your hopes, the fame and
honor of your rulers. Above all, guard against those base, unmanly suspicions,
by which foreign and domestic enemies strive to break the anchor of
Independence, confidence between rulers and people. Then, Americans, you may
rely with assurance, that, -- if such be the will of the Supreme ruler, -- you
shall preserve the peace and liberty, you so justly prize, and your country
maintain, in honor and virtue, that high and happy rank, she holds among
nations.


