AN APPEAL TO MATTER OF FACT and COMMON SENSE, RECOMMENDED TO THE SERIOUS
CONIDERATION OF THE Inhabitants of Charleston, South Carolina, etc. TO WHICH IS
AFFIXED, A LETTER TO THE * * * *

BY JOHN PHILLIPS,

So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun,
and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter: and
on the side of their oppressors there was power, But they had no comforter.
ECCLE. Chap. iv. v. 1. Wherefore, behold I send unto you prophets and wise men.
MATT. Chap. xxiii. v. 34. Woe unto him that builds his house by
unrighteousness -- that uses his neighbor's service without wages. JER. Chap.
xxii. v. 13. And Lot said, Up, get ye out of this place: -- but he seemed as
one that mocked unto his sons in law. GENESIS Chap. xix. v. 14. And the smoke of
their torments ascends up for ever and ever. REV. Chap. xiv. v. 11. We hold
these Truths to be SELF-EVIDENT: that all men are created EQUAL, that they are
endowed by their Creator with certain UNALIENABLE RIGHTS -- that among these
are Life, LIBERTY, and the pursuit of Happiness.
DECLARATION OF INDEPENDANCE. New York: PRINTED BY T. KIRK, No. 112,
CHATHAM-STREET.

1798.

THE PREFATORY ADDRESS TO THE READER.
FROM a deep sense of the manifold favors, and repeated blessings vouchsafed to
me by Almighty God, in and through his well beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord;
and the hope of glory, which I daily experience through the Eternal Spirit, as
my comforter and guide -- I am induced to contribute all I possibly can,
toward the complete destruction and final overthrow of Anti-Christ's Kingdom;
the plucking out of the snare of the devil those who are taken captive by him
at his will; preserving the innocent from sin, error and pollution; spreading
the knowledge of the Lord over the whole world, and the teaching men to see
what is the fellowship of the mystery -- that they may know the love of God; in
such a manner as to escape the pollutions, sins and follies, of this present
evil world, and may be accounted worthy to stand before the Son of Man. I am
aware, that reducing the above resolution to practice, will cost me my
reputation, I am not in connection with any body of people, but am in ^^^rity
with all men.
if I have any; render me obnoxious to the displeasure of lukewarm professors,
and to the scoffs, taunts and menaces of the profane: but if they take the
liberty to transgress the laws of God, unauthorized by him so to do, they must
not be surprised* if I use the authority wherewith I am legally invested by God
and man, in reproving and bearing testimony against them, for their sin, (...)
and rebellion against Almighty God. If there be any thing laudable in sin, (as
one might naturally suppose there is, it being so often committed and so much
delighted in) men ought not to be offended when they are reproved for it, or
charged with committing it* but if it is a dishonor to God, and a disgrace to
human nature, let them be ashamed to commit it, and they will not be reproached
by being openly exposed. But what if the earth be moved? The Lord sits above
the water-floods, and remains a King forever. Who art thou? O great mountain!
A plain! Being therefore regardless of consequences relative to myself, and
knowing the terror of the Lord, and the dreadful and unhappy state of the
wicked, I think it my most bounden and indispensible duty, while I am in the
body, to stir up your minds by way of remembrance. Lest your strict attention
to worldly gain, sensual pleasures and earthly delights, should cause you
totally to lose sight of eternal and heavenly things; and in consideration of
the worth and value of your immortal souls, the joys to which you are redeemed,
and the danger you are in of being damned, I use great plainness of speech,
that if possible, I may be instrumental of provoking you to emulation, or of
deterring you from living in the practice of any known sin; that you may be led
to consider your way, and to turn your feet unto God's testimonies; that you
may be led to consider you are wrong before it is too late to be set right; and
also, that your blood may not be found on me, through neglect of warning, and
admonishing you faithfully as from the Lord, of your impending danger, and the
infallible certainty of your utter ruin, destruction and misery, if you
persevere in sinning against Almighty God, and in running counter to his divine
commands. In consequence whereof, I renounce the world, together with its vain
pomp and glory; and also the empty honors, illegal profits, unjust emoluments,
deceitful pleasures and vain delights arising from it; being fully convinced,
by reason and experience, that they cannot be admitted without displeasing God,
injuring mankind, and destroying the immortal soul. And he who does not
contribute all he possibly can toward advancing God's glory, in promoting the
present and future happiness and salvation of mankind, is a dishonest, deceived
and worthless character. How wretchedly ignorant, and at the same time blind to
his present and eternal interests, must he be who vainly supposes that it is
not now required of men to live, as did the prophets and apostles, of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And who, for the sake of being esteemed among men as a peaceable
citizen, will out of mere charity, so called, refuse to reprove his neighbor;
and, by tacitly conniving at his sin, error and folly, suffers him to live and
die in his sins, and finally to sink into perdition.

THE following Appeal being levelled at the root of sin, and sinister motives,
will not, it is probable, meet the approbation but of a few; and as plays,
novels, romances, profane songs, etc. engross the attention of most, whatever
would conduce to the reformation of their hearts and lives, will be neglected,
as things of an indifferent nature, and consequently unworthy their notice and
attention. But however, I shall hereby justify the ways of God to men, through
witnessing in God's behalf to sinners, that he wills not their destruction: and
also, that he proclaims himself to be the Lord Jehovah, God, merciful and
gracious, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin; and that he endues with
power from on high, all those who seek him, to keep his commandments, by not
only reproving sin and folly, but also by living superior to whatever is
contrary to God's most holy law, or offensive to his Divine Majesty. And as I
desire that my good may not be evil spoken of, I have written the following
sheets by way of an Appeal, which I hope will be accompanied with a blessing to
every serious and attentive reader; that all may be merciful, as they hope to
obtain mercy from the Lord. A work of this nature has for some time past been
deeply impressed on my mind, and I have been led to think that I could not die
in peace if I did not carry it into execution. And let it be noted, (whatever
may have been said to the contrary by malicious and designing characters) that
I have such an entire aversion to War, that if the slaves could obtain their
liberty by it, I would, if possible, dissuade them from it. The kingdom which I
contend for is not of this world. Do you not discern this? If it was, the world
would approve of me, for the world loves its own; but now the world hates me
because I ^estify against it that its ways are evil. "Away with such a fellow,
it is not fit that he should live."

I ENTREAT you by all that is great, good, holy, and sacred, that you examine
yourselves and prepare for death and judgment, for when I have printed and
delivered this to you, I shall be clear of your blood -- I shall trouble you no
more for ever! I hope you will not take offense at the plainness I have used in
the following sheets. Believe me, Sirs, I am no duplex, I do nothing under a
cloak, but openly and heartily express my sentiments, simply without any degree
of guile or mental reservation whatever, Would not a lawyer merit censure from
mankind, if he should prove unfaithful to his client through bribery? or a
physician fall into disrepute if he neglected the radical cure of his patient,
rather than put him to pain? But what is the loss of an estate, or the death of
the body, compared with the loss of heaven and the death of the soul? O Sirs!
what would you think of me if I should cry peace, peace, when God has not
spoken peace to your immortal souls? Would you not say, at the great and final
audit, here is the wretch who soothed us in our sins, who sought not us but
ours; who connived at our damnation; who, under the pretense of catching us
with guile, has left us secure in the devil's net? But what more abundantly
aggravates our misery is, that we must behold this deceiver forever in hell. O
Sirs! this is not a random notion, or a mere "enthusiastic revery," arising
from a disordered brain; but truth and consistency, matured by time, and deep
meditation! I would have done you this labor of love much sooner if my
circumstances had been adequate to it, or if I could have prevailed on any
printer to print it; for all men seek their own, and not the things which are
Jesus Christ's; and if they can accumulate worldly gain, they are regardless of
the immortal part, they have no notion of sacrificing a less for a greater
good. O Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us! but do not
riches make to themselves wings and fly away as an eagle toward heaven? Is not
the present failure amongst the merchants a proof of it? See their large and
extensive commerce in one hour, or in a very short space, brought to naught!
Behold, your cities are burnt with fire! and a variety of other afflictions
which are as so many loud calls from God to sinners, to amend their ways, and
to seek happiness in God alone; to lay up treasure in heaven, where true joys
are to be found; where Christ sits at the right hand of God, who will render
to every man according to his works. O ye unhappy beings! I am sorry to see you
express such a rooted and fixed enmity to religion, and religious characters in
general; and at me in particular, because I entreat you to serve the Lord and
save your souls, and to do to all men as you would they should do to you, on
change of circumstances! Another day will teach you how inconsistently you have
acted. May the Lord grant it may be done before it is too late to repent! The
Lord knows that I earnestly desire and pray that you may be happy in God
through Christ. I would willingly undergo the greatest hardships, could I be
rendered instrumental of prevailing with you seriously to consider the
importance of living and dying. I have not the least degree of enmity against
any man; but from the very ground of my heart, freely forgive those who have
injured me, and would gladly embrace the first opportunity to do them good.

CHARLESTON, AUGUST, 1796.
AN APPEAL, etc.
MEN AND BRETHREN,
SI male loquutus sum testare de m^l^. -- Inconscious of having violated the
law, whom shall I fear? Shall I basely decline the path of virtue, because the
path of vice is more frequented? or shun to declare God's whole counsel,
because it militates against the wickedness of the wicked? If conscience meets
you as an armed man, accusing you of the want of love to God, your neighbor
and yourselves, do not blame me, but repent and lead a better life. Shall the
most alarming threat or daring menace, deter me from a full discharge of my
duty? Shall even the fear of death itself, together with all that flesh can do
unto me, (as my master has said, fear not those who kill the body) induce me to
recede from it? No! as I have solemnly sworn allegiance to King Jesus; I will
not thus dishonor and deny him, by shamefully conniving at, or by openly and
profanely abetting the damnation of mankind. As Christ our Savior died for
all, (the Greek word Kosmoon, John iii. 16. signifies, 'all who partake of the
nature in which he suffered') he has commanded his gospel to be preached to
all, saying -- Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature -- Go and Matheteusate make disciples (not slaves) of all nations --
Go, proclaim liberty to the captives. (Does the Almighty condescend to liberate
souls from the power of sin and satan? and will you refuse to copy after him in
liberating men from perpetual bondage to their oppressors?) Whoever then
attempts to impede the progress of the gospel of the blessed Jesus, (as all do
who forbid ministers to instruct the ignorant) (...) the divine displeasure,
comes under the denomination of those who gather not, but scatter and destroy
the flock of Christ, who bring upon themselves swift destruction, through
denying him in his members, which Christ looks upon as done to himself, and for
which he will say unto all such -- Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Permit me to expostulate with you
on this painful and distressing subject. I ask in the name of common sense*
What ill consequences can arise from calling sinners to repentance, to forsake
their sins, to become the servants of Christ? and as a stimulus to this very
important and necessary undertaking, to inform them, that God has made of one
blood all nations. (Acts 17.) That we are all the offspring of God -- That the
soul of the slave is of the same intrinsic value as the soul of the master. All
souls are mine, says Jehovah. Have they then not an equal right with others, to
the privileges of the gospel, and to all other rights and privileges belonging
to a free nation, under certain limitations and restrictions? If any of them
should prefer liberty to slavery, do either the laws of God, or the nature of
the constitution, authorize you to exact more from them than you first advanced
when you purchased them? (allowing a legal stated hire, together with the
interest of your money, etc.) It is certain that neither the laws of God, or
the nature of the constitution, authorize you to do otherwise by them. Does God
esteem men merely for their worldly pomp and grandeur? The rich man, mentioned
in the gospel, evinceth the contrary. He was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day; but through making a miserable and wretched
choice in life, experienced a most distressing and suitable change at death. He
exchanged all his glory, for what? for a winding sheet of sire! In hell he
lifted up his eyes, being in torments. Reader, will this be thy case? So sure
as there is a God it will, if thou live and die in an open violation of
God's law. Time is short and life very uncertain. O seek for, attain to, and
keep innocence, and do the thing that is right, for this will bring thee peace
at the last! When thou failest on earth, thou shall (with poor despised
Lazarus) then be received into everlasting (...) habitations. Se^^, li^et
nemi^i esse n^^^^? Or why was the peace violated on Lord's Day, August 11,
1790, by the (...) guard? The city guard, it is true, found me in the market,
but neither with riot or tumult, neither was I when they came, either singing,
praying or preaching, and I dare affirm, that there was not a ^^^re orderly
congregation, or any congregation in the city which had assembled with greater,
if with equal devotion. I could not conceive at first what was about to be
done, till at length I beheld the people (who were assembled for the worship of
God) escaping in almost every direction; the city guard falling on them* and
beating them without regard to age or sex. Mean while, I could not but admire
the great propriety of the prophet David's words, viz. the tender mercies of
the wicked are cruel! I I said to the city guard, Are you come out as against a
thief with swords and slaves for to take me? they said they were; I desired
they would inform me if I had violated the law? to which they made no reply;
(it had previously been said, that they did not attend to law in such cases)
but one of them, by order of Lieutenant Stone, seized me by the arm, and took
me to the guard house. Passing trough meeting street, as I was reminding them
how contrary their treatment of me was to the nature of the constitution, and
their appeal to heaven relative to the rights of man, etc. a Captain Graham
ordered the Captain of the guard, saying, break the rascal's (alias damned
rascal's) mouth. This kind of language is very prevalent in the minds of a very
great majority in this city, from the man of gray hairs down to the infant:
this, I think, portends some very awful and distressing event. I am
apprehensive, that the novel and antiscriptural notions, imbibed and propagated
by many, viz. denying the divinity of the blessed Jesus, will cast a gloomy and
impenetrable veil over the land. Do you, who are heads of families, pray with
and instruct them in the fear and love of God? Do you watch over their souls,
as those who must give an account to him who is ready to judge both the quick
and the dead? Is Joshua's resolution, (viz. but as for me and my (...) we will
serve the Lord) reduced to practice by you? No. Is not base language your them?
Do you not (...) at religion contemn and despise religious characters? You do,
If then you teach your children and slaves, both by precept and example, to be
wicked, and forbid them to hear those preach who would inform them of their
danger, and teach them their duty toward God and man, can you reasonably think
they will be good and faithful? You cannot. How dwells the love of God in
you* who care not if the souls under your care perish? If your hearts were
right with God, and the eyes of your understandings open to discern spiritual
and eternal things, would you not be stimulated, through a consideration of the
worth and value of their souls, the command of our Lord, to instruct them, and
the expectation and certainty of a promised reward, (viz. he who turns many
to righteousness shall shine as the stars of heaven forever and ever) to seek
their conversion and salvation? You would. O how are you deceived, who, for the
sake of a little short-lived pleasure, empty joy, and vain delight, neglect
present and eternal salvation! and hereby secure to yourselves death and
eternal damnation! Is slavery unlawful, that you are so astonishingly alarmed
at their being taught the value of their souls, as a stimulus to prevail with
them, to emerge out of the deplorably abject and wretched state into which they
are involved, by sin, satan, and wicked men? I speak as to wise men, judge ye
what I say! From whence came they? They were brought to this continent by a
people called Christians. Was it done with or without their consent? Was it
with the view to instruct them in the knowledge and love of God, our Savior
the Lord Jesus Christ? -- (He who does evil that good may come, his damnation
is just.) It was done without their consent, and doubtless without any
intention of instructing them in our Lord's most holy religion. Is it not evil,
in the first instance, as it violates all the tender ties of nature, separating
what God has joined, and making those twain whom he has made one flesh? Is it
not a manifest breach of God's divine command? Genesis chap. ii. v. 24. Therefore
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and
they shall be one flesh. -- In the aforementioned chapter we are informed, that
the sabbath and marriage were two ordinances instituted in innocence; the
former for the preservation of the Church, the latter for the preservation of
mankind. It is said by Matt. xix. 4. 5. that it was God himself who said here,
a man must leave all his relations to cleave to his wife; and, I think it
appears from verse 23. they are the words of Adam in God's name, laying down
this law to all his posterity. The virtue and bonds of a divine ordinance are
stronger even than those of nature. You say, they were in bondage prior to
their being brought to this continent? Admitting they were, this is no argument
in support of its perpetuity, as it is contrary to the rights of man the nature
of the constitution, and also to the gospel law which law not only commands us
to love our neighbors as ourselves, but also to do good to our enemies, and to
do to all men as we would they should do unto us, on change of circumstances.
Hear the words of our Lord: Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do
ye even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets. -- I appeal to your
own consciences in the sight of God: Would you that men of another nation
should come and violently take from you, your wives, husbands or children,
leaving you to grieve, lament and mourn, without hope of being comforted? or
would you be taken with these from your native residence to some foreign land,
and there to be confined to drag out a miserable and wretched life, kept shut
up in the most profound ignorance of God, and when you would make an effort
toward seeking and serving God, your overseer should confiscate your books to
the flames, sentence you to a severe castigation, for attempting to look over
the walls of ignorance, and leave your souls to perish (in the flames of hell
for aught he cares) for lack of knowledge, leaving no stone unturned, reducing
every effort to practice, to render, if possible, your state more abject, and
to make you the more effectual and servile dupes to his caprice and to the
tyrannic despotism of your merciless owners, without any stimulus to labor but
the whip, hard fare, and perpetual slavery for selves and families; and not
content with thus depriving you of your rights, they pursue you with the
malevolence of fiends, and on the slightest off^^^^ given (which perhaps your
ignorance or a consciousness of the injuries done you would sufficiently atone
for) they again separate you from your wives, children or husbands, breaking
these tender ties afresh, through multiplying your sorrows and augmenting your
griefs? Would you that a nation more powerful than yourselves, should take
advantage of you as a weak, unarmed, defenseless, and indeed innocent people,
(for they never invaded the rights of America) indicate to you the most
dastardly and unparalleled cowardice -- would you I say, that men should thus
treat you? You would not. But you have, and are now, treating others in the
aforementioned manner. Is it not then infallibly certain that you are violators
of God's most holy law, and despisers of what his holy prophets have spoken and
written in his name? If you persevere in your opposition to Almighty God, and
refuse to amend your ways, to put away from you the evil of your doings; unless
you cease to do evil and learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, etc. to tremble when ye hear these awful passages of holy writ, viz.
What measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again -- Behold ye despisers
and wonder and perish! -- He who despised Moses' law died without mercy -- He
shall have judgment without mercy who has showed no mercy. And, when ye shall
hear the awfully tremendous voice of Jehovah God, saying, arise ye dead and
come to judgment, to entreat some kind rock, some lovely mountain, to fall on
you and hide you from his flaming wrath, and from his avenging frown. Are not
highwaymen honorable men compared with men-stealers? Men-stealers are in
scripture ranked with the vilest characters. See 1 Timothy i. v. 10. The law is
made for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners, for
unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and mothers, for men-slayers, for
whore-mongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, (i. e. sodomites)
for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other
thing that is contrary to sound doctrine. O man, where art thou? Art thou not
in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity? Do thou already cry
out, O wretched man that I am! joyful news! O escape for thy life! Take asylum
in the ark of safety, the Lord Jesus Christ, or thou art undone and damned
forever! If you desire to advance God's glory in the salvation of mankind,
introduce the gospel in Africa, and no longer connive at or publicly abet the
villainous practice of the slave trade with it. How can you expect mercy from
the Algerines if you show none to the Africans? But alas! no temporal gain
would arise from introducing the gospel among them; and where gain is deified,
nothing but it is worthy our attention; but as it is a false God, the love of
it is the root of all evil, and instead of elevating its votaries to the summit
of true happiness, drowns them in sin, and in eternal perdition; and yet it is
a God notwithstanding, which a very great majority of mankind profoundly
worship, or they would not violate the laws of Jehovah, and deprive men of
their natural and acquired rights to accumulate it; but, that the Africans were
imposed on you by people of another nation, that you did not bring them from
their native land, seems altogether out of the question. Permit me to ask,
Would there be any thieves if there were no receivers? There would not long.
Doubtless those who first put this villainous and unnatural practice into
execution, will be punished for it equal to their demerit. But do you not
resemble those with whom our Lord conversed when on earth, who said, had we
lived in the days of our forefathers we would not have killed the prophets as
they did? by which they proved themselves to be men of like evil dispositions
with those who killed the prophets; in that they sought to take his life. And
you say, you did not bring them to this country, and some of you at least,
blame and condemn those who did; but inasmuch as you perpetuate their crime in
keeping them in ignorance and in perpetual slavery, and conniving at, if not
publicly abetting their being brought into Savannah, ^itting out vessels in
this port for the slave trade, etc. and soliciting that the trade may be opened
again, prove, that you are men of like evil dispositions with those who first
put this villainous and unnatural practice into execution. It is said, if there
^^re a preacher at every corner of the streets, the negroes (...) steal. Is it
not common for the most subtle and crafty o^ a gang of thieves to make off with
the most valuable part of the booty? It is. If you then rob them of their
rights, what marvel if under their present degraded circumstances they render
you evil for evil, and rob you in their turn, as they are not permitted, in the
general, to enjoy the fruit of their hard and servile labor? Permit me to ask,
if any person or persons should attempt to rob you of your rights, if you,
instead of taking a part of their property, would not deprive them of life? Let
the late hostilities between you and Great Britain decide this question. Do
they not act then, however wicked they may be, as if they think that vengeance
is the Lord's, and that he will repay it, in not doing to you as you would do
to them, on change of circumstances? But you say, they are the accursed seed of
Ham, and therefore ought to be in bondage. It is said, Genesis ix. 5. Cursed be
Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. But this does not
imply that temporal servitude or slavery should be their lot forever; much less
that they should be kept ignorant of God; for some of the Canaanites under that
dispensation became (...) and converts to the Jewish religion, as Araunah the
(...) 2 Samuel xxiv. 18. and what one did all might have (...). It is evident
then, that the curse fell on them only in consequence of their own actual sin.
But, when they repented and turned unto the Lord, they were restored to God's
favor, and to equal privileges with their brethren. It is observable, that by
quoting this scripture you acknowledge them to be your brethren, and thereby
condemn your own procedure as illegal, for neither Jewish or Christian laws
subject any one, much less a brother, to perpetual slavery; and as the text
expressly mentions, to their brethren, you are equally culpable if you
acknowledge them not. But why do we dwell on a subject so remote? Is not life
and immortality brought to light through the gospel? The partition wall broken
down between the Jew and Gentile? And all men every where called upon to
repent, and believe the gospel? That whoever will, may come and partake of the
water of life freely -- That whoever will be greatest in Christ's Kingdom, must
become the ^^^vant of all, condescend to do the lowest acts of kindness, that
he may win souls to Christ. Is not your procedure entirely contrary to this? It
is* Do you think with the Romish Church that ignorance is the mother of
devotion? Or why do you insist on their being kept ignorant that they may be
obedient? Is this Republicanism? Is there not some fraud here? (Alas! there is
death in the pot.) Or why do you not come to the light? If you have divine
authority for what you are doing, whom or what do you fear? Or why do you
introduce club-law instead of equity? The faithful are as the Mount Sion, which
cannot be moved, they put to flight the armies of aliens. The Lord, says David,
is on my side, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me! But the truth is --
The wicked flees when no man pursues him: he that does evil comes not to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. He works in the most secret and
covert way possible, conscious to himself that his procedure is illegal, and
will not bear a strict and impartial investigation. Indignum est homine esse
scelesto. As it required an Apelles to paint an Alexander, so it requires an
abler pen than mine to write a portrait of the innumerable and destructive
evils wherewith slavery is pregnant. The slavery held here was doubtless
devised in hell, and reduced to practice by Belial's unruly and benighted sons,
who study mischief on their beds, who sleep not unless they cause some to fall,
who eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of violence, who forsake the
guide of their youth and walk in the old way in which wicked men have trodden;
and as it has its root in hell, ignorance of God (its gloomy and infernal
offspring) has been inculcated in them by these sons of night, with great
diligence and success; which, instead of being the mother of devotion, is the
sure foundation of all heresy and error; for, those who are ignorant of God,
are unthankful, unholy, and to every good work reprobate. You say that This
refers to one who divines for a large sum -- Solomon says, that a gi^t blinds
the eyes. And does not a large salary do the same thing? It appears so.
"more knowledge will not comport with their continuing in their servile and
slavish state;" Alas! what a covetous, unchristian, and at the same time
diabolical disposition, do you here manifestly betray. O thou full of all
subtility, do thou not resemble that fallen spirit, that deceiver of mankind,
viz. the devil? Thou do. -- Does not satan, the father of lies, practice the
same deceitful and accursed art? Does he not know, if sinners saw the danger of
living in sin, and also the privilege of serving God, that they would desert
his service, that they would renounce the former and embrace the latter? He
does; or at least is apprehensive of it; and therefore works with mighty energy
on their hearts, vailing and blinding their minds, lest the glorious gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine into them, and they should be
saved. You charge the slaves of possessing envious and malevolent dispositions,
that they are mere eye servants, etc. If you were taken from your native land
to some foreign nation, to live forever in slavery, and kept as ignorant of God
as possible, would not such a conduct create a bitter and lasting enmity in
your breast, against such vile bloody, and unfeeling miscreants as these? And
would thou not perpetuate its memory by inculcating the same in thy
offspring? Reason says thou would. Thou say, that thy slaves will not
accept of liberty; but why not? Probably thou tenderest them liberty at such a
disadvantage that they cannot embrace it, seeing no way whereby they can
procure the necessaries of life. The air is the bird's element, yet after long
confinement in a cage, becomes blind to its natural right. The Israelites,
after long servitude, sunk into a low and abject state, even beneath the
dignity of men, so as to murmur against Moses their temporary mediator; and
preferred Egyptian bondage to that liberty which God saw to be their privilege,
and had called them to the enjoyment of. There may be many other reasons
assigned why they will not accept of liberty, viz. living as they li^t, etc.
But if under proper circumstances you tender them liberty, and they prefer
continuing with you, this is not an evil thing. If we minutely examine the
internal state of slavery, it discloses to us a scene of the most horrid
nature, attended with the most alarming consequences, viz. the owner carrying
on illicit commerce with the female slave, by which he entails slavery on his
own offspring, and deprives it of its natural right. Thus one sin begets
another. The female slave perceiving that she is caressed by her owner,
meditates the ruin and destruction of her mistress; and having recourse to some
pernicious and baneful corrosive, or in a more premeditated and sudden manner,
ushers in her untimely death. Do they not often poison one another; and do not
the owners connive at it, either through a servile fear of being murdered
themselves, (as a great gentleman said to me, "we know not when we lie down at
night but our throats may be cut ere the morning,") or through fear of losing
the slave who has perpetrated the wicked deed. Is not the owner, if possible,
in a more wretched and servile state than the slave? He is. As his procedure is
wrong, he does not rest secure beneath the shadow of the Almighty, neither do
the angels of God encamp around his habitation. Lo! this is the man who takes
not God for his strength, but trusts in the multitude of his riches, and
strengthens himself in his wickedness, for "he knows not but his throat may
be cut ere the morning." O most wretched and distressing state this! O sin how
deceitful is thy gain, and how fascinating are thy charms, that rationals by
thee are divested of their rationality, and live in misery to be more
abundantly miserable! O what a disgrace to human nature, dishonor to God,
hatred to Christ, despite to the spirit of grace, destruction to themselves,
and injury to others, is done by incorrigible and abandoned sinners! Neither
are they alarmed at the judgments of God, which have not been a few. In the
first place, the rice was destroyed by the freshets: these have been succeeded
by two tremendous fires in the city, and the fires by the pestilence, which
swept away a very great number; but as these can be accounted for by natural
causes, the hand of God is not seen in them; therefore, because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set in them to do evil. You add, that you have "ministers
enough already, and such as do not cry down slavery, the ball-room, playhouse,
billiard-table, etc. as being of so pernicious a kind as I represent them to
be." Is not the reason obvious? It is. They either receive large salaries,
which are a very great temptation to them, to connive at the fashionable vices
of the age, to submit to the mere cant of the day, and to see no evil in
whatever comports with their present lucrative station; or they frequent the
same places, and do the same things with their deceived auditors. Some of them
it is certain, not only hold slaves (contrary to the station of true Levites
and ministers of the New Testament,) but at the same time are either afraid,
ashamed, (or think it will not comport with their continuing to be the dupes of
their avarice and ambition,) to instruct them in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Does not this plainly evince, that they are only nominal,
not real ministers of Jesus Christ? It does: unless it can be proved that
religion is not in substance what it was seventeen hundred years ago. Is it not
evident that they are fallen beneath the dignity of men, and much more of
Christian ministers? For the scriptures enjoin ministers to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. O ye ministers! How will you
answer it to God, for suffering ^hese weak brethren (for you call them
brethren) to perish for whom Christ died? And instead of making converts of
those to whom you preach, to the religion of Jesus Christ, make them tenfold
more the children of hell, by your evil example, than it is probable they
otherwise would have been. Do you not neglect to reprove them sharply that they
may be found in the faith, and thereby suffer sin upon them, and also confirm
them in it, by acting contrary to your profession? Is this a time for ministers
to be absorbed in the business of this world, in buying, selling, and getting
gain; holding a vast number of slaves shut up in ignorance; living as beasts
before the Lord, without either food or seeder? O ye ministers! is this walking
as Christ walked? It is not. Unto the wicked, faith God, wherefore do thou
preach my laws? Whereas thou hate to be reformed. -- For the Lord's sake,
your own souls sake, and for the sake of others, amend your ways, or resign
your important station; give full proof of your ministry in future, or the Lord
will come upon you at a time when you expect him not, and at an hour when you
look not for him, and cut you asunder, and appoint you your portion with the
hypocrites! Do you not profess to believe that you were moved by the Holy Ghost
to take upon you the work of the ministry? You do. But where are the souls you
have been instrumental of turning to the Lord? Are they not to be found? What
is the cause? Is it not that you have been moved by an unholy spirit to neglect
your duty; and instead of teaching the people to abstain from the very
appearance of evil, and to stand aloof from balls, plays, billiards, cards,
horse-races, etc. as pernicious and destructive things, you sanction them by
your presence, and thereby encourage men in the way to destruction. Let shame
and confusion cover your faces, that you have so highly dishonored God,
degraded yourselves, and injured others, in bringing a stain on the most holy
religion of the blessed Jesus, by being seen at any of the above places, as you
have thereby caused the enemies of religion and God, to blaspheme, supposing
that religion is a cunningly devised fable, and that gain is godliness. Was it
ever known that any was gathered into the fold or flock of Christ at a
playhouse? No! an infallible proof that players are not of God; for our Lord
faith, He that gathers not with me, scatters abroad! and this saying is
verified both in players, and in their auditors, as the more they repeat and
hear plays, etc. the less desire they have to hear sermons, and to seek the
salvation of their souls. And with respect to the innocence of balls, suffice
it to say, that heathens were more discreet than to admit of ladies and
gentlemen dancing together. Cicero says, Nemo sobrius saltat -- no modest man
danceth. Chrysostom. says, Ubi est saltatis the est Diabolus -- where dancing is,
there the devil is. Let it then be remembered by these male, and female,
triflers with God, that a dance caused the head of John the Baptist to be taken
off, and that every dancer at best is a murderer of precious dear-bought time.
But you have taken offense at my preaching in the public market! Is it contrary
to scripture to preach abroad? It is not. If I preferred your present and
future happiness to temporal gain, pardon me this wrong. What would you have me
do? I endeavored to procure the old Baptist Church (pro tem.) but did not
succeed, it being hired previous to my application; neither could I obtain
liberty to preach in the French Church, though I would have given ample
payment, and also sufficient security to resign whenever their minister should
arrive. -- Relative to my attempting to join the English Church, I shall only
mention, that there was no vacancy -- further particulars may be mentioned
hereafter. But did you not in some recent advertisements, solicit the
inhabitants of other states to migrate to this state for the "enjoyment of
greater privileges?" and also that you protected "every kind of religion?" You
did. -- It appears then by your mode of expression, that you would protect and
defend their persons in the free exercise of their religious worship. But how
does this comport with your treatment of me, (as it is well known that
Methodists from the beginning preached aloud) unless you mean by protection,
that you will carefully lodge them in the guard-house? But intendant E -- ds
professes a greater degree of sanctity than some other persons do, though it
is evident that profession is not possession, or he would not disperse the
slaves, and also the free blacks, whenever he is informed of their being
assembled to pray and to praise God. Intendant E -- ds it seems, has offered to
join all his influence to ruin me, and to destroy my wife's school: but why
would he do this? Did you not appoint the ministers their province -- Did you
not openly declare that they ought not to interfere in secular matters; that
the cure of souls was sufficient for them to attend to? You did. -- This
supposes that souls are diseased. But is it customary for the patient to
prescribe to the physician? I think not. -- How comes it to pass then that you,
after appointing the ministers their province, undertake to direct them in what
manner they shall apply their medicine! And to whom they shall, and to whom
they shall not apply it? Pray what do you mean by this conduct? Is it that you
will have no ministers but such as will suffer themselves to be the mere dupes
and tools of your caprice and humor? You may find some greedy dogs who can
never have enough, who will submit to you; but true ministers of Jesus Christ
will not, they have more regard for your souls than to flatter and deceive you.
Is it reasonable to suppose, that men who have been commissioned from the high
court of heaven, to preach the everlasting gospel to every creature, will ask
your permission, when, where, how, and to whom they shall preach it? It is not.
For the importance of their station is by far superior to that of a king; and
if they walk as Christ walked, seeking the interest of the Redeemer's kingdom,
they are the salt of the earth; but those who seek the honor which comes of
men, who are afraid to declare to the people openly and publicly, that unless
they depart from all sin and iniquity, and live a life devoted to God, they
will perish, are unworthy the name of ministers. It appears from 2 Cor. chap.
5. that God has committed unto his true and faithful ministers the ministry of
reconciliation. How very important then is their office, and how laudable their
undertaking. How pleasant and delightful would their tidings be to you if you
would exercise reason, and humbly and calmly wait on God, until he has filled
you with that sweet heaven-born peace through Christ, which they make mention
of. Language and expression fail to set forth the incomparable worth and
dignity of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world, and the
innate happiness and permanent satisfaction enjoyed by all his true and
faithful followers. Has not the Apostle Paul commanded men to pray every where,
lifting up holy hands to God without wrath and doubting? He has. And was he not
guided and directed by the spirit of God in what he has enjoined us? He was. I
ask then, by what authority do you forbid men to pray every where, or at least
in their own houses? Is this true liberty or the quintessence of popery? Is
this man's natural right? Will long prayers, long sermons, and a feigned
sanctity, justify you in opposing the order of God? Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever seed a man sows that shall he also reap. How can you
make it appear to be consistent even with heathen honesty, much less with
Christianity, to forbid the free blacks, etc. to assemble together, to pray,
and sing praises to Almighty God? Or why do you threaten them with imprisonment
if they are found persevering in the above practi^e* Is there not a species of
the inquisition in this; and if retained, will it not introduce the guillotine
among us, or something worse? I fear so. -- God will not be trifled with. All
your prayers, while you thus act, will, like Cain's sacrifice, return in curses
upon your guilty heads. Do not the free blacks, etc. pay taxes, and also
discharge all other duties and obligations imposed on them, equally with other
men? They do. Why then were they denied the privilege of purchasing the
liberty, to sue for their rights, and at the same time severely threatened, if
they should attempt to ask it in future -- or why may they not assemble
together, to worship God without molestation? Is it either good sense or good
policy to deny them this privilege? Will you not, by limiting them in this
respect, cause them to break forth, and burst their bonds? See ye to it. Does
not the above arise from ignorance of God and divine things? I think so. For
Mr. R -- ge, of Short-street, came near my window and cursed me, when I was at
prayer! and on a certain evening I went to the Methodist Church to hear the
Rev. Dr. Coke preach, when the Clerk of the Old Church came into the house,
about half drunk, and said, he would send the minister with all the damned
Methodists to damnation, etc. I presume that the common plea whereupon many
ground their argument to support the Justness of slavery, (viz that through
this mean many of them have been converted to Christianity) is a mere
subterfuge; for as the slaves' conversion was not their primary motive, however
God may have overruled it for the slaves' good, the merchandizer in human blood
is condemned nevertheless. (He who does evil that good may come, his damnation
is just.) And how much more so when he does it with an evil design. But as God
is not limited, could he not have given the slaves this blessing in their own
land; could he not have communicated that love to them which is the substance
of Christianity? He could* Was it either your conduct toward them, or kind
treatment, which caused them to fall in love with Christianity, so called? No,
your consciences acquit you: to this you plead not guilty; but if the
Babylonish garment of slavery entitles you to a winding sheet of fire, what
will all your satanical faith avail you if you do not the will of God who is in
heaven? It is not believing right only that makes us differ from the devil, but
doing right. Christ went about doing good, seeking to save the lost; but satan,
as a roaring lion, goes about seeking whom he may devour: the devil, is
orthodox in faith, but destitute of love; and were you as orthodox as satan in
the faith, and not imitators of Christ in love, you are not of God, but of the
wicked one. But you plead very strongly for your great goddess Diana; you add,
that the Captain says it is a deed of charity to bring them from their own
land: and the charity of the merchandizer in his brother's blood, is fully
evinced by the manner in which he treats him and disposes of him: but where
interest is concerned, you prefer darkness to light, pass over judgment and the
love of God, and act as if you were licenced to do wrong, and at the same time
to say, "The Temple of the Lord are we."
Because cause I, pursuant to our Lord's command, went out into the streets and
lanes of the city, to call sinners to repentance. I appealed to every man's
conscience if it was not enough that the poor Africans were torn away from
their native land, but that the additional trial of being confined to a
plantation, or shut up in a rice swamp, must be superadded? That I viewed it to
be incompatible with the Christian character, and at the same time contrary to
the Declaration of Independence, which says, That liberty is every man's
natural birthright. I also, (after the example of St. Paul) exhorted the slaves
to be regardless of their servile state, to serve God, and not deprive their
owners of any part of their property, but to be honest, upright and sincere
unto the day of Christ, who will abundantly reward all his true and faithful
followers, and punish with everlasting destruction, their oppressors and the
opposers of his gospel. What color of excuse have you for the contempt with
which you treat this part of our species? that contrary to the laws of God and
man, you refuse to put them upon the common foot of humanity? Have you not
offered more for the head of a slave than for his being restored to you? Deuteronomy.
chap. xxiii. verses 15. 16. Thou shall not deliver unto his master, the servant
which is escaped from his master unto thee; thou shall not oppress him. What a
contrast between your procedure and the law of God. Who can without deep sorrow
of heart read Joel Barlow's letter addressed to the Secretary of State at
Philadelphia, relative to the sufferings of the Americans who are in Algerine
bondage, and which has been recently inserted in the Charleston papers? Do not
those who encourage, abet, or connive at the continuation of the Slave Trade,
bring distress on the land, and pull down the judgments of God upon it? Is it
not an accursed policy thus to fly in the face of heaven, and to act as if they
feared they should fail of damnation, and therefore do evil that good may come,
that it may be just and sure to them? Do they not see the hand of God in
permitting the Americans to go into Algerine Slavery, is not this a judicial
punishment for continuing the Slave Trade, etc.?
(What a stimulus is this to murder). And is not the murder of them frequently
passed over unnoticed? And it is evident you do all you can to cut them off
from the prospects of happiness in the other world, as well as in this, and
deny them the means (as far as in you lies) of attaining it. Are you
republicans? God pity you! I would rather be found in the place of an **** than
in yours, if you die as you live; and what hope is there but that you will die
so? You ask, is slave-holding a soul-damning sin? Let the scriptures decide
this question. 1 Cor. vi. 9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the kingdom of God. Is not slave-holding both an unrighteous and unjust
thing? The hope of unjust men perishes. Prove. xi. 7. Is it not pregnant with
injustice, extortion, covetousness and theft? I think so. It is then infallibly
certain (as the scriptures cannot be broken) there is no alternative. You must
either decline it, or be excluded the kingdom of God; except they prefer living
with you in bondage to being liberated, then you are free from that
condemnation. Abraham's servants enjoyed religious privileges equally with his
own son. They were not trained up in ignorance of God, but taught to serve and
obey him. Teach your slaves to do likewise. Would it not be advisable to weigh
in the balance of justice and equity, the present abject and servile state of
the poor despised and oppressed Africans? Admitting (as you say) that local
circumstances necessitate you to hold them, if they are necessary in order to
your support, do they not merit from you much better treatment and attention
than they generally meet with? It is certain they do. Slavery may be necessary
to the support of luxury and extravagance, but not to the support of frugal and
abstemious living, which every Christian ought to be contented with. Godliness
with contentment is great gain, for we brought nothing into this world, and it
is certain we can carry nothing out; but where godliness is wanting, there is
an aching void in the soul, which (though many things are substituted in its
stead) nothing can supply. Hence the covetous man troubles his own house, is a
flat idolator, destroys his own soul, and aims (at least) at the destruction
of others, and finally sinks into perdition. As you employ overseers to
superintend your business, and to insist on the slaves doing whatever he shall
insist on as a duty incumbent on them to their owners. Why do you not employ a
good man who, at the same time might instruct them in their duty to God? Ought
not your ministers to visit them, to see that every man has his own wife, and
every woman her own husband? To join them together in holy matrimony. For
marriage is honorable in all* and the bed undefiled, but whore-mongers and
adulterers God will judge; whether they are high, or low, rich or poor, white
or black, bond or free. For without holiness shall no man see his face in
glory. Some families whom I much esteem, and from whom I have received many
favors, have frequently complained of the dishonesty and ingratitude of their
slaves, in rendering them contempt, hatred, and disobedience, in return for
their indulgence and kindness to them. This I know to be truth, and am very
sorry they are thus perplexed and troubled, instead of being obeyed, honored,
and esteemed by their servants; as I believe they are better done by than they
could do for themselves if they were liberated. (It is true there are very few
such instances!) But it seems that nothing will atone for their being deprived
of their natural right. Nature pleads for its own, and will not (in the
general) be content without it, though you would give many gifts. The very idea
of limitation is irksome to the rational soul. As the Almighty has given us
just and holy laws, and has capacitated and qualified us to keep them; and at
the same time, freedom and liberty to obey or disobey, and to these has annexed
gracious promises and dreadful threatenings; the former to encourage and
stimulate to love and obedience, the latter to awe and deter us from sin and
disobedience. And that we might not live beneath our privileges on the one
hand, and remain ignorant of our dangers and disadvantages on the other, has
(through Christ) given the Holy Ghost, and a preached gospel. Would it not be
laudable to imitate, and copy, after Jehovah God? The apostle says, be ye
imitators of God as dear children; which, in the first instance, would lead us
to put into execution the Declaration of Independance, viz. that liberty is
every man's natural and unalienable right; and to instruct all men in the
truth, making them acquainted with the laws of God, and with the laws of their
country; that whenever they violate them, they may not do it through ignorance;
that being convicted of transgression, they may be justly punished; and, in
consequence of their good deportment and well regulated life and conversation,
they may be equally esteemed in this world, and also in the world to come
receive the crown of glory that fades not away. I fear you have not considered
the dangerous consequences of cow-skin or forced obedience, or you would
immediately decline it. The only proper method whereby to know what men are, is
to treat them as free agents; and whoever follows not this rule, is either
ignorant or dishonest; for where there is no stimulous to obedience but
ignorance, castigation, menaces and abusive language, it forebodes a most
melancholy, alarming and dire catastrophe! Here I might (to illustrate this
awful and tremendous scene) begin with Egypt, where literature first
flourished; and from thence proceed to the Chaldean, Grecian and Roman nations,
and even down to individuals; and then inquire, what has been the cause of
these changes, and of the great devastation and ruin wrought among them; the
answer would be sin! What is sin? Sin is anomia! A transgression of the law.
And as no person is under the necessity of transgressing God's holy law, it
plainly evinceth, that their condemnation for sin is just, and that their
destruction is entirely of themselves; and what has been may be again; however
secure we may think ourselves our sins will find us out. Solomon says, let a
bear bereaved of her whelps meet a man rather than a fool in his folly*
Ignorant persons, when stimulated to contend for their rights* will show you no
pity. (This is very discernable from their present deportment, for when you say
to them go or come, they do these when they please. Here the lady must commence
savage, and the gentleman diabolian, to make them subservient to their
commands; and wound, grieve, and destroy their immortal souls, through
breathing out bitter oaths, and horrid imprecations, etc.) When, on the
contrary, if their support or sustenance, as free men, depended on their good
deportment, etc. they would not dare act as they now do. Take a retrospect not
only of the ancient, but more particularly of the recent changes, commotions,
and deso^^lations, which have happened, and are now taking place in the
neighboring nations and islands; changes, which had they been mentioned a few
years ago, would have been scoffed at, and the author or propagator of such
things either apprehended as a "dangerous character," and confined in prison,
or banished, if not deprived of life. And has not God said, that righteousness
shall cover the face of the earth? It then behooves all those who would wish to
escape the wrath of God, to reduce their utmost efforts to practice, to
establish it in the earth. Let it be remembered, that if we provoke the
Almighty to come down to remove the evils which he has commanded us to remove,
and to establish that justice and equity among men which he has commanded us
to establish, we may expect to meet with no other treatment from him than our
base, wicked, and ungodly conduct has merited, viz. death, and without
repentance (which will then be uncertain) damnation. Have you never read of
that awfully tremendous period, when Jehovah, from Jehovah, rained brimstone
and fire out of heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah? Or when Jehovah caused the
earth to open her mouth and to swallow up Dathan, etc.? And do you believe that
he is the same, yesterday, today, and forever? That the wicked shall be turned
into hell with all the nations that forget God? That he can destroy both soul
and body in hell? What then will all your gain, pomp and grandeur avail you?
All the pains you have been at to aggrandize self, or to accumulate large
fortunes, and a vast number of slaves for your children, when death gnaweth
upon your souls, O how then will the scene change! When you will have to
reflect on your past misconduct; that you heaped up treasure to eat your flesh
as it were fire! Is it not more than probable that the very slaves you are now
training up in sin and ignorance, and securing as a portion for your children,
will be the very instruments of their, if not of your destruction? Thus will
the Almighty visit the sins of wicked parents on their wicked offspring. Is not
the curse reversed? Are not the owners become the servants of servants? In a
spiritual sense they are; for they fear lest the slaves should either poison
them or cut their throats. Thus the head is become the tail, according to the
saying of Moses in Deuteronomy. This city has already received a deadly wound,
which is judged will take ten years in healing; but without a speedy
reformation, who can say it will ever be healed? I beseech you therefore, by
the mercies of God, that you decline cow-skin reformation, (excepting the case
of infants, who must be chastised betimes, to drive foolishness far from them)
sentencing (...) blacks to be severely chastised by the merciless, This refers
to S -- s, master of the workhouse, or inquisition, where the blacks are
confined and punished.
that you reprobate the very idea of continuing the slave trade, and, endeavor
at least, to instruct those you already have in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ; for consider how you will lament, and mourn, when death stares you in
the face, that the gain you got by slavery served only to nourish and increase
your pride; and to prompt you to spend your precious strength, time and
talents, at those places and about those things wherein you could not glorify
God, but blaspheme his honor! O repent and lead a holy life! O be entreated,
for Christ's sake, for your soul's sake, to escape the damnation of hell, and
to enjoy eternal felicity! But, do you hate to be reformed? Will you defy
Jehovah? Are you regardless of what will be the end of sinning? Will you
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them who know not God, and who have not obeyed the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence
of the Lord and from the glory of his power. Can you dwell with devouring fire?
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched? Where the smoke of
their torments ascends up for ever and ever? What, will you choose death in
the error of your life, and dwell with devils and damned spirits in eternal
fire? Be drenched with the sulphurous fumes of the deep abyss? What, will you
who are redeemed by Jesus Christ, become the reproach of devils? Through
denying him, by wicked works, will you dare him to deny you, before his Father
and the holy angels? O God! can these dead sinners live? Lord thou know! O
Lord, breathe upon these slain by sin and satan, that they may live! Do you not
live, as if you were created for yourselves, instead of being created for God's
service and the good of mankind? Have you not already turned Jesus Christ out
of doors? You have, in denying his divinity and contemning his worship. And
have you not done this because your manner of living contradicts his holy
mandates, as if this would be a sufficient excuse for you at that great and
awful period, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed? But let it be
remembered, that there is no other name given among men, whereby we can be
saved, but by Jesus! Therefore if you live and die without an interest in his
merits, you wilfully exclude yourselves from the glory and happiness of heaven,
and plunge yourselves into the miseries and torments of hell. Alas! did not but
see your sins, the nearness of death and judgment, the lake of fire and
brimstone, and the fiends who attend you, what loud cries and bitter wailings
would you make! What, can you eat, drink and talk, on the verge of hell,
without any concern for your immortal soul? Is the song of the drunkard your
delight? O thou neglector of salvation! God is angry with thee, condemns thee
to be damned, and may the next moment slay and send thee to hell. Art thou bold
on the brink of endless burnings? Awake and call upon the Lord! Do thou see
how sin turned angels into devils and damned them forever; and sudden death may
soon separate thee from all good, and plunge thee into eternal torments! The
fire of God's wrath will enter and go through sinners, and make their torments
intolerable. This is part of the damnation of hell. But to prevent thy
destruction, and that thou may not despair of salvation, when thou
considerest thy dangerous state and condition, and what a bitter enemy thou
have been against God, thy neighbor and thyself, the Lord has said, As I live
I will not the death of the sinner, but that he repent, return and live -- When
the wicked man turns away from the wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive -- Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. The doubt
is not whether God will have mercy on you, but whether you will embrace it in
his way and on his own plan, viz. through Christ. O come to God, depending on
the alone merits of his only begotten Son for present and future salvation! And
rest not satisfied until you know that you are accepted in and through the
beloved Jesus, until you know that you have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of all your past sins, and have received the Holy Ghost as your
comforter and guide, and as the earnest of your eternal inheritance -- that
following his guidance, and living a holy and spotless life, and being renewed
in righteousness and in true holiness, you may be presented faultless before
the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, and receive the crown of life --
the sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, and receive the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world; when the righteous will shine forth
as the sun in the firmament in the kingdom of their father; where they will
behold God in the person of Jesus Christ, through the countless ages of
eternity; singing praises to him who lives forever and ever. O most great and
glorious God, impart thy sovereign aid, to give success to what is here
written, consonant to thy most holy and sacred will, that sinners may fear and
tremble and turn unto the Lord; and that saints may join with angels in lauding
th^^ great and glorious name at the conversion, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

Men and Brethren, I am yours, in the bonds of Christian love, JOHN PHILLIPS.

A COPY OF A LETTER.
I ADDRESS you in the name and presence of the Eternal Jehovah, whose I am and
whom I serve; and before whose bar you and I must (...) pass the strictest
scrutiny; he will disclose the secrets of all hearts, and render to every man
according to the deeds done in the body. How wretched then, beyond all
conception, must he be, who has showed no mercy! He shall have judgment
without mercy! When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on those who know not God, and
who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired
in all who believe, in that day. It is reported, that you advised Old Isaac (a
slave belonging to Mr* D^ner, a tanner in this city, who was about to be sold
at vand^^, and whom you intended to purchase) to leave his wife, saying, "never
mind your wife, I have plenty of young girls in the country, I will give you
one of them for a wife." If the report is true, are you not the man, who,
living and dying in your present state, shall never see the face of God with
comfort? Can you advise men to leave their wives, and remain guiltless? No. For
he who breaks the least commandment, and teaches men so, whether by precept
or example, the same shall be called least, in the kingdom of heaven, that is,
shall have no part therein. Can it possibly be, that you have wandered so far
from the right way, as to advise a man to leave his wife? Is not your precept
herein contrary to our Lord's precept? It is. For our Lord teaches that a man
shall leave all his relations and cleave to his wife. -- Can any whore-monger,
adulterer, fornicator, unclean person, covetous man, or idolator, enter the
kingdom of heaven? No. What then will the end be of those who advise men to put
away their wives, and take other wives? While you thus act, is not your
preaching an abomination to the Lord, and is not your prayer turned into sin?
Unto the wicked, says God, wherefore do thou preach my laws, whereas thou
hate to be reformed? Thou art inexcusable, O man! For, while thou teach
some from the pulpit not to sin, thou advisest others to leave their wives in
thy private conversation with them, and hereby thou temptest them to commit
sin. Consider, I pray thee, for a few moments, the importance of thy station;
and the mean, abject, and servile state of the poor slave whom thou advisest to
leave his wife; and then contrast the subject between a learned Doctor, who has
had the advantages of a liberal and polite education, and an ignorant slave,
who cannot utter a sentence of English with any degree of propriety, and you
will be led to see that you have great reason to be ashamed before Almighty,
God, that you have so much abused these great advantages, as to subject
yourself to be thus exposed, by there proof of a poor, abject slave. It is then
infallibly certain, that great learning and superior advantages only serve to
make the possessor so much the more like satan, if he is hardened in sin, and
is not partaker of the Holy Ghost, or does not follow and attend to his
dictates. Thus it was with the scribes of old, they destroyed their precept by
their example. Is not he who provides not for his own, especially for those of
his own house, worse than an infidel? And does not this provision, copiously
considered, imply training them up in the way they should go, in the
instruction and admonition of the Lord? How then can you escape the wrath of
God, which is revealed from heaven, against all unrighteousness, for confining
your slaves to your plantation, suffering them to live in sin, and in
ignorance, without teaching them to seek and serve the Lord, violating the
Lord's day by servile labor, etc. while you are in the house of God, taking
the name of God in vain, by saying, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy
upon us. when you do not the things which he commands you. And though you
should pay tithe of mint, anise, and cummin, you neglect the weightier matters
of the law, judgment, mercy and faith. You resemble those blind guides who
strain out a gnat and swallow a camel. Those who within are full of rapine and
intemperance -- those who within are full of dead men's bones and all
uncleanness -- those who within are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. How exter^s
is this character to that of a true minister of Jesus Christ -- how contrary to
that charity which is the grand characteristic of a true Christian! What if you
should give all your goods to feed the poor, and your body to be burned and
remain destitute of charity, divine love to God and man, what will it avail you
at the last and great day, when robed in dreadful majesty the Judge of all
shall come? If you are found to be an unprofitable servant, you will be cast
into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Have thou a
name that thou live and art dead? O repent and do thy first works, lest God
should remove thee out of time into a tormenting hell! O consider this, lest
God should pluck thee away, and there be none to deliver thee* That the Lord
may bless this to thy immortal soul is the prayer of thy sincere friend, in the
bonds of a peaceful gospel.

Ch^^lest^^ Jan. 6. 17^7. J. PHILLIPS.


