FACTS AND OBSERVATIONS RELATIVE TO THE NATURE AND ORIGIN OF THE Pestilential
Fever, WHICH PREVAILED IN THIS CITY, IN 1793, 1797, AND 1798.

BY THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE, NO. 41, SOUTH
SECOND STREET. 1798.

FACTS, etc.
FROM the first appearance, in this city, of the contagious malignant,
pestilential or yellow fever, in 1793, the College of Physicians, agreeably to
the principles of their institution, sanctioned by a charter from the
legislature in 1789, have used their best endeavors to check the progress and
to guard against the future introduction of this dreadful calamity. To the
repeated applications made to them, by the different departments of the state
government on the subject, they have ever paid a prompt and respectful
attention, and they now conceive it a duty incumbent on them to publish a
concise detail of their former proceedings, and to explain more fully their
sentiments on the nature, origin and prevention of this fatal disease.

About the latter end of July and beginning of August 1793, a fever of a new
and very alarming nature prevailed in this city. It first appeared in Water
street, between Mulberry and Sassafras streets, and all the cases of this
fever, were, for two or three weeks evidently traced to this particular spot. A
considerable part of the city, Northern Liberties and district of Southwark
became gradually infected, and it was not until the coming of the frost, that
the disease subsided, after having proved fatal to nearly five thousand persons.

The peculiarity of the symptoms, the remarkable inefficacy of remedies
generally used for diseases which commonly occur in the same season of the
year, with somewhat similar symptoms, its great mortality and contagious
nature, sufficiently evinced, that a very unusual disease existed amongst us;
which was soon discovered to be what is called the Siam, in the French, and the
Yellow Fever in the British West Indies.

The College met on the 25th day of August to consider what was necessary for
them to do on the occasion, and next day sent to the Mayor of the city,
Directions for preventing the further progress of the malignant fever, which
were published. These directions may be seen at large in a pamphlet entitled,
Proceedings of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia, relative to the
prevention of the introduction and spreading of contagious diseases, published
in January 1798, containing a regular account of all that had been done by the
College on the occasion. A copy of this publication was sent to every member of
the federal and state legislatures, and of the select and common council of the
city. These directions plainly show that the College regarded the disease as
highly contagious and malignant.

On the fifth day of November a letter was received from the Governor of the
state, requesting information of the origin of the disease, the precautions
best calculated to prevent its recurrence, and the proper means to be pursued
to purify the city from latent infection. The College entered into a careful
inquiry on this subject, and although they met with many difficulties in the
investigation, difficulties which generally occur on such occasions, and the
solution of which would criminate those persons who are more immediately
concerned, and who are the best qualified to give the necessary accounts, yet
they obtained sufficient information to offer the following answer to the
Governor.

No instance has ever occurred, of the disease called the Yellow Fever, being
generated in this city, or in any other part of this state, as far as we know;
but there have been frequent instances of its having been imported, not only
into this, but into other parts of North America, and prevailing there for a
certain period of time; and from the rise, progress and nature of the malignant
fever, which began to prevail here about the beginning of last August, and
extended itself gradually over a great part of the city, we are of opinion,
that this disease was imported into Philadelphia by some of the vessels which
arrived in the port after the middle of July. This opinion we are further
confirmed in by the various accounts we have received from the best authorities
we could procure on the subject.

The College also informed the Governor of the best means to purify the city
from latent infection, and offered their services to cooperate with the
legislature in their endeavors to prevent, avert or remove these dangerous
calamities.

On the second day of December 1794, a committee of the College was appointed
to consider the defects in the health-laws and to point out a proper remedy. On
the report of this committee it was resolved, that a memorial on the subject
should be presented to the state legislature, which was done accordingly,
January 26th, 1795. The principal objects of this memorial were, a request that
medical characters might be appointed to assist the consulting physician of the
port to prevent the spreading of contagious diseases when introduced amongst
us, and to authorize them to remove the diseased and those exposed to
contagion. Also that they should be consulted respecting the quarantine and
purification of vessels, and the construction and regulation of the city
hospital.

So much attention was paid to this memorial that the legislature, in the new
health-law, passed this session, empowered the Governor to appoint four
persons, members of the College, to assist the consulting physician as
recommended, who were accordingly appointed in August following, and were
invited to hold one meeting with the Board of Health; but another law was
passed the succeeding session which excluded them from any further share in the
business.

About the latter end of July 1797, the malignant contagious fever again
appeared in Philadelphia: and on the fifteenth of August a letter was received
from the Governor requesting information concerning its existence, and an
opinion on the best mode of preventing the calamity threatened. The College
immediately directed, their President to inform the Governor that such a
disease had lately appeared in Penn-street and its neighborhood, and on the
seventeenth of the month, in a letter to the Governor, gave their opinion of
the best mode of averting the threatened calamity, by first, prescribing the
methods for preventing the spreading of contagious diseases when introduced,
and secondly, by preventing their introduction.

To attain the first of these purposes, they recommended strict attention to
cleaning and watering the streets, habits of temperance, attention to
clothing, exercise, etc. to avoid intercourse with the sick, and to purify
places suspected or occupied by the sick.

For the second purpose they recommended, a new law on the subject, which will
be hereafter recurred to. See next page.

On the twenty-second day of August the Board of Health requested the College
to adopt and publish such advice as would tend to check the progress of The
College, accordingly on the twenty-fifth, furnished the board with their
sentiments on the subject. Their plan consisted, generally, in separating the
sick from the well, great attention to cleanliness, free admission of air,
purification of bedding, clothing, etc. by exposing them to the smoke of
charcoal and sulphur in close rooms, the free use of lime and cold water, and
the application of the vapor produced by mixing oil of vitriol and salt petre,
in sick rooms.

October 30th, a letter was read from the Governor of the state requesting to
know what measures ought to be pursued to purify the city from any latent
infection, and what precautions were best calculated to guard against the
future recurrence of a similar calamity. On the seventh day of November a full
answer to the Governor's letter was agreed on and communicated to him. This
letter is here introduced as giving more fully the sense of the College on this
very interesting subject.

SIR,
We have duly considered your letter of the 24th ult. and shall cheerfully
comply with the requisitions contained therein.

The measures to be pursued for purifying the city from any latent infection,
are such as we have heretofore recommended, viz. -- A strict attention to
cleanliness, washing, white-washing, and ventilating the infected houses,
bedding and clothing; and fumigating them with charcoal and sulphur, or a
mixture of oil of vitriol and saltpeter. These, with the frost, we believe,
will be found sufficient entirely to destroy any latent contagion.

But the latter part of your inquiry, viz. What precautions are best calculated
to guard against the future occurrence of a similar calamity, is an object of
such magnitude, as to demand a more particular reply.

We have, on former occasions, communicated our sentiments on this head; but as
you now inform us, that it is intended to establish a foundation for future
regulations, we willingly enter into the detail; and though this will
principally consist of repetition, yet it may be useful to have our ideas
presented in one view for your consideration. And as these sentiments have been
more fully confirmed by recent events, we are again induced earnestly to
recommend a strict adoption of the measures we advised in our communication of
August 18th, 1797, as being the best calculated to guard against the future
introduction of contagious diseases. We now recapitulate those advices with
some additions.

Let an entire new health-law be made, constituting a Board of Health, to
consist of five persons, two of whom to be practitioners of physic. The
smallness of the number will ensure responsibility, and a constant residence in
the city; and the professional knowledge of the medical characters will be
necessary to assist in directing the measures of the Board. Let no person whose
private interest may be affected by quarantine laws, be a member of this Board.

Let a sufficient sum of money, per annum, be subject to the draughts of the
Board, who shall render to the Assembly a yearly account of their expenditures.
Let this Board sit daily during the months of July, August, September, and
October; and, during these months let every vessel from the Mediterranean,
coast of Africa, West Indies, and continent of America, to the southward of
Florida, perform an effectual quarantine. Let the cargoes of suspicious vessels
be unloaded, and, with the vessels, be purified at the Island.

Let a resident physician, or health-officer be appointed, who shall never be
absent from the Island during the above mentioned months, and a consulting
physician, who shall reside at Philadelphia.

Let the punishment of a master of a vessel, who evades the law, by landing
cargo, crew or passengers, contrary to the intent and meaning of it, be the
same as for murder of the second degree. Let no vessel of war ever be allowed
to come above the fort.

Let co-operative laws be procured from the neighboring legislatures or from
congress.

Let the Board of Health have power, with the concurrence of the Governor, to
cut off the intercourse with infected persons and places. Let the long
projected Hospital be erected.

Let the most diligent and scrupulous attention be given to cleaning and
watering the streets, gutters and wharves, throughout the city and liberties.

Such are the precautions which we believe best calculated to guard against the
future occurrence of calamities similar to those we have experienced. If
further discoveries shall happily add to our knowledge on this important
subject, we shall not fail to make such communications to the Governor without
delay.

By order of the College of Physicians JOHN REDMAN, President. Attest, THOMAS
C. JAMES, Sec'y.
Philadelphia, Nov. 7, 1797.

To his Excellency, THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire. Governor of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
Although the College had now complied with every requisition that had been
made to them, yet, feelingly impressed with the magnitude of the subject, they
judged it proper to present to the state legislature their reasons for
believing the disease to be of foreign origin, hoping that the legislature
would be induced to make such a change in the health-laws as might secure us
from its future introduction. This Memorial was accompanied with a narrative of
facts relative to the probable origin and progress of the malignant contagious
fever, which had lately appeared amongst us.

The Memorial contains our most striking reasons for believing in the foreign
origin of the disease, but for general information, it may be useful more fully
to adduce our arguments in support of these opinions, which have been still
further confirmed by the circumstances that have occurred during the last
summer and Autumn; accompanied with such a statement of facts as we think
cannot fail of producing conviction in every unprejudiced mind.

Our aim is the investigation and spreading of truth on this important subject.
We are equally interested, with our fellow-citizens in discovering the means of
averting so terrible a disease. A proper health-law for the purpose has not yet
been applied, and unless something more efficient be done upon the occasion,
our seaport towns may soon become uninhabitable.

We shall give our reasons for believing that the disease in question is not of
domestic origin, and we trust they will prove convincing to our legislature,
and to our fellow-citizens, generally.

When the destructive pestilence raged at Marscilles in 1720, there were found
physicians of eminence, who strenuously maintained, that it was neither a
contagious nor an imported disease. See A Treatise on the Plague, by Patrick
Russell, M. D. F. R. S. and surgeon to the British factory at Aleppo. Printed,
London, 1791.
They derived it from the poor diet of the lower class of the inhabitants; and
although they saw the vessel that brought it, and the most unequivocal and
dreadful marks of contagion, yet they still persisted in their first opinions.
Similar contrarieties of opinion prevailed at Messina in 1743, but efficient
quarantine laws have since preserved Marseilles and Messina from this
destructive visitant, although continually exposed.

In the present year the city of Baltimore has been preserved in a similar
manner, and we would ask, Is the city of Boston more exposed by its situation
to the generation of tropical diseases than Baltimore. Where do we see the
first appearance of our pestilential fever? Is it amongst the marshes to the
south west of our city, or in the neighborhood of the wharves? Is it in the
confined alleys; or on the salubrious banks of the Delaware at Kensington? Is
it not always near those places where vessels from foreign countries are found?

Look at the disease itself; does any fever of our country ever assume such
forms, or produce such effects? Do our severest bilious fevers generally
terminate fatally in a few days? Do they steal on insensibly, infecting one
person after another in a family and in a neighborhood? Are they ever equally
severe in seasons so opposite as 1797 and 1798? Do not the rise, the symptoms,
the progress and the termination of this fatal disease, demonstrate that it is
totally different from any thing we have been accustomed to?

But more particularly to examine the subject: our principal reasons for
believing that this disease does not originate amongst us, are the following:

Firstly. It differs essentially from any other disease which is common to this
country, and agrees in its most essential symptoms, with what is called the
Yellow Fever in the West Indies.

Secondly. It has been regularly traced to the vicinity of some vessel or
vessels, from the West Indies; or to persons or clothing connected with them.

The principal peculiarities of this fever are, its contagious nature, the
progress of the symptoms and the mortality consequent on it.

To endeavor to prove the contagious nature of this disease would, in our
opinion, be equally useless as to prove the contagion of the plague. But in all
our observation and practice we know of no case, where the autumnal bilious
remittents of our country have proved contagious. We are aware that these are
sometimes attended with violent and dangerous symptoms, but this striking
characteristic of contagion being always absent, they never become an object of
public dread or concern.

The characteristic symptoms of this disease are, generally, a constant fever
for about three days, which, in dangerous cases, is followed by a cessation
thereof. The concomitant symptoms of yellowness of the skin, and vomiting of
black matter, which are so common in this fever, do sometimes, though rarely,
occur in other diseases.

The mortality which ensues is such as is common when pestilential diseases
prevail. The general confusion and desertion of the sick, naturally add to the
fatal consequences of these diseases.

As to the second point, the origin of the fever, we may observe, that until
the year 1793, no doubts on this subject, as far as we know, had been
promulgated in America. Doctor Lining of Charleston, South Carolina, one of the
best, and the only American author who had then published on this subject, and
who wrote in 1753, expressly informs us, that the yellow fever had prevailed in
that city four times within twenty-five years, and that whenever it appeared
there, it was easily traced to some person who was lately arrived from some of
the West India Islands, where it was epidemical.

It may not be improper here to remark, that very erroneous opinions on this
subject have arisen from confounding this pestilential fever with the malignant
remittents of the West Indies and America. The difference still holds good,
that these last are not contagious, if we may give credit to the writings and
observations of Physicians who have practiced in the West Indies, added to our
own. But the malignant fever which prevailed in this city in 1793, 1797, and
1798, was always more or less so, according to circumstances.

A striking peculiarity, which does not occur in any other disease, attends the
yellow fever in the West Indies. The natives and persons who have resided long
in those islands, are very seldom seized with this fever. It was likewise
remarked, and it is a circumstance that deserves particular attention, that
very few, if any, of the Creole French in this city, suffered from the
contagious malignant fever which prevailed here, in 1793, 1797, and 1798,
though the disease was introduced into their families; and children born in
this country, of Creole parents, died with it last autumn, while the parents
and the children born in the West Indies, were entirely exempt from it. To
European French, Irish, and other strangers, the disease was remarkably fatal.
It is an observation, founded in long and extensive experience, and which
admits not of an exception, that strangers are the greatest sufferers from the
diseases of the country into which they migrate: were the yellow fever a
disease of our country, the Creoles would probably have been among the first to
experience its fatal effects; but as it is of West India origin, and their
constitutions are assimilated to it, they escaped it here as they do in their
native country. The natives of the West Indies being so seldom affected with
the yellow fever, has given rise and currency to the opinion, that it is not
contagious in that country, and with respect to them the observation is well
founded; but then it is as highly contagious to Europeans and Americans in the
seaports of the West Indies, as it is in this city, when introduced here. [See
Note A. in the Appendix.]

It is no new opinion that pestilential fevers are generated in ships or
transported by them from one place to another; and that when they are brought
to a seaport, where the climate and season favor their spreading, they always
do so in a greater or less degree.

The plague is checked by great heat and severe cold in the cities of Europe
and Asia. We have full proof of the effect of cold upon the malignant
contagious fever in North America.

We have equal proof that efficient quarantine laws have latterly preserved the
seaport towns of Europe from the introduction of the plague; and the example
of Baltimore, [Note B.] in the present year, shows us what may be done in
America in this respect. The inefficacy of our own laws and regulations in this
important matter is well known, and much regretted by all who have been
concerned in their execution.

Perhaps a more particular attention to the circumstances of the fever of the
present year, may place this subject in a clearer point of light.

In the months of June and July last, twenty-seven vessels arrived in this port
from Cape Nichola Mole, Jeremie and Port-au-Prince in the Island of Hispaniola
or St. Domingo, places which had long been garrisoned by the British forces,
and of consequence more peculiarly adapted to the generation of pestilential
diseases.

It is a well known fact, that these places were evacuated in great haste, and
that a considerable number of American vessels which lay there, were employed
to transport the British garrison; and if we are to give credit to the facts
related by Pringle, [Note C.] Lind, [Note D.] Brocklesby, Young, Carmichael
Smyth and others, contagion is not only generated in such circumstances, but
for a long time retained, by clothing, bedding, tents, and sails, even walls
and timber.

We have further proof that the yellow fever prevailed in those ports while the
abovementioned vessels lay there. [Note E.]

On the fifth day of July last, six or eight of these vessels, having a large
number of passengers on board, of course a quantity of clothing, bedding, etc.
brought off in the greatest haste, themselves exposed to all those
circumstances which are generally allowed to produce contagious fevers: in this
situation they arrived at the fort, where they were detained on board for
twenty days, [Note F.] an occurrence well adapted to heighten the violence of
the contagion. On their arrival at the city, after this detention, they
generally lay at the wharves between Walnut and Spruce streets. [Note G.] And
it is well known, that at this part of the city the fever first appeared, about
the latter end of July and beginning of August, and spread from thence to
almost every other quarter. These are facts too recent and too generally
admitted to require further proof.

On the evening of the eighth of July, the armed ship Deborah, captain Edward
Yard, arrived at the fort from Jeremie. She buried eight persons during her
stay there and return, [Note H.] and sent six sick to the Marine hospital.
[Note I.] She was one of those employed to transport troops in the West Indies.
[Note K.] After a detention of ten days this vessel came up to the city. We
have been assured that some of her crew were brought up before her arrival.
[Note L.]

On the twenty-eighth of July, the Deborah was moved to Kensington, where she
was hove down. We can clearly trace the rise and progress of the disease at
that place to this vessel; [Note M.] and also the first appearance of it in
some other parts of the city to persons who had been on board her. [Note N.]

On the sixth day of August, the College recommended to the managers of the
Marine and City hospitals, that all the vessels lying between Walnut and Spruce
streets should be removed to a proper distance from the city; instead of which
they were distributed indiscriminately to the other wharves, except in one
instance, most of them being sent to the upper parts of the city.

From the many sources of contagion above enumerated, existing at the same
time, and being so generally spread, it is not surprising that the disease had
such an extensive operation; and it is to this extraordinary circumstance that
we also ascribe the introduction and prevalence of this disease at Chester,
[Note O.] Wilmington and Marcus-hook.

A disease so fatal and so destructive, has naturally directed the public
attention to discover the means of preventing its future recurrence. And as men
are generally inclined to ascribe effects to surrounding circumstances; so in
the present case a variety of means have been suggested to prevent any future
calamity of a similar nature.

But when we reflect, that Philadelphia is one of the cleanest best aired
cities in the union; that Kensington, Chester and Wilmington, enjoy all the
advantages of country air; that no possible improvement with respect to water
or ventilation, can make our situation more eligible than that of these places;
and particularly when we consider, that the situation of Wilmington precludes
all idea of a defect of ventilation, and that New York, being furnished with
water brought from a distance, the bad quality of our water cannot be the
cause. When we observe that our city has become more healthy by the salutary
improvements made in it, that the number of our common native diseases, such as
autumnal remittents and dysenteries, is greatly diminished. When we also
observe that it is only in seaports that this fatal pestilential fever
prevails, why should we refuse, in this particular instance, heartily to deduce
effects from causes, and to admit, that although local circumstances may favor
the spreading of such diseases, yet, as they can always be traced to the
shipping or its neighborhood, or to persons or materials connected with
shipping, that there are the strongest reasons to conclude that they are
introduced from thence?

From the preceding facts and observations we think the following conclusions
may be justly drawn.

That the contagious malignant fever which appeared in this city in the years
1793, 1797, and 1798, is essentially different from the bilious remittent fever
of this climate.

That the contagious malignant fever of those years is essentially the same,
with the disease called the yellow fever in the British, and the malady de
Siam, in the French West India islands.

That the yellow fever or malady de Siam prevailed in a very great degree in
the different ports of Hispaniola, during the last year, and more particularly
in Port-au-Prince, Jeremie and Cape Nichola Mole.

That a very great number of vessels arrived at this city from those ports,
during the months of June and July 1798.

That this disease has been several times introduced into North America by
contagion retained in the wearing apparel of persons who had died in the West
Indies, although no person was sick on board at the time the vessel arrived in
this country; and that we have demonstrated, as fully as it is possible in a
matter which is not obvious to our senses, that the contagion of the fever of
1798 was imported from Jeremie, Cape Nichola Mole or Port-au-Prince, in one or
more vessels, which arrived here in June and July last.

That efficient quarantine laws, similar to those existing in Italy, France and
other countries, to prevent the introduction of the plague into their
commercial cities, are the only effectual means to guard against the future
recurrence of a calamity which threatens us with total ruin.

To conclude -- We have, from the first appearance of this destructive
pestilence in 1793 to the present time, endeavored to discharge our duty, by
warning our fellow citizens of its appearance, and by pointing out the means of
checking its extension when introduced; by informing the legislature of the
proper methods of preventing its return, by strict quarantine laws and internal
regulations; and although our recommendations have been too little attended to,
yet we conceive it to be a duty again thus to publish our opinions on the
subject in a more detailed and familiar manner, as well for the information of
our fellow citizens at large, as of those who are called to the very important
office of legislation. In doing this we have no design of entering into or
exciting contention: our sole aim is truth and the public good.

Published by order of the College, JOHN REDMAN, President. THOMAS C. JAMES,
Sec'y.
Philadelphia December 24, 1798.

APPENDIX.
PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
NOTE A.
Extract from Practical Observations on the treatment of acute diseases;
particularly those of the West Indies. By William Wright, M. D. Fellow of the
Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and of the Royal Societies of London
and Edinburgh; and Physician to the Forces in the West Indies. From the seventh
volume of Medical Facts and Observations, published in London 1797, dated
Edinburgh, December, 1794.
SOME late authors, who have written on West India diseases, have roundly
asserted, that in tropical countries fevers are not contagious; but whoever has
had the care of crowded hospitals, of jails, of ships of war, or of transports
full of troops, must have seen numerous and fatal instances of contagion in the
West Indies; more especially where cleanliness and free ventilation have been
neglected.

From causes of this sort a most fatal and destructive disorder broke out in
the West Indies in 1793, and soon after in Philadelphia, viz. the yellow fever.
Dr. Rush has classed this disorder with remittents; but every one who has
practiced in the West Indies, knows for certain, that the remitting fevers of
warm countries are not contagious. From, Dr. Rush's book, and from the numerous
letters of my correspondents, there remains not a doubt, in my mind, of the
yellow fever being Typhus, exalted to a great degree of virulence from climate,
situation, and other adventitious circumstances.

The yellow fever has appeared in America at different periods, as we learn
from Dr. Lining's paper in the Edinburgh Essays, Physical and Literary, Vol.
II.; and it was this same disorder that committed such havoc amongst the
troops, under Admiral Vernon, in 1741.

The commencement of this fever, in Grenada, is dated from May, 1793, soon
after the arrival of a Guinea ship from Sierra Leone, the crew of which had
been so sickly, that most of the sailors died of the yellow fever, either in
the voyage, or soon after the arrival of the ship. It suddenly spread over the
other Leeward islands, and from thence was carried to Philadelphia, Hispaniola,
and Jamaica.

The first account I received of this fever, was from Dr. James Clark, a
physician of eminence in Dominica; his letter to me is dated July 23, 1793, and
runs as follows: I have been harassed night and day, for a month past, by
attendance on people ill of the yellow fever. Since its appearance in this
island, it has already carried off more than a hundred sailors, new comers, and
emigrants. In its progress it has been, and still is, as quick and fatal as the
plague; it often finishes its course in forty-eight hours; but if the sick get
past the fifth day, they generally recover.

All the letters I have had from my medical friends agree, that this fever is
highly contagious, and that new comers are most subject to receive it,
particularly such as are young, or are addicted to drinking spirituous liquors.
Next to these are the nurses and attendants on the sick, who breathe the air in
their chambers, or handle their bodies or bedclothes. But such as avoid
infected houses, or keep at a distance from people convalescent, are no way
subject to the yellow fever. It appears, also, that people of color, and
negroes, are in a manner totally exempted from this disease, except such as are
employed as house servants, and fare the same as white people.

The Creole white inhabitants, and others who have long resided in the islands,
are, it seems, seldom attacked with this disorder, unless under the
circumstances abovementioned. But why the yellow fever should attack some, and
not others, can only be accounted for in this way: that in order to receive or
resist contagion, men's bodies and minds must be in a particular state; and
that field negroes should not be liable to it is to me inexplicable. They,
however, have their epidemics, from which white people are exempted.

NOTE B.
Extract of a letter from Joseph Townsend to Doctor Griffitts, dated Baltimore,
12th month, (December) 6th, 1798.
I find it will be best to forward thee, the following resolution, to the
operation of which our late enjoyment of good health is attributed.


August 10th, 1798. Board of Health for the City of Baltimore.
Resolved,
That all vessels arriving from any of the West India islands, loaded with
coffee or other produce that may be liable to damage or putrefaction, be not
permitted to come up into port, but that the cargoes thereof be discharged into
other vessels while it remains in the river, and every necessary care extended
to purify the same before it be admitted into the city; and that the health
officer be required to pay strict attention thereto.

On behalf of the Board, JOSEPH TOWNSEND, Clk.


NOTE C.
"Orders coming soon after, to remove all the sick from Germany to Flanders,
they were embarked in bilanders, to be carried to Ghent; but where they did not
arrive till the middle of December. During this voyage, the fever having
acquired new force by the confinement of the air, by the mortifications and
other putrid effluvia, it became so virulent, that above half the number died
in the boats; and many of the remainder soon after their arrival. Its
resemblance to the plague was further evinced by this memorable incident. A
parcel of old tents being sent on board the same bilanders with the men, were
used by them for bedding; these tents, in order to be refitted, were put into
the hands of a tradesman at Ghent, who having employed twenty-three Flemish
journeymen about the work, lost seventeen of them by the distemper; though they
had no other communication with the infected." Pringle's Observations on the
Diseases of the Army, page 26.

NOTE D.
The infected ships were the Princess Amelia, the Oxford, Shrewsbury, Medway,
Dublin, and Neptune. The most vigorous contagion had invaded the two latter. It
was said, the Neptune had lost one hundred and sixty of her men in a few
months, and her report contained one hundred and thirty-three sick. The surgeon
had been seized with the yellow fever, but was recovered.

"The crew of the Cambridge, an healthy ship, enjoyed a good state of health
until some of them were ordered on board the Neptune, to prepare that ship for
the dock, which was then in great distress for want of hands, most of her
people being then at the hospitals. Three of these men belonging to the
Cambridge were brought into the hospital, one died and another narrowly escaped
with life, and I have reason to believe, that their other shipmates, who were
employed in the Neptune, conveyed the fever to the Cambridge, as she soon after
sent to the hospital several afflicted with the same fever.

"I would have it here observed, that this infection did not proceed from any
sick person on board the Neptune; for during this period no sick man was kept
for an hour on board any of the ships, if the weather did permit to send him on
shore.

"Besides, in these ships, it was plain the infection could not proceed from a
foul air. They were furnished with ventilators; and I have it from good
authority that the Neptune was kept uncommonly clean and neat; and being a
second rate, a prodigious draught of air must have been admitted from her
having three tier of ports; and when these ports were open, (which was all the
time she lay at Spithead and in Portsmouth harbor, while the contagion was to
violent) the ventilation and renewal of the air, exceeded what could be
effected in most other places. The diet of the people was fresh beef and broth
with greens.

"The sick apartment of the Neptune while at sea was on the lower gun-deck,
spacious and neat. Two scuttles were cut for the admission of fresh air; the
adjoining ports were also opened, when it could be done with safety. It was
washed twice a week with warm vinegar, and daily cleaned.

This practice of cleanliness and the benefit of the freshest air, did not
however avail to remove this contagion; which continued till the ship was taken
into dock, and properly purified by fire and smoke. After this operation, the
ship and crew became perfectly healthy. Lind, on Fevers and Infection.

NOTE E.
Letter from Doctor Stevens to Doctor Griffitts.
SIR,
During my residence in Santo Domingo and the Cape, I received frequent
information that the yellow fever prevailed in almost all the seaport towns in
the French part of Hispaniola, particularly at Cape Nichola Mole. It raged so
violently at this latter place, and the mortality was so great, that it obliged
the British to abandon the post sooner than they intended. About the same time
this disease made its appearance in the harbor of St. Thomas, and was so
destructive to foreigners that it obtained the name of the plague from all
those who spoke of it. At Santo Domingo I saw several cases of it, during the
months of August and September. These were entirely confined to American
seamen, while the native inhabitants of the city were altogether exempt from
it. The privateers which frequented this port lost also several of their crew
by this fever, while they remained at anchor.

I mentioned to you that a similar disease had broke out on board of the
schooner Swift at Porto-Rico. The following are the facts respecting that
vessel, viz. On the 11th of last March she sailed from the Delaware, and, after
touching at Tortola and St. Thomas, arrived at the city of Santo Domingo on the
13th of April, where she continued until the 26th of June, when, she went to
the Cape, and returned again on the 1st of August, without touching at any
other port. She remained at Santo Domingo until the 28th of October, and then
sailed for Porto-Rico, where she arrived on the 5th, of November. She anchored
at the entrance of the harbor, at a considerable distance from any other
vessel. A short time before she left the city of Santo Domingo she took on
board, from a French privateer that had been dismantled, a quanty of rigging,
sails, guns and ammunition. From the time that she left Philadelphia until her
arrival at Porto-Rico the crew were healthy, except two of the saillors who
were affected with venereal complaints. The second day after she anchored at
this latter port the mate and one of the sailors began to complain, and the
greatest part of the crew, together with the captain, were successively
attacked. The two first died after a short illness, and one of the others
during her passage to America. The captain escaped in consequence of being
brought on shore and carefully attended, at the commencement of the disorder.
When she arrived at Porto-Rico, and during her stay there, both the harbor and
city were remarkably healthy, and her crew had little or no communication with
either the shore or the shipping. These are all the facts which have come to my
knowledge respecting the existence of this disease in the West Indies, during
the last summer and fall. I remain, Sir,

With due respect, Yours, etc. etc. EDWARD STEVENS.
Walnut street, Dec. 26, 1798.
NOTE F.
See the daily papers at that time.

NOTE G.
The information referred to was procured from the health office.

NOTE H.
Deposition of the captain of the Deborah, procured from the health office.
Questions to be proposed to masters or commanders of vessels coming to at the
health office on State Island.
Q. 1. What is the name of this vessel?

A. Ship Deborah.

Q. 2. What is the name of the captain?

A. Edward Yard.

Q. 3. Where does your vessel belong to?

A. Philadelphia.

Q. 4. How many men belong to this vessel?

A. 37.

Q. 5. How many passengers have you brought with you? Are they now all on
board? And if not, where were they landed?

A. 58 on board, landed none.

Q. 6. When did the vessel enter on her voyage?

A. 7 February.

Q. 7. At what port have you taken in the cargo, which you have now on board?
-- And when did you sail from the same?

A. Port-au-Prince and Jeremie; left Jeremie 24 of June.

Q. 8. What does your present cargo consist of?

A. Sugar, coffee and cocoa.

Q. 9. What ports or places have you touched at since you have taken your last
cargo? And when did you leave them?

A. None.

Q. 10. Have you touched at any sickly ports, places or islands, during your
voyage?

A. None.

Q. 11. How were the inhabitants and the people belonging to the shipping of
the port you have left or touched at, during your voyage? Were they healthy, or
not?

A. Healthy on shore but sickly in the harbor.

Q. 12. Have you brought with you all the crew, which you have taken out? if
not, what has become of them?

A. Brought all the crew back but 13, eight left me.

Q. 13. Have you lost any persons by diseases during your voyage? If so, when,
in what place, and what was his or their complaint?

A. Lost 5 with the dysentery, the first at Jeremie, and the last 24th June,
seamen and three passengers.

Q. 14. Have you any wearing apparel or bedding belonging to deceased persons
on board?

A. Part of the wearing apparel of the abovementioned 5 persons, the rest was
sunk at sea.

Q. 15. What vessels have you met at sea, during your last passage? What port
were they from? Have you sent your boat o^ board of them, or did they send
their boats on board of your vessel? Had they any sick on board?

A. Boarded the sloop Friendship, all well.

Q. 16. Yourself, your people and passengers, are they all now in good health?

A. All well on board, but one negro woman, with a fever and lax.

EDWD. YARD.
July 8, 1798, 6 o'Clock, P. M. Sworn, JAMES HALL, Residt. Phyn. Port.

Two ventilators were used on board the ship Deborah for 8 days.

JAMES HALL.
Mr. WILLIAM ALLEN, Health Officer, No. 32, Walnut st.


NOTE I.
Health Office, 26 th Dec. 1798. SIR,
After you left the office I found the Steward's return of the number of sick
persons landed from the ship Deborah at the marine hospital; their names and
time of admission are as follow:

A French black girl admitted, 8th. July. John Lincoln, 9th. Robert Stone, 9th.
Wm. Wallworth, 10th. Jonathan Farnham, 11th. Robert Price, 11th.

The above statement may be relied on as accurate.

I am, Sir, Your Obedient Servant, Wm. NESBITT, Clk. DR. GRIFFITTS.

NOTE K.
"On the 12th, August, John Lewis, mate of the Deborah, informed me that she
lost seven persons with fever on board during her passage, and one by accident,
and that she had been employed as a transport in the British service previous
to her taking in her cargo at Jeremie."

Extract of a Letter from Dr. Currie to Dr. Wistar.

NOTE L.
Mr. Thomas Town, citizen of the Northern Liberties, related to Dr. Wistar,
that on the 1st of August, 1798, he saw Alexander Philips, late of
Water-street, tailor in Second-street, opposite the house of Messrs. Hamilton
and Son, and inquired of him whether it was true (as reported) that he had
brought up privately some sick men from the ship Deborah, soon after her
arrival in the river, and had received ten dollars for so doing; and that
Philips replied, that he had brought up two or three in one or two boats. Mr.
Town believes he said that he had gone down as low as Marcus Hook. Philips said
he had taken some of them to his own house, and that one was dead. He added
that he was sorry it had been done; that he was sick himself, but hoped his
complaint would turn out a cold.

He stated that he had done it as an act of friendship, in return for favors
received.

On the Sunday morning following, Mr. Town was invited to Philip's funeral.

THOSE. TOWN, CASPAR WISTAR, Jun.
Nov. 16th, 1798.
The following paper was given to Doctor William Currie, by Mr. John Purdon.
Mr. Purdon says that on the afternoon of the 1st. or 2d. day of August, being
at the house of Mr. Alexander Philips in Water street, he was informed in the
course of conversation by Mr. Philips, that he himself had gone down to a ship
at the fort, and brought from thence one of his old lodgers, then sick, to his
own house in Water street. Mr. Purdon observed to him with horror and
astonishment that he had acted very wrong, and immediately departed from his
house. Mr. Phillips on that day was apparently in perfect health; on the
Saturday night following he was a corpse. Mr. Purdon was not informed by Mr.
Philips from what ship he had conveyed the sick man, but by Mr. Isaac Milnor, a
few weeks after, that it was from the ship Deborah, and on the ninth night of
her quarantine.

NOTE M.
Extract of a Letter from Doctor Daniel de Benneville to Doctor Griffitts.
I shall now proceed to mention a few of the early cases of yellow fever, that
occurred in the immediate neighborhood of the wharf where the ship Deborah
lay. The ship Deborah arrived at George Eyre's wharf in Kensington on the 28th
day of July, and remained there until the 8th day of August following.

Joseph Streeton, the first victim in Kensington, was on board the ship Deborah
July 21st, 1798, whilst she lay in the city, was taken sick July 29th, and died
August 3d.

James Porter, an apprentice boy of Joseph Grise, who lived next door to
Streeton's, was taken sick August 1st, and died August 12th.

James Ashmore, an apprentice lad of Wm. Yard's, whose dwelling house is
opposite the wharf where the ship lay, and who had worked on board while she
lay in the city about the 18th or 20th of July, was taken sick August 2d and
died August 15th.

James Kerr, George Adams, -- Simons, apprentice boys of Wm. Yard's, who worked
on board the ship, were all taken sick a few days after the first appearance of
indisposition in J. Ashmore, their fellow apprentice, and all recovered.

Two laboring men of the name of Sutton, who worked on board the ship, were
taken sick August 3d, one of whom died; the other recovered.

Samuel Baker, whose dwelling house is directly opposite the wharf where the
Deborah lay, was on the wharf July 31st, when his nostrils were assailed with a
very offensive stench from the ship, out of which, the people who worked on
board were heaving some lumber, and which instantly induced him to leave the
wharf, was taken sick August 3d, and recovered.

Daniel de Benneville, who rode by the wharf in his chaise, daily for a week
before his indisposition, and for three days previous walked twice or thrice a
day on the banks, nearly opposite the wharf where the ship lay, the wind
blowing directly from the ship, wafting a disagreeable stench, which he
observed to Manuel Air, the elder, who was in company; and which produced a
violent nausea, in consequence of which he left the shade on the bank, returned
to his house, and took some lavender water and loaf sugar, but without any
effectual relief, until he ejected the contents of his stomach, with a large
proportion of bile, by vomiting; he was taken sick August 5th and recovered.

Catherine Pecky (Daniel de Benneville's housekeeper) was taken sick August
7th, 11 o'Clock A. M. and died August 19th.

Elizabeth de Benneville (wife of Daniel de Benneville) was taken sick August
7th, P. M. and recovered.

Joshua Baker (son of the aforesaid Samuel Baker) who had been on board the
Deborah, was taken sick August 9th, and died August 15th.

Jacob Miller, who lived about 300 yards from the ship, and daily walked by the
wharf to his work, was taken August 9th, and died August 15th.

Jane Newman, daughter of the widow Mary Newman, who lived nearly opposite the
wharf where the ship lay, was taken sick August 10th, and died August 25th.

Susannah Baker (wife of the aforesaid Samuel Baker) was taken sick August
12th, and died August 22d.

Sarah Air (daughter of Manuel Air) was taken sick August 15th, and recovered.

Charlotta Yard (wife of William Yard) was taken sick August 15th, and
recovered.

Jacob Fawns, who worked on board the ship Deborah whilst she lay at
Kensington, was taken sick and recovered.

Three apprentice boys belonging to George Air, who worked about 100 yards
from the Deborah, were all taken sick, one of whom died, and the rest recovered.

Caesar Maul, a negro lad living with Daniel de Benneville aforesaid, was taken
sick August 19th, and recovered.

John M'Curdy was taken sick whilst working on board the Deborah, and recovered.

Thomas Norris, who worked on board the ship Deborah from two days after she
arrived, until she sailed, was seized, whilst working on board, with a violent
nausea, pain in his head, loins and extremities, was relieved by severe
vomiting and sweating that ensued the night following, and felt no manner of
indisposition thereafter.

Henry Underwick, William Moore, George Jenny, and Allen Robinett, who worked
on Doughty's wharf, about 100 yards from the ship Deborah, whilst she lay at
Kensington, were all taken sick about the latter end of August and the
beginning of September, and died.

I have been so repeatedly interrupted in this business that necessity obliged
me to do it in haste, and with a pre-occupied mind. The people here are in the
day time employed in their several occupations, that I have been obliged to
take the evening and best part of the night to obtain correct intelligence on
this subject, and that at intervals: which of course has taken longer time to
effect my purpose; and which you will excuse.

With unfeigned Esteem, I am, Yours, DANIEL DE BENNEVILLE.
Kensington, Nov. 27th, 1798.
NOTE N.
Mr. Ralston was attacked with the fever July 25: on the 29th, I first visited
him, he died on the 30th. He was at work on board the ship Deborah the three
days immediately preceding the attack.

A Mr. Beaty, who assisted to nurse him, was attacked August the 1st. I
attended him two days, he was then removed from near the hay-scales, North
Front street, to a small alley in North Seventh street, where, I was informed
by his brother, he died a few days after.

J. PROUDFIT.
DR. GRIFFITTS.

John Butcher, a seaman residing in Mifflin's alley, worked nine days on board
the Deborah, first at Race street wharf, then at Kensington; until he was taken
sick on the 2d August last. Being opposite my laboratory, his wife requested I
would call and see him. He appeared to me to have the symptoms of the yellow
fever. He was immediately bled plentifully, and briskly purged; he recovered in
2 or 3 days. Doctor Proudfit also visited him and was of the same opinion.

This being in the evening of the 3d August and the health office shut, I
requested Captain Lawler to inform the Board thereof, who next morning sent
Doctor Duffield to visit him; when Butcher, by the operation of the above
remedies, was so much better that Doctor Duffield doubted his having the
disease. Yet the impression was so great on my mind, that I immediately sent my
children to the country. I am still of the opinion, that he was the first who
brought the fever into Mifflin's alley, where it was so fatal.

GEORGE HUNTER.
Philadelphia, December 1st, 1798.
NOTE O.
DEAR SIR,
I met Davis Bevan in Second street, who informed me, as a proof of the
Deborah's being an unhealthy vessel, that seven boys of Chester went in a boat
to see a comrade on board, staid with him an hour or two, and returned: that in
two or three days, six of them were taken ill of a fever, supposed to be the
yellow fever, and that five of them died in less than ten days. He said he
would take his oath of this fact, if required.

I think I am accurate, for it appeared to me a strong confirmation of the
Deborah's importing the yellow fever of 1798.

Yours, Respectfully, W. SHIPPEN, junr.
DR. GRIFFITTS. December 26, 1798.
THE END.

