MR. PARISH'S SERMON, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF HIS ORDINATION.

THE EXCELLENCE OF THE GOSPEL VISIBLE IN THE WRETCHEDNESS OF PAGANISM. A
DISCOURSE DELIVERED DECEMBER 20, 1797, BEING THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF HIS
ORDINATION, By ELIJAH PARISH, A. M. MINISTER OF THE CONGREGATION IN BYFIELD.

Printed by A. MARCH, Newburyport. Jan. 1798.

TO the Congregation in BYFIELD, with the best wishes and services of the
Preacher, this Discourse is cordially dedicated.

IT was hastily written without a thought of publication. The request of
Friends is the only apology for its being made public. It would require several
sermons to do justice to the subject.

If this imperfect miniature excite any curiosity for further enquiry; if any
be more forcibly impressed with the value of christian privileges; if any good
be done; the author has a rich reward.

LUKE, iv. xviii. To heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised.


TO understand the nature of the objects around us, justly to estimate their
value is a high attainment of knowledge.

HAVING informed our minds and obtained right opinions, then to direct our
desires, our pursuits, and our zeal, according to the nature of their object,
is the summit of human goodness.

THE husbandman, therefore, may highly value his farm, the mechanic his shop,
the mariner his compass, the man of science his books; because these things are
necessary to their mode of living.

THE man of moral reflection, enquiring whence his origin, what his
destination, what his present duty, what his future prospects, finds the gospel
essential to his peace here, to his happiness hereafter. To him the gospel is
precious. He is "blind." He explores the resources of his own mind; he learns
the philosophy of the wise; he finds light, only, in the volume of revelation.
His conduct is wrong; his passions lead him 'captive.' To restrain himself he
thinks of his interest, of his reputation; he finds commanding motives of
goodness, only in the book of God. Here he reads the sinner's end; he trembles;
he obeys. To bind our lusts, reputation and interest are no better than
Sampson's bursting cords.

IMPERFECT man feels remorse, his spirit is 'broken;' he concludes himself
under condemnation; the revelation of christians furnishes a balm to 'heal' his
bleeding heart. With terrors he is enslaved; the gospel gives 'liberty' and
joy. The text ascribes to the gospel all these excellencies. The gospel heals
the broken hearted, consoles the anguish of a guilty conscience: it gives
freedom to the slaves of sin: It gives sight to the blind, knowledge to those
ignorant of moral truth.

TO ILLUSTRATE THE VALUE OR EXCELLENCE OF THE GOSPEL IS OUR PRESENT OBJECT.

I. THE christian revelation is excellent; it teaches men what to BELIEVE
respecting God, themselves and a future state: It directs the FAITH of mankind.
This is a circumstance of the greatest importance; for the faith of men will
ever, more or less, influence their conduct.

TRUTHS, the most interesting to the heart of man are no where discovered but
in the oracles of God.

THE religious opinions of those destitute of revelation are, in general, so
many gross absurdities. -- That we may see the value of our privileges, let us
for a moment recollect the articles of faith among the most enlightened nations
of the heathen world.

PRIESTS and Philosophers taught, and the people believed, there was a
plurality of gods.

THE Romans had three hundred Jupiters. Under so many names they worshipped this
deity.

THE Greeks reckoned thirty thousand gods, there were finally in the heathen
catalogue two hundred and eighty thousand gods.

CATTLE, Cats, and Crocodiles, were among the divinities of Egypt.

PHILOSOPHERS taught that creation from nothing was impossible; that matter was
eternal; that there was no such thing as a first bird, nor a first man; that
the gods had not power to make a good man unhappy; that pain was no evil; that
a wise man was happy in the midst of tortures; that the gods were in shape like
men, but of a larger size.

THESE are a few articles of a philosophic creed.

PEOPLE and Philosophers believed the responses of oracles, the pretensions of
fortune tellers, the efficacy of divination, the power of witchcraft, the piety
of observing dreams, signs and omens, fortunate and unfortunate days. Some of
these heathenisms, remain in christian countries. -- These christians are like
those 'Children, who spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak
the Jews language' in purity.

AT Athens it was believed that deformed children might be murdered or exposed
to perish alone. Hipasus and Heraclitus taught that god was fire: Parmenides,
that he was composed of earth and fire.

ZENO maintained that all crimes were equal; that injuries are never to be
forgiven. Cleanthes instructed sons and daughters to roast and eat the flesh of
their parents.

EPICURUS denied the providence of God: He allowed men to co-habit with their
daughters and mothers. That parents might sacrifice and eat their own children
was a doctrine of the Cynic philosophers. Ideas of immortality the heathen
have; but how low, how sensual!

THE paradise of the Alcoran forbids description. In the other world the savage
expects the pleasures of the chase, and the indulgence of ease. It is common in
heathen countries to bury with the dead, or deposit near their graves the first
articles of enjoyment.

IN the Caroline Isles they place near the graves of their friends, fruits and
other eatables.

THE Savage of America buries with the deceased what he possessed, the most
valuable.

IN India, with their kings, they bury a number of animals, and such vessels of
silver and gold, as they think will be most useful in a future life.

IN the states of Barbary they carry vessels of water and provisions to the
graves of their friends. This office is repeated every friday, as long as
friends or relatives survive, who retain kindness, to perform such an act of
supposed friendship. They have no belief, no conception of joys superior to
those experienced here.

HOW different, how much more excellent is the FAITH of christians in all these
particulars!

THE christian revelation teaches us there is ONE GOD the creator and governor
of the universe, that he possesses all divine perfections. The gospel teaches
us what MAN is, a fallen creature, "being in honor he abode not." The gospel
teaches us, there is a MEDIATOR; that there is salvation for the believing,
through Jesus Christ; that there will be a general resurrection; that the
righteous will be rewarded according to their works, the wicked punished.

A LIGHT shines; the curtain is drawn; we have a glance beyond the grave. We
may learn where our spirits may be while our bodies are conveyed to "the narrow
house of death;" where they may dwell while ages of ages in succession pass.

THE faith of the christian is the substance of things for which he hopes. But
to those intimate with the doctrines of christianity we need not be particular.

HAD not the Lawgiver of Israel, nor the Prophet of Bethlehem instructed us,
instead of the truths of revelation, we might have embraced the creed of
pagans. Does not the gospel open blind eyes? Does it not direct the FAITH of
mankind? Has it not invaluable excellence?

II. THE christian system is excellent, it mends the morals of mankind: It
regulates their practice.

To determine what christianity has done toward the regulation of morals, we
must again recur to the pagan world.

IT is necessary to examine heathen, and compare it with christian morality.

IF we observe the morals of a Paul, a Stephen, and innumerable other saints;
how great is the contrast between them, and a Nero, a Mahomet, and an Attila?

HOW divine the christian appears! If we compare with Pagans, those who have
only a theoretic knowledge of the gospel; the advantage, in general, is vastly
on the side of christianity

WITH all their guilt the believers in revelation appear almost like Angels,
when contrasted with the professors of any other religion.

THE Heathen did not think themselves obliged to be better than their Gods.
Many of these they supposed immoral and cruel: their conduct was approved and
imitated. Accordingly, in some part of Africa and Terrafirma the chief servants
of a prince, at his death, were murdered to serve him in the other world. The
heathen temples have commonly been asylums for the worst criminals. In Algiers
a Turk may with impunity murder three Moors, or five Arabs, if he flee to a
mosque where a marabout hermit, or saint has been buried.

HE may murder eleven Jews, and find security in any mosque. Where somewhat
like this prevails in countries called christian, they have really returned to
paganism.

THE author of christianity allows not one immorality. The African and Indian
shores receive the ashes of the living widow in the same blaze, which consumes
her deceased husband. They had shambles for selling human flesh to be eaten in
Jago, Hispaniola and Brazil. The Tartars suck the blood of wounded, dying
persons. The Indians of Canada feasted on the bodies of their captives. At the
present time several nations of Africa expose those children they do not like,
to be eaten of wild be it On the banks of the Danube it was the custom to cast
their new born infants into the river; those who could swim were taken up and
preserved; the others slept in their watery grave. Others killed their parents
at a certain age, and feasted on their flesh. The Mingrelians bury their own
children alive. In most heathen countries, and lately in France, since they
have rejected christianity, they at pleasure dissolve the marriage relation.
Nothing is necessary for a divorce in that "TERRIBLE REPUBLIC" but a month's
warning from the husband or wife. In the city of Paris alone, five hundred and
sixty-two divorces took place in three months.

THE Persians married their daughters, their sisters and their mothers. The
connection is for life, or any particular time. In Tartary the father marries
his own daughter, or sells her to the Turks, or Persians. When people become
infirm through great age, or some disease thought incurable, they are left to
perish alone.

THE religion of Zoroaster allows incest. A remnant of his followers remain in
Persia and India. The licentiousness of the Spartans in the conjugal relation,
their customs at some of their festivals -- I may not describe. In Peru it was
customary to fat and eat their own children born of captives, whom as
concubines they kept for that purpose. When they became too old for this, they
were killed and eaten. Such is the morality of nations never taught by the
Redeemer of Israel. The world by their wisdom do not know God; but give
themselves up to vile affections.

THE heathen Philosophers taught that bloody wars, merely for conquest, were
just; that revenge was no crime. Their precepts armed one man against another.

NOT so does the philanthropist of Nazareth instruct his disciples. From his
precepts we learn that humility is a virtue, that forgiveness is a duty, that
we should love our neighbor as ourselves, that we should treat others as we
desire to be treated.

IT is one grand design of the gospel to unite man with man, and nation with
nation; to form the world into one family of perfect morals.

SUCH will be the effect when the influence of the gospel shall be complete. No
impiety, no wars, no criminal designs, will pain the heart of goodness.

THE good Samaritan, bearing the wounded stranger to the Inn; the poor widow
giving away her whole living, exemplifies the excellence of the gospel.

WHEN religious truth is powerfully impressed on the minds of a family, a
neighborhood, a church; we see, we feel how happy are the effects of the
christian religion. In the me^^ness, the endearing kindness, the unaffected
goodness of some persons, we form an idea of the millenium, we form some
imperfect idea of Heaven.

I should abuse Christianity; I should wrong many beloved friends, to deny I
had seen such a spirit.

MIGHTY is the gospel to attract man to man; to harmonize their minds; to unite
them in disinterested love; to regulate their moral conduct. Were it not for
the benign precepts of christianity, is it not probable we should sacrifice our
children, feast on our parents, be guilty of the grossest immoralities?

THE humane, the benevolent, the divine precepts of Christ teach us better;
preserve us from these kinds of wickedness; instruct us in a perfect morality;
require us to visit the fatherless and the widow in their affliction; to do
justly, to love mercy and walk humbly with our God.

THE MORALS taught by the son of Joseph in the Synagogues of Israel, the
deserts and mountains of Judea, as far surpass all other systems, as the
sublimities of nature are superior to the works of art, as the creation of God
excels the labor of man. Who then can describe the excellence of the gospel?

III. THE revelation of christians is precious; it teaches them in what manner
to worship (...).

BY the powers of reason men have never discovered with what sacrifice to
appear before God. Here revelation is our only guide. Of this (...) be
convinced, if we recollect with what horrid vices, the different Pagan nations
have worshipped their Gods.

WHILE we are speaking in terms not the most respectful of the heathen faith
and worship, it may be justly acknowledged that their Philosophers Seneca,
Tully, Antoninus, Zeno, Socrates, and others, taught many very excellent
truths. But from what authority? What convictions, what reformation did they
produce in others or themselves? After all the fine things he has written,
Cicero says, "Whether the soul be immortal or not, is a very great question."

(...) practiced divination, sacrificed to the Gods, and at his death ordered a
cock to be offered to Ae^^^lapi^^. Zeno, the father of stoicism, murders
himself to escape the pain of a broken finger. Cato destroyed himself with
circumstances too horrible for description.

THESE are the men, blessed JESUS, whom thy foes name as rivals to thee. Their
errors, their vices, are more favorably regarded than thy spotless morals, thy
benign doctrines, thy godlike benevolence, thy glorious death, thy majesty on
the cross, thy power of raising the dead, thy revelations from heaven, thy
perfection of character, is brought down to a level with worms, who tremble
before an idol, or madly wallow in their own blood.

FOR a moment we are to attend pagan worship. A full view is improper. No words
are delicate enough to describe in a christian assembly all their modes of
worship. Too indecent some are to be named.

STILL it is hoped some freedom of speech will be excused, as the subject is
important, and not generally known.

AT Sparta boys were scourged on the altar of Diana till they expired

IN the region of Indostan, it is common for the Farquirs, voluntarily to
undergo tortures dreadful to relate. They have strong iron hooks thrust through
the flesh of their bodies; then getting themselves drawn up into the air, they
are whirled round in the most violent manner with machines made for the purpose.

IN Mexico as an atonement for their sins, or a preparation for a solemn
festival, they mangled their flesh till the blood profusely flowed. At the fast
of the Tlascalans, which lasted one hundred and sixty days, the chief priest
with about two hundred persons ascended a high mountain: When they came down
they had a great number of little knives and small rods given them. The first
day they bored their tongues, through which they drew the rods, and
notwithstanding, their excessive pain, and loss of blood, they were obliged to
sing aloud hymns to their gods. This operation was repeated every twenty days.
At the end of eighty days, a general fast of the people began which continued
an equal time.

IN some places they performed their worship by cutting off pieces of their own
flesh and casting them at the idol.

HOW terrible is paganism compared with the mild spirit of Jesus!

THE remaining part of the description is still more dreadful.

WE have the testimony of the best witnesses; we have the most certain
evidence, that lewdness constituted a part of heathen worship.

WE have one instance recorded by Moses in the story of Zimri and Gozbi. They
were slain not for a secret crime, but a public offering to Baal Peor.

THE Greeks worshipped some of their gods with the same abomination.

WHEN Antiochus Epiphanes converted the Temple at Jerusalem into a temple for
Jupiter. "It was filled with riot and revelling by the gentiles, who dallied
with harlots -- within the circuit of the holy places." 2d Macc. 6.4.

JUVENAL says, "In what Temple are not women defiled?" Among the eastern
nations after the mourning with which their festivals began, the rest of the
time was spent in mirth and jollity, in debauchery, adultery, and incest. These
were their religious assemblies. A considerable revenue is now collected for
the temples of Indostan from the prostitution, there encouraged. Refering to
this custom as ancient as the old Testament, God says, "Thou shall not bring
the hire of a harlot into the house of the Lord thy God." Deuteronomy. 23.18.

AT Babylon every woman was obliged once in her life to visit the temple
dedicated to lust. Surely these were services performed for Devils.

I HASTEN to finish this awful picture by inform^ you, that in all quarters of
the globe, false gods have been worshipped by human sacrifices. The Queen of
Xerxes caused 14 boys of the noblest families in Persia to be buried alive, a
sacrifice to the infernal gods. The Scythians sacrificed to Mars one out of
every hundred of the captives, they took in war. In the Island of Ceylon, and
the whole region of the Indians human sacrifices were common. The altars of
Moloch, in the land of Canaan were stained with human blood. In Gaul they
enclosed a man in a kind of wicker work, and burnt him in honor of the Gods.

THE banks of the Nile drank the blood of human victims.

UPON extraordinary occasions, the Romans offered their children on their
country's altars. Marius sacrificed his own daughter. The same practice
prevailed in Greece. Themistocles sacrificed three women to Bacchus. A daughter
was offered on the altar by a king of Athens.

THE Carthagenians, not only immolated their own children in hundreds, but
themselves also in times of calamity.

ON the islands lately discovered in the south sea, their sacred places are
cumbered with skulls of men offered to evil spirits.

IN Peru they tied a living man to a stake, pulled his flesh from his bones in
small pieces; broiled and eat it before his eyes.

IN Terrafirma the natives honored their divinities with offerings of human
blood.

IN Mexico they annually sacrificed twenty thousand men.

THE aborigines of Canada, of Virginia, and of New England, sometimes, offered
men to their malignant deities.

POSSIBLY, therefore, the spot on which we are has been an altar -- perhaps
here stood the bloody sacrificer -- here lay the agonizing victim -- here the
dust was crimsoned with human gore -- these fields around echoed the last cries
of men offered to devils. More certain it is, our ancestors were such men. The
inhabitants of Britain were so remarkable for this abomination, that even the
Romans forbid them the exercise of their religion.

IN the time of Julius Caesar the Britons constructed hollow images; these they
filled with human beings whom they burnt alive. If any wish to be more
acquainted with these subjects, besides the authorities incidentally mentioned
in the course of the sermon, they are refered to Pastoral letters of the Bishop
of London, printed A. D. 1730 -- to Dr. Robertson's history of south America --
to discourses of Dr. Priestly relating to the evidences of revealed religion,
delivered at Philadelphia 1796 -- to Mr. Lock's essays concerning human
understanding -- to Posthumus observations on theological subjects by President
Edwards -- to Foss's and Saunders' Journal -- to Hannah Adams' view of religion
-- to Morse's Geography -- to Guthries grammar -- to Burkes' letters to a
member of Parliament -- to the Encyclopedia -- to Cooks voyages -- to
Leechman's sermons -- to Brown's sermons -- to Plutarch's lives -- to
Prideaux's connexions of the history of the old and new testament -- to
Stackhouse's History of the Bible -- to Mosheim's Ecclesiastical history -- to
the Dictionary of the Bible.

After naming the Authors consulted on the subjects of the sermon, I have
supposed it unnecessary to mark every phrase or sentence in which their words
are used.




THESE are the people from whom we are descended. And why are not we, their
children, this evening employed in sacrificing a kind friend, a faithful
parent, or a weeping babe?

WHAT has made us to differ? What has taught us to worship Jehovah in a more
wise manner? Is it not revelation alone which has opened our blind eyes, taught
us rational piety, brought us into communion with God.

It is the christian revelation, which instructs us to worship ONE GOD "to
worship him in spirit and truth, to call upon him out of a pure heart, to lift
up holy hands without wrath or doubting:" Christianity instructs us to address
God in the name of the mediator; to pray in secret, in public; to intercede for
all mankind. So rational, so benevolent is the worship of christians. All round
the globe cruelties, self-murder, lewdness, human sacrifices, have constituted
their religious services, but where the gospel is known there is a worship,
adapted to the nature of man, the purity and goodness of God.

IV. THE christian doctrines are valuable; they unite men to God. The christian
loves God. He contemplates God as his guardian, his friend, his father. The
religion of pagans did not attach them to their divinities. Their affection to
the objects of their worship, we may see in Suetonius, one of their own
historians.

HE says, "they were so angry with their Gods at the death of Germanicus, that
they battered their temples with stones, overthrew their altars and flung their
household divinities into the streets." These were the enlightened Romans.

DU HALDE assures us "That the Chinese, after offering largely to their Gods,
and being disappointed of their assistance, sometimes sue them, and obtain
decrees against, them from the Mandarines."

Do such facts need any comment? It is the christian alone, who loves God. The
perfections, the honor, the family of God, are all dear to the christian.

THE christian loves the cause of God, more than his own interest. The
christian lives to do good, to promote his makers cause. Joyful are those days,
devoted to his God, nor is life dear when the happiness of others, the glory of
God, demands the sacrifice. So benevolent, so self denying is the christian
temper. Then, is not the gospel precious?

V. THE excellence of the gospel is visible in its preparing Believers for
death.

WHAT are the supports of the Pagan in that serious hour, which awaits the sons
of men? What was the hope of the renowned Brutus, when he pronounced Virtue an
empty name, and sheathed his sword in his own vitals?

WHAT are all the heathen rites; what all the philosophy of the wise; what all
the energetic reasonings of our own minds, as we approach the awful darkness of
another world?

THE gospel alone brings consolation in that dreary-dreadful moment. The
sanctifying influence of revelation prepares the christian to die in peace with
himself, his connections and his God. A divine hope animates his departing
spirit. He depends on the Mediator, who has made propitiation for his sins and
the sins of the whole world. Jesus has made an atonement. He has died, the just
for the unjust. He is exalted to give repentance and remission of sins, The
penitent sinner is pardoned, his name is written in the volume of life. An
intercessor is at the fathers right hand. See the holy christian in his last
moments. Would he exchange his bed of death, for the thrones of unbelievers?

HE is pale, helpless, dying. His physician has retired. No hope of life
remains; his friends weep; their hearts are wrung with grief. He sees their
tears he hears their sighs, their despair is visible. Sympathising in their
distress; inspired with humble triumph; he says: "weep not for me" -- "See how
a christian can die." His voice fails. The parent who would die in his stead,
cannot procure him an hours reprieve. The brother, whose soul is tenderness,
endures not the scene; his agonizing cries to God cannot be heard. The wife,
frantic with anguish, is bidding adieu to hope, and every earthful bliss; she
leans over the cold pillow. -- The departing saint casts a fixed gaze on the
friend of his heart: he looks with undescribable tenderness. Still he enjoys
divine peace, his countenance is serene. Faith bears him above the terrors of
death, by faith he fees beyond the borders of life; the grave clouds not his
prospect. Visions of approaching bliss cheer his spirit. He sees a divine
inheritance, a heaven of joy, a throne of glory, a golden crown, a spotless
robe, adoring saints, waiting angels, a smiling God.

ABSORBED in these ravashing views, he whispers: "Tell me, my soul, can this be
death? -- where is thy sting? When shall I die; when shall I live forever!"
Often in such a frame the christian leaves the world.

WHERE can the pagan find such consolations in his last hour, where discover
such enrapturing views?

WILL not all bless God for the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ?

HAVING endeavored to show the value of the christian revelation; we proceed
to make some general reflections, which the subject may present.

1. DOES not the divine excellence of the christian system call Minister and
people, cordially, to unite in promoting its success?

UPON our cordial union, upon our affording comfort and encouragement to one
another the success of the gospel very much depends.

FROM divine ordinances very little can be hoped where there is strife or
alienation.

SHALL the golden talent be lost, because we have not mutual kindness?

THE blood of souls will then crimson our garments. If we exercise not a
friendly, mutual regard, we refuse to imbibe a christian temper; the benevolent
tendency of revelation increases our guilt. For those, who receive such valued
blessings from each other; for those united for such glorious purposes, not to
be cordially attached is ungrateful, is unnatual.

I PRAY God, we may hope better things of ourselves.

ON his part your Pastor has no complaint; but many favors to acknowledge. He
has, ever experienced much of your affectionate regard, your sympathy, your
candor, your kindness. May HE, who records the smallest act of goodness, and
the most secret wish of love, repay you ten thousand fold, and give you a
disciples reward.

2. FROM the excellence of the gospel, we infer, those have a bad taste and
erroneous judgment, who prefer worldly pleasures to religious privileges.

THE precepts of Jesus form you associates for the sons and daughters of glory;
they make the world, the universe thy own: "all things are yours." -- Those,
who choose earthly things, prefer atoms to worlds; had rather grope in
darkness, than shine as stars, and walk with saints in light. They desire not
to join in the songs of the redeemed, nor listen to the harps of angels; but to
grovel with "serpents and vipers." Have such persons a sound judgment? Have
they a taste for the sublime or beautiful? what objects ever struck the heart
of man or angels more grand or noble, than those presented in the
administration of the gospel?

LET the children of earth prefer the world; submit to no self-denial for the
gospel; live as you wish; press to thy heart the fascinating objects of sense!
But will they cheer your mind in the agonies of death?

WILL they calm your horrors in the tremendous scenes of the great day?

IF it be more necessary, than earthly bliss, for doubting, trembling man to
emerge from clouds of moral darkness to enjoy the light of truth; to approach
near and nearer still to the temper of spirits glorified; to learn so to
worship God, that he may say: "Command ye me;" if it be more necessary than
sinful pleasure to a candidate for glory, to attain immortal union with him
whose smile is heaven; with triumphant hope to enter the dreary vale of death;
then compared with the gospel, what are all the objects, that enchant the
sinners heart?

THE privileges of a christian are the only means of effecting these glorious
purposes.

REVELATION is absolutely NECESSARY to the religious improvement of mankind.

WITHOUT revelation a rational piety would not be practiced in the world. There
is no good evidence that in any quarter of the globe a single kingdom, state,
province, city, or village, ignorant of revelation, has just notions of
providence, or a becoming worship of the true God, or well founded comforts in
death.

SEVERAL thousand years they have had to make improvements in religion: they
are wrapped in the black-shades of paganism.

WHERE is one country or town to be excepted? I ask the Deist of universal
science: where can I find one hamlet thus blessed? -- He is silent. No such spot
has an existence. Must not 'the baptized infidel' blush for his brethren? Blush
for himself? What shall we say then to the nominal believer, who prefers the
world to religious privileges? Has he not a bad taste, a perverted judgment?
Is a not 'madness in his heart?'

3. IF the gospel is so veluable; we ought to pray for its extension and
success.

'PRAY for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper, who love her.' What
request can be more important, more benevolent, more acceptable to God?

4. IF the gospel is so precious, then is it a blessing to be a Minister of
Christ.

INSTANTLY it may be objected, that "His life is retired -- few are attached to
his person -- many grudge him their services -- he is dependent -- abused."

ALL this may be true, yet who would not be a Minister of Jesus, the prince of
peace? Is it no compensation for difficulties to administer the WORD of eternal
life? Is it no privilege to teach those, we love as our own souls, what faith
will save the soul, what is pure morality, what the true worship of GOD? Is it
no privilege to be an Agent in preparing our friends for death, for heaven, for
immortal glory? One, who had been in perils much, in deaths often, could say: "I
thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled (...) for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the ministry."

THIS was no enthusiast; but a man of science and genius. Great is the
privilege; pleasant the work to administer comfort to the broken hearted; to
solve the doubts of the enquiring; to exhibit to all the knowledge of salvation.

5. FROM the excellence of the christian revelation, we see how very wicked are
mankind.

A GREAT part of those, who read and hear the gospel, neglect, despise, hate
and oppose its doctrines and spirit. They had rather perish forever, than deny
themselves to obey its laws. With such light, with such convictions, to abuse
redeeming mercy; what amazing guilt! How much more aggravated are their sins
than pagans? More dreadful will their eternity be. The man of tears, who
complains: 'They hated me without a cause.' 'Ye will not come unto me that ye
might have life,' will soon be their wrathful Judge.

6. IF the gospel is so excellent, so superior to all other systems of morality
and theology; is not this good evidence, that it came from God?

How came the wanderers of the Arabian defert to fabricate a system of religion
more excellent than any other nation? Is it a common event, or is it a prodigy
unparalleled in the history of man for a company of slaves, marching from their
masters to frame wise systems of divinity? If the Israelites did not invent
their theology, it was from the God of heaven. They could not borrow it from
their tyrants, who were worshipping beasts and vegetables; nor from their
neighbors, who from their own bosoms tore their weeping babes to feast the
devouring flames.

WAS it ever known that a carpenter's son, born in a manger, educated in a
cottage, employed as a mechanic, with a few illiterate fishermen, ever invented
a system of Truth, infinitely surpassing all previous, and subsequent
productions of the human mind? These persons "bring immortality to light;"
teach the unity of God; teach that God is LOVE; that repentance of sin and
faith in Christ will save the soul.

THEY are the first to tell us, our bodies for ages slumbering, shall rise,
clothed with glory or made vessels of wrath.

THEY present the awful grandeur of the last solemn scene. The world shall
blaze, the sun expire, the Heavens vanish.

THE Greeks and Romans were charmed with the eloquence of philosophy. In other
regions was venerated the austerity of the Druids. Who can number the followers
of Confucius? Mahomet boasts of visions and revelations; nations adopt his
faith. Capac shines like a beam of the fun.

BUT, as directions to future happiness, what are all their doctrines
collected, more than the jargon of Babel, if compared with the gospel of Jesus
Christ. Is not the plan of redemption 'the wisdom of God?' Is not every precept
of christianity clothed with the authority of Jehovah?

7. IF the gospel is so excellent, then it is a rich compensation for all the
sacrifices we make for it.

THE ordinances of christianity cannot be enjoyed without some sacrifices.
Should your christian privileges cost all your possessions, cost, your life, as
they did the martyrs; this would be less than their value. If you enjoy the
glad tidings of redemption for less than your precious soul; they are
profitable.

CHRISTIAN wisdom is better than rubies or gold, better than fine gold, better
than a revenue of choice silver.

JUSTLY prize the consolations of religion, estimate the joys of heaven;
realize the torments of the damned; number the days of eternity; calculate the
worth of souls redeemed by Jesus Christ; then tell us what is too great a
sacrifice for the gospel of salvation.

8. IF the gospel is so valuable, how interesting is that day or hour, which
unites a Minister and People!

THE grand object of their union is to accomplish the glorious designs of the
christian revelation. To enlighten, to reform, to sanctify, to save souls, is
the great motive to continue the sacred relation. "Be thou faithful to this
flock, and I will give thee a crown of life," is the voice of Heaven to the
pastor.

TO the people the voice is "forsake not the assembling of yourselves -- where
two or three are met in my name, there am I -- hear and your souls shall live."

THE unfaithful have nothing to hope.

"OH son of man, if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that
man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand.'

PEOPLE, careless, are solemnly warned. "If ye will not hear, and if ye will
not lay it to heart to give glory unto my name, I will even send a curse upon
you, and I will curse your blessings; yea I have cursed them." The salvation of
Minister and people is apparently, suspended on their mutual faithfulness.
Deeply interesting, therefore, was the hour, which united us in this relation.
With joy or woe the moment will be recollected in eternity. Let us be careful
then to perform the duties, we reciprocally owe each other. For an endless
duration this may fix our character and our happiness. Oh my people, may we be
faithful; the reward is immortal glory.

9. IF the christian system is so valuable, how unhappy are those, who do not
receive its benefits!

ALAS for the poor pagans! Whose heart bleeds not for them? They are stumbling
on the dark mountains of death; the light of redemption shines not on their
habitations. And must I not say: Alas, for some of you assembled this evening?
Are there not (...), who enjoy not the saving effects of the gospel? And is it
possible that hereafter any present should be on a level with pagans? Possible
it is. More tolerable will it be for Sodom at the great day than for such. "It
had been better for you not to have known the way of righteousness, than after
having known it to turn from the holy commandment." -- The excellence of the
gospel demands your immediate acceptance. Another year is ended, little is
there interesting in our religious affairs.

WE have, for which God be praised, enjoyed entire peace. No discord, no
unkindness, no difficulties, have occurred. But to whom has the arm of the Lord
been revealed? Who has believed to the saving of his soul? Has the gospel been
affectionately urged? Has the heart of goodness been comforted? Has the wicked
been warned from his way? Before a higher tribunal these enquiries must be
answered. Now is our time to prepare for the issue.

THE year past only one person has united with this church. (...)
Despise not the day of small things. The cloud, which filled the land of
Israel with rain, was like a man's hand.

SEVEN children have received the christian name in the ordinance of baptism.
The grave has twelve times opened its cold mansion. The hoary head and the
infant have bowed to the king of terrors.

TWO of the deceased were professors of religion. -- One had long been an
officer in this church.

HAVE we reason to hope the Lord has not forsaken us? Is there a general
disposition to converse on things serious, and to attend religious instruction?

OF those, who have long been in the school of Christ, may it be enquired
whether by the gospel, you are edified, comforted, and strengthened? The hope
of this is pleasing, The great shepherd of Israel has commanded to feed his
sheep as well as his lambs, to give strong meat to men as well as milk to
babes. Be strong in God; your redemption draws nigh.

ARE any alarmed and almost persuaded to become christans? Thy time for
consideration is short.

CARELESS do any remain? I would persuade you to be reconciled to God. While in
the midst of your pleasures death is near: Providence may say: "This year thou
shall die."

IN the grave is no knowledge, nor work nor change.

THIS may prove the last opportunity of the kind, we may enjoy together. Happy
is the Preacher that his best years have been cordially devoted to you: may
remaining moments not be lost. Beyond all conception important is it now to
live in such a manner, that in our last hour, we may have a sure hope of
uniting again where death, nor separation shall ever come. The pious shall
unitedly enjoy God. Pleasing is the thought, animating the hope, ravishing the
assurance of such joy. What are your public professions; what, your secret
vows; what, your resolutions; what, your real preparations? Are you diligent to
make your calling and election sure? Is it your great concern to enjoy peace of
conscience? -- Is the law of God the only rule of your conduct? -- By our
mutual advantages are we daily improving? Must we recur to years past to find
benefits from the gospel, or are some gentle dews of grace, constantly, falling
to restrain the wicked, to console the sorrowful, to encourage the feeble, to
sanctify the penitent? And have any felt a penitent heart under the ministry of
your own choosing? Do you still know the consolations of religion? God be
thanked; God be praised. Oh, that all present were in this situation! By men of
observation it is asserted, a most tender, indissoluble friendship exists
between the Minister, and those awakened and sanctified by his instructions.
Hence Paul styles himself the father of his converts, and them, his children.

IT is said, they partake each others joys share each others griefs; have a
mutual tenderness; are animated with one spirit.

WERE I to use the freedom of speaking as I feel, I should adopt these
sentiments as my own. Happy the Minister, who has many such children; he may
speak with the enemy in the gate, nor be afraid.

REMEMBER, my Friends, the solemn vows you have made to God; remember the
reputation of the church, the salvation of your own souls depends on the real
sincerity of your religion. Finally: Ought we not all devoutly, to notice the
good hand of our God in bringing us to another anniversary eve; to bless God
that he has not denied us the precious gospel of salvation?

WE know not what another year may bring forth. A night of affliction, the hour
of final separation may be near,

LET us strive to do good, to make each other happy to meet our God in peace.

THE gospel is the only mean of salvation; it is balm to the wounded; it is
freedom to the captive; it is sight to the blind. Blessed are the people, who
know the joyful sound.

AMEN.
ERRATA. -- In some copies the following errors of the Press will be noticed.
10th page, 15 lines from the bottom, for inform read informing. 16th page, 7
lines from the bottom, for adopted read adapted. 18th page, 18 lines from the
bottom, for saints read saint. 19th page, 4 lines from the bottom, for your
read you. 20th page, 14 lines from the top, for claim read calm, and in several
instances, for privileges read privileges,

Lines, with some alteration, sung after the sermon.
1 'TWAS night when angels sung on Bethle'm's
"Glad tidings" published in seraphic strains;
'Twas night the gospel came to our relief, (...) was in the evening.

Dispel'd our fears, and soothed our anxious grief;
In grateful song let hallowed joy resound;
This happy eve we long sought blessings found.
2. May Jesus kind, whose every thought is love,
In tender mercy send the heavenly dove,
To show our hearts how safe are wisdom's ways,
Unfold the terrors which from Sinai blaze,
Display the folly of each wrong design,
A power resistless give to truth divine.
3. With pleased attention we instruction hear;
New blessings hope from each revolving year;
Our bliss shall rise, if Jesus we believe,
Our Pastor share each rapture we receive;
Oh may we crowd the sacramental feast,
And choose our Savior for our king and priest.
4. ^^rice happy night, which gave us gospel truth,
It (...) the old, and saves the wandering youth;
(...) things the Lord has done-we praise his name,
Our ^^arts be love, and our devotion flame;
We praise the Lord; let every tongue be praise,
This night demands the noblest song we raise.
FINIS.

