MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF CATHERINE PHILLIPS: TO WHICH ARE ADDED SOME OF HER
EPISTLES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY BUDD AND BART^AM, FOR ROBERT JOHNSON AND CO. No 147,
HIGH STREET.

1798.

MEMOIRS, etc.
CHAP. I.
AS the dealings of the Almighty with me from my youth have been singular, and
are worthy to be retained in remembrance with thankfulness, I have committed to
writing some remarkable circumstances of my life; tending to awaken future
thanksgiving and watchfulness in myself; and, considering how wonderfully the
divine arm has been manifested for my help, to encourage me to a steady trust
therein, and perseverance in submission thereto: and in order to leave to my
surviving relations, some memorials of the various exercises and dangers which
I have passed through, and of the merciful support and preservation vouchsafed
from the Lord therein.

But first it appears proper for me to leave a testimony to my parents, who not
only professed the truth, but had it in possession. My father, Henry Payton, of
Dudley in Worcestershire (son of John and Catherine Payton, respectable members
in the society of Friends), was called into the work of the ministry about the
eighteenth year of his age; and, when young, traveled much in the service of
truth in diverse parts of this nation, Ireland, and Scotland, as also in the
American colonies: and from the testimonies of friends, I have good reason to
believe that his service was truly acceptable and edifying to the churches; his
ministry being lively and clear, and his care not to exceed the openings of
truth therein apparent. His deportment was grave, his conduct clean and steady,
and his charity, in proportion to his circumstances, diffusive. He was an
affectionate husband, a tender father, and kind master; serviceable amongst his
neighbors, and beloved and respected by them. Many years before his decease,
he was disabled not only for public service in the ministry, but for acting in
the private duties of life in providing for his family; being afflicted with a
paralytic disorder, under which his faculties gradually gave way. I was much
his companion in his long weakness, reading to him and attending upon him; and
can give this testimony respecting him, that he retained the favor of the
divine life to the last; and frequently manifested a religious concern for his
children, and particularly for me, his youngest child and tenderly beloved by
him. He would often say, 'The Lord bless you my children,' when his speech
faltered so that he could articulate but little. In the seventy-fifth year of
his age he was released from his affliction, and I doubt not is entered into
everlasting bliss.

My mother was the daughter of Henry and Elizabeth Fowler, of Evesham in
Worcestershire. She was a religious woman, endued with a strong and steady
understanding, and many and singular virtues whereby she was fitted for the
part she had to act in life. This was peculiarly exercising in part, through my
father's incapacity for business, the care of a pretty large and young family,
and a considerable business (and that not of the kind the most fit for a woman)
devolving upon her. When my father was disabled from acting for his family,
being engaged in a partnership in one branch of business which terminated in
great loss of property, his affairs were in a very unsettled state; all which,
with other very trying circumstances, my mother passed through with admirable
steadiness, fortitude, and patience; and through a long series of necessary
worldly engagements, she was favored to retain the best life. The Lord greatly
blessed her endeavors for her children, in temporals; and I doubt not heard
her prayers that the dew of heaven might rest upon them. She would say, she
desired not great riches for her children, but that they might dwell in the
fear of God. Her steady and strong conjugal affection was manifested in my
father's long indisposition, by tender attention; and after his decease, by her
frequent mentioning him in terms which evinced that their union was founded in
that love, which death cannot dissolve. She said that when she married him, she
was so far from being intimidated at the thought of his leaving her, to travel
in his ministerial office, that she entered the solemn covenant, with a
resolution to do her utmost to set him at liberty therein; and when it pleased
Divine Wisdom to deprive her of a husband whom she might offer up to his
service, she was desirous that some one at least of her offspring might be
called to the ministry: which was fulfilled in me, whom she bore rather late in
life, and tenderly loved; but, I believe she as freely dedicated me to the Lord
as Hannah did Samuel, and was always ready to put me forward in his work; yet
was weightily concerned that I might not run before my true guide. And
although, after I was called to the ministry, it was my lot to be much absent
from her, she never repined at it, but frequently encouraged and excited me to
faithfulness: so that among the many mercies bestowed by bounteous Providence,
I may justly number as not the least, the having such a parent.

She was an affectionate mother to all her children, yet very quick-sighted to
their faults, ready to reprove them; and not subject to indulge them in
childhood; but educated them in industry. In fine, she was an example of
fortitude, cheerfulness, gravity, industry, economy, self-denial, and
resignation to the divine will. She was generous to her friends; her house and
heart always open to receive the Lord's messengers: for which she would say she
thought a blessing was dropped upon her family. She was charitable to the poor;
rather choosing to save from other expenses, that she might have to dispense.
She died in the ninety-first year of her age; and retained a considerable
degree of soundness of judgment until near the close of a useful, but careful
life.

Thus descended, it may be supposed I was in the way to receive religious
instruction from my infancy; and indeed I cannot date the first dawn of divine
light upon my soul; for with humble thankfulness I may say, that early in the
morning of life I knew the Lord to be a God nigh at hand; convincing of evil,
and raising breathings after the saving knowledge of his divine love and power.
Friends who traveled in the ministry usually lodged at my father's house. I
loved their company when but very young, and their tender notice of me I
commemorate with gratitude. And here I remark, that if our youth prized the
favor of the company and converse of such whose "feet appear beautiful upon
the mountains of salvation, and who have had large experience of the love of
God, they might profit much thereby. -- But, alas! how often do some avoid
their company, scarcely giving them an opportunity of manifesting to them that
tender affection, wherewith their spirits are clothed; being probably afraid of
reproof, on account of their indulging in liberties, contrary to the pure
liberty of truth; which they think hard, although it be given in that love
which seeks the true happiness of their souls. I could read well when very
young, and (as is before hinted) spending much time with my afflicted father, I
read much to him; and the experiences and sufferings of faithful martyrs, and
of our worthy friends, with the accounts of the glorious exit of such as
launched out of time in full assurance of everlasting bliss, made profitable
impressions upon my mind; my spirit being often tendered thereby, and my love
of virtue and piety strengthened; so that I may truly say that such holy
persons, though they are dead, yet speak. May their language be heard by the
youth of the present and succeeding generations; and excite them to eschew the
paths of vanity, and to follow the footsteps of Christ's companions. So will
the song of his redeemed be theirs.

But, notwithstanding these promising beginnings, as I grew up, I yielded to
diverse temptations, and was allured from the simplicity of truth; the evil
propensities in nature getting the ascendency. But even in my childhood I
experienced many conflicts, and my convictions for evil were strong; so that at
times my heart was sorrowful, and my pillow watered with my tears, although my
countenance and deportment were mostly cheerful. Once, having yielded to
temptation, my sense of guilt was such, that I concluded I had sinned against
the Holy Ghost; and that, agreeably to Christ's testimony, I "should never be
forgiven." This so affected my tender mind with sorrow and unutterable
distress, that it could not be entirely concealed from the family; although I
was enabled, even in childhood, to keep my exercises of mind much to myself. I
think I must have been about eight or nine years old when it was thus with me;
and as in my childhood I was several times visited with fevers, which brought
me very low, I was led to consider how I was prepared for the awful change
wherewith I was threatened; and a weighty sense rested upon my spirit, that my
soul was not pure enough for admittance into Christ's holy kingdom. Sometimes I
would covenant with the Lord to be more circumspect and watchful for the
future; but the airy natural disposition again got the ascendency, whereby
again an occasion for repentance would arise. My natural disposition was very
volatile, and my apprehension quick; and as my faculties opened, I delighted
much in books of a very contrary nature and tendency to those which had engaged
my attention in my childhood. I had a near relation, who, notwithstanding his
having been divinely favored in his youth, had slighted his soul's mercies,
and pursued lying vanities. He kept house in the town; and through him, myself,
and my sisters, had opportunities of obtaining plays and romances, which I read
with avidity. I also spent so much time at his house as to be introduced into
amusements very inconsistent with the simplicity of truth, and my former
religious impressions; so that my state was indeed dangerous, and but for the
interposition of Divine Providence, I had been left to pursue courses which
must have terminated deplorably. I also read history, was fond of poetry, and
had a taste for philosophy; so that I was in the way to embellish my
understanding (as is the common phrase), and become accomplished to shine in
conversation; which might have tended to feed the vain proud nature, render me
pleasing to those who were in it, and make me conspicuous in the world. But the
Lord, in his wisdom, designed to bring me to public view in a line directly
opposite to worldly wisdom, pleasure, or honor; and when he was pleased more
fully to open to my understanding his great and glorious work of renovation of
spirit, I saw that I must desist from these amusing publications and studies,
and pursue the one necessary business, viz. working out the salvation of my
immortal soul: and I esteem it a great mercy that I readily attended to this
intimation. However lawful it may be, in proper seasons, to look into the works
of nature, and become acquainted with the history of former or present times,
my attention was now powerfully attracted to higher subjects; and had I pursued
those lower things, I might have become as a "vessel marred upon the wheel."
This is, alas! the case with many who have been divinely visited, but who, not
deeply and steadily attending to the instructions of pure wisdom, but seeking
to be wise and learned; in matters which merely relate to this present state,
have not advanced in the simplicity of divine knowledge; and although it has
remained obvious that the Lord's hand has mercifully been turned upon them to
form them for his service, they have not grown up to that degree of usefulness
in Christ's church, whereto they might have attained, had they passively abode
the turnings of his preparing hand. Were the sons and daughters of our
religious society, who are favored with good natural understandings, clothed
with heavenly wisdom, they would become and appear truly great, in the
dignified simplicity and humility of the service of the King of kings. Human
knowledge and acquirements too often puff up the minds of youth; and indeed
some of more advanced age pride themselves therein, when, as examples to the
rising generation, they should be clothed with humility. It was observed of a
truly honorable member of our favored society, that 'he was a divine and a
naturalist, and all of the Almighty's making.' William Penn's Account of George
Fox.
I have read very little on natural philosophy, and am not in a disposition to
boast of my acquired knowledge, of either human, natural, or divine things; but
I may say, that I have admired how by one gleam of heavenly light the
understanding is opened into natural things; so as in degree to behold, as at
one view, the general economy of the divine Former of all things, as it is
displayed in the outward creation. This produces adoration to him under the
humbling sense of his power, mercy, and wisdom, as well as admiration of his
works; and discovers that they are indeed mavelous, and in their full extent
incomprehensible; and impossible to be traced in innumerable ages. Therefore,
let not the faculties of his adopted children be so improperly occupied in
exploring them, as to prevent their advances in their various stations in his
militant church: when happily their souls are fixed in the triumphant, they
will know so much, as for ever to inspire the angelic song of Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, in wisdom have thou made them all!

From these remarks I return to my education, which, whilst I was at home, had
not been entirely neglected, as to useful and necessary learning; yet, as
through the afflicted circumstances of our family, I had been kept pretty
closely there until I had attained my sixteenth year, my mother concluded to
send me to London, and put me for one year under the care of Rachel Trafford,
who, with her sister, kept a respectable boarding-school; not doubting her
attention to me, as she when young had spent a considerable time in my father's
family: and indeed she was affectionately kind to me; and, as a minister as
well as mistress, I believe her mind was frequently exercised for the religious
improvement of her scholars, which at times was manifested by verbal
supplication for them, as well as advice and reproof.

I improved much for the time I staid in the school, in some arts taught in it;
and my school-fellows behaved well to me; but being so far advanced toward
maturity, tall, and proportionably grown for my age, I looked rather too much
like a woman for a school; yet some of my school-fellows were older than
myself, which I believe increased my mistress's anxious solicitude for our
preservation, we being (to use her own expression) a school of women. I soon
connected myself most intimately with my mistress's niece, who acted as a
teacher, and with one of the scholars, a sensible agreeable well-behaved young
woman, but not of our society, who was admitted into the school to qualify
herself in needle work, for a school-mistress. As neither of them were much
under the influence of religion, I did not profit by their conversation, in the
most essential respect. But after I had been a few months in the school, I was
favored with a renewed visitation of divine love, and grew uneasy with my
situation. Home became desirable, although I knew it to be a house of
affliction; and on my intimating it to my dear mother, my brother James fetched
me there, sooner than she intended when I left her.

Thus far I have commemorated the dealings of the Almighty with my soul,
manifested principally in tender mercy; but now the day was coming wherein his
righteous judgments were manifested against all that was high, and opposite to
his pure spirit; in which day my wanderings from him, the Shepherd of Israel,
were brought to my remembrance, and my sins set in order before me; which
wrought great humiliation and brokenness of heart, with strong cries to him,
that he would graciously pass by my transgressions, and receive me into
covenant with himself. And although this dispensation was not agreeable to
degenerated nature, which, like Adam when he had transgressed, seeks to evade
the condemnation; yet, because of the glory which I was favored to discover
beyond it, and the divine love which I saw therein, I said, in the secret of my
soul, "It is good for me to be under it;" and I was made willing patiently to
abide the judgments of the Lord for sin, in order that I might witness
remission thereof through the baptism of repentance, and the sanctifying life
or spirit of his Son Jesus Christ. And this mercy, in the appointed season of
infinite wisdom, I experienced; so that my past transgressions were blotted out
of the book of remembrance, upon the terms of my future steady perseverance in
the fear of God; and in the sensible exaltation of the attribute of divine
mercy over judgment, my soul rejoiced with humble thankfulness. Yet as when the
children of Israel were delivered out of Egypt, and traveled through the
wilderness, they had there new trials of various kinds to encounter, insomuch
that they thought their sufferings rather increased than diminished, and
frequently feared perishing in that desert land; so, being now relieved from
the oppressive weight of past actual transgression, and traveling after the
saints promissed inheritance, which is a state of establishment in
righteousness, I had to pass, to the attainment thereof, through many deep
baptisms and exercises of faith and patience. I was now brought into my own
heart, which, by reason of the irregularity of its passions and inclinations,
might well be compared to an uncultivated wilderness; through which I must
travel, and wherein I must receive the law for the ordering of my outward
conduct: and O! the seasons of hunger and thirst, the tossings and
perplexities, the "thunderings, lightnings, and tempests," which seemed to
threaten destruction, which I had to pass through in that day, are to be had in
everlasting remembrance; with thanksgiving to that divine hand which preserved
me from being so far dismayed at them as to look back with a desire to return
to that country, or state, from which I had happily escaped. The adversary here
transformed himself as into an angel of light, and, under the specious
appearance of righteousness, represented the way so strait, that it was
impossible to walk therein and act as a rational being; thereby endeavoring to
discourage me, or prevent my attaining to the true gospel liberty, in the use
of the creatures, and the course of my conduct. Indeed, in this season of deep
distress, both the earth and heavens were shaken; some of those religious
principles, which I had received by education, were called in question; and I
was left without any foundation of certainty respecting them; nor could I
attain to it by the testimony of others, or the writings of such as had
vindicated them to the world; being to receive my convincement of them, from
the deep ground of divine revelation.

All which I have seen was necessary to fit me for the service which was
appointed me; that the foundations of my faith might be laid in certainty, and
that I might be able to testify with boldness, that I had experienced what I
asserted to be the truth; and be also suitably qualified to sympathize with,
and minister to, such as were in the like states. I saw early for what station
I was designed in Christ's church. This manifestation of the divine will, my
soul received with a good degree of resignation; nevertheless, until the Lord's
time for putting me forth to service was come, I was frequently assaulted with
fears, lest it should be required of me at such times, and in such manners, as
would be doubly hard to flesh and blood: and the adversary was very busy with
his presentations, intending thereby either to dispirit my mind from pursuing
its proper duty, or, by hurrying me into what had the appearance thereof, to
bring me into confusion. But, in all these voices of the stranger, there was a
want of that certainty, which I had concluded should attend such a discovery of
the divine will, and which I was happily led to look for; and I was at length
strengthened to covenant with the Almighty, that whenever the evidence was
clear and strong, I would submit thereto.

And here it may not be unprofitable to remark, that some minds are more liable
to be thus affected than others. Such as have a strong and quick imagination,
and whose hearts have been deeply affected with the exceeding sinfulness of
sin, and of the love of God to mankind; whose desires are strong, that the one
might come to an end, and the other abound in the earth; it is difficult for
these at all times (especially when young in religious experience) to keep the
quiet habitation, wherein alone the voice of the true Shepherd is to be heard,
and distinguished from that of the stranger's. But as the will becomes
gradually resigned to that of God, and the imagination in its natural working
silenced, and the soul comes more constantly to worship in the Lord's temple;
the adversary in these false appearances is bound, or if suffered to present
them, there is strength acquired to stand still and try the spirits. This I
have seen, in the light of truth, to be absolutely necessary before we move in
the Lord's service; the want of which has been productive of much confusion,
and administered cause of reproach on our high and holy profession, to such who
are seeking for an occasion to lay waste the belief in divine revelation.

But to return: -- Being come to the aforesaid state of resignation, I waited
quietly to discern the puttings forth of the divine hand, in a state of earnest
prayer that I might not be suffered to move before the proper time; which I
have good ground to believe was heard and answered; and that from the motion of
divine life I was constrained to supplicate the Almighty in our little meeting
at Dudley, the tenth day of the Second month, 1748, being then newly entered
the twenty-second year of my age. May such of the Lord's children, whom he
appoints to the solemn important service of the ministry, humbly and patiently
wait to know when to move therein; as through neglect of it some have stepped
into it, before they have fully passed through the dispensation of preparation
for it; and, if ever they have become strong in his service, they have
continued long in a state of weakness. Yet let none despise "the day of small
things." A few words spoken under divine direction, are often blessed to those
to whom the Master of the solemn assemblies directs them.

I continued to minister, as the Lord was pleased to give me ability, in great
brokenness of heart, and for a time in but a few words; for great fear was upon
my spirit lest I should minister in the wisdom of the creature, which ever
brings death, and begets its like: and, in a sense of this danger, strong were
my cries to the Almighty, that what I handed forth to the people might be
unmixed, let it appear ever so simple or despisable in the view of the worldly
wise and learned. And as I then continued to move in fear and trembling, the
Lord was with me, and enlarged my understanding, and increased my service in
the openings of truth: at which his people rejoiced, and, in obedience to his
requirings I felt sweet peace. Yet was my spirit frequently in heaviness, being
humbled with many deep exercises, which I found profitable to establish it in
righteousness, although painful to nature. And I leave it as an observation,
that I have seldom, if ever, seen any stand, and arrive to any considerable
degree of usefulness in the church, whose foundation have not been deeply laid
in afflictions and exercises; whereby they are crucified with Christ, and shall
therefore rise with him to glory and honor, in the present as well as in a
future state. But in all my afflictions and deep baptisms, the Shepherd of
Israel was with me, and preserved and supported my spirit to the honor of his
own nature, to whom alone I could attribute the praise: for in those allotted
days and years of tribulation, very little instrumental help was afforded me;
my lot being cast in a quarter, where there were none near who were capable of
giving me much assistance or wise counsel, not having trodden the same steps. I
sometimes thought my case was hidden from some of the Lord's servants, who were
concerned to visit his heritage; or else that they were in part restrained from
ministering to it; and my tongue was much sealed in silence, for my exercises
were incommunicable.

All this I saw to be of excellent use, as the contrary might have led to a
dependence on the servants (which ever brings weakness); or have been
productive of confusion, through my imparting my case to such as were not
skilful to minister to it, and who nevertheless might have advised therein. I
have seen it to be profitable and necessary for such as are in a state of
infancy in religion, to dwell with their exercises; leaning simply on that arm,
which alone is able to carry through them; and, until the mind has acquired a
depth of judgment to distinguish clearly who is on the Lord's side, to be very
cautious to whom they communicate them; lest they be wounded, by discovering
those, whom they have chosen for their friends, to be enemies to the cross of
Christ. Yet when the Lord directs, in times of great strait, to advise with
some experienced servant, it will undoubtedly be advantageous; and a steady
sympathizing friend is a great strength and blessing, when it is afforded in
divine wisdom.

I am inclined to close this chapter with a little poem, which I wrote in my
nineteenth year; as it has been handed about in manuscript, and suffered much
by copying. It is even in print, and one whole verse omitted. Between my
eighteenth and twenty-second year I penned several small tracts, all of a
religious nature; but soon after I appeared in the ministry, I dropped my pen
in regard to verses. I do not say it was a sacrifice required; but the
continuing of the practice might have proved a share some way: it might have
engaged my attention too much, or tended to make me popular, which I have ever
guarded against, perhaps too much so in some points; but I was early afraid of
my mind and services being tarnished with vanity. And here I may add, that from
the time I came from school, I read but little, save religious books; and after
I appeared in the ministry, until late in life, reading even them was much
taken from me, except the scriptures: all which I believe was in divine wisdom,
that I might not minister from what I had gathered from religious writings; but
might receive the arguments I was enabled to advance on behalf of the truth, by
the immediate revelation of the Holy Spirit. And I can with truth say, that the
Lord has been to me, mouth and wisdom, tongue and utterance, to my own humbling
admiration. May all the praise be given to him now and for ever!

A PRAYER FOR WISDOM.
MAKER supreme, of heaven and earth,
Of sea, of air, and sky;
O! thou who gav'st to all things birth,
Lord, hear me when I cry.
To Thee, invisible, I Will pray,
Thou only righteous God;
And Thee, omnipotent, obey,
And fear thy dreadful rod.
Riches or life, I do not crave,
Nor any transient things;
The one has wings, and in the grave
Are laid the proudest kings.
It Is heavenly wisdom I admire;
It Is this is my request:
Oh, grant, great God, this my desire,
And I am fully blessed:
Wisdom to worship thee aright,
To understand thy will,
To do my duty in thy sight,
And thy commands fulfill:
That when my fleeting sands are run,
And death shall set me free;
When the short thread of life is spun,
My soul may fly to thee:
Where I shall live eternally,
And fear no end of time;
But praise thy name, enthroned on high,
Thou pow'ful God divine,
Not with a weak and mortal voice,
But in celestial strains;
In heaven, the center of my joys,
And end of all my pains.
CHAP. II.
HAVING now entered the list of public combatants in the Lamb's army, I pretty
soon became concerned to travel for the promotion of truth and righteousness;
and for more than twenty years, had but little intermission from gospel labors.

In the Fifth month, 1749 (old style) I left home, in order to visit some part
of Wales; in which journey my dear friend Lucy Bradley was made willing to
accompany me (although, as she said, she knew not that her call to service was
much farther than to assist me); with whom I traveled in sweet unity, she
being a true sympathizing friend, and deep travailler in spirit, as well as
rightly qualified publicly to minister. We visited the meetings of Friends in
Radnorshire, Monmouthshire, Glamorganshire, Pembrokeshire, and part of North
Wales; and in about seven weeks I returned home in peace and thankfulness, to
my dear mother and relations; who had been made willing to give me up for
truth's sake, and gladly received me back. In this journey the principal share
of the public service fell to my lot; wherein the Lord was evidently with me,
strengthening for the work of the day to the honor of his own name; and the
testimony of truth was sometimes exalted, in its own authority, over the
libertine and hypocritical professors of it. The youth, and tender
honest-minded, were visited and refreshed in divine love; liberty and strength
were afforded to declare it to those not of our society; and I had ground to
hope that our labor was not entirely in vain: some persons being powerfully
affected, who, I hope, long retained a sense of that visitation; particularly
William Phillips from Cornwall, who was then upon a visit to his relations at
Swansea.

In less than a week after my return from this journey, I went to the circular
yearly meeting for the seven western countries, which was held this year at
Coventry, and was very large, and, in the main, satisfactory. It was attended
by many valuable experienced ministers, who were careful of laying hands
suddenly upon me; although I had good reason to believe that the most weighty
of them loved me; but were fearful of hurting me by discovering too much of
their approbation or affection; which some minds, in the infancy of religious
experience, have not been able to bear. After my return from this meeting, I
was stripped of that strength wherewith the Almighty had been pleased to clothe
me; which, with some other discouragement I met with, sunk me very low,
insomuch that I was ready to doubt of all I had known, and call in question my
commission to minister: and my soul was attacked by the adversary in some of
his most subtle appearances, and baptized into a cloud of darkness. This
dispensation I afterward saw to be serviceable; the more so, as before my
return from my Welsh journey, I had a prospect of another into the west of
England; for therein I forgot all my former services, was emptied of all
self-sufficiency, and became weak and depending as when I first engaged in the
weighty service of the ministry: and it lives in my experience, that thus the
Lord will deal with his servants, for their preservation, that they may dwell
in a continual sense, that the excellency is of Him; from whom proceeds wisdom,
power, light, utterance, peace, and every good gift.

My concern for the west continuing and increasing, I imparted it to my
relations, who being willing to give me up (though sorry to part with me), I
sought for a companion, but could hear of none suitable. This added to my
exercise; for it seemed very dangerous for such a child as I, to travel alone;
but after waiting as long as I durst, I laid my concern before Friends of our
Monthly meeting, and requested their certificate, Should any one not acquainted
with Friends discipline read these Memoirs, it is not improper to observe,
that, when a minister, approved amongst them, believes it his or her duty to
visit a distant part of the nation, etc. a certificate is given of the unity of
Friends of the monthly meeting whereof such minister is a member, that Friends
where they travel may be assured that they do not move in so weighty a service
without the concurrence of their Friends at home: also that the laying on of
hands mentioned in the preceding page, is only to be understood as a figurative
expression.
but told them that I knew of no companion; and if they had not been free to
let me go alone, I believe I should have been easy to have waited longer; but
they gave me a certificate; and in the Eleventh month, 1749, I left home in
great humility and fear, being accompanied by my dear brother James Payton, who
went with me to several meetings in our own county, and left me not without
some doubt on account of the natural weakness of my constitution, which he
feared might suffer in this winter's journey. I proceeded to Bristol, and from
thence, through part of the counties of Wilts, Somerset, Dorset, and Devon, to
Penzance in Cornwall, and returned back to that city in the spring.

And although I went from home alone, I was not much without a suitable
companion, the Almighty putting it into the heart of one or other of his
servants to accompany me. Mary Fry, of Sutton in Wiltshire, went with me
through Dorsetshire; and Mary Pole, of Milverton in Somersetshire, through
Devonshire and Cornwall; who were both very tender of me, and serviceable to
me. The latter was not in the ministry, but a solid sympathizing friend, and
true labourer in spirit in meetings.

I visited the meetings of Friends pretty generally in Dorsetshire, Devonshire,
and Cornwall; some of which were attended by many people of other societies;
before whom the Lord gave me boldness to testify of his truth with good
authority, and to lay open the false and dangerous opinions of some professed
Christians, particularly that of unconditional election and reprobation; which
dark principle was then likely to gain ground in these parts. I was concerned
to appoint meetings at several places, where Friends had no meeting houses; all
which I hope had their service. At Truro in Cornwall, I had a satisfactory
meeting, although the people at that town had heretofore manifested their
dislike to Friends laboring among them; but they behaved pretty peaceably now,
and I had cause to believe my service in this meeting tended to open the way
for the circular yearly meeting to be held here; which it was in the year 1752,
much to the satisfaction of Friends. At Bath, in my return, I was concerned to
appoint a meeting for the strangers in town (it being the season for drinking
the waters); to which some of them came, and it was a memorable opportunity,
the power of truth being exalted to the reducing of their light and airy
spirits, to some degree of solidity; for which my soul bowed in thankfulness to
Him who calls to and qualifies for his service. In this meeting a man sat
opposite to me, who wrote by intervals while I was speaking, and I apprehended
was taking down what I said; but my spirit was borne above looking at that,
being bound to the testimony of truth.

After staying about a week at Bristol, I went for the Welsh yearly meeting,
which was held this year at Brecknock, being accompanied by John Curtis, a
valuable minister of Bristol, and diverse other Friends. In our way we appointed
meetings at Caerleon, Pontypool, and Abergavenny; at the first of which places,
I could not find that there had ever been a meeting before; but the people
behaved well, and I hope it ended to the satisfaction of the fensible friends
present. It was held upon a First Day in the afternoon; and while we were in
it, a number of people were going about the street with a fiddle; it being the
custom in some places in Wales, after what they call divine service, to
entertain themselves with music, or other diversions. What an inconsistency!

That at Abergavenny was large, and I hope of service, in opening the way of
the testimony amongst the people. Here a Presbyterian preacher made some
disturbance in the close of it. I thought his aim was to cloud the doctrine
which had been preached, and so prevent the people from being shaken thereby
from their old sentiments; but he was blamed by them, and I hope missed his
end. I had not much public service at Brecknock, yet was glad I was there, for
indeed it was a humbling time to me. For although, in porportion to my gift and
experience, the Almighty had eminently favored me in this journey; yet, on
beholding the service and conduct of some other of his ministers, and comparing
mine with them, I was led to look upon myself but as a mean instrument, and
greatly to esteem these my elders in the truth. O! how secretly does the Lord
work, to the purifying of the hearts of such of his servants who desire to be
divested of every high thought, and humbly to cast down their crowns at his
feet: which was the ardent prayer of my soul, from the sense of the miserable
loss some had sustained, in being puffed up with self-conceit and the esteem of
the people; which I have seen to be a very fallacious line to measure one's
self by: for sometimes that which is highly applauded by them, is reproved by
that Spirit which searches all things.

From Brecknock I returned to Bristol yearly meeting, from whence I thought of
returning home; but, to my great disappointment, a concern rested upon me to
proceed to the yearly meeting at London, in company with Rachel Wilson, who
came with me from Brecknock, and was without any companion in the ministry.
This brought a great exercise upon my mind, under the consideration of the
concern it would bring upon my relations; who I knew were desirous that I might
steadily move in the counsel of God; and perhaps might fear my running too
fast, which I also dreaded; but finding I could not otherwise be easy, I
advised with some friends, and particularly with my ancient and honorable
friend, Benjamin Kidd, who encouraged me therein.

The Bristol yearly meeting ended satisfactorily, many valuable ministers
attended it, and the testimony of Truth was measurably exalted. It had pleased
the Lord in the several times I had been in this city, to favor me with
considerable liberty in the exercise of my gift, whereby a door was opened to
me in the minds of Friends there; which favor I hope I received with due
thankfulness.

Being clear of Bristol, I proceeded to London attending several meetings in
the way appointed by Rachel Wilson; at one of which we met with our valuable
friend, Daniel Stanton from America, with whom we went in company to London;
where we were affectionately received by many Friends, and I had good ground to
believe my coming to that city, was in the will and wisdom of the Almighty,
though greatly in a cross to my own.

After the yearly meeting, I returned directly home, through mercy in peace,
and was there gladly received by my dear mother, etc.

Upon a review of this journey, I found abundant cause to adore the wisdom,
love, and care, of the heavenly Shepherd; which was eminently manifested in his
conducting, dealing with, and preserving, me, a poor weak inexperienced child.
The many dangers I had escaped, the many deep exercises I had been supported
under, with the multitude of favors conferred on so unworthy an object, struck
me with admiration, and raised this acknowledgement, that He had not dealt with
me according to my desert, but according to the multitude of his mercies.

My return from this journey was in the Fourth month (old style), 17^0. I staid
about home until the fall of the year, when I found mind drawn to Bath,
principally on the account of such as resorted thither to drink the waters; to
which city I went, and spent a few weeks therein, and at Bristol, etc. I hope
profitably. I passed the winter of this year chiefly at and about home, and
amongst my relations.

In the spring of the year 1751, I attended the yearly meeting for Wales, held
at Newport in Shropshire, which was large and divinely favored. My dear friend
Samuel Fothergill attended it, to whom I imparted a concern, which I had for
some time been under, of visiting Ireland; in which he encouraged me, and
advised that I would endeavor to get to Dublin half-year's meeting; and I had
afterward cause to believe his advice was right; for, although I did not
arrive timely to attend it, yet, had I not come in time to have consulted Mary
Peisley before she left the city, I might not have been favored with her
company. Accordingly I very soon set forward, my brother accompanying me to
Liverpool, and seeing me on board a vessel bound for Dublin, in which he left
me to the protection of Providence. We sailed down the harbor, but the wind
proving contrary, lay that night at anchor, and the next day returned to
Liverpool; where I was content to wait, until He who sent me forth was pleased
to afford the means of my release from my native land; which was in a few days,
when I was favored with a good passage, for which my spirit was thankful. I
took up my lodgings in Dublin at John Barclay's, by whom, though personally
unknown, I was kindly received.

Soon after I landed I heard that my dear friend Mary Peisley was in town. I
told her that, as I was without a companion, I should be glad if she could find
freedom to go with me a part of the journey; to which she said little then, but
before she left the city, she informed me that she had for some time felt
drawings to visit the western and northern provinces, and was free to join me
in these parts; with which I thankfully concurred. It is worthy remarking, that
the evening before I landed, she being under the influence of heavenly
goodness, and in that state resigned to go this journey, it appeared to her
that a companion would be sent her from England. Thus does the Lord mercifully
provide all things necessary for such as trust in him, and are willing to
follow whithersoever he leads them.

Mary Peisley returned home from Dublin, in order to prepare for the journey. I
staid a few days, and then left it with an intention to visit two meetings in
the county of Wicklow, and return back to the city. Several Friends accompanied
me in a coach, which I mention as being singularly providential, for the day we
left town I was taken ill; but as a meeting was appointed at Wicklow, we went
forward, and reached the place that night. Next day I was much worse, yet
attended the meeting and had some little service therein, though under a heavy
load of sickness; which continuing, I returned the next day to Dublin (which I
could not have done on horseback), where I was laid up for about two weeks; in
all which time my mind was remarkably resigned to this dispensation of
Providence; feeling sweet peace in giving up to come the journey, even if it
were the Lord's will I should lay down my natural life in that city; having a
comfortable hope that it would have been in peace; but as he saw meet, in
wisdom and mercy, to raise me from this state of weakness, my earnest desire
was, that my longer continuance in mutability might be to the honor of his
ever worthy name.

In the time of my indisposition, I lodged at Robert Clibborn's, whose wife was
exceedingly tender of me. John Barclay and two more in his family were ill,
which rendered it improper for me to return to his house. I staid some little
time in Dublin to recover my strength, and my friend John Barclay's
indisposition proving mortal, I attended the meeting held on account of his
funeral; which was very large, and attended with a good degree of solemnity.
After this, I left the city accompanied by a solid young woman, named Elizabeth
Cariton, not in the ministry, who was with me about three weeks; in which time
I passed through the meetings of Friends in the counties of Carlow and Wexford,
to Waterford; where I was met by my dear friend Mary Peisley, who was my
companion through most of the remainder of this journey: and I had cause
thankfully to acknowledge the mercy of Providence in affording me one so steady
and experienced, from whose conduct I might gather instruction. We traveled
together in great unity and affection, which rendered the trials we met with in
the journey the more easy. These were considerable, resulting in part from the
nature of our services; which were mostly pointed to the states of persons or
meetings, and exposed us to censure from spirits unsubjected to the power of
truth; but our good Master supported us through all, and nearly united our
spirits to the living conscientious professors of it, in that nation. It was
sometimes my lot in this journey to appoint meetings in places where there were
none of our Society, in which I had the unity of my companion and friend; and
they mostly ended to satisfaction, the Almighty proportioning wisdom and
strength to the occasions. The 27th of the Seventh month I returned to Dublin,
in hope that I might in a few days take my passage for my native land; but two
women friends from England, who had been visiting Ireland, being expected in
town soon, and to return home, I was free to wait a little for their company;
but therein was disappointed, for one of the friends got a fall from her horse
in Dublin street, by which she was disabled from pursuing her intention of
going home. So I put to sea, but the wind proving contrary, we were forced
back, after having been beating against it almost four days. This sunk my
spirits considerably, but on my return service opened for me, and the wind
being still contrary, I took a little turn in the country to satisfaction, and
attended the province meeting for Leinster, where I was met by my dear friend
Mary Peisley; with whom I went to her father's house, and staid about a week,
and we went in company to the half-year's meeting at Dublin; in which solemnity
I was favored to minister in the authority of truth; and after taking an
affectionate leave of my near friends, and especially of my companion, who was
still more near to me in the union of the divine Spirit, I sailed for England
the 12th of the Ninth month, 1751, It seems worthy of noting, that although I
did not make my passage when I first went to sea, my attempting it might have
been of use to the captain, who was a religious-minded man, with whom I had
conversation. He suffered no profane language aboard his vessel. He said he had
difficulty to prevent it, but he made it a rule; and that the sailors might
obey his orders, sometimes asked their advice, and when they concurred with him
in judgment, they quietly submitted to orders.
arrived at Parkgate 14th, and reached home the 16th, to the mutual rejoicing
of myself and relations.

After my return my spirit rested some time in a quiet settlement, and great
enjoyment in the truth; which was an abundant compensation for all my labor
and sufferings attending the journey. Before I left Ireland, I found my mind
drawn to visit the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders in the province of
Ulster by an Epistle; and soon after my return home, I was also concerned to
write a few lines to a people at Cardiff in Wales, who had in part relinquished
their former professions of religion, and sat together in silence, but were in
an unsettled state.

This winter I found my mind drawn in the love of truth to visit the meetings
of Friends in London, and experienced true peace in the discharge of that duty.
My service was acceptable to Friends, and I returned home in thankfulness of
heart to the Lord, unto whom is due the praise of all his works. I lodged with
my former schoolmistress, Rachel Trafford, who now rejoiced in receiving me as
a minister of Christ.

Thus far have I wrote as things have been revived in my remembrance, having
made little or no minutes, whilst on my journies, of my labors and exercises;
but in my next journey which was into Scotland, my mind seemed directed to make
some remarks as I went along; which, as they are expressive of the nature of my
service, and the manner wherein divine Wisdom led me in the various changes of
seasons, I insert almost entire.

CHAP. III. Some Minutes of my Journey into Scotland, in Company with Mary
Abbot, of Northamptonshire.
ON the 3d of the Fourth month, 1752 (new style), we went to Coalbrook Dale,
and had a meeting there the same evening, in which we had good satisfaction:
the testimony of truth flowed to the youth, some of whom were carried away with
the vanities of this world, and the tender seed of life in them was oppressed.

The 4th, we went to Shrewsbury, and that evening, accompanied by some friends
of the town, visited two friends who were imprisoned for tithes: in which visit
we were favored with the flowings of the refreshing streams of divine love,
wherein the spirits of some of us were united and comforted.

The 5th, being the First of the week, we attended two meetings in that town.
In the morning, the testimony of truth was in a good degree set over the minds
of the people of other societies, as well as of our own; although there is in
this place a dark spirit; but the Lord was graciously pleased to bear our
spirits above it.

In the afternoon, a pretty many people of other societies came in; but it
consisted with infinite wisdom to disappoint their expectations; and as I abode
in silence, I had peace. I thought the cause of this trial might be an example
to one of that place, who was forward to minister, but without divine authority.

In the evening, we again visited the prisoners; and the 6th, went toward
Warrington, where we came the 7th, and so proceeded the 8th and 9th to the
quarterly meeting at Lancaster; wherein I thought the expectation of the people
was considerable toward me, who was a stranger in the country; under which I
suffered, but patiently bore my testimony in silence; being deeply affected
with a sense of the prevalency of that spirit which would exalt the creature. I
was refreshed under the ministry of that deep and experienced servant of Jesus
Christ, John Churchman of America, whom, with his companion John Pemberton, we
met at this place.

The 11th, we went to Kendal, where the quarterly meeting for Westmoreland was
held; wherein John Churchman had good service, but I was still pretty much
silent; in which dispensation I felt the refining power of the Almighty near,
and was sensible of its service, in emptying my soul of old things, and
preparing it for the fresh reception of the openings of truth.

The 13th, in company with John Churchman, and many other friends, we set
forward for the yearly meeting for the four northern counties, which was held
this year at Carlisle. In our way thither myself and companion staid a meeting
at Penrith, which was previously appointed by Kendal Friends, and was attended
by many people of other societies; and I believe would have been of good
service, had it not been for some, with whom discerning Friends had not unity,
intruding into the service of the ministry.

At Carlisle, my spirit was set at liberty, and I labored weightily, and was
much favored in the enlargement of truth. There seemed a great struggle
between the two powers of light and darkness, and what greatly added to the
exercise of sensible Friends was, that the power of darkness discovered itself
in the appearance of ministry, through some deluded spirits; but, through
divine favor, truth had the escendency.

We staid at Carlisle over the next First Day, in which time we visited several
families of Friends to satisfaction: the meetings on the First Day were
attended by many of the town's people, and we were favored with an evidence of
being in our proper place and service, which was renewed cause of thankfulness.

From the 20th to the 23d, we visited several meetings in Cumberland, wherein
the expectation of the people was great; but my satisfaction and rejoicing
stood in abiding with the seed of God, which being oppressed in the souls of
some professors of truth, the testimony of it did not rise in such authority,
as at some other times.

The 24th, we went a long day's journey to Kelso in Scotland, at which place my
spirit was sorely distressed on account of truth's being almost forsaken by its
professors, who were but few in that town. We got some comfort in visiting a
sick friend, whose son and husband we thought in a hopeful way.

The 27th, we went to Ormston, and in the way thither, my mind was drawn to the
eastward; but when we came to our quarters, I could see but little likelihood
of getting any assistance in visiting the people that way.

The 28th, we had a meeting at Ormston, which was exceedingly crowded, but
satisfactory. Being still thoughtful about the people to the eastward, John
Christy (at whose house we lodged) told me that if I would stay till the 30th,
he would accompany me to any one place I should choose; which I was free to do,
and we went to North Berwick, where I knew not that any meeting of Friends had
been held before. We had a dark spirit in some to encounter, before we could
get a place to meet in, but at last we got a large granary. My spirit was
inexpressibly loaded before meeting, but in patience bent toward the center of
its strength, in which state I went to the meeting. There came many people, and
I admired at the solidity of their behavior. The Lord was with us, and exalted
the testimony of his truth, and we left the town in great satisfaction, and I
hope true thankfulness.

We returned that night to Ormston, and the next day, the 1st of the Fifth
month, went to Edinburgh, where we lodged at William Miller's. We attended the
meetings in that city on the next First Day. That in the morning was pretty
large, although there are very few who profess with us in that city, and
although cloudy in the beginning, yet the Almighty was pleased to favor in the
conclusion, in exalting the testimony of his truth. In the afternoon the house
was exceedingly crowded, and the people very unsettled; but after a long time
of exercise, life rose measurably, wherein the spring of gospel ministry was
opened.

The 5th, we went to Linlithgow, where was no meeting of Friends. We got a
small meeting in an inn with the town's people, which was low, though not quite
dead; and returned at night to Edinburgh, having traveled about twenty-eight
Scotch miles that day. In the morning before I set out, I found myself very
poorly, and in the journey I got worse, and the next day still worse; yet I
attended a meeting which was appointed for the professors of truth only, whose
states were mostly distressing, a libertine spirit having carried away the
youth, and an easy indifferent one prevailing amongst those farther advanced in
years; both which were spoken to.

My illness still increased, and, proving a fever, reduced me to a state of
great weakness, and I experienced much poverty of spirit; but my frequent
petition to the Almighty was for patience, and he was pleased to favor me with
quietness and resignation.

The 25th, we went from Edinburgh toward the north. I was still very weak, but
gradually gathered strength, and was encouraged to press forward; which I did
as far as there were any meetings of Friends, and returned to England by way of
Perth and Glasgow. The number of Friends in Scotland is small, and the life of
truth low in some of them; but among the few, there are some who stand as
monuments of the divine power, in this barren and almost desolate land; wherein
however there is an open door in many places, to preach the gospel to those not
professing with us.

From Glasgow we went to Carlisle without holding any meetings. The first night
we lodged at Stirling, where my spirit was exercised respecting the holding of
a meeting; but having only one young man with us, not the most steady as a
Friend, and it appearing to be a high professing place, I suffered cowardice to
prevail, which occasioned future distress: there was time enough for an evening
meeting after we came to our inn; and I think the landlord would have granted
us his large diningroom. In the morning we proceeded forward, a long day's
journey, and dangerous roads; lodged at a very poor lonely Scotch inn upon a
chaff bed; our bed-room a ground floor, and no fastening to the door; and there
being men in the house drinking, we were not quite easy with our situation, but
through divine favor, we went to sleep, and were preserved from harm. We rode
through much heavy rain from Glasgow to this place, which had swelled the river
Ersk so much, that it was not thought safe to attempt to pass it the night we
came there; but next morning we crossed it in two branches: it had a dreadful
appearance, the water looked very muddy, the stream wide, deep, and rapid; but
we had careful guides, and through favor of Providence got safe over the 17th
of the Sixth month, and came to Carlisle the same day. And here I may note to
the honor of Scotland, that in all the time I was in it, I do not recollect
hearing an oath or a curse uttered, except the word faith might be accounted an
oath, which was spoken by a soldier. Alas, for England! the streets of whose
towns echo with most profane language, to the shame and condemnation of its
magistrates, as well as its wicked inhabitants. At Carlisle I parted from my
companion, who was concerned to visit some of the northern counties, and I, to
attend the quarterly meeting at York; where I came the 22d, taking meetings in
my way, at Penrith, Raby, and Haby. The last, being a monthly meeting, was
pretty large, and I believe many souls were refreshed therein: the testimony of
truth rose in considerable strength and clearness; and the meeting concluded in
a sense of heavenly sweetness, which was again renewed in the women's meeting.
My spirit was humbly bowed in thankfulness, that my lot was cast there that day.

At York I met with my dear friend Ann Fothergill from London, and many other
friends whom I dearly loved, who were glad to see me returned to my native
land, the more so from a report having prevailed in England, that I was dead. I
think it worthy noting, that Samuel Fothergill, being at London yearly meeting,
when this report was current, on a friend's bringing him a supposed
confirmation of the truth of it, paused awhile, and bid her tell the person who
informed her, from him, She is not dead: which was soon confirmed by an account
from Scotland.
Here my mind was turned to consider the wonderful loving kindness of
Providence manifested in this journey; and, considering my weak state of health
through a great part of it, I thought it miraculous that I should so soon
accomplish it; such a fatigue seeming no way proportioned to my strength. But
with God all things are possible; therefore have his servants cause to trust in
his holy arm of power.

The quarterly meeting at York was mercifully attended with the presence of the
Master of our solemn assemblies; the testimony of truth was exalted, and the
spirits of his people united in gospel fellowship.

The 25th, I went to Malton, accompanied by my dear friend Sarah Tailor of
Manchester. We had a meeting there that evening, and the 26th went to
Scarborough, and that evening visited a young man, who I thought was near his
end; but we had little to say to him, his condition being lamentably stupid. I
thought intemperance was the cause of his indisposition, and found afterward I
was not mistaken. O! the deplorable effects of this degrading vice on the body,
soul, and temporal substance, of numbers who unhappily indulge in it; whose
faculties are debased below those of the brute animals; and so stupefied as not
to be roused to the most important work of their soul's salvation. It lays men
open to every temptation, and reduces many from opulent circumstances to
extreme poverty. It is destructive of every delicate social enjoyment; it often
emaciates the body, deprives the soul of its highest good, the divine Presence,
whilst in time; and if continued to the end of it, finally excludes it from
Christ's pure kingdom of everlasting bliss. Alas! that men should indulge in it
to their shame. Solomon says truly, Pro. xx.1.
Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is
not wise; again, Ibid xxiii.29, 30, 31, and 32.
Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babbling? who
has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at
the wine, that go to seek mixed wine. Look not thou upon the wine when it is
red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves itself aright. At the
last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.

The 27th, being First Day, we attended the meetings. In the morning, we were
much favored with the evidence of truth in our service: several were there not
of our Society who behaved well, and I believe went away satisfied. My concern
was to show them the difference betwixt true and false says, and the tendency
of each; with some other truths, which immediately opened in my understanding.
In the afternoon, the meeting was large, but the Lord saw meet to disappoint
the expectations of the people, and manifest both to them and us, that without
him we can do nothing in his service; for neither of us had a word to say to
them; but I was concerned in supplication, and was abundantly rewarded, in
submitting quietly to this dispensation of divine wisdom. In the evening, we
visited two friends who could not attend meetings, by reason of age or
indisposition; and next morning, another friend in a very low estate of mind,
with whom we had a good opportunity, and left him better than we found him; and
I afterward heard that from that time, he was restored. That afternoon we
departed in peace from Scarborough, and returned to Malton, so to York, Leeds,
Rawden, Bradford, and Halifax; in all which places I met with a share of
exercises, and, I thought, was mostly very low in the ministry; but had the
consolation to believe that what I stammered out was suited to the states of
the people; which is a proof of true ministry.

The 7th of the Seventh month, we came to Manchester, where I left Sarah
Tailor; the 10th, I went to Warrington, and had a meeting there that evening,
wherein I was silent as to testimony.

The 11th, I went to Liverpool, in my way stopped to take some refreshment at
Prescot, and found my mind exercised for the people of that town, wherein there
was no meeting of Friends; but went on for Liverpool, and next day was at two
meetings there, and visited a friend in distress, in all which I had good
satisfaction. In the evening, finding a concern for Prescot still to remain, I
proposed to Friends, the having of a meeting there the next morning, in my way
to Warrington; which, though some difficulty was started, was accomplished, and
a blessed opportunity it was; the Lord's power being largely revealed, and the
people behaving solidly, although I suppose, a meeting of Friends had not been
held in the town for very many years.

In the evening, I had a meeting in Warrington. The 14th, I went to Morley, my
dear friend Samuel Fothergill, and several other friends accompanying me, and
diverse others meeting us from Manchester: and the Lord, in his wonderful mercy,
was pleased to open the fresh spring of his love, and favor us with a sweet
opportunity together therein: in a thankful sense whereof we parted from each
other; and I came by way of Stafford and Atherston, home the 20th, where I was
gladly received by my dear and worthy mother, etc. After some little time of
settlement, my mind was directed to take a view of my late journey, in the
course whereof I discovered the wonderful loving kindness of God largly
manifested; but was for a time much distressed on account of not having had a
meeting at Stirling, as before hinted: under which distress my soul ardently
desired that for the future I might be careful to discharge my duty; for I
found it a heavy burden not to be clear from the blood of the people.

In a few weeks after my return from this journey I went to our quarterly
meeting at Shipston; which was eminently favored with the presence of the Most
High.

In the fall of the year I was obliged to accompany my sister to Bath, for the
benefit of her health; in which city I was the most affectingly dipped into a
state of poverty, that ever I had known myself to be, which, being joined by
great weakness of body, was hard to bear, yet I believe not without its
peculiar service.

I visited Bristol meeting twice in this journey, where I was made to taste of
the poverty and weakness, which appears in many there, through unfaithfulness.
It was indeed a time of mourning to the servants of the Lord, while those who
were the cause of it required of them a song; but they were constrained for the
most part to bear their burdens in solemn silence.

At Bath I suffered much under a libertine spirit, which was very apparent both
amongst those who professed truth, and others in that place. I had several
testimonies of close reproof to bear to friends, and some pretty open service
with strangers in town, and upon the whole had cause of thankfulness
administered; the Lord rewarding my faithfulness and sufferings with peace in
the end; and I returned home in a much better state of health than I left it;
the use of the waters having been of service to me, though of little to my
sister. But now another trial of faith came upon me, which was the near
approach of a visit to Friends in America, which had appeared in prospect for
about a year; with an apprehension that I must go with my dear friend Mary
Peisley, who I believed was preparing for that service: yet I never gave her
any hint of accompanying her, being desirous that if it must be my lot, it
might be evidently pointed by the finger of Providence.

On my return home I received a letter from her, wherein she desired to be
informed, whether I knew of any woman friend going to America from England, and
hinted her concern for that quarter of the world. This stuck close to my mind,
yet I kept it to myself for several weeks, and then communicated it to my dear
mother, who heard it with a becoming resignation, telling me it was not
entirely unexpected to her.

And although it was exceeding hard, to the natural part in her, thus to part
with me in her declining years; especially as she so tenderly loved me as a
child, as well as in the truth; she freely gave me up to the divine requiring,
earnestly desiring that the Lord might be my director and preserver.

Upon this, I wrote to my dear friend Mary Peisley. Some extracts of my letter
to her, with her answer, follow.

Catherine Payton to Mary Peisley.
My dear friend,
It is not because I forgot thy affectionate request of hearing from me soon,
that I have so long postponed a reply to thy last acceptable favor; but when
it came here I was from home (as I hope thou art already advised by a few lines
I wrote from Bath), and the sequel of this will discover my reason for not
writing thee immediately on my return.

With pleasure I observed that thy health was better than heretofore, and hope
the blessing is still continued, so that by the assistance of heavenly
goodness, thou have been and still may be capable to perform the duty
required, with a degree of ease and cheerfulness, to which a good share of
health greatly contributes; although it must be confessed with humble
gratitude, that the Lord is to his servants strength in weakness, of body as
well as mind.

What we have seen of the exaltation of his arm of power in this respect, may
encourage us to perseverance, and a steady dependency thereon; and silence the
voice of nature, which sometimes insinuates that we are not able to perform
what is required; for we have good cause to believe nothing is impossible with
Him who has called us; but, through his power communicated, we may perfectly
perform his will. And suppose our race to be attended with weakness, pain,
anxious concern, travail of soul, and inconveniency to the body; can it ever
equal the incomparable sufferings of the Captain of our salvation? Oh! how does
the consideration of the tribulating path he invariably trod, stifle the
pleadings for ease and pleasure? For shall we, who dare to aspire to no higher
title than servants, expect to be better accommodated than was our Lord? Shall
we supinely settle in the outward possessions afforded us, when he laboriously
trod the wine press alone, and that for our sakes? He was destitute of a place
of residence, and had not where to lay his head, though Lord of all; and
although he could limit the power of Satan, yea, totally bind him, yet suffered
the contradiction of sinners against himself, as well as a series of deep
temptations. Let us be united to the sufferings infinite Wisdom allots,
remembering the blessing dropped on such as endure afflictions.

I know to whom I am writing, and believe that thou art much farther advanced
than myself in this glorious resignation to the divine will; but thus much I
may say, that, as I have seen, in a degree, into this happy state of constant
devotion, I ardently desire to be made a partaker therein.

I rejoice to find that unity, and sympathy of spirit, which so remarkably
attended us when present, subsists now absent; and thought my wish in my last
was answered in the sense thou had of my state. Oh! may we both be preserved
near to the fountain of life, and then we must be near each other in the
fellowship of the gospel, which distance of space cannot hinder, nor time
efface; but it will center with our spirits in that unchangeable state of
felicity we humbly hope for.

I now come to answer thy last request, which will show the cause of my
silence, viz. Whether I know of any woman friend who was going from England to
America. I told thee I had a hint of -- 's inclination, the same I had of --,
but know not that either is more than supposition, for I do not hear that
either are preparing to set forward, and have heard of no one else.

But my dear friend, I am almost at a loss to find terms to express the
laborious thought which has possessed my soul; for it seems to me, that
Providence designs I should accompany thee; unto which, if way may be made for
me, and an unquestionable evidence given that it is right, I am at last
resigned; although it be but to be a servant of servants; but he only knows who
discovers the inward struggle betwixt flesh and spirit, with what reluctance I
shall, if it must be so, part from my dear relations, especially my dear and
honored mother, unto whom I have communicated the painful thought. She heard
it with becoming resignation, being determined to give me up to the divine
requiring; only desires to be convinced it is such, which I hope is but an
allowable request. I have waited to have the thing a little settled on her
mind, and she yesterday gave me leave to inform thee of it.

And now my dear friend, I entreat thee to weigh it well, and as
disinterestedly as possible, and give me thy thoughts thereupon with all the
freedom which our friendship, and the nature of the case, requires, not
concealing one doubt; for I am exceedingly afraid of being deceived, and would
willingly be convinced, if this appearance is but for the proving of my
submission. But however it may be, I find peace in standing resigned, and trust
my good Master will rightly conduct me.

Notwithstanding what I have before said, if any companion offers with whom
thou have freedom to join, pursue thy journey, and leave me to Providence, who,
I believe will take care of me.


Some Extracts of Mary Peisley's Letter to Catherine Phillips, in answer to the
foregoing.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
THIS goes with the salutation of my best love, and may inform thee, that I
received thy two very acceptable favors of the Tenth and Twelfth month. The
last came first to hand, for I did not get that from Bath till last week; yet
was it very acceptable to me, and a stronger confirmation of what thou mentions
in the latter part of thy last being right, if my concern is so. For the
baptism thou there describes as into a cloud of darkness, bears a just
resemblance to what my spirit passed through, before I had a distinct
discerning of the near approach of the journey which is now before me: and
agrees with the experience of that great instrument John Churchman, as he wrote
to me before he had any knowledge of my concern, but what he received by
sympathy; which was some strength to me, and what I greatly desired. Thy last
came to hand about two weeks after its date, which I should have answered
sooner, but that I waited for his answer, being willing to comply with thy
request That part of my letter to Mary Peisley I omitted to transcribe in the
before-written abstract.
in consulting him, which I had not done before: and notwithstanding his
writing as he did, his reply was, That he had thoughts of my being under such
an exercise, and therefore my letter was not surprising to him; but that he had
little to say to it, well knowing that it is safe for us all to attend to that
divine instruction which can alone make truly knowing in our least acceptable
services at home, as well as the most weighty we may be called to abroad; but
what he did say was very edifying, and although the concurrence of such as him
is what we must naturally desire; yet to our own Master we must stand or fall.

I find it a great trial to my poor father to part with me, but the thoughts of
thy going with me has made it much easier to him; and for my part I may
acknowledge it is a favor, neither looked for, nor expected; it being like
forbid me to take any thought about a companion, as well indeed it might, when
my kind, good Master was providing so agreeably for me. To my kind and good
Master I owe first and chief my hearty thanks, for all the benefit received
from secondary causes.

But thou may remember, my dear, though I wrote to thee to know if any
friend from your nation was likely to go, it was not by way of querying for a
companion; but it springs on my heart to say, Thou art the woman, and I really
believe the thing is of the Lord; and as we abide in his counsel, I firmly hope
that he will bless us together, and make his work to prosper in our hands, if
our eye be but single to his glory, seeking, hoping, nor desiring, any thing
but the advancement thereof: and I can assure thee my dear friend,
notwithstanding the love I have for thee in the truth, and the affection which
I bear to thy person, with the likeness of souls I had discovered; yet, did I
feel any obstruction or doubt in my mind of the thing's being right, I dare not
conceal it from thee, nor take one step knowingly, out of the light and counsel
of truth, in to important an affair; and it is just with me to say, Tempt not
the Lord thy God, in seeking more strong and convincing manifestations than he
may see meet to give thee: but be willing to go in faith, leaning on thy staff;
for I must tell thee, I think I have brought sufferings on myself for so doing;
for, since the time that it was clearly manifested unto me as a duty, till
within these few weeks, I have been peaceably resigned; in which state was
favored with great tranquillity of soul, which made me look on the
difficulties and dangers of the journey, with such eyes, that I began to fear
that I had a will to go, and set my face against it, till I had a further
manifestation of its being right. And here nature began to please itself with
many pleasing prospects in my stay; and the enemy was at hand to suggest that
the former manifestation was but to try my love and obedience; and here I lost
faith, and without it could no more think of going than of removing mountains.
Thus did the enemy work as in a mystery, till my spirit was brought into such
darkness and distress, as is better felt than expressed. I am now again, by the
mercy of God, and by that faith which is his gift, fully resigned without any
further manifestation; than in looking that way wherein I see a little light,
peace and comfort to my poor soul; and in turning any other, fear, pain, and
darkness, meet me.

Thus, my friend, have I given thee a short but true account of the dealings of
the Lord with my soul; which has been the cause of my silence till this day,
for the forepart of this letter was wrote more than three weeks ago, but could
not find strength to finish it till now; yet in all that trying season had no
doubt of thy concern being right. Ah! what states and dispensations must we
pass through, who are sitting to speak of the Lord's wonders which are seen in
the deeps!

If it be my lot to go, the way which now seems pointed to me is, to spend some
time in Dublin; to go from thence with Friends to the yearly meeting at London;
and, when clear of that city, to take shipping from thence: this I hope will be
acceptable to thee, but if thou have any call to Ireland before thou goes, let
not this prevent thee.


After the receipt of this letter I continued to make preparation for the
journey, my way being open both in the minds of my relations and friends;
though it was a trial to both to part with me.

CHAP. IV. Some Minutes of Travels, Labors, and Sufferings in America, etc.
ON the 4th of the Sixth month, 1753, I took an affecting and affectionate
farewell of my dear mother and relations, leaving her and them to the protection
of Providence; and went, accompanied with my sister Ann, to Worcester. I was at
a monthly meeting there the next day, which was laborious and exercising, some
Friends being sunk into a state of indolence, and, though sometimes favored
with a feeling sense of divine good, not quickened thereby to action in the
affairs of the church: and so the visitation of heaven is rendered fruitless,
while the things of this world are pursued with industry and ardency. Against
this spirit, I, with some others, had to testify, in close doctrine and advice;
and, although the meeting was dull and painful in the beginning, it ended in a
sweet living stream of supplication and praise: in which the living present,
committed each other into the hands of the Almighty for preservation.

In the women's meeting, I endeavored for a regulation, that our Christian
discipline might be revived, for which a concern had rested upon my mind for
some years: and some women Friends of this city being under a like exercise, it
afforded a comfortable hope, that the Lord would qualify instruments for this
service. In the evening, the visitation of infinite goodness was renewed to us,
and to a few friends who came to visit us at my dear friend Ashby's, in the
sense of which we parted. The 6th we went to Evesham, where we were met by my
brother James, and several friends from Ireland, who were going to the yearly
meeting at London. We staid over the monthly meeting there the next day, and so
proceeding on our journey (Ann Ashby going forward with us), reached London the
9th; where I met with my dear friend and companion, Mary Peisley.

The yearly meeting was large, and attended by many weighty Friends; who were
divinely assisted to labor for the promotion of Truth, and the ordering of the
affairs of the church.

My brother and sister left me in London; and, my companion Mary Peisley having
a concern to attend the meetings at Colchester, Woodbridge, and Norwich, I
spent a little time at Chelmsford, at the house of John Griffith (the state of
my health and spirits being such as seemed to call for rest and quiet), and
returned to London in about two weeks; but being still poorly in health, I went
to the country house of my worthy friend John Hayward, accompanied by Ann
Fothergill; where I was indisposed, and confined to my bed and the house, for
about a week. Recovering a little strength, I returned to London; where the
disorder returned, and continued for nine or ten days; and being succeeded by
the jaundice, it brought me very low; but through the kindness of Providence, I
was preserved patient and resigned under this dispensation. In this time my
companion returned to London, but did not find her way open to leave England;
so that my trials were increased with the prospect of being longer detained,
and at a distance from my dear relations. But infinite Wisdom knows best how to
plan out the way for his people, the secret workings of whose Providence I
thought I clearly discovered, in this succession of probations being permitted
to attend me where they did. Had it been at home it would have been much more
afflicting both to my relations and myself; as it would have rendered their
parting with me in such a weak state of health the more painful, and my leaving
home the more difficult: nay, I have questioned, if I had not left it as I did,
whether, considering the discouragement, I should have gone the journey. Nor
was my indisposition without a singular service: for my health had languished
under the oppression of the remains of the fever which I had at Edinburgh;
which by this disorder were, in a good measure, carried off, and my body the
better prepared to sustain the fatigues and trials of the ensuing journey,
arising from the difference of climate, etc. So that in this painful allotment,
I had renewed cause to bless and praise the name of my God, and to acknowledge,
that whatever he does is best.

Almost as soon as I recovered strength to get abroad, the cloud dispersed; and
we found our spirits at liberty to take our passage on board the Alexander,
Captain Curling, bound from London to Charleston, in South Carolina; which
sailed in about a week after we agreed to go in her. The last First Day we were
in London, we were favored to take a comfortable farewell of many of our
friends, in the feeling sense of divine goodness; wherein also, we were enabled
to resign and commit each other into the hands of the Almighty for preservation.

We left London the 21st of the Eighth month, 1753; and, as our vessel was to
stop at Portsmouth to take in some of her passengers, our friends thought it
best for us to go thither by land: which we did, and several of them freely
accompanied us.

We came to Portsmouth the 24th, and went on board our vessel the 25th, where
we took leave of our friends with affection.

Being settled in our vessel, a sweet composure came over my spirit; which
strengthened my faith that I was moving by divine direction.

The next day the wind turned against us, and we came to an anchor in Yarmouth
Road, Isle of Wight. Being First Day, we were a little thoughtful about having
a meeting with the passengers; but one of our company being a clergyman, and
the ship's crew busy in settling the vessel, we concluded it would not be very
easily obtained, and were content in sitting together in our own apartment;
during which time the parson got some of our people together in the great
cabin, and read prayers to them.

I had purposely left our room door open, in order that, if any duty presented,
I might have an opportunity of performing it; and after they had done, I found
a concern to call upon the Lord in humble supplication, to which I gave up; but
a part of the company went on deck, being I supposed exampled by their teacher;
however I was favored with a pretty satisfactory opportunity, and the
strengthening evidence of peace in the conclusion.

The 27th, we set sail, and passed the Needles the 28th. The 29th, the wind
came against us, and blowing hard we anchored in the evening in Portland Bay,
where we lay till the 3d of the ninth month; when we set sail, and got clear of
the land the 5th; from which time we were mostly favored with gentle
favorable winds, till we came near the coast of South Carolina.

The 18th of the Tenth month, we got into soundings; but the wind blowing very
hard, and the sea running high, our captain durst not attempt to go over
Charleston bar, so stood off, in hopes the wind might fall; but instead of that
it turned against us, and continued to blow very hard till the 22d: all which
time we lay with our helm lashed, driving with the wind. The 22d, the sea and
wind fell very much, the weather (which in this time had been very foul)
cleared up, and the wind became favorable, and we got within sight of land;
but it being to the southward of our designed port, the captain tacked about to
the northward, hoping thereby to gain so much in the night as to be able to run
in with the tide in the morning; but we were again beat back to sea by a
contrary stormy wind.

Thus were we tossed to and fro, almost within sight of our harbor; but
through prevailing grace our minds were wonderfully preserved above either fear
or complaint, enjoying a clam within, in the midst of a storm without; being
happily resigned to suffer in this way, if it were the Lord's will so to
appoint: which blessed disposition, attended us through the voyage, helped to
alleviate our bodily hardships, which would otherwise have appeared
considerable.

We were sea-sick, though not so extremely as we expected; and we suffered much
from the excessive heat of the weather, steering within one degree, as far
south as the tropic of Cancer; in which latitude I believe we continued near
three weeks, being becalmed; and, neither I nor my companion being very strong,
nature had a considerable struggle, to surmount the expense of spirits she
sustained.

But we had cause to be thankful that we escaped a violent fever, which
frequently seizes those who pass through this climate, and have been used to
one much colder.

During the storm, the seams of our vessel, being opened on the side where we
lay, let in the wet, and our apartment was in a manner flooded. My bed was so
wet that I could not lie therein, so I threw myself down for several nights
upon some blankets in a birth in the great cabin, and slept better than I could
have expected; but the spray of the sea drove so upon it, even there, that my
linen was so damp, that I esteemed it a singular mercy I was not exceeding ill.

Indeed we were both of us brought very low, but recruited again as the weather
cleared up; which it did the 24th, and we set sail in the evening, and the 25th
got our pilot on board, who intended that night to run as near the bar as
prudent, and wait for another tide to carry us into port. But here we
apprehended ourselves to be in imminent danger; for, the man who sounded
mistaking the length of the line which he let go, the vessel ran too far before
they dropped anchor; so that we lay all night in very shallow water, so near,
if not upon the breakers, that had the wind sprung up fresh, it seemed
questionable our having room to turn the vessel from them, when the anchors
were weighed: but the Lord preserved us, and we landed at Charleston the 26th
in the morning, under a grateful sense of his merciful Providence having
attended us through the voyage. We were upwards of nine weeks on shipboard.

We had several meetings while on shipboard with the sailors and passengers,
who were of different countries. There was a South Carolina woman and her negro
maid, a man and his wife, the one a German and the other a Swiss; a Scotch
schoolmaster, our captain and his brother of French extraction, if not born in
France.

Our first meeting was with the sailors and steerage passengers, on the
afternoon of the First Day, wherein we lay at anchor in Portland Bay. The
priest in the morning, read prayers to the cabin passengers, but took no care
for the others on board. The captain offered us the cabin to meet in, but we
rather chose to go to them in the steerage; from which the priest would have
dissuaded us, by telling us, they would be likely to insult us; but, on our
sending a message to the sailors that we intended them a visit, they returned
for answer, that though they had not had college education, they should be glad
to hear the word of God, and would readily admit us. The meeting was attended
with a good degree of solemnity, and afforded satisfaction to ourselves. My
companion was favored in testimony suited to the states of the people, and I
was graciously admitted to supplicate the Lord for them.

Our other meetings were held in the cabin, which we had the use of for that
purpose on the afternoons of the First-days, as the parson had, in the
mornings. They were generally attended by most of the passengers and some of
the sailors; but there being but little entrance for the word, made it hard
laboring among them. We were, however, favored with peace, in endeavoring to
promote their good; and blessed with the incomes of divine life in our own
souls, not only on those occasions, but at many other times: so that it was a
season to be had in lasting remembrance, with thanksgiving to the Lord, whose
good presence accompanied us when on the mighty ocean, and rendered our
separation from our dear relations and friends easy.

The parson, observing that in our ministry, we spoke extempore, told me that
he could preach extempore, and we should hear him if we pleased the next
Sunday. Accordingly when the day came, we were all seated in the great cabin,
and he preached without notes. His subject was the transfiguration of Christ,
which he found a wonder, -- expatiated upon it as a wonder, -- and left it a
wonder; without entering into the spirituality of the text: indeed I doubt he
did not understand it.

From this time he read prayers and preached on the First Day mornings, when
the weather permitted, and sometimes we sat in the cabin with them; and
although the inconsistency of their prayers and professions with their own
states, as well as of the manner of their offering them with the nature of the
solemn duty of calling upon the Lord, joined to the priest's labored, dry
discourses, could not but painfully affect us; yet in the time of their
worship, the Almighty by his power broke in upon our spirits, and bowed them in
contrition before himself: so that, in the enjoyment of his goodness, we had a
silent testimony to bear to that living worship which he inspires, and accepts.

And although both by word and conduct we differed from the priest, we heard
that when he came on shore he spoke well of us, acknowledging that we had been
instruments of good to him; and particularly that my companion had convinced
him of the evil of gaming; which he appeared to like whilst on the voyage, but
which we also heard he afterward preached zealously against, as well as other
vanities. Indeed he became much changed, and whilst in Carolina appeared
conscientiously concerned for the people's welfare. Some time after we left
America he returned to England, and I think I heard that the people did not
like his close doctrine.

We lodged in Charleston at John Sinclair's, who was educated amongst Friends,
but had married one not of our Society. Both he and his wife received us
kindly, and treated us while with them with great hospitality and generosity.

The meeting of Friends here was very small; and most of those who attended it
were rather stumbling blocks, than way-marks, to other professors of religion;
yet we found a few to whom we were measurably united, and who I believe were
thankful for our visit. During our stay in this place, we were treated with
great civility and kindness, by the inhabitants thereof who did not profess
with us; but we saw it necessary to be strictly guarded in our conversation
with them; lest their very respectful behavior should betray us into a
familiarity injurious to ourselves. Many of them are ready to hear the
testimony of Truth, but there is a certain lightness of disposition which
greatly obstructs its progress amongst them; and if not carefully watched
against, will infect the minds of persons who converse with them.

Many of them attended our meetings, and mostly behaved soberly in them; but
what with ignorance of the spirituality of religion, a high professing spirit
in some, and libertinism both in principle and practice in others, it was very
hard to labor amongst them: however, the Almighty was pleased so to favor us,
that we were not without hope, that the testimony given us to bear affected
some minds, and, in the general, commanded their assent.

We had two select meetings for Friends, and paid a religious visit to most of
their families; in which service we were owned by the power of Truth, though in
some places we were very closely exercised; insomuch, that one man absented
himself from meeting, not liking any longer to sit under our doctrine; but we
found we had rather cause to rejoice than to be uneasy, in being instrumental
of separating him from the Society (if so it should prove), his conduct being a
scandal to his profession, though he pretended to join it by convincement.

We took a little turn to the south of Charleston, and had meetings at James's
Island, John's Island, and Stones. The first was the most satisfactory.

At Stones, we had a close exercising time in the family of a young man, whose
father had formerly made profession of Truth; but he was quite gone from
Friends, and I fear was tinctured with libertine principles; but he entertained
us freely, and did not seem to take offense at what we had to deliver. I heard
he died soon after. We had also a satisfactory opportunity with a family not
professing with us, in Charleston, but whose ancestors by the father's side
were Friends.

It seemed as though the Almighty had sent us peculiarly to seek the lost sheep
of the house of Israel: that his merciful visitation may be accepted by them,
is the sincere desire of my soul.

I was engaged to return to James's Island, but, my companion having no concern
to accompany me, I went alone, and had a much larger meeting than when there
before: and I hope it was well that I went back, as, through Divine favor,
many gospel truths were opened to the people, in a degree of life and authority.

My friend John Witter, of the Island, sent with me over the Sound a negro man,
who was to attend me to my lodgings. He was well-dressed, and looked well-fed.
I entered a little into conversation with him respecting his situation as a
slave. He appeared easy in it, and said that he had a good master, but that
many negroes were treated no better than dogs. Indeed we could not but lament
over those poor people, as we passed through the colonies. Diverse of our
friends were then in possession of some negroes, either by inheritance or
purchase; and the negroes who had them for masters rejoiced in their lot. But
about this time concern arose amongst Friends, to abolish slave-keeping in our
Society; which concern has since prevailed in the American Colonies; and many
friends have given up large possessions in negroes, but employed many of them
as hired servants after they had given them their liberty.

We left Charleston the 26th of the Eleventh month, accompanied by James
Verree, a young man, a friend, residing there; and went toward a small
settelement of Friends of the Wateree River, which is on the north side of the
Province. They were lately come over from Ireland.

In our way we had meetings in the families of Isaac Perinoes, and John Lloyd
where we lodged, who were neither of them of our Society, but they readily gave
us an opportunity with them, and Truth favored us.

Several difficulties attended us in this journey. We had appointed a friend to
meet us with horses, about a hundred and twenty miles from Charleston; and
being set to a time, we durst not stay to discharge our minds of that duty of
love, which seemed to point toward the people, as we went along. Secondly, we
had poor accommodation, especially as to lodging; some of the houses being so
open to the air, that I could attribute our preservation from great
indisposition, to nothing short of the mediate interposition of Providence; but
as the people behaved very civilly toward us, and we enjoyed some liberty of
spirit among them, it was rendered the more easy. When we came to the place
where we had appointed to be met, we found neither the friend nor the horses;
and those which we brought from Charleston, being borrowed, and the friend who
came with us being earnest to return, we discharged him from any further care
of us, sent the horses back with him, and concluded to stay at the house of the
beforementioned John Lloyd; who was a substantial planter, and very freely
gave us an invitation thereto, till our friends from the Wateree, could meet us
with horses; unto whom we had an opportunity of sending an account of the
strait we were in, by a neighbor of theirs, whom we met at the house of this
planter, and who was then going home.

However, kind Providence soon opened a way for our release. A poor friend who
lived between this place and the Wateree, and was going to Charleston with
goods for the market, stopped at John Lloyd's; and, seeing the circumstances we
were in, left his load in John Lloyd's warehouse, and returned back with us to
his own house; where we got a very poor lodging, but received it thankfully, as
the best he could provide us with; and the next day he accompanied us to the
Wateree, through a wilderness country, wherein it was dangerous for women to
travel, by reason of the swamps and deep creeks, which are difficult and very
frightful to pass: but we were mercifully preserved from hurt.

We crossed one creek upon the trunk of a tree laid from bank to bank, and the
water was so deep, that if the trunk had broken, we had probably been drowned.
When we got on the other side we saw it was decayed; and when our friends came
over with our saddles upon their backs, we observed it bend with their weight.
Our horses were driven through a part of the creek where the water was
shallower, yet perhaps there it was out of their depths. Providentially, before
we crossed this creek, we were met by our friend Robert Millhouse: had it not
been so, I know not how the poor friend would have got us over.

Robert Millhouse had brought horses for us, and gladly took us to his house
with him. My companion's former acquaintance with him in Ireland, rendered
their meeting very agreeable. We found his not meeting us according to
appointment, was occasioned by our letters not reaching him timely; which had
we known, our spirits might have been more at liberty to have attended the
before mentioned pointings of love toward the people; but inasmuch as we had
not wilfully omitted our duty, Divine mercy was extended, and our minds soon
became easy on that account.

We came to the Wateree River the 1st of the Twelfth month, and staid there
till the 12th; in which time we attended Friends' meetings as they came in
course, both on the First, and other days of the week, and paid a religious
visit to every family of Friends in the settlement; in which service we were
evidently owned by our Master; or at least my companion was so, who had most of
the service in this place. The state of the friends settled here was mostly
low, as to religious experience; but some of the youth were under a divine
visitation, which afforded us some comfort. Some people not professing with us
attended our meetings, and behaved soberly; but in general, the people in this
part of the country were lamentably ignorant and wicked: indeed, they had very
few opportunities of religious instruction, no place of worship being near;
perhaps not nearer than twenty miles. Seldom, if ever, any clergyman came
amongst them oftener than once a year, to sprinkle their children. Alas! what
will these pretended and hireling shepherds have to answer for? of whom it may
well be said, they feed themselves but not the flock.

Indeed, none can feed the flock, who have not themselves been fed by the
heavenly Shepherd.

Part of the time we spent here, was to me a season of deep inward trials; the
enemy being suffered so to beset me, that my soul was distressed both night and
day; and though sometimes a ray of hope of deliverance and preservation would
break in upon it, and I was favored with a taste of divine love; yet when that
was withdrawn, I was left as weak and unable to resist him as before; so that
my spirit was in inexpressible bitterness.

I had very little share in the ministerial service; sometimes perhaps a few
simple expressions. But before we left the Wateree, the load was in part
removed, and my spirit brought into a greater calm, in which I desired to wait
the Lord's time, to be put forth to service. He had clothed me, and he had a
right to strip me at his pleasure; and I could say with Job, The Lord gave, and
takes away, blessed be his name. The incomes of his love and peace in my
heart, were more to me than to be honored before the people. And here I cannot
but again observe the various baptisms which the ministers of Christ have to
pass through, in order to their being renewedly fitted to minister to the
different states of the people. What deep poverty and distress, doubts, fears,
and temptations! I was sometimes however in mercy admitted to taste of the cup
of heavenly consolation. All is consistent with the wisdom of God, and tends to
bend the mind more effectually toward Him, and to mortify the flesh with its
corrupt affections: so that the spiritual life is often strengthened by these
afflicting dispensations.

We bought horses at the Wateree, and, accompanied by Robert Millhouse and
Samuel Kelly, set forwards toward the River Peedee, where we had heard there
was a settlement of Friends. We traveled through a wilderness country for
several days, carrying provisions for ourselves and horses. In the day we took
our repast in the woods, and at night got lodging at some planters'; who,
though not of our Society, readily gave us admittance into their houses, and
freely entertained us according to their manner of living: and although it was
very different from what we had been accustomed to, and the lodging in some
places very cold and poor; we were content, and thankful to the Almighty for
it, as well as for his providential care, variously manifested in preserving us
from the dangers which attended us, in passing swamps, deep creeks, etc. And
although we lived low, our spirits were preserved pretty cheerful, and our
health tolerable.

One particular instance of Divine protection, I think worthy of commemoration.
The 14th in the evening we came to a swamp, which appeared very dangerous to
cross; but a friendly man on the other side directed us where to turn our
horses over, and came himself and assisted us over some trees which lay across
it. Having got over, we asked him how far it was to the place where we intended
to lodge, and whether the way was easy to find. He told us it was twelve miles,
and that the latter part of the way was intricate; and, after walking by our
side a little time, he offered to conduct us, which offer we readily accepted.
If he had not accompanied us, I know not but that we must have been all night
in the woods; for the way being so difficult to find, and night coming upon us,
we should probably have missed it; and the weather being frosty, and we
unprovided either with materials to strike fire, or blankets to cover us, we
should have suffered much, if we had escaped with our lives.

Our kind guide brought us to the house of James Gillespy, upon Peedee River;
who was a substantial planter, and a hospitable man, I think by profession a
Presbyterian. His heart seemed opened toward us. Of him we inquired after the
settlement of Friends which we had heard of, but could get no intelligence of
it; yet were our minds mercifully preserved pretty easy and quiet, although we
knew not which way we should steer our course from this place, being all of us
strangers in the country. In a short time, I found freedom to propose to my
companion, our having a meeting in the neighborhood; with which she
concurring, we asked our kind host, before we went to bed, whether he thought
we might have a religious opportunity with some of his neighbors. He made but
little reply then, but in the morning told Robert Millhouse, that if we would
stay till First Day, we should be welcome both to what entertainment he could
give us and our horses, and also to have a meeting in his house; and he would
send his servant to acquaint his neighbors. To this we assented, and spent the
next day peaceably there. On the First Day we had a meeting, which was not
large, and, by reason of the ignorance of the people in divine truths, was
exercising to our minds. A young man, who came from the settlement of Friends
which we were in quest of, being in this neighborhood on business, and hearing
of the meeting, staid to attend it. After it was over, he informed Robert
Millhouse, that several families of Friends were settled about twenty miles up
the river, to whom he was going the next day, and should be glad of our
company. To this we readily assented, and, being thus providentially instructed
in our way, we next morning took leave of our kind friend James Gillespy, who
had generously entertained us while at his house. We called at the house where
we had appointed to meet our expected guide; but it being a very wet morning,
he concluded we should not move, and was gone; however, we had got such
intelligence from him of the way, that, with a little more which we obtained as
we went along, we found the friend's house to which we intended to go. He was a
poor man lately convinced, but he gladly received us, and freely gave us such
entertainment as his circumstances would afford; which though very mean, was
made easy and pleasant to us, being sweetened by the gentle flowings of divine
peace in our hearts.

We found here a few newly convinced friends, and some others under
convincement; with whom we had two meetings to good satisfaction, many things
suitable to their states being opened both by way of doctrine and
encouragement; and we were glad that we were thus directed to find them in this
desolate spot; which was very distant from any Friends; but they were under the
Divine regard. They had not settled a meeting; but as our guides from the
Wateree were returning home, they found them busy in building a meeting house;
and we afterward heard that a meeting was settled amongst them.

The 20th, we left Peedee River, accompanied by John and Charles Moreman, and
the two friends who came with us from the Wateree, and set our faces toward a
settlement of Friends on the Waters of Haw River. The morning was wet when we
set out and I was very poorly; but in a little time the weather cleared up, and
I grew better. We rode that day about forty miles through the woods, without
seeing any house; and at night took up our lodging in the woods, by the side of
a branch or swamp, which afforded plenty of canes for our horses. Our friends
made us a little shed of the branches of pine-trees, on a rising sandy ground,
which abounded with lofty pines. We made a large fire, and it being a calm,
fair, moonlight night, we spent it cheerfully, though we slept but little. Our
saddles were our pillows; and we had in company a man, who came from Peedee and
was going a part of our next day's journey, whose wife had sent a blanket;
which, with one our friends had brought, being thrown at our backs upon our
shed sheltered us much; so that we still saw kind Providence cared for us. In
the morning we pursued our journey, and went that day about forty-five miles;
and at night took up our lodging again in the woods, but did not meet with so
advantageous a spot as the night before, for the ground was wet, and the
shelter bad, and poor wood for firing. The weather also being very cold, and my
companion ill with a pain in her face, and myself but poorly, we spent the
night very uncomfortably as to the body, but through divine favor were
preserved quiet, and resigned in spirit.

We set out next morning in hopes of reaching a settlement of Friends at new
Garden that day; but the pain in my companion's face continuing, we thought it
best to stop at William Rinalds's at Polecat, who was under the profession of
Truth; and the next day, being the First of the week, we had a meeting there
with a few friends, and some of the neighbors; which was exercising, yet ended
in a sense of Divine sweetness.

The 24th, we went to New Garden, and staid amongst friends in that settlement
till the 28th. This was a new settlement of Friends, and we were the first from
Europe that had visited them, or traveled in these parts in the service of
Truth.

We had pretty close service among them, and labored for the establishment of
a meeting for ministers and elders in their monthly meetings; which we found
was much wanting: and we had reason to hope that the proposition would be
adopted; diverse Friends being convinced of its usefulness, and seemed glad that
it became our concern to recommend it. We found a sincere-hearted remnant in
this meeting, unto whom the Lord united us; but there was also a dead, formal,
professing spirit, under which the living were sorely oppressed; as well as
under a flashy wordy ministry.

The 29th, we got to Cane Creek, another new settlement of Friends; with whom
we had a meeting the 30th, wherein we were rather low, yet favored with peace
in our spirits.

The 31st, we went about 30 miles to a very small meeting on the river Eno,
which was very exercising; for through their number was small, their states
were various, and some of them widely distant from that pure, humble, living,
sensible disposition which Truth produces. And as it was the will of the
Almighty, measurably to baptize us into the states of the people, we could not
but suffer in spirit with his pure seed; and it seemed as though a drawn sword
was delivered to us in this the beginning of our journey, which we were to use
against spiritual wickedness; and not to spare, though it were exalted in high
places. Here we labored for the establishment of a Weekday meeting.

The 2d of the First month, 1754, my companion returned to Cane Creek, in order
to be at their Weekday meeting; and I went about six miles up the River, being
engaged to have a meeting amongst a people not professing with us. Many came to
it, and behaved soberly, but most of them seemed very ignorant of spiritual
things; and some were heavy laden with diverse sins; but kind Providence so
favored me, that I left them pretty easy, and returned to my companion at Cane
Creek, the 4th. The same day we had a meeting at Rocky River, which was
satisfactory, and we returned to Cane Creek, and were at the First Day meeting
there.

The 7th, we set out for Carver's Creek, a journey of about 160 miles, through
an almost uninhabited country. We were accompanied by John Wright and J. Pigot,
friends. The accommodation we met with was very mean, but rendered easy, under
a sense of our being in the way of our duty. At one place where we lodged, the
room wherein we lay was exposed to the weather on almost every side, and it
being a wet night, the rain beat in upon us in bed; but my mind was preserved
in sweet peace, and under some degree of a sense of Divine favor. The woman of
the house was of a tender spirit, and appeared to be seeking after substantial
good. I had considerable freedom to speak to her on religious subjects; which
she took well, and I was thankful that our lots were cast under that roof.

Another night, we lay in the woods, with tolerable comfort, though the weather
was cold, and the ground damp. About two hours before we stopped, as I was
attempting to cross a swamp on some loose pieces of wood, one of them rolled,
and threw me backward into it. One of our friends was leading me, and the
other, seeing me in danger of falling, stepped behind me into the swamp, and
caught me, so that I was wet but on one side, except my feet: and, although I
mounted my horse immediately after putting on a dry pair of stockings, rode in
my wet clothes, and lay down in them, I was preserved from taking cold. In the
night two of our horses When travelers who lodge in the woods turn their
horses to graze, they fasten a bell about each of their necks, and if they miss
the sound of any of them, they go to see whether they are not strayed far from
the shed.
strayed away from us, and our guides were obliged to leave us and go in quest
of them; so that we were several hours ourselves in this wilderness,
surrounded, for aught we knew, by bears, wolves, and panthers. Before we
pitched our tent, I had been intimidated by an account which had been given me
respecting the panthers infesting that quarter; one of which it was said had
killed a person not very far distant from this spot; but when we were thus
left, all fear was removed, and we spent the time of our friend's absence
cheerfully. I went without the shelter of our shed, and renewed our fire with
some wood our friends had gathered. The fire under Providence, was probably our
preservation from those ferocious animals.

It was a fine moonlight night, our friends tracked our horses' footsteps in
the sand for about three miles in the way we had come, and found them feeding
on some luxuriant canes. The sagacious animals probably observed them as they
came to the spot where we pitched our tent, and having but poor feeding there,
went back to fill their bellies. As we proceeded on our journey, some of our
company discovered the track of a wild beast in the sand, which gave room to
suspect that they had been near our tents in the night; but we were preserved
both from their fury, and from being affrighted by their hideous howl. However,
as we rode through the woods in the morning, we heard the barking of wolves at
a small distance from us, but a rising ground prevented us from seeing them.

We breakfasted at a miserable inn, about eight or ten miles on our way; where
we met such a wicked set of company, who had spent the night there, that we
concluded it providential that we did not press forward to lodge there;
respecting which we were considering before we pitched our tent. It appeared
much more comfortable to be under the open canopy of heaven, and the protection
of Providence, though among the wild beasts, than among those of the human
race, whose natures were so depraved as to render them more terrible and
dangerous: the first only (or at least generally), assaulting mankind of
necessity, or by provocation; but the last from the incitements of their
depraved passions.

We went forward to Dunn's Creek, and had a small meeting, with a few under the
profession of Truth; and from thence to Carver's Creek the same night, being
the 12th. The 13th, we had a meeting there, and the 14th, went to Wilmington,
on Cape Fear River, where we had two meetings the 15th. There are none in this
place who can properly be called members of our society, but many people came
to the meetings, and behaved civilly; and the testimony of Truth ran pretty
freely toward them in doctrine, reproof, and counsel; though I believe many of
them were of very loose conversation. The 16th, we returned to Carver's Creek,
so to Brompton, Dunn's Creek, and Cape Fear.

The 20th, we proceeded toward Perquimons River, being accompanied by our
friends William Hall and B. Cooper. We calculated our journey to Perquimons at
273 miles; going across the country to visit several small meetings of Friends;
amongst whom, and the people of other societies, we had some satisfactory
service. No women-ministers had visited part of this country before us, so that
the people were probably excited by curiosity to attend some of the meetings we
appointed. We found a few seeking people in these back settlements, who had
very little, even of what they esteem, instrumental help, in this wilderness
country; which appears too poor for priestcraft to thrive in; but I hoped the
Lord would gather some of them to faith in his own immediate instruction. In
this journey we met with considerable hardships, the people amongst whom we
were being very poor, their houses cold, and provisions mean. One night we
lodged in a void house on the River Neice. A man who kept a store on the other
side of the river, gave us the liberty of it, sent his negroes to make us a
fire, and lent us a bed and coverings for it. We were content, although our
provisions were so near spent that we had very little to refresh ourselves
with, after a hard day's journey; and we could get neither bread for ourselves,
nor corn for our horses, for our money; as the man who lent us the house and
bed, would let us have none, though we sent to request it. Our friends William
Hall and B. Cooper accompanied us more than 100 miles in this journey.

On the 6th of the Second month, we reached Perquimons River, on which, and the
River Pasquatank, the main body of Friends in the province of North Carolina
was settled.

Our first meeting among them was at the Piney Woods meeting house, which was
pretty large considering the shortness of the time allowed to give notice of
it; and the Lord was pleased to favor us with a good opportunity: the spirits
of sensible friends present were in a good degree settled, and I hope
refreshed. We visited two other meetings in this quarter, in one of which
neither of us had much public service. There is a number of valuable friends
in this country, who were under suffering from the prevalence of a spirit of
carnal ease, and also from the ministry of some who will not be restrained by
wholesome counsel: wherewith a number are amused rather than profitably fed;
and instead of being solidly settled in a silent exercise of spirit, they are
in continual expectation of words, and remain in sorrowful ignorance of the
operation of Truth in themselves.

Here it seems necessary to go back a little, and give some account of an
exercise which attended my mind, when about Carver's Creek. It was to part from
my companion, and go the lower way through Bath Town, to the county of
Perquimons; but the difficulty of getting guides suitable for us both, and an
unwillingness to part from my companion, considering the desolate journey she
would have to go, and not being quite well in her health, determined me to
accompany her; nevertheless, I stood open to be turned back when I had a
suitable evidence of its being required. Here, an exercise respecting those
places being again revived, and being fearful of omitting my duty, I mentioned
the going back to them to my companion, who, although she was not free to
accompany me, was easy with my going, and rather disposed to encourage me. Her
health seemed to require a little rest, which she purposed to take at the house
of our friend Thomas Nicholson of Little River, who had not long since paid a
religious visit to Friends in England. I then proposed it to Friends to set
forward the 11th, and if Providence permitted, to return to their quarterly
meeting in Pasquatank county; to which they only objected, that they feared the
notice was so short, that they could not procure suitable companions for me.
However, they resolved to mention it after the meeting on the 10th, and see if
any friend would offer to go with me, to which I agreed; but told one of the
most sensible amongst them, that if the way did not pretty readily open, I
durst not push much for it; which, considering the event, I was glad I had said.

After meeting, I was informed that two young men, and Rebecca Tombs, a
valuable friend, and an acceptable minister, were willing to accompany me. I
did not find any objection in my mind to accepting her company, though I had
not requested it; but an uncommon sense of sorrow seized my spirits; though I
did not see that I ought to omit the journey, nor yet comprehend the cause of
the exercise. Next morning I took leave of my companion Mary Peisley, in pretty
much the same state of mind; and, after crossing Perquimons River, we rode that
day to Eden Town. On the road my mind became quiet, yet was low. The names of
the young men who accompanied us were Nathaniel Newley and John White.

The 12th we had a meeting at Eden Town, which on account of the excessive
coldness of the weather, was not large, and it was much disturbed by a wicked
drunken man, while I was speaking; with whom, being a litigious lawyer, the
town's people were afraid to meddle, lest he should have an action against
them: so I was obliged to bear it, and the meeting concluded with less
solemnity than I could have wished. I observed a serious looking woman in the
meeting, and thought if she asked me to her house I should go; which she did,
and in the evening I went, accompanied by my companion. We found both herself
and her husband under a religious exercise; and several things were opened in
me to speak to them, which were well received, and I left them in a good degree
of peace; believing that the seasoning virtue of Truth had been felt in our
conversation. There was no meeting of Friends in this town, and we lodged at an
inn.

The 13th, in the morning, we crossed a ferry, eight miles over. The weather
was extremely cold, which affected Rebecca Tombs much. The frost was so hard,
that the water in the Sound we had crossed was frozen some distance from the
shore on each side, but we got through it safe. We rode about twenty-five
miles, lodged at a mean inn; and next morning early we set out for Bath Town.
When we had rode about seven miles, I had a fall from my horse, occasioned by
the horse's starting at a bird flying out of a tree. I fell over the saddle, on
my right arm, and the ground being very hard from the frost, it was much hurt;
but I esteemed it a great favor that the bone was not broken. When we came to
the next inn, my companion procured some wormwood with vinegar, and bound it
round my arm; and we proceeded to Bath Town, though my arm gave me much pain.

I had some thoughts of crossing the ferry here, which is four miles over, and
so proceeding to Newbern; but having received this hurt, and the wind being
contrary, I became inclined to have a meeting here the next day. Just as we
alighted at the inn, a respectable looking man, who I afterward found was an
attorney, and lived about two miles out of town, came in; to whom I found
freedom to impart our desire of having a meeting, and to consult him about a
proper place to hold it in. He appeared well pleased with the proposition, and
we concluded to hold it in the morning in the courthouse, if the weather were
warm enough to admit of the people's sitting there; if not, our landlord gave
us the liberty of a room in his house. I had much pain from my arm this
afternoon; but somenting it as before, it became easier toward evening. Our
meeting was attended next day by a pretty many people, most of whom behaved
with sobriety; but the life of religion was scarcely so much as known by many
of them; yet the Lord was pleased to open many gospel truths to them; which
were delivered under a feeling sense of their low ignorant state, and I trust
had their service. After this meeting, as I was returning to my inn, my mind
seemed drawn to return back to my companion Mary Peisley; and when I came to
the inn, I found Rebecca Tombs, who had got thither before me, seized with an
ague; which brought a heavy weight of exercise upon my spirit, and I soon
became apprehensive of her being removed by death. The same evening also one of
the young men who came with us, was taken ill in the same way, and I was myself
very poorly with a cold, which affected my head and throat. Next day Rebecca
Tombs's indisposition increased, and I became very thoughtful whether I had
best endeavor to remove her homewards, or continue her at Bath Town. There
appeared to me danger of my incurring censure from her relations, in acting
either way. I therefore concluded it best to refer it to Providence, and see
what turn it would take in her own mind. In the afternoon she discovered a
desire to be removed, and I found most ease of mind in acting accordingly.

I met in this town, to my surprise, with a young woman who was daughter to a
principal tradesman of the neighborhood of Dudley. She had been my
school-fellow. Her husband, whom she married in England, kept a store in this
place. They seeing our afflicted situation, readily furnished us with a chaise
for our return; so we prepared for going, and the attorney beforementioned
generously lent us a horse, and a negro-man to bring it back. He was at our inn
in the evening. I went to him, and acknowledged his civility and kindness to
us; and before we parted, we fell into a religious conversation, which I hoped
might have its service. Several persons were present, one of them the sheriff
of the county, who had some share in the discourse and offered his house to
have a meeting in. The attorney spoke with great moderation, and made
considerable concessions respecting the ceremonial part of religion, and seemed
pleased with the information I gave him of the principles and discipline of
Friends; which I was remarkably opened to give some account of, and we parted
friendly.

After he got home, he sent me some wine to assist the friend in our journey
(which necessity made an acceptable present, as we could buy none that was good
in town), with a letter to request that, if I staid longer in the country than
I expected, I would come to his house; which I took kindly, and suitably
acknowledged his civility. I just add respecting Bath Town, that the man of the
inn, though he behaved civilly to us, appeared to be of a dark ferocious
disposition. One night a poor negro girl fell asleep at the top of the stairs,
near our chamber door, and he seeing her there kicked her down them. The poor
girl cried out, but I did not hear that she was wounded by the fall. Indeed
darkness seemed to surround us in this house.

The 17th, being the First Day of the week, we set forward in the chaise, and
got eighteen miles on our way and lodged at the same house of entertainment as
we did when we came down; where we had very poor accommodation. My friend was
greatly fatigued, she grew much worse that night, and next morning the young
man that was unwell went to acquaint her husband with her indisposition; but
the Almighty did not see sit to continue her in pain till her husband came to
her. Her pain was indeed extreme, and soon effected the end for which it was
designed; for the 20th in the morning, she quietly expired. From near the first
of her being taken ill, she had a sense that it would end in death, and was
enabled to resign herself and her near connexions into the hands of Providence.
She desired me to pen some memorandums of love and advice, to her husband,
children, and relations; and then said, she had nothing to do but to die. She
several times expressed her satisfaction in having a clear conscience, and I
was convinced of her spirit's centering in everlasting blessedness. About
twenty-four hours before she departed, I was concerned to supplicate the
Almighty on her behalf, that he might be pleased to mitigate her pain, and
grant her spirit an easy passage out of its afflicted tabernacle: for which she
expressed thankfulness; and in a short time her pain gradually abated, and her
death was remarkably easy. Her disorder appeared to be pleuretic. We got her
bled, and made use of such other means as our circumstances admitted; but she
was averse to having a doctor, nor do I think that one would have been of any
service to her.

Through this uncommon trial, my spirit was singularly preserved in patience
and stability, though sometimes inexpressibly loaded. My health being but
poorly, the fatigue I sustained bore hard upon me; but I was enabled to
discharge my duty to my friend, and in the end witnessed the return of peace.
My lodging was in the same room with her. I lay down in my clothes upon a bench
by the fireside, whereon the landlady laid something to render it the more
easy. The young man who continued with us behaved with remarkable composure,
patience, and affection to the friend, who was his aunt, and I had reason to
hope that the journey would be of lasting service to him.

The day she departed we got a coffin made, and put the corpse into it. Whilst
it was making, my neighbor Turton (brother to the young woman who kindly
furnished us with the chaise at Bath Town) came in, and was surprised to meet
me here. As we had sent back the chaise, and he was going to his sister's, he
took charge of it. In the evening, I got a religious opportunity with the
family at the inn; and the next morning set off with the corpse of my deceased
friend. We had procured the wheels of a cart to carry it on, and a man to drive
it.

We got well to the Sound, over which we were to cross to Eden Town; but before
we got into the boat we met the husband of our deceased friend, who bore the
shock full as well as I expected; and it must have been great, to meet in so
unexpected a manner the corpse of an endeared, affectionate wife. The same
evening we crossed the ferry, and proceeded to the house of a planter, who had
brought home the corpse of his In this country the changes of the weather are so
sudden, and so extreme from hot to cold, that when a hard frost lasts for a
pretty many days, the people frequently drop off suddenly, with pleuretic
disorders. I thought their manner of living might in many instances contribute
to their sudden death. They eat pork, or other flesh, at almost every meal, not
excepting breakfast, and such as can get it (too generally) drink neat rum.
Frequently, they rather choose to drink water alone, and take their drams, than
mix them together.
mother about two hours before we came into it.

The 22d, we crossed Perquimons River, and got the corpse home; but the
affecting sorrowful scene of meeting the poor motherless children (of which
there were seven), and other near relations and friends of the deceased, is
difficult to describe; nor shall I attempt it, as the ideas it must raise in a
sensible mind, will sufficiently represent it.

That night I went to my companion Mary Peisley, and through mercy found her
well at Thomas Nicholson's; and next day we went to the quarterly meeting of
Friends for the province of North Carolina, held at Old Neck in Pasquatank
county. The meeting was large but exercising, weakness being sensibly felt. I
was favored with a good opportunity amongst Friends, wherewith I had reason to
believe the sensible part of them had unity, and were thankful for it.

The 25th, we attended the meeting for ministers and elders, and a large
public meeting, which though very exercising in the beginning, ended well; for
which favor we had renewed cause to bless the Almighty, who baptizes his
ministers into the states of the people, and enables them to minister thereto.

The 25th, we attended the funeral of Rebecca Tombs; and the meeting was large
and crowned with solemnity. After the meeting, a young man who kept the ferry
at Perquimons River, desired to speak with me. When I came over the ferry with
the corpse of Rebecca Tombs, he was with us in the boat, and while we were upon
the water, my mind was affected on his behalf, so much, that when we landed I
took him aside and spoke closely to him. What I said had such an effect, that
he told me, he could do no less than acknowledge the truth of it; and withal,
that his mind was so awakened thereby, that he could take no rest since. I said
what then arose in my heart to encourage him to endure the chastising hand of
the Lord, until his judgments had wrought their proper effect; and left him
with thankfulness that I had been made instrumental to awaken a poor prodigal
to a sense of his outgoings: for such I afterward heard he was, though the son
of a friend in good esteem.

Although I had been almost miraculously supported through the before recited
trials, and had been enabled to minister to many people as I passed along in my
journey to Bath Town, and my return; yet considering all the circumstances
attending it, much cause for painful rumination was administered. I might
naturally query whether it were right for me to turn back, as the ends I had in
view, viz. the visiting a few Friends in a desolate situation, as well as
having meetings at Eden Town and Bath Town, were in part frustrated; and the
afflicted case of the deceased friend's numerous family, who, perhaps might
have been spared a little longer with them, had she not gone with me, bore so
hard upon my mind, that, like Jonah, I wished to die; but I quickly saw, that
in so doing I erred greatly; for in that impatient state of mind I was not fit
to enter into the saint's rest. After some time my mind settled in a good
degree of quiet, and it appeared that perhaps the design of Infinite Wisdom, in
engaging me to move, as before mentioned, might, in a good degree, be answered.
And as to Rebecca Tombs, she appeared to be in so weak a state when she left
home, that had she staid there, her surviving that pinching season of the
weather might well be doubted.

The 26th we left the province of North Carolina, and came into Virginia, and
the Lord was pleased to cause his peace so to rest upon our spirits, that we
were renewedly convinced, that we were moving in his counsel. We had traveled
upwards of a thousand miles in North Carolina, and been preserved through
various jeopardies and trials, to the praise of his adorable name.

The 27th we had our first meeting in Virginia, wherein the testimony of truth
was borne in a close manner by both of us, against a dull inactive spirit, and
appeared to have some present effect.

The 28th we went to Nancemond River, and visited several meetings on it, and
adjacent to it; wherein we were still exercised to speak closely to the members
of them; which I believe tended to the relief of the sensible part of Friends.
In one of these meetings, having been closely engaged in testimony, I cautioned
friends to beware of judging me for the liberty which I took amongst them, in
laying open the state of the society, although some of other societies were
present; remarking, that it was more likely to convince considerate people of
the truth, than to hear them salved over in their sins. I concluded with some
short remarks and hints of advice to such as were not under our name, which I
suppose had its effect on a pretty high professor of the church of England, who
accidentally came into the meeting; for the next day he followed us seven miles
to a meeting, wherein I was told he was much broken into tears; and the day
following he came about twelve miles to another meeting; I therefore hoped that
the Truth had been at work in his heart. I record this passage as an incitement
to a faithful discharge of duty in the line the All-wise Director of true
ministers points out. He can make effectual a few simple expressions to the
gathering of those who are without; or even sanctify to them the doctrine which
may be lost on the unfaithful professors of his truth.

The 17th of the Third month, we had a meeting at Surry Black Water, which was
large; Friends from the neighboring meetings, and many persons of other
societies, collecting at it. After the meeting, a pretty high professor of the
church of England (his name Peter Worrel), but who for some years had been
dissatisfied therewith, and had been seeking the way of Truth, sought an
opportunity of conversation with us. He had followed us to several meetings,
and being serious in his inquiries, and free in expressing his sentiments, he
told my companion (who had had most of the service in the meetings he had
attended), that he could not discover much difference between the ground of the
doctrine he had heard from her, and the fundamental principles of the church of
England. I saw his state, that he heard with his bodily ears, and judged by his
natural understanding, of which he had a good share, and had read much. I
therefore told him, that if he would attain the knowledge of the Truth, he must
not only understand the words which were spoken, but the power whereby they
were given forth; for that, according to the Apostle's testimony, The kingdom
of God stands not in word, but in power, which, with something else I said,
adapted to his case, was carried home beyond my expectation. He followed us to
another meeting, and then sought an opportunity with me alone; when he told me,
that what I had dropped in conversation, and that day in my ministry, had so
affected him, that he was now convinced that a Divine power accompanied true
gospel ministry, and that he thought he should join with us in society; but
that he was under some discouragement on account of the degeneracy of many of
our members. I said what then arose in my heart, by way of exciting him to
faithfulness; and he parted from us in much love: indeed he was remarkably
changed from the time we first saw him; his very countenance bespoke him to
have been with Jesus. He was silent, solid, and weighty in spirit, though
before talkative and full of head-knowledge in religion. I afterward heard
well of him, and I think he settled amongst Friends.

I could not but remark on this occasion, how secretly, and almost unknown to
ourselves, the Almighty sometimes makes use of us to the effecting of his
gracious purposes: for in the meetings this man had attended, previously to our
conversation with him, I was much shut up as to ministry; and my companion was
favored in the exercise of her gift; in one of them remarkably so; and yet it
appeared that I was made the principal instrument of good to this poor seeking
soul.

We then visited several meetings upon Appomatox River; and the Lord was with
us, blessed be his name; thence to the South-west Mountains, where we were led
in a very low track, myself especially. Thence we proceeded through many
meetings to James River, and so to the quarterly meeting at Wyanoak Swamp. By
the time I came to James River, I was sunk exceedingly low in mind; but as I
abode in the patience, the Lord, in his time, was pleased to raise me again to
his own honor. From James River, we went through many meetings in Carolina
County, up Sherrando River, and by Opeekan Creek to Fair-fax, which was the
last meeting we had in Virginia.

In this Colony we had much suffering of spirit, for, although in many
instances we were favored with a good degree of strength and wisdom, to speak
to the states of the people; yet could we not but sympathize with the seed of
life, which in many of their souls was oppressed by a dark carnal spirit:
wherein the discipline is too much conducted, or rather in some places so
perverted, that this designed wall of defense, is rather a stumbling block to
sober inquiries. There are a number of valuable friends among them; but in some
particulars, who, had they kept to the simplicity of Truth, might have been
serviceable in the ministry; sound and flight are grievously mixed therein,
which will never convince the judgment, or settle the mind in the stability of
Truth, although they may please the ear, and affect the passions. After leaving
the province, we sent them an epistle, which was principally penned by my
companion

I think a providential preservation which we experienced in this province
worthy recording, but, not having retained it in the memorandums I have
preserved, I cannot ascertain the name of the river at which it happened. After
a long day's journey, wherein we had dined in the woods on a scanty meal, we
came in the evening to the ford of a broad, rapid river, which, from the
appearance of the waves, we might suppose had a stony bottom. Neither of our
guides were acquainted with the ford, and we were afraid to attempt to cross it
until it was tried by one of them: so the youngest of them, about 19, went
rather beyond the middle of the stream; and not finding it very deep, called to
us to follow, which we with the other guide did, when each of them took charge
of one of us.

My companion followed him who went first, and they kept a pretty straight
course across the river; but my horse, and that of the other friend, bended
down the stream, which I concluded was occasioned by its force and rapidity.
When we got over, we learned that the bed of the river, which was of large
pebbles, was so uneven as to render it dangerous. To ford it safely, the horses
should have gone a little way down the stream, and turned up again to the
landing place; for by going straight across, the edge of a pit in the bottom
must be gone over, which was accounted thirty feet deep, so that my companion
was in considerable danger. Surely much caution is necessary for travelers in
crossing unknown waters.

The 25th of the Fourth month we had a meeting at Monoccasy in Maryland,
wherein Truth measurably favored; from which we proceeded to West River,
taking the meetings in our way. We came to West River the 29th, and could not
get a release from thence till the 8th of the Fifth month. The professors of
Truth in this settlement are principally of the offspring of faithful
ancestors; but diverse of them have taken their flight on the wings of vanity
and earthly riches, and slighted the truly valuable eternal inheritance; and, I
fear, some even despise that precious faith which was once delivered to the
saints. We had six meetings with them, in four of which I was silent; and my
companion had not much liberty of spirit until the last meeting; wherein the
testimony of Truth was raised in its own dominion. The yearly meeting for this
part of Maryland was held during our stay; which, as usual, was attended by
people of other societies, and, I heard there was a great desire to hear me
speak in this place; but the Lord was pleased very much to disappoint their
expectation.

The 8th we went to Gerrard Hopkins's, upon South River: in the way I had a
dangerous fall from my horse, whereby my left arm was much hurt, but, through
Divine favor, no bone was broken or dislocated.

The 9th, we proceeded on our journey, although my arm was so weak and painful
that I was obliged to carry it in a sling. We passed through several meetings
in Baltimore county, to Duck Creek and Bush River, and in many places my
companion had good service; but great were my trials of spirit about this time,
under which the Divine arm secretly sustained me. Oh! what need is there to
stand still in these stripping, dipping seasons, and wait low to discern the
way whereby we may escape the temptations of the subtle enemy. As I was
favored to abide here, a little light and strength was afforded; whereby I was
encouraged to trust in that arm of Almighty sufficiency which had hitherto
preserved me; and was resigned to travel forward, although I might be led in a
low despised track.

The 18th, we came to Susquehannah River, and the 19th, to East Nottingham in
Pennsylvania, to the house of my dear and worthy friend John Churchman, who was
not yet returned from a visit to Friends in England; but his wife and son
gladly received us. The 22d we reached Philadelphia, and took up our lodging
with our worthy and ancient friend Rachel Pemberton.

Here my dear companion met with a trial very affecting to nature, an account
of the death of her father; which however she was the better prepared to
receive, from a remarkable sense having for some time rested upon her mind that
it was so; and she was assisted to bear it with Christian resignation and
fortitude, being favored with the cheering hope that he went well.

We staid in Philadelphia till the 29th, attending the meetings of Friends as
they came in course, wherein I had some service, and was favored with peace in
the discharge of my duty, though led in a low track, very contrary to the
expectations of the people, which were to be disappointed. My companion was
mostly silent during our stay in this city.

The 29th we left Philadelphia, and set our faces toward the eastern colonies.
We appointed but one meeting between Philadelphia and New York; where we had
two large public meetings, which were attended by many people of other
societies; who behaved well, and the testimony of Truth was borne to them by us
both. In the evening my companion had an inclination to have a select
opportunity with Friends in that city; which, I believe, was memorable to some
present, for she was much favored amongst them.

On the 3d of the Sixth month, we crossed the river to Long Island; and the
5th, had a small meeting with a few who professed the truth at Setoket, and so
proceeded to the east end of the island, intending to go from thence to the
yearly meeting in Rhode Island. We were accompanied by two Friends from
Philadelphia, John Aimil and Thomas Lightfoot, and one from Setoket. Here we
were detained near two days by contrary winds, and lodged at the house of a
friendly man, a Presbyterian, but more generous in his way of thinking than are
many of that profession in this Island. I had a concern to have a meeting with
the neighbors, and a young man kindly offered his house; which we accepted,
and a pretty many people came, and behaved well while I was speaking; but very
soon after I had done, most of them went away, although the meeting was not yet
concluded. The Almighty was pleased to cause many gospel truths to be opened to
them, and although it seemed to take too little effect, I had peace in the
discharge of my duty.

On the 8th, we set sail in a sloop, but the wind not favoring, we dropped
anchor that night, and next day, being the First of the week, went on shore at
a place about two miles distant from whence we embarked. Here we were received
by another Presbyterian, and that day were favored with a comfortable
religious opportunity together. The wind continued contrary to the 12th, in
which interval we had a meeting with some of the neighbors; which, although
exercising by reason of the hardness of their hearts, was favored by Divine
condescension; many gospel truths being testified to therein, which I hope had
admittance in some minds.

The 12th, early in the morning we sailed, accompanied by the beforementioned
friends, and landed on Rhode Island in the afternoon.

The 13th, we attended a large meeting at Portsmouth. The 14th, the yearly
meeting began, which was held at Newport, and continued till the 17th. It was
attended by a large number of Friends and others; and the Lord was pleased to
manifest his ancient love and power amongst us, whereby our spirits were set at
liberty in the exercise of our gifts. I had particularly, at diverse times, to
oppose that dark principle of unconditional election and reprobation, and had
cause to hope the testimony against it had weight with some of its professors.
We were exercised for the restoration of discipline, which had been much
neglected in this quarter; and our endeavors for its establishment were
measurably crowned with success; so that, upon the whole, at this yearly
meeting abundant cause was administered for thankfulness to the bounteous
Author of all good. We visited the prison; we also visited several friends who
were confined through indisposition; in which charitable service we had peace
and comfort.

The 19th, we went to Tiverton, and so, through several meetings in that
quarter, to the monthly meeting at Poniganset, wherein we were exceeding
closely exercised; the testimony principally directed to Friends.

After we left Newport, my mind was much distressed, and drawn back to that
place, but my companion not encouraging me, and I being fearful, did not
return, which I had afterward reason to believe I ought to have done; for
after our leaving it, a young man whom we had visited in his illness died. He
was of considerable account in the world, and just upon the point of marriage
with an agreeable young woman of the same meeting. Had I moved in faith, I
might have got to his funeral.

It is worthy remarking, that while I was under the exercise for returning
back, two friends came to visit us, and my companion being engaged above
stairs, I was with them alone a short time. We sat a few minutes in silence,
when one of them said, Go down to the camp and see, without any comment upon
the expression. I had doubtless been ruminating why my mind should be drawn
back; and had I attended to this intimation, and set off immediately, I might,
with close riding, have reached the beforementioned funeral, and have returned
in season to the monthly meeting at Poniganset; whereto, as Friends of the
particular meetings resorted, all the service required of me might have been
answered.

The 28th, we went on board a sloop, and sailed for the Island of Nantucket. We
intended, by Divine permission, to have attended the yearly meeting there, but
the wind proving contrary, we did not get there till the 30th, when the meeting
was in part over. We went on shore for a few hours on Elizabeth Island, where
we saw no inhabitant; but it being a fine sunshine day, and the ground rising
from the sea, we laid ourselves down upon the turf, and got a little sleep; for
the sloop was so crowded, being small, that we could get very little on board.
At Nantucket we met our friends Daniel Stanton, Israel Pemberton, etc. from
Philadelphia, who had all been with us at the yearly meeting at Rhode Island.
We were mutually refreshed together, and the Lord favored us in his service,
both in the work of the ministry and in discipline; to the satisfaction and
relief of the sensible body of Friends, and I hope to the edification of some
others.

The inhabitants of this Island were favored with wonderful visitations from
on high, at the time when our valuable friends John Richardson and others
visited America; by whose labors as ministers, a large meeting was gathered to
the praise of the Lord's name; which wrought powerfully to the turning the
people from "darkness to light:" and many worthy professors of Truth then
belonged to it, men and women zealous for the honor of it, who walked in that
true light wherein they had believed. But most of these being removed to their
eternal mansions, and their offspring not generally walking by the same rule,
our society was in a state of weakness, although the meeting was yet large, and
there remained a living remnant in it. Some of the youth, especially of our own
sex, appeared hopeful; but having been left much to themselves, and the work of
the discipline having been neglected, they were unprepared for it, and ignorant
of its weight and necessity; so that the meeting seemed in a dwindling
condition, as to the life of Truth. We labored for an amendment in these
respects; and in order thereto, recommended their bringing the young people of
orderly conversations to their meetings for business (which had been too much
neglected); with which Friends concurred, and also with the proposition for
their holding two meetings for worship on the First Day; whereby the time,
which was too frequently squandered away unprofitably, by at least many of the
younger sort, might be better employed. Some of the members of the meeting
living distant from it, had probably prevented their holding two meetings
heretofore on the First Day; but that was no excuse for those who dwelt in the
town.

We left the Island in peace, in the afternoon of the 1st of the Seventh month,
in company with our aforsaid friends from Philadelphia, and landed at Woodshold
the same evening; whence Daniel Stanton and Israel Pemberton returned
homewards, but the other friend, not being quite easy to leave us, concluded,
with our permission* to accompany us a little further. He was one of those who
came with us from Philadelphia as guide, and had accompanied us to Rhode
Island, and while with us, had been remarkably under the baptizing power of
Truth; which raised a tender regard in our minds toward him, and we were not
easy to refuse his company, although he was in a single station. Our Friends
also of Philadelphia, who left us here, concurred in his stay, and that the
more freely, as some assistance might be wanted in some places we were about to
pass through.

Here I suggest some cautions necessary to be observed by young women in a
single state, who travel in the service of the ministry, toward those of the
other sex, who are also unmarried.

First, to guard their own minds, lest they admit of any pleasing imagination,
and stamp it with the awful name of revelation; and so slide into a familiarity
and freedom of conversation and behavior, which might tend to engage the
affections of young men. Secondly, to endeavor to retain a feeling sense of
the state of the spirits of those with whom they are intimate, and strictly to
observe their conduct and behavior toward them: so will they be the better
able to judge of their motives for accompanying them, or of any other act of
kindness; and may wisely check any forward thought which looks beyond
friendship; which my easily be done by some prudent remarks (yet obliquely) in
conversation. Thirdly, to beware of hurting any of these tender plants by an
austere conduct. When we are singularly made instruments of good, in the hand
of Providence, to any soul, there is a natural aptitude to lean a little to the
instrument, and to prefer it above others, which for a time may be allowable.
The Lord, leading the mind by gradual steps from the love of other objects to
the entire love of himself, the one only pure, eternal, Excellency, may permit
it for a season to lean to an instrument; in which case a prudent reserve is
necessary, as well as a tender regard to the growth of the party thus visited.
I confess, it is sometimes a nice point, to be ready to be of service to such,
and preserve the unity of the spirit, free from mixture of natural affection; a
distinction which I fear has been overlooked by some to their great hurt, but
which Truth, if adhered to, will make; and will also direct to steer safely
betwixt these dangerous extremes.

From Woodshold we went to Falmouth, and so to the quarterly meeting at
Sandwich, which began the 5th of the Seventh month. It was small and
exercising, but we were favored with Divine assistance, through which the
testimony of Truth was set over the heads of the gainsayers.

From hence we went to Yarmouth, where we had a good meeting with a few
Friends, and a pretty many of the neighbors, and returned back to Sandwich.

The 10th, we had a meeting at Pembroke, which was attended by many people of
other societies, who were much displeased because we were silent. In the
evening we had a meeting with a few friends; the principal service whereof was
to strengthen their hands in the discipline.

The 11th, we went to Boston, and had a meeting there with Friends and some
others the same evening, which ended comfortably.

The 12th, our friend of Philadelphia left us to return home, and we pursued
our journey toward the quarterly meeting, to be held at Hampton the 13th and
14th, and with hard traveling we reached it in due time. But such a scene of
confusion and distraction I never was in before; occasioned by a company of
Ranters, who had gone out from Friends in a spirit of separation; but who, in
reality, were never properly of us, having been injudiciously taken into
membership, before Friends knew on what foundation they were; and being
high-minded, heady, and exceedingly wild in their imaginations (which they
accounted revelations), would not submit to the sense of Friends in the
discipline, and were therefore disowned. These frequently made it their
practice to disturb the meetings of Friends, with their wild disorderly
appearances; and many of them came to this quarterly meeting, against whom we
had to testify, being in the course of the meetings exceedingly burdened with
their spirits and public appearances under pretense of preaching; but we were
obliged to suffer under their spirits, until our concluding meeting, whereto
many of them came. After a time of silence therein, my companion stood up, and
one of their company began haranguing the people in the grave-yard, and others
were disturbing Friends in the meeting house; wherein I think a form broke
down, whereby the disturbance became so great, that she sat down in
discouragement, and the meeting continued in disorder. In a short time I stood
up with a view to inform the people present who did not profess with us (who
were numerous), of the reason of our conduct toward these Ranters. I had said
but little before I was sensible of the spring of Divine life being opened;
from whence I was enabled to minister, though I had no view of what was given
me to speak before I stood up; but I was immediately and mercifully clothed
with such a degree of authority, that it might indeed be said, the Truth was
over all, and the meeting ended in awful solemnity: for which my soul was
humbly thankful to the Lord, who gave us victory over these deluded spirits.

The 16th, we went to Dover, and had two meetings with Friends in that quarter,
in both of which I was shut up. We attended the funeral of a friend whose
relations were Presbyterians, and had a seasonable opportunity among the
people, wherein the testimony of Truth was exalted.

The 20th, we had a meeting with Friends at Thomas Henson's; and thence went to
Berwick and Winter Harbor, whence we crossed part of Casco Bay in a canoe, to
visit a few friends on some islands therein. Several friends from Dover, etc.
accompanied us in this journey; wherein had human fears prevailed, we might
have apprehended ourselves in danger from the Indians, who sometimes annoy the
inhabitants, killing some, and carrying others captive to Canada: but our
spirits were mercifully preserved above fear, and comforted with the hope of
Truth's prosperity among the few friends in that quarter; several of whom were
under its humbling visitation, and therefore were near to our spirits; from
whom we departed in gospel love, and returned to Dover the 30th.

The 1st of the Eighth month, we went to New Town, had a meeting at Nathan
Hoeg's, wherein much instructive doctrine flowed to several states,
particularly to that of the before mentioned Ranters; and we found that there
were present two young women who sometimes went among them, with whom, after
meeting, we had some discourse. They behaved civilly to us, and told us they
had heard many lies of us; and one of them was considerably tendered in spirit,
but the other was high in imagination.

From hence we proceeded to Almsbury and Newbury, where a concern rested upon
my dear companion to go back, and pay a visit in the love of the gospel to
these Ranters, for whom she had for some time been exercised, and particularly
for their leader James Bean; a man of great cunning and a strong will, who had
heretofore been suffered to minister amongst Friends. She laid this concern
before Friends, wherewith they concurring, we went on the 5th to Brintwood, the
place where they held their meeting. Many friends accompanied us, who I believe
were earnestly desirous that we might be rightly conducted among these dark,
crafty spirits; who readily gave us an opportunity with them at their own
meeting house. In the forepart of the meeting several of them spoke something,
but at length my companion got liberty, and was favored with the openings and
power of Truth, directly pointed to the confused deluded state wherein they
were. I was also exercised in the like manner, and we had good tidings for some
of them, viz. that there was a way open for them to return, if they would
suffer their wills and works to be tried, judged, and condemned; which I
believe a few of them received well; for there appeared to be some
simple-hearted deluded souls among them; who, being taken with the more than
ordinary show of righteousness, and high pretensions to enjoyments, visions,
and revelations; and not having their spiritual faculties sufficiently strong
to discern betwixt the reality and the image of Truth; had been inadvertently
catched by them. We had reason to hope that our labors and sufferings among
these ranting spirits had its service; for after we left them, we heard that
from that time they had been less troublesome to Friends in their meetings.

The 7th, we had meetings at Lynn and Salem. The first was large, and greatly
mixed with people of other societies, wherein the Lord was pleased to favor me
in the exercise of my gift: the last was of Friends select, and the service
principally fell upon my companion, whose concern chiefly pointed to Friends.

The 8th, we went to Boston, and attended the monthly meeting there the same
day, to which came many people of other societies, but we were wholly silent.
We staid over the First Day meetings, which were attended by abundance of
people not professing with us; but neither of us had much to impart to them,
which was matter of wonder both to them and to some who professed with us;
there being now a willingness in the people of this city, to hear the testimony
of Truth. We were engaged to pay a religious visit to most of the families of
Friends there, wherein we were favored with the satisfactory evidence of being
in the way of our duty; and from which we hoped some good would ensue, for it
seemed to have considerable effect upon some, especially of the youth.

The 14th, we went to Mendon, and after having visited a few little meetings to
the north-west; we passed, through several, to Rhode Island. We were painfully
exercised in this quarter, being engaged for the establishing of a right
discipline; and in the discouragement of a ministry in words, which was not
accompanied with the power of Truth; wherewith some of the people were amused,
but not profitably fed, and the truly sensible were distressed. In diverse
places we were mostly or wholly silent, in large mixed meetings, perhaps for
examples to these forward spirits. It raised the displeasure of some against
us; but we were mercifully preserved patient and resigned, and I hope ready to
do good for evil.

The 27th, we came to Newport on Rhode Island, and were affectionately received
by our friends Thomas and Mary Richardson and their children, with whom we
lodged both now and when there before.

The 28th, we were at their weekday meeting, which was pretty much mixed with
people of other societies; but our concern at this time being principally to
Friends, their coming rendered it difficult for us to discharge our duties. We
therefore requested a meeting of Friends select, which we obtained, and I
believe it ended to the general satisfaction of the sensible minds present; the
Lord's power being exalted therein, under the tendering effects whereof some of
the youth were bowed.

From Newport we went through several meetings on the island of Poniganset to
Greenwich, wherein I had but little share in the ministry; but my companion had
good service in this quarter. Here we parted from many Friends who had been
made near to us in the Truth; and on the 8th of the Ninth month, set our faces
toward New York government; but my companion, not finding her spirit released
from Greenwich, we returned back the next morning, and had a meeting with
Friends there the same day; and the 10th, had one at Machanticut. We had some
painful labor in both these meetings, the cause of which I forbear to mention,
but in the end had to point out one of the parties that had occasioned it.

The 11th, we proceeded on our journey through Connecticut Province, to Oblong
in New York government, about 150 miles, having no meetings by the way but at
New Millford, where there is a few under the profession of Truth.

From thence we went to Salisbury, and the Nine Partners; where my companion
was confined by indisposition, and I was obliged to attend the meetings in this
quarter alone; wherein I was favored with a degree of Divine help.

The 23d, we returned to Oblong, and were at the meetings there on the
First Day, which were large, and I hope serviceable.

From hence we had thoughts of passing through the other meetings of Friends on
the main land in this quarter, and so of proceeding to Long Island; but soon
after we left Oblong, a cloud came over our spirits; and being divested of a
capacity for service, we concluded to go directly to Long Island, and there to
rest until the cause or end of this dispensation should be manifested to us;
which proved to be a separation from each other. I had long seen it would be
so, and some of our friends before we left Europe expected, and rather pressed
it; fearing that our service would be less to the church by our keeping
together, than if we separated. We had now traveled together as companions in
the most difficult parts of the country; had shared so many trials, sufferings,
and dangers, and had been favored with great unity of spirit therein, that it
appeared hard for us to part; but when we were convinced of the propriety of
it, we submitted, in hope that it might tend to the benefit of that glorious
cause, for which we left our native land. After patiently waiting some days, my
companion's way opened to Philadelphia; but I not being quite clear that the
time for my leaving this quarter was fully come, concluded to stay behind her;
which she, as well as myself, being most easy with, we imparted our exercise to
Friends at their monthly meeting, and had their approbation in our separation.

The 3d of the Tenth month, we took an affectionate leave of each other at the
house of our friend John Bowne of Flushing; and she, accompanied by some men
friends, proceeded toward Philadelphia. My view was to turn back to the few
meetings we had not visited on the main land, and J. Bowne's wife being willing
to accompany me, we, with two men friends, left her house the same afternoon.
We had a pretty broad ferry to cross, and the tide not serving until evening,
it was near night when we got over. We did not go in the same boat with the
horses, but one of the men friends staid with them, and we could not expect
them over for a considerable time. The ferry house seemed a poor place to lodge
at, and it appeared proper we should that night get to the house of a friend,
who was member of the meeting I wished to attend next day, that notice might be
given of it; and if we staid for our horses the family might probably be gone
to bed. We therefore inquired for horses to proceed forward, but could procure
only one, upon which I determined to go with a man to ride before me, who was
to bring the horse back. My friends who were with me knew the people of the
ferry, so I set out without fear, although I had no pillion. We had but about
two or three miles to ride, and it was a fine, clear, moonlight night, and most
of the way on an even sand. I soon found the horse was a stumbler (indeed the
poor beast had no shoes on, a common case on Long Island, and other even, sandy
parts of the country), and when we had gone perhaps half way, down he came, and
threw us both; but we were thrown far enough from the horse to receive no hurt
from him. The horse rolled upon his back, and when he arose I found the saddle
had no girth to it, and I knew before that it had no crupper, so it was
unlikely that its rider should have any command of him when he fell. We had a
kind of a wash-way to pass before we got to the friend's house, so I could not
well walk it; therefore I mounted again at some high rails, and we reached the
house before the family was in bed; and my friends came safe the same night. I
visited the meetings on the Main, which I had a view of, and returned to
Flushing the 5th.

I wished to visit the meetings on Long Island, that I might be excused from
returning back thereto; but not having ease of mind in the prospect, I
concluded to follow my companion to Philadelphia; in which I believe I was
right, as it tended to convince Friends in general that our separation was not
occasioned by any difference betwixt us, or other improper cause or motive: so
I proceeded accordingly, accompanied by one man friend.

On the 7th, we stopped to refresh ourselves at New York, and my affectionate
friend Margaret Bowne at whose house we had lodged before, concluded to take me
in her chaise to Philadelphia: a seasonable relief from riding on horseback. We
crossed the Sound that afternoon, and reached Philadelphia the 10th, a journey
of about 100 miles from New York. My companion had gone a little round, in her
way from Long Island to visit a general meeting, and came to Philadelphia the
same day; and after having conversed with each other, we were mutually
satisfied with meeting, although we could not see that we should unite again in
the service through the provinces of Pennsylvania and the Jerseys.

We staid in Philadelphia more than a week, and our friends were unanimous that
it was best for us to separate. My way opened to go to the yearly meeting to be
held at Shrewsbury. In the way thereto, I fell in with several weekday
meetings, and with one appointed by Joshua Dixon, a friend on a religious visit
from England. I had also some service in the families of Friends, for which I
had my reward. The meeting at Shrewsbury began the 28th, and was attended by
diverse valuable ministers; and indeed I thought there was need of weight to
counteract the light frothy spirit which appeared in the people, both in s^^e
of those who made profession of Truth, as well as many of other societies;
whose motive in attending that meeting being more to please the natural mind,
by getting into the company and conversation of each other, than for the honor
of Truth, they added no weight to it. However, the Lord was pleased so to
favor, that the testimony of Truth was several times set over them in good
authority. I was particularly engaged for the welfare of my fellow members in
society, and desired an opportunity with the heads of families; which was
procured, and I had good satisfaction in it.

The 30th, I left Shrewsbury, and the 1st of the Eleventh month, returned to
Philadelphia, a journey of near 90 miles. I met my companion here well and also
my dear friends John Churchman, who was returned from his visit to Friends in
England, and Samuel Forthergill, who was entering upon one to Friends in
America. We were mutually refreshed in beholding the faces one of another, our
union in the Truth being strong, which was now renewed in the fresh springing
up of its life. We all attended the quarterly meeting at Philadelphia, which
was large, and eminently crowned with the Divine presence; wherein my companion
and self rejoiced, though we had but little share in the public service.

As we found it right to part, for the gospel's sake, on the 8th, we took leave
of each other in a degree of cheerfulness, and in the unity of the spirits;
committing each other to the Divine protection, under a feeling sense of his
humbling goodness. My views pointed to West Jersey, so I crossed the River
Delaware at Philadelphia, being accompanied by Sarah Barney, a religious young
woman of the Island of Nantucket, who had come to Philadelphia to spend some
time among Friends there, and found freedom to go with me for a while, as I did
to except of her company. She was not in the ministry.

I passed through a train of meetings to the quarterly meeting at Salem, and my
concern principally bending to the members of our own society in that quarter,
I was pleased that the meetings, were not mixed with others; and was sometimes
favored with a degree of enlargement in the heavenly gift, though at others
poor and low.

The quarterly meeting at Salem began the 16th and ended the 19th, wherein I
had close hard exercise in spirit, as well as in ministerial service, in which
I was not much enlarged.

The 20th, I had a meeting at Greenwich, where there is a promising prospect
among the youth, on several of whom the solidity of Truth is deeply impressed.
My spirit was closely united to them, but could minister but little. It
appeared to me, that the Almighty would more perfect his work in them, by the
immediate operation of his own Spirit, than by the help of instruments.

The 21st, we rode between 50 and 60 miles to Cape May, visited the few Friends
there and so proceeded to Great Egg Harbor, visited the several meetings
there, and the 28th, went to Little Egg Harbor. We went a considerable way
betwixt these two harbors in a canoe just wide enough for one person to sit
in: there was ice in the bottom of it, which being broken, some straw was laid
for me to sit on.

Hence we proceeded, through Upper Springfield, to New York. In our way we
lodged at Amboy, at the house of a widow, who was under the profession of
Truth. Here we met with a young woman, to whose person and character I was an
entire stranger, on whose account I became concerned, suspecting that all was
not right with her: and in the morning after breakfast, I spoke to her in a
very close manner, and gave her such advice, as in the openings of Truth arose
in my heart. I thought I could partly have pointed out her crime, had not
delicacy and fear kept me back. She wept much, and hastily retired in great
confusion and agitation of mind; and I afterward heard that she had had a
child by her sister's husband, and was come here to be sheltered from public
notice; but the Lord followed her, and I had reason to hope that the extendings
of his grace were toward her, although she had been so great an offender.
After some more close and very particular service with the woman of the house,
I left it in peace and thankfulness to the Almighty, who had enabled me to
discharge this hard piece of service; for so indeed it was, to speak thus to
individuals and strangers: but in the day of his power his people are made
willing to execute his commands.

I went to Raway and Rywoods meetings, and got to New York the 5th of the
Twelfth month; and after a meeting there went on Long Island, where I visited
all the settled meetings of Friends, save one, which I had been at before. My
concern here at this time principally bended toward the members of our own
society; and sometimes when meetings were much mixed with others, I had nothing
to say to them; which gave offense, not only to them, but to some carnal
professors of Truth; but I endeavored to rest satisfied in the Divine will,
well knowing, Infinite Wisdom knew best what to administer for their good. At
Flushing, the people not professing with us, had a great curiosity to hear me
preach. Many of them had been with me at two meetings when I was before on the
Island at both of which I was silent, and now came again, and were a third time
disappointed, I believe in wisdom; for they being still dissatisfied, a number
of young people came in the evening to my lodgings, I suppose with an intent to
know whether I had any private meeting in the family, with whom I sat down in
retirement; and others of the neighborhood hearing of it (by means of some of
the family whom they had desired to give them intelligence if there were such
an opportunity), came in, and I had a remarkable testimony amongst them,
directed to their states; the force of which some of them could not evade, as
the opportunity was so select. I found afterward that diverse of them were
Deists, against whose principles I had to strike with much strength and
clearness. Friends present were comforted in the feeling of Divine goodness;
for the power of Truth was exalted, blessed for ever be the name of the Lord;
who in his own time, will honor such as honor him by manifesting that they
are nothing, nor can do any thing, but through his Divine assistance.

The 18th of the Twelfth month, we left Long Island, in a thankful sense of the
providential care of our heavenly Father, in preserving and sustaining us
through the many dangers and difficulties attendant on this journey in the
winter season; when the roads in many places were bad, and we had many broad,
wild ferries to cross, which are sometimes rendered very dangerous through the
frost and strong gales of wind; but the weather was always favorable when we
crossed them.

The 19th, I attended a monthly meeting at Woodbridge, which was small and
exercising, wherein I had little service, except to strengthen the hands of
Friends in the discipline, the line whereof should have been farther stretched
over some transgressors. We rested a day or two at Raway, at the house of our
kind friends Jos. and Sarah Shotwell, and the 22d, went to Plainfield, and
thence, through several small meetings, to a number of meetings about
Burlington, which were mostly large, and some of them satisfactory, being
attended by the power of Truth; but the doctrine was mostly close, for which
there was sorrowfully a cause. The 13th of the First month, 1755, we crossed
the River Delaware, and were at a meeting at Bristol, in Bucks County,
Pennsylvania; which was not large, but attended with a degree of the Divine
presence. The 15th, we were at the Falls meeting, in which I was silent, and
which was a comfortable season to me. The 16th, I parted from my companion
Sarah Barney, who having received a hurt upon her arm by a fall from her horse,
was prevented from accompanying me further. She was a tender affectionate
companion, and very exemplary in her conversation; which together with that
sincere love to Truth which dwelt in her, united her to my spirit.

Grace Fisher, a friend in the ministry from Philadelphia, accompanied me
through the rest of the meetings in Bucks County, which were five. In some
seasons of silence the people appeared to be too generally in a dull, sluggish
state. In some of these meetings the Almighty pleased to open the spring of the
ministry, which I believe flowed in a manner not quite agreeable to some, who
wanted smooth things, although they were not their portion: and may I never
minister so deceitfully, as to cry Peace, when his holy spirit is grieved.
There is in this country a weighty, living number of friends, unto whom my
spirit was closely united in the covenant of life, but there are many dwellers
at ease. Some of the youth appear promising, and the Divine visitation was
largely extended to many. Oh! that they may embrace and dwell under it, so as
to become partakers of the glorious privileges of the gospel dispensation.

The 21st, I again crossed the River Delaware, accompanied by Grace Crosdale, a
Friend of Bucks County, who had a gift in the ministry, and went to Bethlehem,
and thence to visit a few families about twenty miles back in the woods; with
some of whom we had a meeting which was attended by several of their
neighbors; to whom I was drawn to minister freely in the love of the gospel,
and believe it had its effect amongst them.

The 23d, we again crossed the River Delaware, which was pretty full of ice,
and our men friends were a little doubtful that if they went over with us they
could not return the next day, should the frost continue; as the ice might be
united, though not strong enough to bear them; and I being unwilling they
should be detained, concluded to go with two men (strangers to me, but one of
them known to friends in general) who were waiting for a passage over the
river; they accompanied us to a friend's house about five miles on the other
side where the next day we had a small meeting with a few Dutch people, and
then proceeded to the upper part of Philadelphia County and Berks County, in
which part the meetings are mostly small. I had some painful labor of spirit
in this quarter, and also a comfortable prospect; for the Lord has amongst
Friends here, a remnant of the ancient stock, who have, in a good degree, kept
their habitations in the Truth; and a few of the youth are brought under its
humbling baptism; and I thought the extendings of his Divine visitation were to
the careless.

The 31st, we crossed the River Schuylkill in a canoe, and our horses were swum
over. We attended a meeting at Nantmill in Chester County, the 1st of the
Second month; and passed through several meetings to the quarterly meeting for
Chester County, held at Concord.

About this time I was under a very heavy exercise of spirit, being environed
with darkness and made to stand as in the state of such as despise religion,
and call in question Divine justice and mercy. Under this painful baptism I
continued many days, whereby all the blessings of kind Providence were
imbittered, and my life seemed a burden; yet sometimes a glimpse of light
would dart through the cloud, and I conceived a hope of deliverance thereby,
and that this dispensation was allotted renewedly to fit me to minister to some
in this state, as well as to sympathize with the afflicted and tempted. It
appeared to me remarkable that although I was thus exercised when out of
meetings, both by day and by night, and perhaps for a considerable part of the
time I was in them; yet was I not entirely disabled for service; the cloud
would break as in an instant, and I had just light and strength afforded to see
and discharge my duty; and after a while it would close up again as before. My
soul has abundant cause to bless the name of my God in this and such like
painful seasons, which I desire to retain in lasting remembrance; for had it
not been for the support of his powerful merciful hand, I had been as one who
goes down into the pit; being as it were entered, in thought, into the dark
avenues which lead to destruction; yet faintly (as I thought) adhearing to that
faith which was once delivered to the saints. These are the seasons of the
trial of our faith, which is more precious than that of gold which perishes.

The quarterly meeting at Concord began the 7th of the Second month, where I
met my dear companion Mary Peisly. Our meeting was attended with Divine
consolation, under a sense of the protection of Providence having been over us
in our absence from each other; and our union in the Truth was renewed and
strengthened. The quarterly meeting was large, and Divinely favored and the
testimony of Truth therein exalted in strength and clearness.

The minds of some members of our society were at this time much unsettled
through government affairs. A war with the French seemed likely to break out;
and some were for deviating from our Christian testimony, which is against
defensive, as well as offensive war; consistently with that pure charity which
bears all things, and seeks not its own by means contrary to the tendency
of the peaceable gospel dispensation. Against this spirit we had to testify, I
hope to good purpose, for the power of Truth was over the meetings in an
eminent degree, whereby the doctrine preached was enforced: glory be to the
Lord for ever! He brings down and raises up, for the honor of his own name,
and the establishment of his servants in righteousness and truth. The scripture
given me to comment upon in this meeting was Joel 2d, verse the 15th, and some
following, whereon I was opened to my own humbling admiration and that of some
of my friends. Here we met our friends John Churchman, Joshua Dixon, and many
more, with whom our spirits were comforted in the Divine presence.

The 12th, we came to Philadelphia, where we spent a few days, and were
principally engaged in visiting some friends' families and the girls' school
for Friends' children. We also visited the prison, wherein were confined
several who had made some profession of Truth, viz. one for debt, and three
boys for theft, who, with the fourth, their accomplice, were much broken in
spirit. This was to me one of the most affecting services I had ever been
engaged in, from the consideration of their deplorable circumstances; for
although their lives might be spared, a lasting stain might remain upon their
reputation; but we were comforted in the hope of their being brought to
repentance, as Divine mercy was extended unto them. Oh! how careful ought young
people to be of the company they keep; for if they are familiar with the
children of darkness, they too often, by almost imperceptible degrees, contract
their vicious inclinations, and are led into acts of wickedness, from which
they would once, perhaps, have shrunk back with horror.

The 18th, we went in company to Frankfort, where we had a good meeting, and
parted in the comfortable sense of the Divine presence; my companion going to
some meetings in Bucks County, and myself to Abington, Horsham, and Plymouth,
accompanied by Sarah Morris of Philadelphia, and Anna Logan.

The 22d, I again met my companion at Burlington, where we attended the
quarterly meeting for the upper part of West Jersey; which was a solemn season,
and the spring of the ministry was opened to edification and comfort.

The 26th and 27th, we attended the quarterly meeting in Bucks county,
Pennsylvania; which was large and satisfactory, Divine help being extended to
the encouragement of us and of the faithful present. Here my companion and I
again separated in a sense of our heavenly Father's love; and myself with Sarah
Morris proceeded to visit some meetings in Bucks and Philadelphia Counties, and
came to Philadelphia the 8th of the Third month. I staid in and about the city
till the 24th, visiting some of the families of friends, as my strength which
was but low, would permit; but I had solid peace in spending a few days in this
service.

On the 24th, I went to Newtown in West Jersey, so to Evesham and Haddonfield
to the quarterly meeting for that province; wherein I was low both in body and
mind, and had (...) much public service.

The 28th, the half-year's meeting at Philadelphia began. Here I again met my
dear companion Mary Peisley. The meeting was large and solemn, there was much
silence in it, which was perhaps not less profitable to many, though less
pleasing, than preaching.

The 3d of the Fourth month we again separated, and I went toward the eastern
shore of Maryland, having for a companion Hannah Foster of West Jersey, also
Joshua Fisher of Philadelphia, who went to assist us, it being a quarter
wherein it might have been difficult always to procure guides. We were obliged
to travel hard, and I having also hard service amongst a few unfaithful
professors of Truth who were scattered about in this quarter, and my health
being poor, it was painful for me to pursue the journey; but Divine goodness
secretly sustained my soul, and assisted to discharge my duty according to
knowledge; and in the end afforded a comfortable hope that my labor was not
entirely fruitless. We attended a half-year's meeting at Chester in Maryland,
and another at Duck Creek: at the last we met John Churchman. We had labourious
travail of spirit, the life of Truth being low in that quarter, but through
Infinite goodness, the testimony of it was raised in a good degree of
authority. We had comfortable hope respecting some young people hereaway, and
parted from the living amongst them under a sense of Divine favor. We
proceeded through several small meetings of Friends (wherein I had painful
labor of spirit, yet I hope some solid service) to Lewiston. There is no
meeting of Friends established here, but we had a large one in the courthouse,
wherein the power and testimony of Truth was raised in dominion to the praise
of the great Name.

The 29th, we returned to Duck Creek, myself in a very low state both of body
and mind; but as I endeavored to keep my mind to the Lord, he was pleased as
in an instant to dispel the thick cloud of darkness which for some days had
encompassed me; and so to lift up the light of his countenance upon me, that I
rejoiced exceedingly in the hope of his salvation.

The 4th of the Fifth month my companion Hannah Foster left me at East
Nottingham, and my valuable friend Margaret Churchman (wife of John Churchman)
accompanied me to some meetings in Lancaster and York Counties; and so to the
yearly meeting held at West River, for the western shore of Maryland, at which
I had been with my companion M. Peisley, in 1754, but had then but little
public service amongst the people. I met with some opposition in my endeavors
for the revival of discipline, from apostate and libertine spirits; but the
Lord supported me above it.

The yearly meeting was large, and Divinely favored. Several friends came over
the bay to it, and I was favored to see a little fruit of my painful labor
when on the other side, by the change which was apparently wrought in a young
person, who was then of a light conversation. William Brown, from Philadelphia,
attended this meeting, and had good service therein. Love seemed to spread
amongst Friends at this time, and we left them in peace, and returned the 26th
to East Nottingham; where I met Sarah Morris, from Philadelphia, who proposed
to accompany me through Chester and Lancaster Counties, etc. She was a truly
exemplary woman, and sometimes highly favored in the ministry.

We left Nottingham the 29th, and passed through the rest of the meetings in
Lancaster County, wherein I had much close service. We visited Chester County
pretty thoroughly, wherein is a very large body of professors of Truth, but
many of them are deficient in regard to its sanctifying operation upon the
spirit. Many noble pillars have been removed from amongst them, and some of the
elders who then remained had unhappily lost their stations in the Truth, and
yet nominally retained their offices in the church. These were stumbling blocks
to the youth, who were too apt to look at the example of such, and to plead
their inconsistent practices as an excuse for their own taking liberties in
other respects. Against these, and such like deceitful watchers and pretended
laborers, who had not kept the vineyard of their own hearts, and yet dared to
stretch forth their hands to the Lord's service, I had sharply to testify: and
I sometimes was made an example of silence in the solemn assemblies. There was
also in this county a solid living number of friends, who were preachers of
righteousness in their respective stations, both by example and precept; with
whose unity the Lord was pleased to favor me, and who I trust will ever be
near to my life in that holy bond, which neither time nor death can dissolve.

After visiting Chester County, I became much indisposed, and retired to the
house of my kind friend John Morris, in Philadelphia County; where (as at
several time before had been the case) I was affectionately received, and the
necessary endeavors were used for my recovery; which the Lord was pleased so
to bless, that I was enabled in about two weeks, to pursue my journey, though
in considerable weakness of body. In this season of confinement and release
from public labor, the good physician so favored, that although my body
sustained considerable pain and weakness, my mind rather gathered strength, and
was greatly encouraged in the hope of future preservation. My dear companion M.
Peisley came to me from Philadelphia, who having visited almost all the
meetings of Friends on the continent of America, entertained hope of our soon
embarking for our native lands; but we had much more both to do and to suffer,
before that hour came. We met in wonted affection, and therein again parted the
2d of the Seventh month; when I proceeded to visit some meetings in
Philadelphia and Berks County, where there seemed a promising prospect amongst
the youth, some of whom appeared to be advancing in rectitude of spirit and
conduct at which my soul rejoiced; it being part of the fruits of that labor
of love, the Lord of the harvest had caused us to bestow upon them. I had
considerable freedom in the exercise of my gift in this renewed visit to these
places, and again met my companion the 16th, at Stenton near Philadelphia; from
which place we went in company to Philadelphia the 17th, and thence to the
quarterly meeting at Concord, in Chester County; after which I proceeded to
some other meetings in that county, and returned to my companion at
Philadelphia the 19th of the Eighth month.

From this time we were mostly together while in the country, which was much
longer than was agreeable to our natural inclinations; for we were detained the
winter; being engaged in visiting the families of Friends in Philadelphia, in
conjunction with the Friends who were under appointment for that service; in
which important work, we were frequently favored by the Wise Head of the
church, who directs, that even Jerusalem shall be searched with lighted
candles; and for that purpose illuminates the spirits of his servants, and
furnishes with doctrine suited to the states of those visited. We took diverse
turns in the country, to visit quarterly, monthly, and particular meetings, and
had good service for the Lord therein; but in the meetings in Philadelphia were
frequently bound in spirit, being made to preach silence by example; which I
believe had its use, by instructing the people not to depend on instrumental
ministry.

Toward the latter end of the winter, my dear companion became very much
indisposed, and continued so for several months; in which time she was
frequently prevented from attending meetings, and sometimes confined to her
room. I gave her the strictest attendance I was capable, insomuch that with
other exercises attending, my health was greatly affected, and my spirits sunk
to a degree of dejection I had never before known: nevertheless I was so
favored as to be alive, and to be at times strong, in my ministerial service,
to the very conclusion of our stay in the country.

And now, as it was our lots in the wise direction of Providence, to be in the
providence of Pennsylvania, at a time when the minds of Friends were more than
commonly exercised, on account of public or political affairs; by reason of
the French making encroachments on some of the British colonies; and some of
the Indian tribes having committed great outrages on their frontiers, and
murdered many of the back inhabitants; the conduct of us who were concerned to
labor for the support of our peaceable Christian testimony, was harshly
censured by the unthinking multitude; and by such of our own society as were
one with them in spirit; who insinuated that we intruded into matters foreign
to our proper business, and were in part the cause of the continuation of the
calamities which attended the provinces, through our testifying against the
spirit of war, and advising Friends to support our Christian testimony
faithfully, I think it not improper briefly to give some account of the share I
had in concerns of this nature.

On my coming to Philadelphia in the Third month, 1755, I understood the
assembly was about to sit; and the major part of its members being then under
the profession of Truth, on considering how difficult it would be for such, to
maintain our Christian testimony, and to act consistently with what the people
at large thought was for the good of the province; I was induced to propose, a
few weighty friends having a religious opportunity with such members of the
assembly, as made profession with us; wherein, perhaps, Truth might open
counsels suitable to the occasion, and our sympathy with such as were concerned
to maintain its testimony might be manifested.

This meeting with the concurrence of Friends, such an opportunity was
obtained, and I had the privilege of being at it; and therein was concerned to
testify against that spirit, which from human considerations was for war, and
to strengthen the minds of Friends against leaning thereto. Diverse times during
those troubles, I was concerned publicly to assert the consistency of our
peaceable principle with the gospel dispensation; and once, if not oftener, to
point out the consequence of Friends deviating therefrom, which was remarkably
fulfilled before I left the country. This was no more than consistent with my
office as a minister, and my commission to that country, which was to preach
Truth and Righteousness, and strengthen the hands of my brethren, against their
opposers. Both myself and companion were so clear of improperly intermeddling
with the affairs of government, that we sometimes checked the torrent of
conversation on that subject, either by silent or verbal reproof; and but
seldom so much as read their newspapers.

During the time of the people's being in so great confusion and distress, on
account of the Indian war, my mind was much exercised; but for several months,
I know not that I could at all, even secretly, petition the Almighty for their
relief, with any evidence of such a petition arising from the spring of Divine
life. But a little before a stop was put to their depredations, my spirit was
almost continually clothed with intercession, that the Lord might be pleased to
stay the sword; and in two public meetings I was concerned in like manner; and
I did not hear that any mischief was done after that time, by any Indians who
had occasioned that disturbance, and a cessation of arms ensued. I record this
as an instance of Divine wisdom instructing his servants to ask what it is
pleasing to him to grant; as well as restraining them from petitioning for what
might be exceeding desirable to themselves, before the proper time; and I
believe that if ministers thus kept under the government of that spirit of
wisdom, which gives liberty in the appointed season acceptably to approach the
throne of divine Grace, it would be more self-evident that they asked in the
name and spirit of Jesus, by their prayer being answered.

I think it worth remarking, that the termination of this Indian war, was at
last effected by the peaceable interposition of Friends. An Indian chief, with
other Indians in friendship with Pennsylvania, being occasionally in
Philadelphia, Friends obtained leave of the governor to have a conference with
them; in order to endeavor, through their interference to bring about an
accommodation with the Indians now at war with the British colonies. As we were
admitted to attend this conference, I mention it. It evinces the veneration the
Indians retained for the memory of William Penn, and for his pacific
principles; and their great regard to Friends, whom they styled his children.
Several of their women sat in this conference, who, for fixed solidity,
appeared to me like Roman matrons. They scarcely moved, much less spoke, during
the time it was held; and there was a dignity in the behavour and countenance
of one of them, that I cannot forget. I was informed that they admit their most
respected women into their counsels.

And here I remark, that we were in Philadelphia at the time when the first
soldiers that had come there commissioned from the English government, arrived
at that city; under the command of General Braddock. I said a cloud of darkness
came with them. The Lord had settled this colony by peaceable means, he had
hitherto protected it by his own Almighty arm and it prospered greatly; but
henceforward disunion and disturbance prevailed and increased in it. Our friend
Samuel Fothergill, as well as we, was strongly and affectionately engaged to
promote peace, and guard them against the event, which he feared would ensue,
and which in time followed.

Our stay in this country was considerably longer than usual for friends who
visit it from Europe; which was much in the cross to our natural inclination,
but quite in the unity of the sensible body of Friends; who saw that we were
industriously engaged in the service to which Truth had called us: and whatever
some loose spirits might suggest respecting our long absence from home, I have
this testimony in my conscience, that since I have been engaged in the solemn
service of the ministry, I have ever endeavored to accomplish the duties
assigned me, in as short time as I could; being desirous that I might not
afford occasion of censure to such, as being unacquainted with the humbling
weight of this service, may conclude that we travel for pleasure, or to gratify
a roving or curious disposition; as well as that I might spend the spare time
afforded me in the exercise of my duty in my own family; and examining the
state of my mind; which, after returning from journies of this kind, as well as
in going along, should be necessarily attended to: and may I never be a servant
whom Divine wisdom has made a keeper of his vineyard, but who neglects the
culture of his own heart.

My companion's service through the continent principally bended toward
Friends, yet was she at times clearly and livingly opened to others; but my
concern was mostly more general; although in the provinces of Pennsylvania and
the Jerseys, wherein our Christian principles were pretty much known, it was
more particularly directed to my fellow members in society; who had perhaps
been the less labored with by ministers visiting them, on account of meetings
often being much mixed with other professors. As we spent so much time in
Philadelphia before we left the continent, I had many times been much enlarged
in the service appointed me, both to Friends and others; and my companion, whom
as a minister I preferred to myself, had extraordinary service; but as is
before hinted, her bodily weakness prevented her attending meetings some of the
latter part of the time we spent in it. I may say without boasting, that we
were endeared to the weighty body of Friends in that city, as well as in the
other parts of the continent, and they were so to us. And after having labored
among them more than two years and seven months, we took a solemn leave in the
love of the gospel, of those present in a large quarterly meeting held at
Phialadelphia, and left the city on the 5th of the Sixth month, 1756. We were
accompanied by many Friends to Chester, and were there Divinely favored
together the next day, when we went on board a snow bound for Dublin, in
company with our dear friend Samuel Fothergill, who was returning from his
religious visit to Friends in America, and Abraham Farrington, who was going on
one to Friends in Europe.

There were passengers in the same vessel with us, Samuel Emlen, a friend of
Philadelphia, and two other young men friends, who were going to England by way
of Ireland. We had a very quick but stormy passage; being on board only
thirty-four days, and but twenty-six of them out of sight of land. The sailors
accounted it a very fine passage, but we suffered very much in it, through the
boisterous winds, and their consequences. The wind being right aft, the water
frequently dashed over into our cabin, although our Boards put to defend the
cabin-windows in storms.
dead-lights were mostly kept up; and it run much under my bed, so as to render
my lodging very uncomfortable; and, being seasick and otherwise indisposed, I
was at times sunk very low, yet the hand of the Lord was near to sustain and
comfort me. Notwithstanding the stormy weather, we had several blessed meetings
on the voyage, at some of which the master and sailors were present, unto whom
Divine goodness was pleased to open suitable instruction. England was now at
war with France, and by the account of some fishermen who came on board us in
the Irish Channel, we narrowly escaped being taken prisoners, as two privateers
were seen in the Channel, at the very time we should probably have met them,
had we not for some hours been forced back by a strong contrary wind, the only
one we had during the voyage, which appeared signally providential for us.

We lodged in Dublin at the house of our friend Samuel Judd (who was uncle to
my companion), which was formerly the habitation of my very worthy aunt, Sarah
Baker, whose services in the ministry, when resident in this city, had endeared
her to Friends, and her name was precious to those of the present day.

The 10th of the Seventh month, we landed at Dublin; and the 25th after taking
an affectionate leave of my dear companion and friends, Samuel Fothergill and I
took shipping for England, and landed at Holyhead in Wales the 27th. Here we
bought horses, and reached Chester the 29th, where my friend Samuel Fothergill
left me, and whence, accompanied by a young man, a friend, I got home the 31st.
I was affectionately received by my dear mother, brother and sister, who united
in thankful acknowledgments of the Lord's mercy, in restoring me to them and my
native land. I traveled 155 miles from Holyhead in four days; and had been
absent from my mother's house three years, and upwards of one month.

I had noted having traveled upon the continent and islands, upwards of 8750
miles (my companion not so much). When I compare the fatigues, and the various
inconveniences and hardships I sustained, with my natural constitution, I
cannot but admire, that I did not entirely sink under them: and, on considering
the dangers attending the journey, which were too numerous for me to
particularize in the foregoing account of it, I must thankfully acknowledge
that the preserving sustaining hand of my heavenly Father, was signally
extended for my help and salvation. May the humbling sense of his mercies and
tender care, by me unmerited, rest weightily and lastingly upon my spirit.

CHAP. V.
THROUGH my late long and great bodily fatigues, my constitution was so shaken,
that a season of rest appeared desirable, and I rather expected it some time
before I returned home; but the Lord was pleased to order it otherwise, I hope
to his own honor and my preservation: for before and quickly after my arrival
in England, diverse prospects of duty opened, which appeared likely to engage me
for more than a year; and which I was favored to accomplish in the following
order.

In about two weeks after my return, I attended our quarterly meeting, where I
was met by many of my dear friends, who rejoiced to see me, and we were
measurably favored together in the Divine presence. Quickly after this I went
to the circular yearly meeting for the seven western counties, which was held
this year at Warwick: it was large, and attended with holy solemnity. My dear
friend Samuel Fothergill and myself had the principal share in the public
service, wherein the Lord favored us; to whom be the praise of all his works
now and for ever. This being the usual time of harvest, with a prospect of the
plentiful crops of grain being much injured by the heavy rains, Samuel
Fothergill in one of his testimonies noted it, as a threatened judgment from
Him who opens the floodgates of heaven or stays them, to the effecting of
his own righteous purposes. The rains continuing long, so much grain was
spoiled or damaged, as to occasion an extreme scarcity before the next harvest.

A few weeks after my return from this meeting, I went into Herefordshire, to
visit my sister Young and her family. I there found my mind engaged to visit
the meetings of Friends in that county, which I did, except one of them, and
returned home by way of Worcester. Here it appeared right for me to get an
opportunity with some of the most experienced friends of that city; that we
might together consider about setting forward the good work of visiting the
families of Friends in this county: of which I had a view before I reached home
from Ireland; and when I came there, I found that a general visit to Friends'
families throughout the nation had been recommended by the last yearly meeting
at London. I therefore found freedom to offer myself to assist in that service,
provided the same could be accomplished so as not to interfere with my other
prospects of duty. I also recommended to the friends present, the establishment
of a meeting for ministers and elders in the quarterly meeting for this county.
We were eminently favored in this opportunity, and I left the city in peace,
and with a hope of some conclusion being come to at our next quarterly meeting.

I staid at home a few weeks, being closely engaged in writing. The 22d of the
Eleventh month, I went to Worcester to attend our quarterly meeting, under a
weighty exercise of spirit, having an intention, if Friends should accede to
the aforesaid proposition of visiting families, to stay and join them therein.
Our quarterly meeting was attended, in a good degree, with the Divine presence,
yet the service of it was hard and laborious. Friends were backward in regard
to giving in their names to enter upon the visit to families, concluding
themselves unfit for so weighty a work; however some were nominated, with whom
I united, and concluded to stay, and see how Providence might favor the
undertaking. I had some struggle betwixt affection to my natural parent, and
the pursuit of the service before me; my dear and aged mother being likely to
be left without either of her daughters; my sister Ann being with my sister
Young, whose children had the smallpox; but I was enabled to pursue my duty,
and to commit her to the care of gracious Providence; whose regard I found by
account from herself, she signally experienced in my absence, and encouraged me
to continue in the service. I began in great self-diffidence, and went through
the families of Friends in the city; but the Lord was with me, and frequently
clothed me with strength and wisdom suited to the occasion. I was considerably
favored whilst in the city in the exercise of my gift in the public meetings
of Friends, took leave of them in much love, and left it in peace and
thankfulness.

The 19th of the Twelfth month, being accompanied by Mary Oldbury, a young
woman of Worcester, who had an acceptable gift in the ministry, I went to
Pershore, a town wherein no member of our society resided; but Friends, having
a meeting house there, held a meeting quarterly, which was this day* It was
large, but mostly composed of people of other societies. I sat about an hour
and an half silent, in which season my spirit was sweetly composed, and
resigned to wait the Lord's time to be put forth in service; wherein I was
afterward much favored, the testimony of Truth being exalted in its own
authority. The people were very solid and attentive, and I left the town in
peace, accompanied by the beforementioned friend Mary Oldbury, to visit the
families of Friends in Evesham and Shipston, which we were favored to
accomplish to a good degree of satisfaction. We sat with Friends in a few of
the meetings in Warwickshire, and so came to my own monthly meeting of
Chadwick, having visited almost all the families of Friends in the several
towns which constitute it, which were four. I returned home in peace and
thankfulness for the gracious assistance vouchsafed by Divine goodness, through
this laborious service, the 24th of the First month 1757.

I staid about home until the latter end of the Third month, in which interval
I was closely engaged in attending to services as they opened in that quarter,
and preparing for those distant ones, which had been impressed upon my mind to
be executed this summer; viz. the attending the yearly meeting for the four
northern counties, and from that to the national meeting at Dublin; so to the
yearly meeting at London, and the succeeding quarterly meetings in Essex,
Suffolk, and Norfolk; which are styled yearly meetings, because at that quarter
in the year, there are some additional meetings for worship held, which are
generally large both of Friends and others; and after these meetings to visit
the few friends remaining in Holland.

My dear friend Lucy Bradley, being engaged to visit Friends in Ireland,
concluded to accompany me to Dublin. I met her at Stourbridge on the 23d of the
Third month, and left her there for a few days with her relations, with an
expectation that she would meet me the 27th. I took an affectionate leave of my
dear mother and brother, and went, accompanied by my sister Ann to Wednesbury;
a town at which a meeting was held quarterly, which happened to be on that day.
Here I expected Lucy Bradley to meet me, and that we should from thence have
pursued our journey together, but, being prevented from coming, through
indisposition, she informed me that she hoped to be able to meet me in a few
days. The meeting was large both of Friends and others, and divinely favored;
and after it I took leave of my sister and diverse friends, and went that night
to Rugeley in Staffordshire, and as I had for some time had a view of visiting
the families of Friends in that county, who are not numerous, I entered upon
that service the 28th, and visited such as were in that place with some
satisfaction.

The 29th, I went to Stafford, at which place the quarterly meeting for the
county was that day held, and I laid before Friends my concern for visiting the
families, and had their concurrence therewith.

Here I met with my friend Samuel Emlen, who came passenger with me in the same
ship from America to Ireland; in which nation he had traveled as companion to
his aged countryman Abraham Farrington, and had himself appeared in the
ministry in that nation, to the satisfaction of Friends. As he was in a weak,
low state of mind, I was inclined to take him with me for a few days.
Accordingly we left Stafford in company, and, having visited several Friends'
families in the country, went to Uttoxeter; where we proceeded in the same
service. My companion Lucy Bradley came to me here, to our mutual comfort. We
were favored together with a blessed opportunity in the friend's family where
we lodged; and after committing each other to the protection of Providence, we
parted from Samuel Emlen and went to Leek; where we also visited the families
of Friends, which we were favored to finish the 8th of the Fourth month, I
hope to the mutual satisfaction of ourselves, and of the friends of the county
who accompanied us in that service.

During my engagement in this weighty work, I was surprised with the
intelligence that my endeared friend and companion Mary Peisley was removed
from mutability. She had been married but three days to Samuel Neale, a Friend
of Ireland, and went off with a few hours indisposition; being doubtless
removed from the prospect of a settlement on earth, to a glorious eternal
inheritance; for which she appeared more visibly prepared than many others of
the Lord's servants. We had been companions together in many probations, and
our union in the Truth was strong, so that her death affected me deeply, the
more so from being attended with so singular a circumstance; yet was my spirit
thankful that she was taken at an hour when her crown shone brightly. She had
been a great example to me in diverse respects, and I begged to be assisted to
follow her, as she had followed Christ.

The 9th we went to Warrington, where a renewed occasion of thankfulness to
gracious Providence was administered, by the probability of the recovery of our
dear friend Samuel Fothergill, from an indisposition wherein his life had been
despaired of. This had much affected my mind, from the consideration of the
great loss the church would sustain by his removal, and myself as an individual
member thereof; yet durst I not ask his longer continuance in this state of
trials and dangers, knowing that if Divine wisdom called him out of it now, it
would certainly be in the best time.

From Warrington we went, through diverse meetings in Lancashire, to the
quarterly meeting at Lancaster, which was signally favored with the
manifestation of Divine regard through the ministry. I remember, before the
public meeting, I was sunk so low, that I scarcely expected ever more to be
set at liberty in the exercise of my gift as heretofore; yet could not see what
I had done to occasion a loss therein; but in the meeting I was as remarkably
raised. Thus are the poor instruments abased and honored for their own
preservation, and the good of the church; the one dispensation being as a
ballast for the other.

The 26th, we went, in company with several friends, toward Penrith, where the
yearly meeting for the four northern counties was to be held. In our way we
called upon that truly honorable mother in Israel, Grace Chambers, who was
very ancient and had been long indisposed, with whom we were favored with a
refreshing opportunity. How encouraging is it to young travelers to behold and
consider such examples of perseverance! It baffles the efforts of the adversary
to persuade that it is impossible to hold out to the end; and raises this
language in the soul, Lord, let my life and latter end be like theirs. At
Penrith we met my beloved friend Abraham Farrington, another of these ancient
worthies, and we mutually rejoiced to see each other.

The yearly meeting was large both of Friends and people of other societies. My
spirit was bowed before the Almighty, that I might be preserved acting in my
proper place in the course of my service therein, and that my conduct might be
unblamable; and, through mercy, I had humbling cause of thankfulness
administered in the close thereof, to Him who had exalted his own name and
testimony through so weak an instrument, unto whom be the praise now and for
ever, says my soul! Although this meeting was attended by several able
ministers of the male sex, it pleased the wise Master of the solemnity to
employ them but little, and to lay the weight of the service upon the females;
who, though the weaker vessels by nature, are at times rendered strong through
his Divine power: and our brethren rejoiced that it was apparently so, through
the course of these meetings.

The exercise of my mind while at Penrith, was added to by the prospect of my
concern for visiting some parts of Holland; for although before I left home I
was resigned thereto, and had imparted it to my relations, as well as to
Friends of the monthly meeting, that they might consider respecting granting me
a certificate; yet now on its near approach, my want of the language, the
various notions in religion which I knew prevailed amongst that people, my sex,
and, for ought I knew, the being exposed to much hardship, revolved in my mind;
and, being opposed to my little strength, depressed my spirits, yet not so as
to cause me to turn from the prospect, or prevent my wrestling with the
Almighty for wisdom and strength, to know and do his will.

After the yearly meeting at Penrith, we went to Cockermouth, and there
attended a large general meeting. My concern for Holland continuing, and not
expecting to be at home in time to attend our monthly meeting, I wrote to my
brother to procure a certificate for the accomplishment thereof.

The 3d, we went on board a vessel bound from Whitehaven to Dublin, and arrived
at that city the 5th, having been favored with fine weather on our passage;
but my spirit was much stripped of a sense of divine good, and as I drew near
the city it became depressed; in which state I landed, and proceeded to my
lodgings, which was at Samuel Judd's. At my entering his house, the remembrance
of dear Mary Peisley affectingly occurred. It was in this house that we
separated in our return from America; and therein we had spent many precious
hours, in sweet union of spirit. The national meeting began the 7th and
continued till the 12th. It was a season of close engagement and hard labor,
both in the meetings for worship and discipline; but I was favored in it with
the unity of the living members of the Society, and the helping hand of the
Almighty; and in the close, was humbly bowed before him under a sense of his
goodness, variously manifested in sustaining my weak body under such laborious
exercises, and strengthening me spiritually to testify boldly against the sins
of the people: which although it might expose me to their censure, yielded to
my soul the peaceable fruits of righteousness.

After the conclusion of the national meeting, I requested a friend to go and
take my passage, saying, I must get to our quarterly meeting; on which a friend
present said, I spoke as if I had the wind at command. I replied, that, if the
Lord appointed my being there, he would dispose the wind to favor it, which
happened accordingly.

The 14th, I parted from my dear companion L. Bradley in much affection, and
quietly went on board a vessel bound for Parkgate, accompanied by my friends
Abraham Shackelton, Thomas Greer, and Joseph Inman, who were going to the
yearly meeting at London. We landed at our designed port the 15th, and reached
Stourbridge on the 17th, where the quarterly meeting for Worcestershire was to
be held; and the meeting for ministers and elders began soon after we came
there.

Here I was met by my dear mother and brother, to our mutual rejoicing; and my
heart was deeply affected with love and gratitude, under the consideration of
the many mercies extended to me; and strong desires were raised to be enabled
so to persevere, as to be favored with the continuance thereof.

We had a good meeting, and many Friends who attended it rejoiced to see me
returned in safety, and, after taking an affectionate leave of them, I went
home.

CHAP. VI.
I STAID but a few days with my relations, but set forward, with my dear
brother and the beforementioned Friends from Ireland, for the yearly meeting
at London. In our way thereto we met our friends Samuel Fothergill and Abraham
Farrington, unto whom I imparted my view of visiting Friends in Holland,
wherein they sympathized with me. At London I laid my concern before the
meeting for ministers and elders; and it met the approbation of my friends, and
a suitable companion was prepared for me by my good Master, namely, Sophia
Hume, of London.

It is worthy remarking, that when this journey was first presented to my mind,
this friend was pointed out as a companion therein; yet had I not freedom to
write, or say any thing to her thereupon until I had thus proposed it, for the
consideration of Friends; when I found that kind Providence had cared for me,
as she had for some time found her mind engaged to hold herself in readiness to
accompany some friend on a journey, though she knew not whom nor whereto, but
on my mentioning my concern, saw both. John Kendal, a Friend of Colchester, who
could speak Dutch, was engaged in love to accompany us. Thus does the Lord
mercifully provide all things necessary for such of his servants as are freely
given up to run on his errands, and move simply by his directions.

The yearly meeting at London was overshadowed with the wing of Divine love. I
had some satisfactory service therein; and on the 7th of the Sixth month I went
to Plaistow to visit my dear and ancient friend John Hayward; and here I parted
in much affection with my dear brother, and with Samuel and Ann Fothergill.

The 9th, I went to Chelmsford, where I staid until the 12th, being in want of
a little rest. Here my companion Sophia Hume came to me, and we went together,
with Abraham Farrington, to the beforementioned quarterly meetings held at
Colchester, Woodbridge, and Norwich; in all of which I was laboriously
exercised, and the hand of my heavenly Father was with me; through which I was
made strong in his cause, and I hope the meetings ended to the honor of his
worthy name. Under a sense thereof my spirit bowed in thankfulness to him who
clothes with strength for the battle, and by his own right arm gets himself the
victory: unto whose service may my soul be bound for ever!

We staid about three weeks in Norwich, in which city there is a large body of
Friends, unto whom a powerful visitation of Divine love had latterly been
extended; through the prevalence whereof diverse natural members, or branches of
our own society, had in a good degree submitted to the simplicity of the cross;
and others had been gathered to the immediate teachings of the Shepherd of
Israel from other religious societies. Several had appeared in public
testimony, for whom in an especial manner our spirits were exercised, that they
might honor God in their respective callings, by an exemplary conversation and
a living ministry. I had much service amongst them in the openings of Divine
wisdom and love, wherein some of the dangers which attended them were pointed
out. I was also concerned closely to reprove such as had sustained loss in the
Truth, by letting out their minds after terrestrial enjoyments, and were
seeking great things to themselves, whereby the Lord's work in them was marred.

From Norwich we went to Harwich, and on the 21st of the Seventh month, 1757,
accompanied by John Kendal, went on board the packet bound for Helvoetsluys,
where we landed the next day. There we took a carriage and went to the Briel, a
pretty large town; but I did not find that ever any of our society resided
therein, and the people seemed very ignorant respecting us: for as we walked
the streets, offense was taken at our friend John Kendal for not returning the
customary salutation of putting off the hat in the same manner.

My spirit was very low on my arrival in this country, on account of the
difficulty I labored under for want of knowing the language. Could either
myself or my companion have spoken Dutch, we might have explained to the man,
who was an officer in the army, our reasons for not returning his civility, for
such it appeared to be; and he was very much irritated at John Kendal's not
noting it as such.

From the Briel we went in a boat to Rotterdam, which is a large city, wherein
there was formerly a meeting of Friends, and where still remains a
meeting house, and there are a few who were educated among us; but they had so
little regard to the testimony of Truth and the welfare of their souls, as
entirely to neglect assembling to worship the Almighty; yet were not content to
profess with any other people. We had no inclination to call upon any of these;
but having information that the meeting house was under the care of persons who
were the descendants of friends, we called at their house, and desired that the
meeting house might be got in readiness for us to have a meeting there at our
return, which one of them promised it should be. He behaved civilly, but
appeared very distant from the profession of his ancestors. These persons were
great tradesmen, had become rich, and much in the grandeur of this world, and
were now of the society of the Menists or Baptists.

The next day we went in the trackscuyts, by way of Delft and Leyden (in
neither of which cities are any under our name), to Harlem, where lived the
person who used to interpret for Friends from England: upon whom we called, but
found him so enfeebled, as to be entirely unfit for that service. Here we were
met by Sophia Vander Werf and her son John, from Amsterdam. She was a woman of
a sweet natural disposition, came amongst Friends by convincement, and had
received a gift in the ministry, in the exercise of which I believe she was
acceptable to Friends. The young man had resided a considerable time in
England; he spoke English well for a Dutchman, and I looked toward him for an
interpreter; but although he appeared to have a sense of Truth, I feared his
being deep enough in the experimental work of it for that service: so I said
nothing to him, and proceeded to Amsterdam under some discouragement. In this
city a lodging was provided for us by Friends at the house of Abraham Herman,
which appeared the most suitable place for our reception of any belonging to
them. He with his wife received us kindly, and treated us so whilst we staid
with them. It was Seventh-day evening when we came to Amsterdam, and before
John Vander Werf left us, I asked him whether he was willing to assist us as an
interpreter; but he modestly declined, pleading his unfitness for the service.
John Kendal also refused, on account of his deficiency in the language to
interpret in a public meeting, although he could speak Dutch in the common
course of conversation. Under these discouraging circumstances I went to bed,
beseeching the Almighty to lay a concern upon some one to assist me. when I
rose in the morning, my spirit was low, yet not doubtful of my being right in
coming into this country. In this state I went to meeting without any
expectation of an interpreter being provided for me at that meeting; and
therefore rather expected to be silent therein. The meeting was pretty large,
but we were told, less than at some other times: for although there are but few
professing the Truth in this city, it is customary for people of all religious
societies, nations, and qualities, who come there on account of business or
pleasure, to go to our meetings, most of them doubtless from the motive of
curiosity; but the solidity of the countenance and demeanor of some present,
and the knowledge I afterward had of them, convinced me that they were
actuated by a better motive.

In the fore part of the meeting, my spirit was much exercised and broken under
the consideration of having no interpreter; yet supported in hope of the
provision of Providence: for it appeared to me inconsistent with Divine wisdom
and mercy to bring me hither, and not to open the way for me to convey his will
to the people. After some time a Dutch friend bore a short testimony; and soon
after he sat down, something arose in my mind, by way of information to the
people respecting our motives for coming amongst them; and I was quickly
favored with strength to stand up, intending to say that I had something to
communicate to them, which if any one present would interpret, I would impart,
but I was not obliged to proceed thus far, for upon seeing me rise, John Vander
Werf rose also, came and stood by me in the gallery, and interpreted what I
said to the present relief of my spirit, and the satisfaction of such friends
present as understood both Dutch and English.

I found it so difficult to convey the doctrines of Truth in this way to the
people, that it appeared almost impossible to get relief of mind, or liberty of
expression, to that degree I had sometimes been favored in my own tongue. I
spoke a sentence, and stopped for the interpreter to speak it after me; and I
was thankful that kind Providence had so far answered my belief of his
providing for me; and was comforted in the hope that his blessing, which alone
makes fruitful, might be dropped upon my weak endeavors for the exaltation of
his Truth. The meeting ended in solemn supplication, in which exercise I had no
interpreter, John Vander Werf being unwilling to undertake that awful service.
Some present might understand English well enough to comprehend what I said;
and others, I believe, were sensible of the Divine power which overshadowed the
meeting.

The afternoon meeting was neither so large, nor yet so satisfactory, as that
of the morning; which I thought might be occasioned by a fellow-minister
withholding what Divine wisdom required to distribute; whereby my service to
the people appeared to be impeded, and, the life of truth being low, I said but
little. I left the meeting under some discouragement, yet not without hope of
being more at liberty before I left the city.

We staid in and about Amsterdam till the 5th of the Eighth month, in all which
time we had no meeting but in the city; nor did it appear likely we should have
many elsewhere in the country, by reason of my interpreter being clerk to a
merchant, whose business did not admit of his being much absent, save on
First-days. In this time we had several pretty good opportunities with Friends
and the people; yet I seemed as an ambassador in bonds, but labored to be
content in the present dispensation. We were visited by several religious
people, with some of whom I felt a degree of union in the Truth; but saw their
loss in running after notions, and not settling in the ground of true silence,
wherein the mind becomes established in rectitude: and it appeared proper to
set them an example therein; and to be cautious of running into religious
discourse (to which they are much addicted), without feeling liberty for it in
the Truth. We visited a religious Menist, and had some satisfactory service in
his family. There are a number among that people who are near to Christ's
kingdom, though not fully redeemed from inefficacious ceremonies, and a
dependence on instrumental ministry, or at least a fondness for it.

The 5th of the Eighth month, we went in the trackscuyts, as far as Horn,
toward Twisk, our friend Sophia Vander Werf accompanying us. At Horn we called
on two religious Menists; the one a preacher amongst them, who seemed more
gathered into stillness than most of that persuasion, and his wife near the
Truth; the other much inclined to discourse on religious matters, in whose
family I found an engagement to leave a short testimony to the benefit of
silence, which they appeared to receive well. As we passed through the towns,
we scattered some books setting forth our principles. A friend from Twisk met
us here with a wagon, wherein we went home with him that evening.

At Twisk there is a small meeting of professors of Truth, but we found them
much in the mixture, and some of them so exalted in notion, that it was hard
fastening any solid doctrine upon them. We were at two meetings with them, and
several of the Menists; both of which were exercising, that in the morning
particularly so; but I was comforted with an evidence that my service, weak and
imperfect as it appeared to me, was accepted of Him who employed me. The
afternoon-meeting was more satisfactory, although laborious. The Menist
preacher beforementioned, with his wife and son, were with us, in whose
company we had a degree of satisfaction. The next morning we procured a select
opportunity with most of the friends belonging to the meeting, at the house of
a valuable woman friend, whose circumstances demanded our sympathy; she
dwelling solitarily and having been many years confined through extreme
weakness. She was such a pattern of resignation and cheerful innocence, as I
had rarely seen. Her very countenance bespoke acquiescence with the allotment
of Providence, and not one complaining word dropped from her. This meeting tended
to the relief of our spirits, and we took leave of the said friend and others
in love, and returned to Amsterdam, again dispersing some books in our way;
which was all we could do, as our interpreter could not stay with us to have
meetings in the towns.

On our return to Amsterdam, we visited almost all who could be accounted
members of our society, in their families, and attended the meetings on First
and weekdays, as they came in course, until the 21st: in which time I had
several good opportunities with the people of that city, and the strangers who
attended the meetings, and left it in peace.

One visit we paid in Amsterdam was so remarkable in its consequence, that I
note it, viz. A man who was convinced of Truth, had a turbulent spirited wife;
who had violently opposed his going amongst Friends; and after one meeting
which he attended with us, railed much; nevertheless, she sent us an invitation
to sup with her, and it appeared best for us to accept it. She provided
handsomely for us, but seemed to be in a wrangling spirit. She talked about
dress being an indifferent matter; upon which I told her, that the adorning of
Christian women, should be that of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight
of God was of great price. This struck and silenced her, and she afterward
behaved obligingly to us. After we had paid this visit, her husband told us,
that some time before, as they were going to bed, she, being in a very bad
temper, would not let him rest; and, although he was in bed before her, I think
he arose again. She took up the Bible, I suppose, to convince him of his
errors, and opened it upon this very text; which then so affected her, that she
condemned herself, kneeled down to pray for forgiveness, and promised that she
would never more treat him so improperly; but she had not kept her promise, and
the text being now revived in her remembrance, it again affected her. We were
quite ignorant of the circumstance.

The 21st, we had a meeting at Harlem to good satisfaction. We lodged at Isaac
Van Westercappel's, who furnished us with a room to hold a meeting in, and gave
notice of it to the people. He was descended from friends by the mother's side,
but he himself never made profession with us. He was exceedingly kind to us,
and, with his family, appeared to be seeking after the best things. In the
evening we had the company of some seeking people, most of them of the
offspring of friends, with whom we had conversation upon religious subjects.

In our public meeting at this place, I was more at liberty in the exercise of
my gift, than had been usual with me in Holland; at which I afterward admired,
being told that my interpreter was uncommonly defective in rendering what I
said into Dutch. This circumstance sometimes revolved in my remembrance,
accompanied with some kind of doubt respecting my being so much at liberty to
speak, when what I delivered was not well interpreted to the people; but after
some years, a friend of Norwich told me, that there was at that meeting a
sensible man, a Jew, who understood the English tongue well, who told him that
he had attended the meeting, and that my interpreter did not do me justice;
but, continued he, It was no matter, as all she said was directed to me: and my
friend added, that it so affected him, that he believed he would freely
interpret for me, should I ever want his assistance. This relation removed my
beforementioned doubt, for the word preached found its way to one mind, for
which in Divine wisdom it was appointed.

The 22d, we parted with my interpreter John Vander Werf for whom I was
concerned, and sympathised with him, as he was left almost alone (in regard to
Friends), and much exposed in the course of his business; and from the
affability and sprightliness of his disposition, he appeared to be in much
danger: but I conceived hope in the sense of the extendings of divine goodness
being singularly toward him. We also took leave of our kind host J. Van
Westercappel and several of his family and friends in love and tenderness, and
went to Rotterdam, whither his daughter Susanna Van Westercappel, a serious
agreeable young woman, and our friend Sophia Vander Werf accompanied us. In our
way, we distributed books to some people in the trackscuyts, and the same
evening had a meeting at Rotterdam with some people who understood English, of
which there are many in that place.

The 23d, our kind friends Sophia Vander Werf and Susanna Van Westercappel left
us, and we went to the Briel, and thence, the 24th, to Helvoetsluys. In our way
from Rotterdam to this place we met with several persons who were going to
England, with whom we had much discourse concerning our religious principles, I
believe measurably to our mutual satisfaction. One of them was a Swede, a
Lutheran by profession; he was favored with a good understanding, and had a
mind susceptible of religious impressions; although his conversation was not so
uniformly exemplary as could have been desired.

On coming to Helvoetsluys, we found that the wind was against our sailing for
England, and that the inn was full of company many of whom were waiting for
their passage to England: so the landlord put us in a house which was ready
furnished, and we became a family to ourselves, being furnished with provisions
from the inn. The wind continuing contrary until the First Day of the week, and
there being in the place many people of diverse nations and stations who could
speak English; with the concurrence and assistance of our landlord and company,
we got our dining room well seated; and on the First Day morning held a meeting
in it, whereto the strangers pretty generally came. I was favored to declare
the Truth amongst them, to the relief of my own spirit, and I believe to the
comfort and satisfaction of my companions; but the labor was hard, through the
unpreparedness of the hearts of some to receive, and perhaps the want of a
sufficient knowledge of the language in others, to understand, the doctrines
delivered.

The 29th in the evening, the wind turned in our favor, and continued so,
until about the middle of the next day; but our captain would not put to sea
without a pretty steady wind, because of the French privateers: however, we
went on board that day and set sail, and the wind being very boisterous our
jib-sail was soon rent; and another packet boat going out with us, struck upon
the Pales, broke a hole in her side, and, as the passengers said, was in danger
of being lost. The wind continuing to blow hard and contrary, we soon came to
an anchor, and the next morning returned back to Helvoetsluys; and the
following day, the 1st of the Ninth month, we were favored with a fair wind,
and arrived at Harwich the 2d, in peace and thankfulness to the Almighty. I had
to admire his goodness, in thus preserving and supporting my body and mind by
sea and land, and through all the exercises attendant on this journey, amongst
a people of a strange language.

Even our detention at Helvoetsluys appeared to be in the ordering of Divine
wisdom and mercy to the people there visited; and in our select company we had
frequent opportunities of conversing upon edifying subjects; some of our
companions seeming willing to gain information respecting Friends and their
principles. Once the subject of self-defence was started, which they might
probably think we could not invalidate; but we were enabled to give a reason
for dissenting from them in sentiment, and on its being queried what we would
do if attacked, and must either be killed, or kill. I said I could not say how
I should act at such a juncture, wherein nature might be improperly raised; but
that now being favored with the hope of my immortal spirit's centering safe,
and knowing that a person who sought my life must be in an unfit state to enter
Christ's holy kingdom, I should rather choose to die, than plunge that soul
into everlasting misery; and should have greatly the advantage in being
released from this state of trials. They heard with attention, and the Swede
with tears in his eyes, replied, These are indeed sublime sentiments.

We had been so long detained at Helvoetsluys, that our money grew short, but
the captain said we should have what we wanted from him; however, we had enough
to pay our passage, and bear our expenses (excepting the hire of our chaise) to
Colchester: which we reached almost pennyless the 3d, and were affectionately
received by John Kendal's mother, and other friends. Here I drew a bill, and
obtained money, and my companion, Sophia Hume, got enough to carry her to
London.

After a short stay at Colchester, I went with my companion Sophia Hume to
Kelvedon, where we were favored with a comfortable meeting with Friends, and
parting in much love, she went for London. She had been to me a steady,
affectionate, sympathising companion; and although in this journey, not much
engaged in public ministry, she was very helpful in meetings, through a deep
spiritual exercise; and being endowed with a good understanding, both naturally
and spiritually, she was qualified to give an answer of "her faith and the hope
that was in her:" and I was often thankful to the bounteous Author of all my
mercies, for furnishing me with so suitable a companion.

From Kelvedon, I went without any companion, through several meetings, to
Norwich, where I was favored in the service appointed me, but staid there only
a few days; proceeding thence, through some meetings in Lincolnshire, to the
quarterly meeting at York; where I again met with Abraham Farrington, who with
many more of my friends, rejoiced at my being returned to my native land in
peace and safety.

From York, I passed through several meetings in that county, wherein the Lord
was pleased to vary the dispensations of his wisdom, by dipping me into a state
of great suffering; which I could not get above, but which I saw to be good,
near the close of a journey wherein I had been so eminently favored; as it
tended to preserve me from clothing myself with the Lord's jewels, and humbled
my spirit to the very dust. From Yorkshire I went to Manchester and Warrington,
where I regained a little liberty in the Truth, and so proceeded to some
meetings in Cheshire; in one of which I thought I was raised higher, in the
Divine life, in the exercise of my gift, than I had been throughout the
journey. Thus does Divine wisdom abuse and exalt at his pleasure, unto whom be
glory, honor, and praise ascribed, now and for ever.

The 15th of the Tenth month, I got home, to the mutual satisfaction of myself
and relations; and, notwithstanding my great fatigue, in a rather better state
of health than when I left it; and found my dear and aged mother well: and here
I also met my dear friend Lucy Bradley, who was returning home from her visit
to Friends in Ireland, and our rejoicing one in another was mutual.

The 17th, we went together to our monthly meeting, wherein I gave to Friends
some account of my service and satisfaction in this journey; and my spirit was
much humbled in a sense of the providential care and abundant loving kindness
of a merciful God, variously displayed to this period of my life.

This winter I spent much about home, and amongst my relations: not in
idleness, for I was very closely engaged either in attending monthly or
quarterly meetings, or other services.

CHAP. VII.
THE 6th of the Fourth month, 1758, I left home, to attend the yearly meetings
of Wales, Bristol, and London; in all which, especially the two first, I was
Divinely favored; and returned home, in peace and thankfulness, in the Fifth
month.

Toward the fall of the year, I attended our circular yearly meeting held at
Kidderminster, which was large and very satisfactory. After this meeting, being
inclined to visit some provincial meetings, etc. in Ireland, I went with my
dear friend Samuel Fothergill to Warrington, and thence proceeded to Liverpool,
in order to take shipping for Dublin; but finding no vessel there ready to
sail, I sent to inquire whether any one was going from Parkgate; and the
messenger returning, said there was one, but that she would sail the next tide,
and that it was then too late to reach her. I was pretty earnest to try, but
some friends, who I thought were acquainted with the time of the tide's
turning, dissuaded me from attempting it. So I gave it up reluctantly, fearing
I should lose the opportunity of getting my passage in time for the meetings;
and I afterward heard that the tide did not turn till an hour after the time
they said it would; so had I gone, I might probably have reached the vessel in
time.

I waited at Liverpool more than a week, most of that time in almost constant
expectation of sailing, a vessel being soon ready to sail, but the wind was
contrary. At length I went on board, and we set sail with a fair wind, but it
quickly turned against us, and we lay all night at anchor in a small harbor
called Hoylake. The wind blew hard, and I esteemed it a singular favor that
our captain was persuaded to lay at anchor; for we might have been in imminent
danger of perishing among the sand-banks, had he stood out to sea; which I had
some reason to believe he would have done, had I not been on board; for I being
set to a day in getting to Dublin, in order to attend the province-meetings,
had requested him, if there were not a probability of our making our passage in
time, to set me on shore somewhere in Great Britain; which he promised to do if
he could. The vessel being small and very full of passengers, who in the night
crowded into the cabin, it was so extremely close, that I was much afflicted
both in body and mind: under which I sought for Divine direction respecting
proceeding forward in the vessel should the wind prove favorable in the
morning.

I thought I felt my mind turned to the shore, and released from the weight of
the journey, at least for the present; therefore when it was light, I desired
the captain to endeavor to put me on shore, and he accordingly hung out a flag
for a boat to come and take me; but none came, and as the wind was again
shifted in their favor, and it appeared hazardous to send the ship's boat with
me, lest she should not return time enough for her sailing, I feared I must
stay with them; but unexpectedly the captain offered the boat and men, provided
I would be left on the beach with my saddle and clothes, and let the men return
to the vessel immediately; to which I agreed, and left the vessel, under the
probability of her making her passage. A poor woman of Ireland who had no mind
to proceed in her, went on shore with me, who, with her little girl, carried my
saddle, etc. about half a mile, to a public house, where I breakfasted, and
got a man and horses to take me to Liverpool. I proceeded pensively, lest I
should have missed my way in leaving the vessel; yet I could commit my case to
the Lord, who knew I had acted in simplicity. In our way we saw the vessel
under sail, just turning out of the harbor on her course. When we reached
Liverpool I was much fatigued, and low both in body and mind, having slept
little in the night; but after some rest I attended the funeral of a child the
same evening, and in the meeting the Lord so favored, that my fears about
leaving the vessel in a great degree vanished. After meeting I found that the
wind was turned against her, and continued to blow very hard all that night;
and the next morning the vessel came back to Liverpool. I staid there the next
day, and then returned to Warrington, and was at the meetings at Penketh and
Warrington, the next day, and so proceeded home, taking in my way thither a
meeting at Nantwich. Although I had been thus disappointed, I had reason to
hope that my leaving home was not without some fruit to others as well as to
myself; so that my soul had cause to bless the sacred name of Him, who
sanctifies every trial to his children.

The day I staid at Liverpool, I penned the rough draught of an Epistle to
friends in Ireland, and after my return home transcribed and sent it.

My mind settled in quiet after this disappointment, but my body had suffered
so much, that a little rest seemed necessary to repair my health; and I
entertained a hope of being at and about home this winter; but Divine wisdom
pointed out work for me elsewhere, and my mind was resigned to follow his
directions. I left home in the Twelfth month, and went to the quarterly meeting
at Warwick, where through much painful labor of spirit, I was favored to
discharge the duty required of me, to the relief of my own spirit and the
satisfaction of experienced friends. From that place I went, through several
meetings in Oxfordshire and Northamptonshire, to the quarterly meeting at
Northampton; and, turning back to the monthly meeting at Banbury, visited some
other meetings in Oxfordshire, and attended the quarterly meeting held at
Oxford. In all these services the supporting protecting arm of Divine goodness
was near, whereby I was conducted in safety; though not without considerable
danger from the badness of the roads. I had one very dangerous fall from my
horse, but was mercifully preserved from any fracture.

The quarterly meeting at Oxford was attended by many of the students, who
mostly behaved well, although the doctrine of Truth ran very close and pointed
to them. That Divine power with which they were too much unacquainted, bound
down their spirits. May it be praised for ever.

From Oxford, I passed through several meetings wherein Truth favored, pretty
directly for London; where I staid about five weeks visiting the meetings of
Friends, and attending other services as I was favored with strength.
Sometimes, through a fear of exceeding, I apprehend I fell short of my
commission, and a degree of suffering followed; which was however less painful
to me, than what would have arisen from errors on the other hand. I labored
and suffered much in this city, and the state of my health was poor during my
stay in it; but through infinite mercy I left it in the enjoyment of a good
degree of peace, and returned home in the Second month, 1759, to the mutual
rejoicing of myself and friends. My friend Ann Fothergill and several others
accompanied me to some meetings in my way home, and took me in their carriages;
whose affectionate care in my weak state of health, I commemorate with
thankfulness to the everbounteous Author of all my mercies.

The day after I got home, my dear mother was taken ill, as was my brother a
few days after, and the state of my own health was weak, and some peculiar
exercises attended me. Some libertine spirits endeavored to invalidate my
character and service, for no other cause than what appeared to me to be my
duty. This was an extremely trying season, but I hope in the end it was
profitable, and tended to establish my mind in a patient suffering of reproach,
and to guard me with caution that I might not administer occasion for it to the
adversaries of Truth.

I attended to services about home, as liberty and strength were afforded, and
became better in my health: my mother also recovered bravely, but my brother
continued in a very weak state. In the Fourth month I was obliged to leave him,
and my dear mother, being drawn to attend the circular yearly meeting for the
four northern counties, which was this year held at Stockport in Cheshire. It
was very large, and signally attended with the humbling power of Truth; and the
Lord was pleased to make use of me and several other of his servants: for which
my soul worshipped before Him who humbles and exalts, and, in his
unsearchable wisdom, does all things well. I returned home, and found my dear
mother and brother much in the same state as I left them.

In the Fifth month I again left home, intending to attend our quarterly
meeting at Evesham, and so proceed to the yearly meeting at London. My brother
was so much recovered as to accompany me to the quarterly meeting, from whence
he intended to return home; but on our first day's journey he was taken very
ill. This brought a fresh exercise upon me, under which I petitioned the
Almighty that he would be pleased to direct me how to act for the relief of my
own mind, and the discharge of that duty which I owed to an affectionate
brother; on whose account I entreated, that if he might be relieved, the way
for it might be pointed out. Under this exercise I proceeded to Evesham, my
brother still accompanying me, though very weak. After the service of the
quarterly meeting was over, my way opened to Worcester; whereto my brother was
persuaded to accompany me, and to take the advice of a physician, who strongly
pressed his going to Bath. Upon considering the urgency of his case, some of my
friends with myself judged it best for him to proceed there directly, as
returning home first would but weaken him the more: so I wrote an account of
our determination to my dear mother and sister, who acquiesced therein. I also
informed my brother and sister Young of my afflicting situation, and requested
that one of them would accompany him; and Providence so ordered it, that my
sister came prepared for the journey the day after I sent for her. The next
day, being the First of the week, we were favored together by Divine goodness;
and the following morning we parted in much affection, and they proceeded to
Bath, and I was at liberty to pursue my journey. This had been to me an
extremely exercising season, from the great fear I was under of erring on
either hand; but I record it to the praise of Infinite goodness, who, in this
critical juncture, directed me to act for the help of my dear brother; unto
whom my endeavors were signally blessed with success, the Bath waters being
rendered serviceable to him.

From Worcester I went to Coventry; and in the way had a meeting at Henly in
Arden, Warwickshire, in which place Friends have a meeting house, but none of
our society remained. At Coventry, I met my friend Samuel Fothergill, who
having been long indisposed, I was rejoiced to see that it appeared likely he
would be again restored to the service of Truth. We went, together with many
friends from the North of England, direct to London: where I was favored with
strength to attend pretty closely to the service of the yearly meeting, and had
full satisfaction that I was there in the direction of Divine wisdom.

From London I went to the quarterly meeting at Colchester, and in my way there
attended the First Day meeting at Coggeshall, which was large, and favored
with the Divine presence.

I left Colchester before the concluding meeting, being pressed in my mind to
reach the quarterly meeting at Banbury in Oxfordshire, which, with very hard
traveling, I accomplished. I had some meetings in the way, and was comforted
in administering a little relief to some poor souls who appeared ready to faint
under their exercises. After the quarterly meeting at Banbury, I went to that
at Northampton, much in the cross to my own will, being very desirous to get
home, considering the state of our family, and that my own health was affected
with very hard traveling, ministerial labor, and exercise of mind. But I did
not lose my reward, for I was favored with strength sufficient for the service
required, went from Northampton in much peace and thankfulness, and reached
home in two days after: where I was gladly received by my dear aged mother and
sister, but my brother was not yet returned from Bath. In the last fifteen days
before I got home, I attended twenty-three meetings, besides other services,
and traveled on horseback.

The concern I had for Ireland reviving, I left home in the Eighth month, and
with very hard traveling was favored to visit most of the meetings in that
nation this fall, and returned to England soon after the half-year's meeting in
the Eleventh month. A religious young woman, Sarah Christie, not in the
ministry, accompanied me through the greatest part of the journey in Ireland. I
landed from Ireland at Whitehaven, and went through the meetings in some part
of Cumberland, the Bishopric of Durham, and the east side of Yorkshire; and
turned to the quarterly meeting for Westmoreland in the First month 1760. The
weather being extremely sharp this winter, and my health but poor through hard
traveling, and taking cold, I suffered much in body; but gracious Providence
supported and carried me through the service required, to the admiration of
myself and others. The weakness of my constitution appeared inadequate to so
great a fatigue; but I experienced that hand which employed me, to be strength
in weakness: salvation and power be ascribed thereto for ever!

In the beginning of the Fourth month my sister Ann was married to Thomas
Summerfield, of Bloxham, Oxfordshire; and my brother, who accompanied her to
her new habitation, returned home very ill; yet I could not be easy to omit the
attendance of the Welsh yearly meeting held this year at Oswestry, and my
sister Young kindly staid with him and my mother in my absence. The meeting was
very large; and I had good reason to believe I was there in the counsel of the
Almighty. I returned home in little more than a week, where I found my brother
yet unwell; nevertheless I thought it right to leave him again in a few days,
being engaged to attend the yearly meetings of Bristol and London: which I did,
taking some meetings in my way.

The yearly meeting at London was large and very satisfactory, except from some
disturbance which was given to Friends meetings by some disorderly persons not
in unity with them. My strength in the discharge of my duty was mercifully
renewed, and an enlargedness of heart experienced toward my brethren. I had
left home through much difficulty, but was thankful that I had pressed through
it; and on my return I had reason to believe that kind Providence had made up
the loss of my company to my mother and brother; for I found her cheerful, and
him in better health.

I came home in the Sixth month, and staid at or near it until the latter end
of the Eighth, laboring as I found ability in the service of Truth, and
endeavoring to discharge my duty in domestic cares: a greater weight whereof
than heretofore rested upon me since my sister's marriage; through which, and
my brother's continued indisposition, my way in leaving home was straitened;
yet I know not that any clear manifestation of duty was omitted; although
sometimes it was discharged with difficulty.

My brother being somewhat better, I left home in order to visit Friends
meetings in Derbyshire, some of the dales of Yorkshire, and part of Lancashire.
I was favored to accomplish this journey in forty-eight days, traveling in
that time about 700 miles, and attending fifty-two meetings, besides other
services, often in Friends' families, by which hard labor my spirits were much
exhausted, yet was not my health so impaired, but that I hoped with rest it
might be restored.

In this journey I had some satisfactory service among people not professing
with us; and some in towns where no meetings were held. At Bradford in
Lancashire, some unthinking people and children disturbed our meeting almost
through the whole time of our holding it; but some sober inquiring people
attended it, with whom we had reason to hope the testimony of Truth had place.
After the meeting we had a satisfactory opportunity with some of them at the
house of one that had lately joined Friends in that place. Some friends
accompanied me in this service, viz. Jonathan Rain and his wife, of Crawshay
Booth meeting, Matthew Meller of Manchester, and several others; from whom I
parted in gospel love.

On my return home the 16th of the Tenth month, I had the satisfaction to find
my dear mother well, and my brother better than he had been. The night before I
came there, I had a fall from my horse, but through mercy received no hurt.

The 17th of the Eleventh month, I set out to attend our quarterly meeting at
Worcester, which was large and mercifully favored with the Divine presence.
From thence I went to Leominster to visit my sister Young and her family; and
spent a few days with them and friends there profitably. In my way home,
accompanied with several friends from Leominster, I had a large meeting at
Ludlow, in which town there was only one that professed with us. Several sober
people were amongst those who attended this meeting; and Divine goodness was
pleased to favor with opening the Truths of the gospel unto them. I left the
town that night, at which I was not quite easy, not knowing but if I had staid,
some inquiring people might have sought an opportunity of conversation. I
returned home the 27th, and found my mother tolerably well, on whose account,
in this absence from her, I had been concerned, considering her advanced age.

In the Twelfth month, I went to the quarterly meeting at Warwick, and thence
to visit my sister in Oxfordshire; with whom I spent a few days, visited some
meetings in the neighborhood; and proceeded to Oxford. Many of the students
and others not professing with us, came to the meeting; toward whom Divine
Wisdom was pleased to manifest his regard, and some of them behaved soberly. It
was the time of the quarterly meeting. In my return home, I attended at Long
Compton the funeral of a religious young woman, with whom I had been
acquainted. It proved a strengthening season in Divine love, which freely
flowed toward the people.

From Long Compton I went to Chipping-Norton, Evesham, and Worcester, staid a
few days amongst Friends there, and returned home through Evesham and Alcester.

I staid about home until the 21st of the Third month, 1761, when I went to the
quarterly meeting at Birmingham; which was comfortable in a sense of the
continued regard of heaven; but sorrowful in the apparent declension of some
professing with us from the life of Truth.

From Birmingham I proceeded to the quarterly meeting for Nottinghamshire, held
at Mansfield, which was small, few friends residing in that county. I labored
among them in love, and with strong desires for their help; and left them in a
degree of peace, though not without a doubt of having been rather short in
discharging my duty.

From Mansfield, I went to Chesterfield, and had a meeting there, to which came
several from other meetings, and we were favored together in the Divine
presence. I then proceeded through some meetings in Yorkshire, wherein I was
strengthened to minister, I hope to the satisfaction and comfort of
honest-hearted friends, and to the relief of my own spirit. I came to Lancaster
the 9th of the Fourth month, in order to attend the quarterly meeting there.
Thus far on the journey I had traveled very hard, and the day before I came to
Lancaster, having met with a very dangerous fall from my horse, whereby I hurt
one of my arms, so that I was unable to help myself, and was otherwise hurt, it
was hard for me to travel; yet I was enabled to proceed forward the next
afternoon in a chaise to Kendal; and, having attended the quarterly meeting
there, proceeded to Appleby, to the yearly meeting for the four northern
counties, which began the 12th. I carried my arm in a sling, but in this time
of weakness kind Providence furnished me with a suitable companion to assist
me, viz. Christiana Hird of Yorkshire, of whose tender care, and affectionate
services, I retain a grateful sense.

The yearly meeting at Appleby was attended by many sober people from the
adjacent country, as well as by a large number of the inhabitants of the town;
and many of them were considerably affected by the testimony of Truth; whereto
they had been strangers, and many of them had imbibed disagreeable sentiments
respecting Friends and their principles; but the Lord was pleased so to
manifest his power amongst them, that their prejudices were removed, and a
confession obtained to the truths which were freely preached among them; and
Friends left the town rejoicing in the heavenly Father's love and goodness, in
thus favoring us, and exalting the testimony of Truth, in a place wherein some
of our worthy friends in the beginning of our being a people had suffered so
deeply. [See Friends Sufferings by Joseph Besse.] The 15th, Samuel Fothergill
and myself had a meeting at Kirby Steven, which was large and solid, many
seeking people around the country attending it; and the Lord was pleased to
cause the gospel trumpet to be sounded clearly and powerfully among them: glory
be to his Name for ever!

I went, accompanied by Christiana Hird, with the friends from Wenslydale into
that quarter; had a meeting at Haws, and the ensuing First Day attended the
general meeting at Aysgarth, which was very large. A light set of people
frequently attending on that time of the year: but the power of Truth was
measurably over their spirits, and I left the place in a good degree of peace.
I proceeded in visiting the meetings in this part of Yorkshire, and having a
view of going almost directly from that county, to the yearly meeting at
London, and being desirous of getting clear of as many meetings therein as I
could; I continued to travel hard among the dales. But, my strength being much
exhausted, and some painful effects of my late fall continuing, when I came to
the house of my friend William Hird, at Woodhouse (father to my kind
companion), I rested for a few days, and was treated with that tenderness which
the state of my health required. From hence, I went to Gildersome meeting,
where I parted from Christiana Hird, in love and sympathy; and went, through
several meetings in Yorkshire, to Nottingham. I staid at Nottingham over
First Day, and attended two meetings there. I was weak and much affected with a
hoarseness, yet had some service amongst Friends there, though not fully to the
relief of my mind.

I left Nottingham on the 2d day, and reached London the 7th of the Fifth
month. I was favored with a good degree of peace, and thankfulness to that
good Hand, which had hitherto conducted, and supported me in weakness.

The yearly meeting was large, and I hope profitable; although I did not think,
in the general, that instrumental ministry rose so high, as it had done in some
of those annual solemnities: but friends were comforted in the immediate sense
of the continuance of Divine favor, under which they separated; some perhaps,
to meet no more in time. Our friend Joseph White, from America, having paid a
religious visit to Friends in this nation, and being about to return home, had
a certificate from Friends at this meeting of their unity with his services
whilst here; and John Stephenson and Robert Proud being under an engagement of
mind to visit Friends on the continent of America, had certificates for that
end.

My spirit rejoiced that I was enabled to attend this meeting; and indeed I
have seldom or ever attended the yearly meetings in London, without peculiar
edification, although sometimes sufferings from various causes have fallen to
my lot: and I am persuaded that if Friends more generally gave themselves up to
attend that solemnity; and when there, abode under the seasoning virtue of
Truth, they would be better qualified to labor in their several stations and
places of residence: the weight of service devolving upon them there, would be
brought home with them, and a more fervent care would remain for maintaining
our Christian testimony in its various branches, and stretching the line of
discipline over such among us who walk disorderly.

The week after the yearly meeting I went to Plaistow, and rested a few days
with my friend John Hayward; and, being a little recruited, I proceeded, though
in diffidence and fear (being often low in body, as well as pressed with the
weight of the service appointed me), to the yearly meetings of Colchester,
Woodbridge, and Norwich: in all of which, through the strengthening hand of
Divine mercy, I had good service.

From Norwich I passed, through some meetings in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, to
the quarterly meeting at York, which was at this time attended by many friends
from the several quarters of it; and some friends under appointment from the
yearly meeting at London, to visit the monthly and quarterly meetings of
Friends, were there; and, I hope, were serviceable, in inquiring into the
general state of Friends, exciting them to various duties, and endeavoring to
strengthen the hedge of discipline.

From this meeting I proceeded, accompanied by Rachel Wilson and Margaret
Rain, to Leeds and Bradford, and so to a large general meeting held annually
in a barn at Bingley. It was in a good degree satisfactory, many gospel Truths
being opened to the people; who behaved soberly, and many of them seemed well
affected toward Friends. After this meeting I proceeded toward the quarterly
meeting at Lancaster, and from that place, accompanied by my friends Jonathan
Rain and wife and Alexander Parkinson, I went to Turton near Bolton, where
several young men and others were under convincement. Several friends met us
here, and we had a favored meeting with them and many of their neighbors;
rejoicing in the hope, that the Shepherd of Israel would gather to himself a
people in that country. There are none under our name near them, which rendered
the breaking forth of Truth amongst them a more signal instance of the
immediate efficacy of its Divine power. May they be preserved humble, and
dependent on that Hand, which alone can build up, and "establish on the most
holy faith."

From Turton I went with my friend Jonathan Rain and wife to their house near
Rossendale, and attended a large general meeting there the next day; and
proceeded to Manchester on Second-day, and had a meeting there that evening. On
Third-day, accompanied by two men friends, I traveled hard; and in the evening
we missed our way over a moor, which rendered it late in the night when we came
to John Draycoat's in Derbyshire. I had a fall from my mare, through her
missing her step upon a narrow causeway, but through mercy was preserved from
hurt. Next day I had a meeting at Furnace, and afterward rode to Burton upon
Trent, and the ensuing day to Polesworth, in order to attend the marriage of my
cousins John Wilkins and Elizabeth Lythall, which was solemnized at Badsley the
next day, and we were favored together with the Lord's presence: blessed be
his holy name! The next day, being the 20th of the Seventh month I reached
home, where I found my dear mother as well as could be expected for her age,
but my brother yet poorly. I had now at several times visited Friends in
Yorkshire pretty generally; and had considerable service amongst people not
professing with them. After this journey my mind settled in peace and
thankfulness, having to look back upon it with deep gratitude to the Divine
hand, whereby I had been conducted, supported, and encouraged to press forward,
although under considerable bodily weakness, and some fears on account of the
situation of my dear mother, etc. But as my eye was preserved single to the
Lord's service, he cared for those I had left for his name's sake, and brought
me home in a better state of health than I had left it, notwithstanding I had
traveled and labored exceedingly hard; having in fifteen weeks attended 117
meetings, and traveled about 1230 miles; nearly the whole on horseback.

The beginning of the Eighth month, I attended the Circular yearly meeting,
which was held at Bromyard in Herefordshire. It was not so large, either of
Friends or people of other societies, as of late years had been usual, nor did
the life of Truth in the ministry rise to the height I have known it; yet, upon
the whole, Friends had cause to be thankful for the opportunity.

From this meeting I went to spend a day or two with my dear sister Young at
Leominster, which I esteemed a great favor, as it was the last time we spent
together, except near her last moments. She was seized in the Tenth month
following with an indisposition, which terminated in a violent inflammatory
fever. Her husband was then in the west of England, in company with some
friends, on a religious visit to the monthly and quarterly meetings of Friends
in that part of the nation. A messenger being sent to inform us of her illness,
I went to her; and was favored to find her so sensible as to inform me that
she was very easy in mind: soon after which she grew delirious, and her senses
were never more quite clear; yet she once intimated that she was quiet, and
hoped she had a quiet habitation.

She was a truly valuable woman, and doubtless her spirit entered into rest.
She died at the age of forty-five, after a life attended with various trials.
The loss to her family, her other relations, friends, and neighbors, was
great; and the sorrow for it amongst all who were acquainted with her was
general: yet under a sense that our loss was her great gain, it was mixed with
joy in the hearts of her nearest relations and friends.

She left three children, and her sorrowful and very affectionate husband; who,
after he had information of her dangerous state, traveled hard to get home,
but did not reach it until after her corpse was interred. My brother staid at
Leominster until he came thither, and I returned home to my dear mother, and my
sister's eldest daughter, who was then at Dudley, a thoughtful child of about
eleven years of age, who had a very great affection for her mother. I found
them full as well as I expected, considering my mother's great love for my
sister, who had been an extraordinary child to her; steadily sympathizing with,
and assisting her in her afflictions, when she had no other child that was so
capable of doing it. But she was favored with signal resignation to the Divine
will, which is doubtless right in taking away, as well as in giving.

My spirits had been supported beyond my expectation through this trial,
although my health appeared shaken by the fatigue attending it; yet in less
than two weeks, I set out for Bloxham to attend my sister Summerfield, who was
now my only surviving sister. I attended Warwick meeting in my way; and in the
evening appointed one for the neighbors, which was large, and crowned with
Divine life and power, for which I was truly thankful. After about two weeks
stay I went for London, having before I left home a certificate to visit
Friends in that city. I had several meetings in my way thither amongst people
not professing with us, to satisfaction.

I staid rather more than a month in London, and through diligent labor, and
considerable travail of spirit, left it easy in mind, and returned home by my
sister's.

The day I left her house the wind was very high. I rode double, and when we
came to the high uninclosed field-lands, nearly upon a level with the summit of
Edge hill, it was so extremely boisterous, that myself and the man who rode
before me, concluded it safest to alight; which we did, under shelter of a
short thorn-hedge, probably planted to afford shelter to sheep. We saw a
village, but had to cross the field to it. The man held the horse by one hand,
and I held by his other arm; but the wind was so violently strong, that he
rather dragged than led me, for I stooped very low, being unable to stand
against it. I think it rained also while we crossed the field. We got to a poor
house of entertainment, the covering of a building belonging to which was
stripped off a little before we came; and we staid in it, not without fear,
until the violence of the wind abated; which it did in the afternoon, and we
reached Eatington the same night. I think this was the wind of which it was
said, that none had been so high since Eddystone light-house was blown down;
and our getting through it without hurt appeared providential. It was a
hurricane in the morning, yet it was tolerably calm in the evening.

I got home the 15th of the First month, 1762, in a better state of health than
I left it, and was comforted to find our family tolerably well; and I had great
cause for thankfulness, for the many mercies and preservations vouchsafed in
this journey.

In the spring of this year I attended the northern and Welsh yearly meetings;
the first held at Bolton in Lancashire, and that for Wales at Bala in
Merionethshire. That at Bolton was very large, and attended by many valuable
ministers and friends, and a great number of sober inquiring people of other
societies; amongst whom the gospel-trumpet was sounded in Divine authority, to
the comfort of faithful friends, and, I hope, to the instruction and awakening
of many souls. In my way from Bolton to Bala, in company with my friend Samuel
Fothergill, I attended the meeting at Chester on the First Day morning; whereto
many soberly behaved people of the town came, and we were favored with a
comfortable tendering opportunity together. From Chester we proceeded to Bala,
in company with Isabella Middleton, a ministering friend from Ireland, and
overtook Rachel Wilson and Christiana Hird, before we got thither.

The meeting at Bala was large, considering the part of the country it was held
in: the people behaved soberly, and many of them were affected by the
heart-tendering power of Truth. We had a comfortable opportunity with a few
that came in love to bid us farewell; and left the place, in full assurance of
the extendings of Divine love to the inhabitants of this poor part of the
nation, and thankfulness that we were accounted worthy to preach the gospel to
them. I returned home by Coalbrookdale, and on the First Day was at a very
large meeting at the New Dale, wherein the Lord's power was exalted: blessed be
his name for ever!

I reached home the 4th of the Fifth month, and found my mother and brother
well as usual, but my brother Henry (my father's son by a former wife) unwell,
with a disorder in his right leg; which terminated in a mortification, and in
something more than eight weeks his leg was taken off. Our affliction through
this circumstance was considerable; for besides the care for his natural life,
which was imminently in danger, our concern for his immortal soul was great.
For having addicted himself to pleasure and to the gratification of his natural
appetites, he had lost the simplicity of his education; and, because he would
indulge himself in liberties which he knew were inconsistent with the
profession of Truth, he threw it off; saying, he would not retain the name and
be a reproach to the people. He sometimes went to the church of England, not,
as he said, from principle, but because he would go somewhere. When a youth, he
was much humbled under the visitation of Divine love; but when he arrived to
mature age, he was drawn aside by vain company.

In this affliction he was favored with a renewed visitation of heavenly
favor; under which he lamented his loss and fall, and remarked that it had
been through keeping company, and not that which is accounted the worst of
company neither. He had a long time allowed him to repent, and in the fore part
of his illness was penitent and much exercised in mind; but being flattered
with the hopes of life after his leg was cut off, his thoughts appeared then to
be too much occupied with its prospects, although not without some proposition
of a reformation of conduct, if his health should be restored.

In this situation I was obliged to leave him, being engaged to attend the
Circular yearly meeting, which was held this year at Exeter. My sister supplied
my place in the family, and I went pretty directly to it, attending the
quarterly meeting at Gloucester, and two other meetings, in my way, the Lord's
power accompanying me.

The meeting at Exeter was much less than some of the like kind had been; but
was attended by some sober people, and by some high professors of religion,
whose foundations were struck at in the power of Truth, the testimony whereof
was measurably exalted. The state of the members of our own society was
ministered to; in some instances it was lamentable, and tended greatly to
lessen the weight of the testimony of Truth, which had been at this time borne
in the demonstration of its own spirit.

I proceeded from Exeter to the quarterly meeting in Somersetshire, which was
eminently crowned with Divine favor; and I parted from Friends there in the
comfortable sense of gospel fellowship, and returned to Bristol, having several
large and satisfactory meetings in the way thither.

I spent a few days in Bristol, I hope profitably, having a renewed cause to
believe that the Divine life was revived in some in that city, although too
many had fallen asleep as in the lap of this world.

From Bristol I went to the quarterly meeting for Herefordshire, held at Ross,
and so to Leominster; where I spent more than a week in my brother Young's
family, not idly, but caring for it; and returned home to the mutual
satisfaction of myself and my relations there.

I found my dear mother and brother tolerably well, and my poor brother Henry
appeared in some respects better, yet at times so languid, that I doubted his
continuing long in time. My fears proved well founded, for his deplorable
disorder seized his other foot, and on the 15th of the Twelfth month, 1762, he
died; having endured a long scene of inexpressible pain and affliction.
Agreeably to his own desire, his corpse was interred in Friends' burying ground.
He was endowed with a good understanding and an engaging natural disposition,
and his person and manners were superior to many. He was in his fifty-seventh
year.

I think it worthy commemoration, that some time before he was seized with the
disorder which terminated his life, I had been earnestly solicitous that the
Lord would bring him to a sense of his apostatized state before he was taken
out of time; and constrain him to condemn that libertine spirit wherein he had
so long indulged; that his associates might not have cause so to triumph as to
invalidate the Christian testimonies. These my desires were signally answered.

CHAP. VIII.
FROM the occurrences related in the close of the foregoing Chapter, until
after I entered into a marriage state, I made no minutes of my religious
labors, although I was as constantly engaged as heretofore, in attending
yearly and quarterly meetings, etc. in diverse parts of the nation, visiting
particular meetings of Friends, as well as appointing some for people of other
societies; and in the winters, I mostly spent some time in London. Yet so few
remarkable incidents occurred, that, my movements appeared scarcely worth
noting; except that the Lord's hand was revealed for my help and preservation,
through which I was enabled to sustain almost uninterrupted, though varied,
fatigue and exercise, both of body and mind. After my sister Ann's marriage, a
load of domestic concerns devolved upon me. Through my mother's very great
age, and my brother's frequent indisposition, my times of respite from
traveling and gospel-labours were far from being seasons of rest. A short time
before I married, my left elbow was dislocated by a fall down stairs, and
reduced with considerable difficulty. As that joint from my infancy had been
weak, and had several times been hurt by falls from my horse, as is before
related, it became from this time so weak, as to render my riding single
improper, and riding double was rather dangerous, as I could not help myself on
horseback without my arm; I had therefore cause to be thankful that my
expected new station would furnish me with a chaise.

For the fulfilling of every purpose of Divine wisdom there is a particular
season; and although I married rather late in life, the connection from its
beginning was attended with such singular circumstances, as marked its being
superior to nature, although nature had its share in it; and the restrictions
laid upon my mind, and that of my beloved husband, were too remarkable to be
omitted in the memoirs of the signally providential occurrences of my life.

I have already noted the meeting with William Phillips in 1749, at Swansea,
(see page 24). Before that time we were entire strangers to each other, I do
not recollect that I had ever heard of him. My mind had been, and was under
strong restrictions in regard to entering into the marriage state, should I be
solicited thereto; for as it appeared that for a series of years I should be
much engaged in traveling for the service of Truth, I feared to indulge
thoughts of forming a connection, which, from its encumbrances, might tend to
frustrate the intention of Divine wisdom respecting me. This caution tended to
keep me reserved in my conduct, toward such as might be likely to entertain
views beyond friendship, in their acquaintance with me; and my mind, to the
time of our meeting, had been so preserved, as never to admit the least
impression of affection beyond that sine, with any one.

William Phillips was then a widower, and had two young children. His worldly
circumstances I was unacquainted with, further than that I then learned the
place of his residence, and somewhat of his business, which was, in part, that
of an agent to a copper-company. He was considerably older than myself. So that
none of these circumstances could of themselves make a connection with him
desirable. For as to his employ, which might seem the least exceptionable, it
was less pleasing to me than would have been his being his own free man. It was
therefore improbable that temporal considerations should bias my mind in his
favor; and as to his religious experience, it appeared to be but in its
infancy. He had indeed, a frank and open disposition, which, joined to a good
understanding, rendered his conversation agreeable; but I had but little
opportunity to judge of this, before it appeared that perhaps we might one day
unite in the marriage covenant.

Upon observing him strictly, I had the satisfaction to see that his mind was
susceptible of the best impressions, and bending out of the world, wherein, in
some parts of his conduct, he had taken too great a part. His behavior to me
was prudently restricted, though he afterward confessed that his mind was
affectionately disposed toward me. We were favored together, especially in
one meeting, with the uniting influence of Divine love, but parted merely as
common friends. Very soon after, a circumstance happened, which, without the
least design on either side, necessarily introduced a correspondence by letters
between us; and we exchanged several in restricted terms, suited to our
situations.

In my next journey to the western counties, I had meetings in some towns where
none were established, particularly at Redruth and Truro in Cornwall, at both
of which William Phillips was very serviceable; and his spirit being dipped
into sympathy with me in my service, and mine, with him under his religious
exercises, it tended to strengthen the regard we had for each other; yet such
was the restriction we were preserved under, that no sentiment transpired, nor
was there any, the least part of his conduct, more than was consistent with a
distinguished friendship: and thus we again parted, and continued our religious
correspondence. But my mind becoming doubtful whether I had such an evidence
that our intimacy would ever rise higher than friendship, as to warrant my
retaining the prospect of it; and ruminating upon the injurious consequences
which might ensue to us both, should our affections be engaged contrary to the
Divine will; and that, perhaps, the continuing an intimacy with me might
prevent his mind from settling upon some other person, who might be a suitable
companion for him through life; and seeing clearly, that my religious prospects
would not for a long time admit of my changing my situation; I concluded it
safest to relinquish our correspondence, and to leave the event of the
foundation of affection which was laid, to future time: hoping, that if Divine
wisdom designed a nearer union betwixt us, he would prepare my friend to be a
suitable helpmate for me. My fear of erring on this occasion was proportioned
to that superior love, which bound me to the service appointed me; in the
pursuit whereof, I was desirous to relinquish every prospect and connection
which might retard my fulfilling it: and I continued closely engaged in it for
many years, and kept an entire distance from my friend.

In this time our minds became so released from each other, as to be at liberty
to entertain other prospects of marriage; and but for the interposition of a
watchful Providence, we might each of us have been engaged to our hurt. But
however promising the prospect might be to my mind, I never was favored with
true peace, in looking to a marriage connection with any other; and as to my
friend, although he had entirely lost the hope of a nearer union with me,
however thoughtful he might be respecting its being convenient for him to
change his situation, he did not find freedom to propose it to any other woman.
Thus we continued separated, and separately exercised; I in close application
to public service; and he in his worldly engagements, and under various
temptations and conflicts, inwardly and outwardly, which called for the
sympathy of a friend; when none was afforded, save that of the never-failing
Helper, by whose hand his head was sustained, and he witnessed preservation
even as from the paw of the lion and bear.

In the year 1766, I attended the Circular meeting, and visited most of the
meetings of Friends in Cornwall. Previously to my taking that journey, I had an
intimation in my mind, which seemed to point toward a revival of our intimacy.
This happened at a time when I was quite free from impressions of natural
affection toward W. Phillips; for I was deeply engaged in thoughtfulness
respecting another friend, and humbly and earnestly desirous to be informed
whether I might safely remove to the place of his residence.

Under this exercise, my mind was turned with uncommon force to Cornwall; and
the name of the place where W. Phillips resided was revived with such strength,
that it was as if vocally spoken in my soul. At the same time I was favored
with the sweet sensation of Divine love and life. And although the removing to
this poor county afforded no pleasing view, I was willing to submit, if Divine
wisdom appointed it; but as to W. Phillips, I doubted his having advanced in
religion, so as to render a nearer union with him safe; but I could only judge
superficially, the exercised state of his mind being hid from me.

Hannah Shipley, of Uttoxeter in Staffordshire, was my companion in this
journey, whose affectionate attention to me, I remember with gratitude: her
service also in the ministry was acceptable to friends.

When we came into Cornwall, I was cautious of giving heed to the
beforementioned intimation; and when I met W. Phillips, was desirous to be
favored with a sense of the state of his spirit; and was thankful to find it
bending toward the spring of Divine life, beyond my expectation. We were
frequently together, while I was in the county; but never alone, so as at all
to enter into conversation on the subject of our former correspondence, except
when riding on the high road; when, one day, he mentioned the trial it was to
him that I should so abruptly drop it; and said he had cautiously avoided a
conduct which might give me umbrage; and added, that he had never admitted a
sentiment of displeasure at me on the occasion, as he concluded that I had some
reason for so doing, which was of sufficient weight to myself: but if my being
in a single station were the cause, I needed not to have feared him, for
although he loved me, hitherto his mind had been under a restriction from
endeavoring to pass the bounds of friendship. This was saying more than he had
ever done before; but during his being with me in this journey, his behavior
was strictly consistent with friendship only.

One circumstance I think worthy of relating, as it discovered both his
sympathy with my religious engagements, and how Divine wisdom works to the
effecting his own purposes. After I left Plymouth, in my way into Cornwall, it
appeared that I should have a meeting at Plymouth Dock in my return. This I
intimated to a friend of Plymouth then with me, and desired him to inquire
whether a proper place could be procured. This friend, and another from
Plymouth, met me at the Circular yearly meeting, which was held at Bodmin, at
which also was W. Phillips.

They gave me no encouragement of getting a meeting at Dock; indeed it was
looked upon improbable that a place large enough for the people could be
procured there; so they proposed that a meeting should be appointed at Friends
meeting house at Plymouth, and that the people of Dock should be invited
thereto. This did not seem to promise relief to my mind; for besides the Dock's
being three miles distant, the house might probably have been too small for the
Plymouth people and them. My concern for the Dock continued, but I said little
about it, except hinting it to my brother, who, with diverse friends out of
Worcestershire was at Bodmin. In the night before I left that place it pressed
weightily upon my mind; but I could see no way to obtain a meeting, unless W.
Phillips would accompany me; who I knew had resolution enough to assist in the
undertaking. He designed going homeward the next day, and I was reluctant to
propose his going with us to Plymouth; but desired, if my exercise for Dock was
from the Lord, and it was right for him to assist me therein, that it might be
impressed on his mind to go. After this, my spirit was relieved, and in the
morning I heard W. Phillips say to the friends, I must go to Plymouth, giving
as a reason, that he had an uncle there who was unwell. He afterward told me,
this was the only reason he could assign for his mind being forcibly drawn to
Plymouth, which it was before he arose; and when at breakfast he heard me
inquiring whether a place could be procured at Dock to hold a meeting, he saw
the cause of his being drawn to Plymouth, and immediately replied, There is no
doubt of it. In our way to Plymouth, we had a large satisfactory meeting in the
market-house at Liskeard. At Dock, my brother, friends from Worcestershire, and
W. Phillips, obtained a large school-room; which opened into a square. A window
was taken out, and I stood in that, so as to speak to the people without; and
the house being full within, I believe all might hear, though there was a great
concourse of people. It was a favored opportunity, at which the friends who
accompanied me for the promoting of it were very serviceable; but had not W.
Phillips assisted them, it did not appear probable that so large a meeting
would have been procured, and held so quietly: he was peculiarly fitted for
such services.

After my return home, our correspondence by letter revived; but although it
soon passed the bounds of mere friendship, our minds were clothed with awful
caution of stepping forward without Divine direction. For some years we saw
each other but seldom, and that only as we met in the course of my service; and
notwithstanding a nearer union was from time to time pointed out, yet our way
not opening clearly to the accomplishment of it, we did not marry until the
15th of Seventh month, 1772; when, in a large and solemn meeting held at
Bewdley, we took each other in the real fear of the Lord, and therein had a
strong evidence of his favor. Many of my friends from the adjacent meetings
met us upon the occasion; unto whom my spirit was drawn forth in the best love;
wherein, after we had taken each other in marriage, I was led to advise,
caution, and encourage them.

The parting from my dear mother had been an affecting circumstance, but it was
a great satisfaction to me, that, although her faculties were breaking, she was
sensible I was removed from her in Divine wisdom. The morning I left her, she
took a quiet steady farewell of me, and told me she was satisfied Providence had
provided for me, unto whose will she was resigned. As my brother proposed
accompanying me home, my sister Sommerfield staid with our mother in his
absence.

After our marriage at Bewdley, we proceeded on our way to my brother Young's
at Leominster, where we staid some days, and then went to Swansea, my brother,
and niece A. Young, accompanying us. In our way to Swansea, we had a meeting at
Hereford, and another near Talgarth in Wales, where the Countess of Huntingdon
had established a college for the education of young men for the ministry. Some
of them came to the meeting, and several behaved rather lightly; but one sought
an opportunity with us afterward, and freely expressed his uneasiness in his
present situation, and desired to get amongst Friends. He requested my
husband's assistance to procure him a suitable place; but though one pretty
soon offered, and he was informed of it, he declined accepting it. Many are
shaken by the power of Truth, but few are steadily concerned to build upon its
foundation: and therefore it may with sorrow be said, "Many are called, but few
chosen." We had also a meeting at Llandilo, which, though not very large, was
satisfactory.

We staid at Swansea some weeks, the wind being contrary for our going down the
Channel. During our stay there, the First and weekday meetings were mostly
large and favored. A particular visitation of Truth was extended to some who
had gone out from Friends by marriage and otherwise, who were affectionately
entreated, and warned of their danger in trifling with the day of their
visitation, which was hastening fast to a conclusion. Several of these were
much affected, and two of them soon finished their course. I have admired the
mercy of God, even to the backsliders and revolters from us; from few of whom
the witness of Truth is so withdrawn, but that they will confess to it; and
many to the latter stage of life are followed with close convictions, and
tender calls to return to the heavenly Father's house, and yet continue in a
country far remote from it: having so connected themselves with those who are
in the spirit of this world, as to conclude it impossible to break loose from
them. But, although through inattention to the holy principle of light and
grace, they may have rendered their way very difficult, and mingled for
themselves a bitter cup; yet if they would attend to that Divine love which
draws them, they would experience its power to release their spirits from the
power of Satan, and bring them into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

I visited the families of those professing Truth in Swansea; but the time for
holding the Circular meeting for the western counties approaching, and it being
to be held this year in Cornwall, my husband was earnest to get home. Another
meeting, also, which was usually very large, held annually near his habitation,
engaged our attention; therefore, the wind not serving for us to go to
Cornwall, we crossed the Channel to lifracomb in Devonshire, and through Divine
favor landed safe, though not without some danger; and proceeded directly home
to Redruth. The First Day after we reached it, we attended the beforementioned
meeting at Key, at which it was supposed there were 1500 people: it was held
without doors, and was a favored opportunity. The next week came on the
Circular yearly meeting, which was held at Helston, was extremely large, and
well attended by friends; and in diverse meetings the testimony of Truth was
exalted through several of the Lord's chosen servants. I was largely and
livingly opened in his service, by him who alone can qualify for it: to whom I
ever desire to ascribe the praise.

For some time after I came home, a pretty many serious people attended our
meetings, and doctrine suitable to their states was opened; but most of them
were too much under the influence of human teachers to receive the Truth in its
simplicity, and walk by its light. I quickly found a concern to appoint a
meeting at the place called St. Agnes, a town on the north sea coast. Near this
place the people were addicted to the barbarous custom of plundering vessels
wrecked upon the coast. Abundance of people collected, so that we were obliged
to hold the meeting in the street, which was a remarkably quiet solemn
opportunity. Many of the wreckers were supposed to be present, and I had to
reprove the practice very closely; which might be supposed to have present
effect, for the people exerted themselves to save the cargo of the next vessel
that was wrecked.

In a few weeks after the Circular meeting, I went to the quarterly meeting for
Devonshire, held at Kingsbridge, and thence took a turn into the north of the
county, accompanied by William Cookworthy and several other friends. We
appointed meetings in several places where none were settled, in all of which,
except at Great Torrington, we had good satisfaction; and there we had reason
to conclude that we appointed the meeting at too late an hour, through
condescension to some who expressed a desire to attend it, and could not come
sooner. It was First Day, and the evening coming on, a crowd of disorderly
people impeded the service; and my mind was the more pained, because an earlier
hour had been pointed to me for holding the meeting. We had a good meeting in
the town hall at Launceston, after which William Cookworthy went homewards, and
I to Wadebridge. I had a meeting there to satisfaction, and returned home,
under the persuasion of having been engaged in the discharge of my duty, and
assisted by Divine grace in the performance thereof.

I staid at and about home until near the time of the yearly meeting at
Bristol, 1773, which I attended; and thence, accompanied by my dear friend
Lydia Hawksworth, went to that in London. We visited the meeting of Friends in
Hampshire in our way, and I returned into Cornwall to our quarterly meeting
held at Looe in the Seventh month; where my husband met me, and we went
together to that for Devonshire, held at Plymouth.

The annual meeting at Key was this year large and satisfactory; after which I
went to visit my aged parent and other relations, and attend the Circular
yearly meeting at Gloucester. I visited the meetings of Friends, as I went
along, who were truly glad to see me, and we were favored together with the
sweet influence of Divine love and life. The Circular yearly meeting was very
large both of Friends and other professors of religion, and was much favored
through the ministry. The select meeting for Friends was a memorable
opportunity. Plentiful are the showers of gospel rain which often fall upon
these occasions; but in regard to many minds visited, it is like water spilled
upon a stone, which, though it wet its surface, does not change its nature; but
in others, I hope it is like "Bread cast upon the waters," a very unstable
element, yet it "may return after many days!"

From this meeting I returned home with my friend Sarah Tregelles. In my way I
had two large meetings at South Molton to good satisfaction. There are none
professing with us in that town; but some friends from Exeter accompanied us,
and others under convincement from the north of Devonshire met us here. I
returned home to our quarterly meeting at Penzance, and was thankfully received
by my dear husband, whose great affection rendered it hard for him to be so
frequently separated from me, but in resignation to the Divine will he was
favored with peace.

In the First month 1774, I had a satisfactory meeting at Helston, in the
town hall. The weather was wet, and the seat whereon I sat was very damp, but
on the evening after the meeting I did not find I had taken any cold. Next
morning I was well as usual, but suddenly, I found myself much indisposed, and
was seized with convulsions in my head. This alarmed my husband, who called
upon an apothecary, and I quickly got better, and we went home, where the
disorder returned. In a few days however I appeared to be much better, but I
quickly relapsed; and in a few weeks was reduced to a state of extreme
weakness. My affliction in this time of indisposition was very great, but I was
preserved in patience, and when I revived a little, wrote as follows.

'I am now reviving from bodily weakness. O! that it may be with renewed
strength to serve the bounteous Author of my being and blessings, who brings
low and raises up in his wisdom and mercy. He knows when afflictions are
needful to his servants; and in this season of weakness, my soul has thankfully
acknowledged his tender care, to prevent my spirit's settling with too great
attention on the things which are seen, and which are temporal. We often want
to be awakened to seek with greater earnestness those things which are eternal,
viz. Righteousness, and its consequence, Divine favor; by being put in
remembrance, that the time of our departure hence may be at hand. "Blessed"
indeed is that servant who, when his Lord comes and calls from works to
rewards "he shall find watching:" and what great need is there to watch against
the encroaching spirit of this world; whereby many quickened, enlightened minds
have been benumbed and darkened; and their desires after the food which
nourishes up the soul unto everlasting life, weakened; until at length they
have left the Lord's table, and fed with pleasure at the table of idols! The
friendships of this world, which are enmity with God, have been delighted and
gloried in, and its interests principally sought.

These, though they may appear orderly in the view of men, are in danger of
becoming as "trees twice dead;" they having been dead in a state of nature, and
quickened by Divine grace. If these totally fall away from their spiritual
exercise, how shall they be again renewed? Alas! the judgment is determined;
they must be plucked out of the Lord's plantation, wherein only living
fruit-bearing trees can remain with acceptance.'

'In this time of weakness my spirit has been renewedly visited, and my
understanding opened in Divine love and light: and therefore it rests with me
to commemorate it, as a fresh instance of the love of my heavenly Father; who,
in all the dispensations of his wisdom to his children, seeks their being
perfected in righteousness; that he may more and more bless them with his
favor whilst here, and finally receive them into everlasting mansions of
bliss.'

But although I grew so much better as to get about in the spring, my
constitution still labored under a heavy load, without hope of being entirely
relieved; and I was therefore frequently led to pray for patience and
resignation to suffer in the way Divine wisdom might permit; and, under great
weakness, was enabled in a degree to come up in the service appointed me, in
our little meeting and about home. I was reduced so extremely low by this
indisposition, as to be doubtful, whether I could have survived it, had I not
been removed from my mother's family; as in that, considering her situation,
and my brother's, it was unlikely I should have been so released from care, and
so tenderly and affectionately attended to, as by my dear husband, and the
assistance he procured for me.

In the Seventh month I left home in order to attend the Circular yearly
meeting and once more visit my aged and honorable parent, who had several
times expressed a desire to see me. My husband accompanied me to Torrington,
where we had a meeting of friends scattered round in that neighborhood. From
Torrington he went to Appledore, and crossed the Channel into Wales, and I
proceeded to Bristol; where, and in its neighborhood, I staid until my
husband's business admitted his coming to me; and thence we proceeded to
Dudley, visiting the meetings of Stourbridge and Worcester in our way. I found
my dear mother extremely weak, and her faculties so impaired that she did not
know me; yet I thought she was sensible I was one for whom she had a great
affection; and after seeing me several times she recollected me, and was much
pleased with my company. After I had taken my leave of her, she said, 'Now I
shall not be here long;' and so it proved, for she died in the following
winter. [See a more particular account of her in the former part of these
memoirs.]

From Dudley we proceeded to the Circular yearly meeting held at Kington,
Herefordshire, which, considering the country not being so populous as some
others, and but few friends in the neighborhood, was large, and for the most
part satisfactory. I still continued in a weak state, yet was enabled to take a
share in the service, Divine mercy strengthening beyond my expectation. After
this meeting we went to Bath, Dr. Fothergill having advised me to drink the
waters.

In the spring of 1775 I visited some meetings in Devonshire, Somersetshire,
and Dorsetshire, in my way to the yearly meeting at London. Lydia Hawksworth
accompanied me in some part of the journey. Such was my state of bodily
weakness, that my getting along, and being enabled to go through with the
service assigned, claimed my admiration and thankfulness. I attended the
meetings in London with considerable diligence, though very unwell, got out of
town as soon as I could, and, accompanied by Lydia Hawksworth, went to her
mother's, Deborah Waring, at Alton; where I rested a few days, and then
proceeded to the quarterly meetings for Hampshire and Dorsetshire held at
Ringwood and Poole; and so to our quarterly meeting at Looe. Here I met my dear
husband, to our mutual rejoicing, although my languid state affected him
painfully. From Looe we returned home, and through Divine favor I so gathered
strength, as that in the Eighth Month I again left home, accompanied by my
husband, intending to go through Wales to the Circular yearly meeting. I had
several meetings in our own county and Devonshire to good satisfaction, and we
crossed the Channel from Appledore to Swansea.

A circumstance happened at Appledore worthy of observation. Some sober people
of that place were desirous of a meeting; but I was restrained from having one
so public as was wished, yet was quite free to sit down in a friendly woman's
house, with such as she might think proper to invite. The meeting was held in
an upper room the window of which fronted the river. A number of serious people
came, and I had a favored opportunity amongst them. Immediately as I sat down,
one of the persons present stepped to me, and told me, the vessel we had wished
to go in was getting under sail. This was unexpected intelligence, as we were
informed she would not sail that tide, and had not taken our passage in her.
Had we held our meeting in another place, she had probably slipped away without
our knowledge; as her sailing was perceived by the beforementioned person in
the meeting from the window. As I was now free to go, I took a glass of wine,
and immediately went out at the backdoor, into a boat, and on board. My
husband went to the inn, and reached the ship, with our clothes, in a boat,
before she got over the bar. We had a good passage; but had we missed this
opportunity, we should have suffered much in coming in a sloop the next day, as
the weather changed to wet and stormy. This is one of the many instances of
providential direction I have experienced.

We staid at and about Swansea about two weeks; and thence proceeded to
Leominster, Worcester, and Dudley. From Dudley, after spending a short time
with my brother, we went to the Circular yearly meeting held at Coleshill,
Warwickshire; which was large and Divinely favored. From Coleshill we went
through Coventry to Warwick, spent a little time with my sister, who, with her
husband and son, were now settled there; and thence we went through Evesham,
Painswick, etc. home, where we arrived in safety.

In this winter a concern rested upon my mind once more to visit Friends in
Ireland; and, in my way to that kingdom, to attend the quarterly meetings at
York, Lancaster, and Westmoreland, and the yearly meeting for the four northern
counties to be held at Keswick. My beloved friend Lydia Hawksworth was given up
to accompany me, and we accordingly prepared for the journey; and in First
month 1776 my husband accompanied me to Bristol. The weather was extremely
cold, and the snow so deep that the roads in Devonshire, and thence to Bristol,
had been impassable, and were then dangerous; but through Divine favor we got
along safe, although the cold was so extreme that it was hard to bear. The road
in some places was cut through the snow, so that it looked like passing through
a deep hollow way, which had a very striking appearance. At Bristol, my dear
husband left me, to go to Swansea, where he arrived safe, although the Severn
at the New Passage, where it is three miles over, was so full of ice as to
render crossing dangerous.

Just at this juncture, my companion's mother died, and she went to attend her
funeral. I staid over First Day at Bristol meetings, and proceeded, through
some meetings in Gloucestershire, etc. to Dudley, where my sister met me. We
spent some time together with my brother, and I went to Birmingham, where I was
met by my companion, and we proceeded on our journey. Our first meeting was
held in the town hall at Stafford, which was large, solemn, and satisfactory.
From thence we went to Leek, and passed, through several meetings in Cheshire
and Lancashire, to Sheffield, and so, through many meetings in Yorkshire, to
the quarterly meeting at York. After the meeting at York I was concerned to
have one at Tadcaster, where there was no Friend's meeting house; and another
near Harwood, which was very satisfactory; and another, on the First Day, at
Otley, which was large, and I hope serviceable. Thence we went, through several
meetings, to Lancaster, attended the quarterly meeting there, afterward to
Westmoreland quarterly meeting held at Kendal, thence to the yearly meeting at
Keswick, and so to Cockermouth and Whitehaven. We had traveled from Birmingham
in sixty-two days, 500 miles, and attended sixty-six meetings; and as much of
the service of meetings lay upon me, my natural strength was greatly exhausted
before I embarked for Ireland: but I had abundant cause to acknowledge that
Divine aid was from time to time dispensed; by which I was enabled to press
forward, though under very painful feelings.

We went on board a large vessel at White-haven on the 21st of the Fourth
month, and landed at Dublin the 25th. Our passage was not without danger. One
night a vessel run so near ours, that they became entangled in their rigging.
The captain and sailors were much alarmed, but we got clear. How imprudent it
is for vessels not to hang out their lights. As our preservation was great, it
claimed our deep thankfulness: a very little more, and probably one of the
vessels had sunk, and the other might have been much damaged. Another night we
lay at anchor near the Isle of Man, and had reason to conclude ourselves in
shallow water upon a sandbank. Had the wind blown up fresh, it might probably
have been of bad consequence.

Our captain had not been accustomed to navigate the Irish Channel: and when we
drew near Dublin Bar, appeared regardless of the danger of crossing it, wishing
to get into port without a pilot, although the wind was rough. A pilot,
however, espying us, came on board, and took the vessel safe in; but the tide
was so far spent, that she threw up the mud with her keel, as we passed the
bank called the Great Bull.

We arrived at Dublin a few days before the national half-year's meeting began.
This allowed us time to attend several meetings with the friends of that city;
wherein the spring of ministry was livingly opened to the states of many
professors amongst us: and although I had to lament the stripped state of that
city, through the removal of useful members, and the weakness of many who
remained in the society; yet was there cause for thankfulness, in feeling the
fresh extending of the Divine visitation to them. The half-year's meeting was
large, and signally favored with an awakening searching visitation; and I was
so helped therein, that many of my friends, who had been with me in former
services in that nation, rejoiced that the heavenly Master had again sent me to
see how they fared.

I write these remarks in reverence and thankfulness to the Great putter forth,
and qualifier for the services he appoints; who, to keep the minds of those
whom he favors humble, permits them to be tried with hidden exercises. This
was my case through the course of this journey, wherein the spring of
gospel ministry was largely opened; and I often appeared to my friends as well
clothed with a royal robe, though, underneath, I was girded as with sackcloth.

From Dublin, we proceeded to visit the meetings through the main body of
Friends in Leinster province, to that of Ulster; wherein we visited all the
meetings, except two or three very small ones, the friends belonging to which
we desired to meet us at another meeting.

We attended the quarterly meetings in both provinces, and returned back to
Dublin the 2d of the Seventh month, where we staid until the 12th: in which
time we attended meetings either for worship or discipline almost every day;
and Divine condescension in opening fresh matter, suited to the several
occasions, was so admirable, that it appeared as if every state and office in
the society were ministered to.

By this time my natural strength was much exhausted; yet we pressed on through
the counties of Wicklow and Wexford, and were at a province meeting at
Enniscorthy, which was very large and crowned with solemnity. Here we took
leave of friends of that province, and proceeded to that of Munster, wherein
there are but few meetings, but the distances mostly long. My reduced state
rendered it hard getting along; yet I was enabled to visit all the meetings,
except a small one at Bandon, and favored to discharge my duty therein;
although my voice was sometimes so weak, that it was with extreme difficulty I
exerted it to speak so as to be understood. When we came to Clonmell, and had
attended the meeting there, it seemed proper for us to retire to the house of
our friend John Grubb about two miles out of the town; whither I went the 8th
of the Eighth month, and staid until the 14th, being much indisposed. Here I
was affectionately received and attended, and the quarterly meeting for the
province being held at Clonmell during my stay there, many friends came to see
me, and we were favored together. I was enabled to speak beyond my
expectation, to the comfort and encouragement of some, and caution of others,
and took a solemn farewell of them in the love of Truth.

The 14th, we went to Waterford, but I continued so much indisposed, that it
appeared best to go into the country; so we retired to a village called
Tramore, by the seaside. Here we staid from the 15th of the Eighth month, till
the 9th of the Ninth month. My indisposition continued and reduced me very low;
but, blessed be the Lord, his hand sustained me, and through all, my spirit was
at times set at liberty in his service to the admiration of myself and friends;
many of whom from Waterford came to us there, and we had diverse seasonable
opportunities with them, as well as with some who were at the place to bathe in
the sea. My nerves being extremely weak, I was also advised to bathe, by the
doctor who attended me, but I believe it had rather a bad effect. We had not
staid at Tramore so long, had there been a suitable vessel at Waterford, ready
to sail for England. On our return thither, we had two meetings with Friends in
a large parlour, at the house of our friend Isaac Jacobs, my voice not being
equal to a meeting in the meeting house. Thus we visited Friends in that city
pretty generally, and the 12th embarked on board a vessel bound for Minehead.
Our friend Robert Grubb, of Clonmell, accompanied us, being, in sympathy with
us, inclined thereto; which we accepted as a favor from Providence.

Our passage was easy as to wind; but my great indisposition, and my
companion's extreme sea-sickness seemed to render such an assistant necessary,
and he was very attentive and serviceable to us. When we came near our desired
port, the wind turned against us and the weather became rough. However, the
captain got over the bar just in time, for had we been but one hour later, we
must have been driven back to sea, if not to Waterford: we landed at Minehead
the 14th. There is only Robert Davies's family of our society in that town. He
was from home, but one of his children met us upon the beach, from whence it
was a long walk to his house. When we came into the street, we saw an empty
cart going up it, and asked the carter to carry us to our friend's, which he
readily did. My dear husband met us here, to our mutual satisfaction; though to
receive me back in so weak a state was affecting to him. The 15th was
First Day, but I did not attend the meeting at the meeting house, but had an
opportunity in the afternoon with the friends belonging to it, in our friend's
parlour.

The 16th, we left Minehead, and traveled homewards by easy stages, my dear
companion accompanying me to the verge of our county, whence she turned to the
Circular yearly meeting held at Bridgewater. She was indeed a most tender
affectionate companion, and a deep travailer in spirit, both in meetings and
private opportunities: and although her public service in this journey was not
large, it was very acceptable; and her private labors in many families were
signally under that heavenly anointing, from which she was concerned to
minister. I hoped to have been able to attend the Circular yearly meeting, and
pressed forward in Ireland, in the fore part of this journey, in order to get
to England in time; but after our return from the north to Dublin, it was much
impressed upon my mind, that I should have but just strength to accomplish the
service in that nation, and so it proved.

I had traveled in this journey in England and Ireland, about 2000 English
miles, and attended 192 meetings, besides family opportunities, and visiting
the sick. Sometimes we had several private meetings of this kind in one day,
and seldom were without one, at least.

After my return home, I continued much indisposed, and my nerves so irritable
that I had continual spasms for a considerable time; and my dear brother James
Payton came to visit me, and, becoming very unwell, was detained the winter. As
I gathered strength, I was enabled to attend upon little services about home;
and my friend Lydia Hawksworth coming to see me, we visited the families of
friends in Falmouth and Marazion monthly meetings, except one or two of each,
whom I afterward saw: in this service the Lord was with us of a truth. Soon
after Lydia Hawksworth left me, Sarah Stevenson came to visit Friends in this
county; in company with whom, I visited most of the families belonging to
Austle monthly meeting, to our mutual satisfaction; my dear husband
accompanying us in this service.

Until the Seventh month in this year 1777, I had not been out of Cornwall
since my return from Ireland in the Ninth month 1776, which was the longest
period I remember to have been confined within the limits of one county, since
my first journey in the service of Truth into Wales, in the year 1749. I do not
mention this as thinking much of my services; for although it has been my lot
to be more constantly employed than many others of my fellow laborers, I can
truly say, I frequently look upon myself as an unprofitable servant; and when
laid by a little, have to ruminate upon my many weaknesses; under a sense
whereof I feelingly acknowledge that what I am, that is acceptable to the Lord,
or honorable in his house, I am through his grace; and I often admire at his
making choice of, and employing me so much in his service.

In the Seventh month this year, in company with my dear husband, I went to
Swansea, his business, and to visit his mother, calling him thither. In our way
we had a meeting with Friends in the north of Devonshire; but being yet very
weak, I was easy to pass along without engaging much in public service. We had
a good meeting at Appledore with some serious people, and crossed the Channel
to Swansea, where we staid about two weeks, and proceeded to Bristol.

In our way between Newport and the New Passage (which we intended to cross),
we received information that the Passage-house was so full of people that there
was no probability of our getting a lodging there; so my husband intended going
forward to Chepstow, though neither of us liked the prospect of crossing at the
Old Passage; but our minds, especially mine, not being easy to proceed thither,
we stopped at a small inn about two miles from the New Passage, and got a
comfortable lodging, and next morning proceeded to the New Passage. We got safe
over the Channel, although the wind was squally; but the same tide, the boat
from the Old Passage was lost, even while we were on the water, and several
men, with many oxen, drowned. Had we gone to Chepstow we should most probably
have been in her. Thus kind Providence signally preserved us.

After about a week's stay at Bristol, and visiting Frenchay meeting, we went
to Worcester, so to Bromsgrove and Dudley. I was still in a very weak state,
yet enabled to attend meetings, and labor in them to the comfort of my friends
and my own peace; although at times in great bodily pain. My sister met me at
Dudley, and we were glad to see each other. From Dudley we proceeded to the
Circular yearly meeting held this year at Bewdley; and in our way we had a
meeting with Friends at Stourbridge, wherein my weakness was such, that I could
hardly impart what pressed upon my mind so as to be heard. I was discouraged
from looking toward the solemnity at Bewdley, with expectation of being able
to take much part in the public service; but was desirous to be assisted to
labor in spirit for the help of my brethren and sisters engaged therein. On
the Seventh-day evening, the meeting for ministers and elders was held, wherein
I had something to impart, but in so low a voice as painfully to affect my
friends; who might reasonably conclude it probable that my strength was so
exhausted, as that I should not long be capable of public labor in the
church; and indeed my own feelings of general weakness coincided with that
apprehension; but in the course of the public meetings the Lord's power was
wonderfully manifested, in strengthening me for service, to the admiration of
all who saw my extreme weakness, and my own also. Indeed with humble gratitude
I may acknowledge that it appeared miraculous; for I do not know whether I was
ever able to speak with greater strength of voice and sentiment, than in the
last meeting; so that although the booth was very large and crowded, I believe
all might hear: and to the praise of the Great Name be it commemorated that his
power was signally over the meeting.

This extraordinary manifestation of favor tended to strengthen my mind, which
for a long time had been sorely exercised with many fears, insomuch that my
spirit was weary in the conflict, and ready to hope for death rather than life.
Yet was I secretly sustained so as to press forward, and mostly to preserve a
cheerful countenance, so that my friends could not perceive how my spirit was
exercised and abased in the sense of infirmities, even when I was evidently
clothed for service. Thus it has pleased Divine wisdom to permit me to be
tried in my passing along from youth to advanced age: doubtless for some good
end, and I desire thankfully to commemorate his gracious and wise dealings with
me, in humble hope that finally all will work together for good; when, having
filled up my measure of sufferings, I may be accepted in and through his
beloved Son. It is not for us to query why these afflicting dispensations are
appointed, but patiently to endeavor to wade through them. We may be certain
they will tend to humble our spirits and prepare for service, as my soul has
many times experienced; and therefore can pray, that I may be passive in regard
to the dealings of the Lord with me, who best knows what is necessary to effect
the glorious purpose he has in view, viz. the thorough sanctification of my
spirit, and reducing it into "the obedience of Christ:" concerning whom it is
written Although he was a son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered; and if so, his servants can expect no other.

I have sometimes considered what that suffering of Christ was, whereby he
learned obedience; seeing that he could not suffer for disobedience, being in
all things subject to the will of his Father. But as man he was made like unto
us, and had the same feelings as have the members of his mystical body; and
although he was never overcome of the enemy, was liable to be assaulted by him.
He had to bear the contradiction of sinners against himself; and, no doubt, in
the course of his ministry felt the oppressive weight of contrary and wicked
spirits, as the members of his church now do in their measure.

As man, we may suppose that he had the same reluctance to pain and insult as
we have; but in submission to his Father's will, did and suffered what he in
wisdom and mercy to mankind appointed him. His followers also must thus "be
made conformable to his death," if they have part with him in his resurrection
unto glory. And although some of them may be left in seasons of extreme
conflict, as he was, the most extreme, without the sensible feeling of the
Divine presence; yet that power which appoints their suffering, secretly
sustains under it; and when they have filled up their measure of suffering for
his body's sake, which is his Church, with all other afflictions attendant on
this probationary state, they will with him be able to say, "It is finished;"
and as good and faithful servants enter into the joy of their Lord.

After the beforementioned memorable meeting at Bewdley, I recruited in
health, though yet attended with very painful feelings. We returned home pretty
directly, taking the quarterly meeting for Somersetshire, and some other
meetings in our way; and the remainder of this year I spent at home, and
attending services in our own county as they opened.

The 20th of the Fourth month 1778, I again left it in company with my dear
husband intending for Wales, he having business there, and I had an engagement
to attend the yearly meeting for that principality. We proceeded to Ilfracomb,
and, in our way, had a meeting with Friends in the north of Devon at Newtown.
At Ilfracomb we had a large satisfactory meeting, amongst a people very
ignorant of our principles. We were detained here by contrary winds until
First Day, and as we sat together in the morning, I earnestly desired to know
whether any further service was required; as it did not appear probable we
should be released that day; and afterward as I sat quietly in my chamber, our
Lord's words to his disciples arose in my mind, Arise, let us go hence, and
soon after, the captain of the vessel came and told us he intended to sail. We
went on board in the afternoon, and before midnight landed at the Mumbles, and
the next morning proceeded to Swansea. My husband's mother was lately dead;
concerning whom I may say, that she was an exercised woman, and I believe
finished her course with joy, about the ninety-seventh year of her age; and
except her hearing, she retained her faculties to admiration. As her furniture,
with her servants, remained in her house, we settled there.

The 2d of the Fifth month we went for the Welsh yearly meeting, and were at a
meeting by the way at New Inn meeting house, which was large and very
satisfactory. Samuel Spavold of Hitchin in Hertfordshire, John Lewis of
Haverford-west, and Thomas Carrington, from North America, were there also; and
we went in company that afternoon to a meeting which was appointed by John
Lewis, at a friend's house, not far out of the way to Llandovery, and to
Llandovery the same night. Here the yearly meeting was held, and began the next
day; and through the various sittings, was a favored season both to Friends
and others. The weather being very wet, it was not so large as was expected,
but many sober people attended, unto whom the gospel flowed freely. In the
course of my travels before my marriage, I had two very satisfactory meetings
at this place, where none live who profess with us.

My spirit, in the course of the yearly meeting, was dipped into sympathy with
the few friends scattered about Wales; and unto those who were there assembled,
encouragement and instruction were afforded. In our return to Swansea, we had a
large and much favored meeting at Llandilo; the beforementioned Friends and
John Townsend of London attending it. They went back to a meeting at the New
Inn meeting house, and next day we all met again at Swansea. The afternoon
meeting there was large, solemn, and instructive.

We staid at Swansea until the 14th, then went to Cardiff, and on the next
morning had a small meeting there with a few who met together on the First Day;
several of whom were not in membership with us. I was very unwell, but was
helped to speak to their states, and was well satisfied with the opportunity.
We reached the New Passage that night, and next day we got to Bristol to attend
the yearly meeting there, which was large and divinely favored. Samuel
Spavold, John Townsend, Thomas Carrington, and other friends in the ministry
attended it.

On the 21st I was at a meeting at Frenchay, with Thomas Waring of Leominster;
and after the meeting, my friend Lydia Hawksworth and I had a good opportunity
with a young woman, who was likely to marry out of the society. She was much
affected, yet held her resolution to engage in the connection. Her intended
husband was a man of property, and had long resided in America, whereto he took
her, and there she died. Her death was occasioned through a singular
circumstance. In the time of the American war, her husband's estate was taken
from him, but was recovered after its termination. When intelligence was
brought her of its being restored, she lay in, I think of her second child; and
the pleasing news so affected her then weak spirits, that she died.

In the afternoon we had a much favored season at Joseph Beck's, with many
young people, and returned that night to Bristol. The 24th (First Day), we were
at Claverham meeting, the 25th and 26th at Bristol; myself unwell.

The 27th, I was at Bath meeting, which was not large but favored, returned to
Bristol, and the 30th, we went to Pont-y-pool. The 31st (First Day), we
attended two meetings at Friends meeting house at Pont-y-moil, near
Pont-y-pool. That in the morning was principally for Friends, that in the
afternoon was large, and both opportunities were crowned with the Divine
presence.

Sixth month 1st, we had a meeting at Cardiff with a few sober people. In our
way back to Swansea we called upon a convinced woman, who lived alone near
Cowbridge, who was comforted by our visit. We staid at Swansea until the 12th,
attending the meetings there in their course, some of which were seasons of
Divine favor. My mind being drawn to visit the few Friends at Haverford-west,
my husband accompanied me there. The way was long, and my strength much
exhausted by the beforementioned services; but I was favored with ability to
discharge my duty. We had a large meeting at Carmarthen the evening we left
Swansea, and next day got to Haverford-west, attended two public meetings
there on the 14th, it being First Day, and in the evening had a private
opportunity with Friends. We had considerable satisfaction in this journey, and
returned to Swansea, accompanied by our friend John Lewis, the 16th.

The 18th was the quarterly meeting at Swansea, which although very small was a
solemn opportunity; Divine mercy favoring the few assembled from the several
meetings, with counsel and encouragement. The 19th, J. Lewis and myself had a
meeting in the townhall at Neath, which was not so large as we expected, but, I
believe it was a profitable season unto some present. The 20th, we went to
Llantrissent, and the 21st attended two large meetings at Tref-y-Ryhg, a
meeting house in the country.

The morning-meeting was much favored. The few from Cardiff, and the poor
lonely woman near Cowbridge, met us, and we had an opportunity with them and a
few other friends at a friend's house. In our return to Swansea, we had a
meeting at Bridgend, in a bowling-green, wherein was an arbor, under which I
stood. The people were very still, and, I hope some were benefited. I was
extremely fatigued with this journey, having performed it mostly on horseback,
double; which appeared the best method of traveling in some part of the
journey, but I found my strength was not equal to that exercise in such long
stages.

The 28th (First Day) I attended a small meeting held at Neath, in a friend's
house, in the morning; and in the evening had a very large meeting at White
Rock, amongst the workmen of the Copper House and others. This was the last
meeting I appointed in Wales, and left Swansea with peace and thankfulness the
27th of the Sixth month, and returned to it no more. We reached Bristol the
29th, and got to Wellington the 1st of the Seventh month, attending the
First Day meetings there: that in the afternoon was very large, and both were
good meetings. The 5th, we had a living meeting at Camelford in Cornwall,
amongst a people not professing with us; but some of whom appeared to me to be
near the kingdom. The 6th, we got home.

The 31st of this month I had a meeting at the house of a man lately convinced,
in the parish of Breague; where some hundreds of people gathered, that we were
obliged to hold it without doors. They generally behaved well, and some were
much affected. It was a favored opportunity, and I was truly thankful for
Divine aid to discharge my duty therein.

The 13th of the Ninth month, the Circular yearly meeting for the western
counties began. It was held at Launceston, and was a large and favored
solemnity; and, although I did not think the ministry rose so high as I have
known it in some of those general meetings, it appeared to be a serviceable
opportunity, and the people seemed well satisfied therewith. I spent the
remaining part of this year about home, and was favored in occasional services
there amongst Friends and others. Upon considering the service wherein I have
been engaged since I settled in Cornwall, I see cause for true thankfulness,
having therein been owned by the heavenly Master: and although in regard to
uniting with us as a people, much fruit has not appeared; the testimony of
Truth seems to gain ground amongst the inhabitants, and some of our own society
and others, are awakened and strengthened thereby; so that I trust I have not
run nor labored in vain altogether. May the Lord preserve me humble and
dependent upon himself, that whatsoever I am or do, it may be by his grace.

In the First month, 1779, our quarterly meeting at Austle was a memorable
season of Divine love, wherein many states were ministered to, and many hearts
tendered. The rebellious were warned, and I believe some of them saw the
imminent danger of their states; but alas! the prophet's complaint respecting
Ephraim, etc. too well befits many visited minds. Their righteousness is as a
morning cloud, and as the early dew which soon passes away; yet I trust the
savor of love and life witnessed in this meeting rested sweetly upon some
minds.

For some time after this meeting, my exercise for some of the members of our
own society was heavy, and I was livingly opened in several meetings, and
private opportunities, agreeably to their states; so that whether the labor
bestowed has its desired effect, or be as water spilt upon a stone, I hope to
be clear respecting them: and great is the mercy of God in visiting and
revisiting them.

The 1st of the Third month, I had a large good meeting at Helston, which many
serious and religious people attended, and I believe were instructed and
refreshed.

CHAP. IX.
FOR some time I had entertained a prospect of visiting some meetings in
Somersetshire and Gloucestershire, and paying a particular visit to the
families of friends in Herefordshire. I left home to accomplish this service,
accompanied by my dear husband; and on the 13th of the Third month 1779, we met
our friend Lydia Hawksworth, who was concerned to accompany me therein, at
Wellington. The 14th, being the first of the week, we attended Friend's meeting
at Spice-land; and in the evening had a select opportunity with Friends at
Wellington. My husband then proceeding to Bristol on business, we industriously
pursued our concern, visiting many meetings in that week; and on the 21st
(First Day) were met by my husband, and my brother James Payton, at Puddimore
meeting. We went the same evening to Compton in Dorsetshire, to visit our
valuable friends Jonah Thompson and his son; spent the next day with them; and
in the evening had a meeting with their scholars and others of the family and
many of the neighbors, in the school-room, which was a favored season; and we
proceeded to Sherborn meeting on the 24th. Here my husband and brother left us,
and next morning we proceeded to Hollowtrow, had a meeting there in the
afternoon, went the same night to Pensford, next day to a meeting at Bolton,
thence to Chew Magna, and were at the First Day meeting held there on the 28th.

The 30th we had a meeting at Portshead, and crossing the Avon at Pill, were at
King's Weston meeting on the 31st; thence went to those at Olveston and
Thornbury, and thence to Worcester. In these meetings in the counties of
Somerset and Gloucester, I was enabled to discharge my duty to my own humbling
admiration, and the edification of many who attended them.

The quarterly meeting for the county of Worcester being held at Worcester, we
attended it, and also two meetings with friends of that city; and on the 7th of
the Fourth month, went to Bramyard in Herefordshire, where we were met by my
brother Young and Thomas Waring of Leominster; who united with us in the
intended visit to the families of friends in that county, which we began at
this place. In this laborious and important service we were Divinely assisted.
My dear companion had a considerable and very acceptable share therein; which
was generally the case in family visits, and private opportunities, although
she was frequently silent in public meetings. She was peculiarly gifted for
these private services, and when she did appear in public ministry, her
service therein was very edifying, and acceptable to Friends. Having an
intention to return to Bristol before the yearly meeting was held there, we
pursued this service with diligence, and on the 24th of the Fourth month, we
paid our last visit.

My brother Young had accompanied us through the visit, but Thomas Waring left
us at Almelly on the 18th, their company was acceptable and strengthening to us.

On the 25th (being First Day) we had a meeting at Shire Newton in
Monmouthshire, which was attended by many of the Welsh people, and the few
friends in the neighborhood, and, I believe was an acceptable opportunity to
them. In the evening we had a meeting with Mary Powel of Chepstow and some
others. She was the only member of our society residing in that town; where a
meeting of Friends was never settled. Next morning, we proceeded to the New
Passage, but the boat being gone a few minutes before we reached it, we were
detained until the evening tide; but, through Divine mercy, we got safe over,
and reached Bristol about ten o'clock the same night.

My husband staid with me at Bristol until the yearly meeting there was ended,
which was large and attended by many ministering friends of this nation and
America; yet a large share of the public labor in the ministry fell to my
lot, at which I believe my brethren and sisters rejoiced; for I was assisted to
minister in the demonstration of the spirit and with power; and returned the
praises due to Him who exalts and abases his servants, as he knows is most
conducive to his honor, and to their preservation. I staid at Bristol to
attend the marriage of two friends with whom I was acquainted; and then,
accompanied by my husband, set out for London. We attended a few meetings in
our way, and reached London about a week before the yearly meeting, myself much
spent with hard labor and exercise. I was enabled to attend the meetings in
course, during the sitting of the yearly meeting; and after its conclusion,
with my husband and friend Lydia Hawksworth, proceeded to Calne in Wiltshire,
attended the meeting of Friends there in the morning of the First Day, and had
a public meeting at Chippenham, appointed to begin at six in the evening. The
meeting was large, and was a favored opportunity; the people not professing
with us behaved with becoming seriousness, and some of them were visibly
affected. It was long in gathering, which might occasion its being late before
it concluded; yet my inclination being strong to go to Melksham that night, we
proceeded thither. Before we reached it, the family where we were to lodge were
in bed, but the master of it, my relation Thomas Fowler, came down and received
us with great kindness. Next day my dear husband left us and went to Bristol
and Swansea. I had a view of visiting some places in the neighborhood; but my
strength was exhausted too much to suffer me to engage immediately upon
service. In the next night I was much indisposed, and in the morning sent for
an apothecary, who thought my disorder was the effects of a cold; but it proved
a fever, which, with the weakness attendant thereon, confined me for some weeks
with these my affectionate relations; whose tender care and generous treatment
of me, both now and at all times, when my lot was cast under their hospitable
roof, demands my grateful acknowledgement, both of their kindness, and that of
my heavenly Father: whose mercy was at this time signally discovered in
upholding my enfeebled frame until I came to friends by whom I was so well
nursed, and with whom my mind was so easy. My affectionate companion continued
also with me, and tenderly assisted me until my fever went off. My husband
returned to me; but his business calling him home, and my strength not being
equal to so long a journey, he left me to the care of my friends. As my
strength returned, my prospect of some service in the neighborhood returned
also, and I ventured to the meeting at Bradford upon a First Day; but my
principal concern was to hold a public meeting at Trowbridge, in which town no
one resided who professed with Friends. I went, in weakness, accompanied by
several friends, and appeared to a friend of London who casually met me there
so emaciated, that when she returned home, she reported amongst friends there,
that it appeared to her my labors were near accomplished. We held a meeting in
a large dining room at the inn, which was attended by many attentive
well-behaved people; and the testimony of Truth was exalted amongst them, to
the praise of Him who strengthens for every service in which he engages his
servants. I was that day made strong to declare of his wisdom and mercy, and
preach the doctrines of his Son Jesus Christ; and returned to Melksham in
peace, and with thankfulness for the assistance afforded in that memorable
day's labor. After this meeting, I was easy to return home; so, accompanied by
my companion and a friend of Melksham, I left that place; and with her got to a
country meeting held at Grenton in Somersetshire on the First Day, which was
attended by many of the country people, both of that place and its
neighborhood, and was a favored opportunity. There being a funeral at the
public burying-ground on the preceding evening, our friends Beaven, with whom
we lodged, gave notice (at my request) of the meeting to the people who
attended it, which occasioned it to be the larger.

In the afternoon we had a private opportunity with the Friends, and next day
proceeded to Wellington, and from thence toward Oakhampton; where we met my
dear husband, to our mutual rejoicing and thankfulness, with whom we proceeded
to our quarterly meeting held at Looe, and thence home, where we came in the
early part of the Seventh month. As I had not preserved any minutes of my
movements since the yearly meeting at London, I could not insert dates.

The state of my health required rest, and I was favored with it; and having
the company of my dear friend Hawksworth, her attention was turned to assist in
restoring my strength; and as she also was in need of rest, I hope she gained
some advantage by accompanying me home; although our quiet was disturbed in the
Eighth month, by an alarm of the French and Spanish fleets being off Falmouth
Harbor. What their design was could not be known, but there they lay for some
days, the wind not permitting them to go up the channel; and as they did not
attempt to land, it was conjectured that their hostile views were toward
Plymouth, and the King's dock near that place. Soon after they had sailed up
the Channel, being in our weekday meeting, with my mind retired to the Lord,
under an exercise on account of the intended mischief, it run through it, He
sent forth lightnings and scattered them. I think, as we returned home from
meeting, the wind was rising; the sky soon loured, and a terrible storm
gathered and discharged itself, with fierce lightning, tremendous thunder, and
violent rain; which continued more or less through great part of the night, and
indeed the thunder until the next evening. The fleets were, by the time the
storm began, got near Plymouth; and we heard that the commanders had
deliberated about the business they had in view; but the Lord, who holds the
winds in his fists, discharged against them his terrible artillery so
powerfully, as to prevent their designs, and obliged them to sheer off from our
coasts in a shattered state. O! what frequent occasions have Britons to praise
the Lord for his mercy, and wonderful interference in their favor! but alas!
though in words they acknowledge it, the generality of them are not concerned
to make those returns which he is calling for; but continue in a course of
conduct, and disposition of mind, which dares his righteous judgments: which
will one day be poured forth upon the inhabitants of this highly favored but
ungrateful nation, unless they repent and turn from their manifold iniquity.

I choose here to mention a remark of a sensible inhabitant of the town of
Helston, upon this signal and memorable storm, so favorable to this nation. He
told me, that seeing it gathering, and having people at work on his harvest, he
hastened to direct their labors. As he went, he made his observation on the
wind, etc, and I think he said that such was the confusion of the elements,
that he could not say from what point the wind blew; and he said in his mind,
'This is no natural storm:' and indeed it proved to be signally providential,
and as such worthy of commemoration; as is also a circumstance which happened
in the town of Falmouth. As soon as government had intelligence of the enemies
lying in great force off that port, ammunition was hastened for the garrison
there. The wagons halted in the market place, to which the sea comes up,
whence the inhabitants fetch seawater for some uses. A woman coming up with a
bucket of water at the instant the ammunition wagons stopped, observed that
the axletree of one of them was on fire, and dashed her water upon it. As the
fire was on the side next the sea, if she had not discovered it, it might have
increased until it had blown up its dangerous loading; and there being also a
quantity of gunpowder in that part of the town, the houses might have been
much damaged, and some lives lost.

My dear friend Hawksworth left me in the latter end of this month, or early in
the next; and I was allowed to stay at and about home for the remainder of this
year.

In the early part of the year 1780, I attended several large meetings in
Cornwall, held on account of marriages or funerals, which were signally
honored with the Divine presence. I also was at our quarterly meeting at
Falmouth; and on the 3d of the Fifth month my husband and I left home to attend
our annual solemnity in London. In our way we had meetings at several places,
and called at Compton to pay our last visit to our beloved friend Jonah
Thomson, who was near the close of an honorable life. We found his mind
awfully collected, and waiting for his release from a pained body, in certain
hope of his spirit's being admitted into the saints rest, after having labored
many years in the work of the ministry. In the younger part of my life, he had
conducted himself toward me as a tender father; and in my more advanced years,
as an affectionate friend. He had also a sincere regard to my husband, and as
our affection was mutual, our interview and farewell was affecting.

The yearly meeting at London was large and favored by the heavenly Master of
the assemblies of his servants. From London, we went, accompanied by our friend
L. Hawksworth, to a general meeting held annually at Weston in Buckinghamshire,
and so to High Wycombe. My husband returned to London, and Lydia Hawksworth and
myself proceeded to Reading, where we met a committee, who, by appointment of
the yearly meeting, were going to visit the meeting for discipline in Bristol.
We attended several meetings with them in our way to that city, where we
arrived on the 1st of the Sixth month.

Before I left Cornwall, I had informed friends of our monthly meeting, that I
was under an engagement of duty to attend the quarterly meeting for Oxfordshire
to be held at Banbury, and to visit some meetings in Warwickshire,
Worcestershire, Shropshire, and Gloncestershire, also to attend the Circular
yearly meeting to be held at Hereford; wherewith they concurred. And my friend
Lydia Hawksworth being given up to accompany me, I staid at and in the
neighborhood of Bristol, until the Seventh month, to afford her time to
prepare for the journey. We went to Worcester, and attended the meetings held
there on the 1st and 3d days: and thence proceeded to Evesham and Alcester.
Several of the town's people, came to the meetings at Alcester, and I was
favored to preach the everlasting gospel to them. The same evening, we reached
Eatington, were at the meeting there on the First Day, whereto many friends
from an adjacent meeting came, at my request, and I hope it was a profitable
opportunity: we proceeded that evening to Banbury, and to the house of Edward
Stone, whose wife was nearly related to me, and with her husband received and
entertained us with affectionate kindness.

The quarterly meeting held at this place was a large and favored solemnity;
and many people not professing with us attended the meetings, unto whom the
gospel of life and salvation was preached in the demonstration of the Divine
spirit. In the course of the meetings, a dangerous accident befell me. In the
womens' meeting-room was a gallery for ministering friends, wherein my
companion, myself, and other friends were seated. Upon my rising to step
further, to make room for more, the floor gave way, and I sunk with it; but I
received but little hurt, which might be esteemed a singular mercy, considering
how I was situated in the fall. Friends ought to be careful in examining these
elevated seats in old meeting houses. This was not the only time I have been in
danger through the neglect of it.

From Banbury we went to a meeting at Redway, and to Warwick the 28th. We staid
here with my dear sister Summerfield, until the 4th of the Eighth month, when
we went to Shipston, where the quarterly meeting for Worcestershire was held
the next day, at which were many friends of that county, who rejoiced to see
me, and we were favored together in the Divine presence. On the 6th, we had a
meeting at Long Compton, which, although small, was a favored season. The same
evening we had a meeting at Tredington at the house of our friend William
Lambly, whose family was the only one of friends residing in that village. His
neighbors attended, but appeared so low in the knowledge of Divine Truths,
that it was difficult to minister to them so as to be understood.

On the 7th, we returned to Warwick, and the 9th, being the first of the week
(accompanied by my sister), attended a large meeting of friends and other
professors of religion, held annually at Birkswell; and on the same evening
went to Coventry. We had a meeting there the 11th, and in the remainder of the
week had meetings at several places amongst friends of Warwickshire; and on
First Day, the 16th, were at a large meeting which is held annually at
Atherston. There I met many friends from diverse counties, amongst whom I had
labored and been conversant before my settling in Cornwall; and we were
favored together with the merciful visitation of Divine love and life. The
17th, we attended a monthly meeting for discipline held at Hartshill. Here I
left my sister, who was so much indisposed as not to be able to accompany us to
the beforementioned meeting at Atherston.

On the 18th, we went to the neighborhood of Birmingham. We attended the
weekday meetings there in this week, and also those on the First Day* I hope
to the edification of many present, and visited several of our friends; and on
the 24th, were at a monthly meeting for discipline at Dudley. The 25th, we had
a large and good meeting at Wolverhampton; and thence we went to Coalbrookdale,
had a meeting there, and proceeding to the meetings of Shrewsbury, and the
Bank, came back to Coalbrookdale meeting, First Day, the 29th. The Lord's power
and presence were evidently with us in our services in this quarter; and after
a solemn opportunity in our friend Abiah Darby's family, at which some other
friends were present, we left it and returned to Dudley; and I visited friends
in that quarter no more. We staid with my dear brother until after the ensuing
First Day, when the meetings were large; as has been usual, when I have visited
that place, since my removal from it; my old neighbors pressing to the
meetings, more generally than when I resided amongst them: and many times has
the Divine power, and the testimony of Truth, been exalted; to the praise
thereof, and the convincement of many of the truth of the doctrine preached,
although but few have so believed unto righteousness, as to make a public
profession thereof. Leaving Dudley, we had meetings at Stourbridge, Bewdley,
and Bromsgrove: that at Bewdley did not tend to relieve my mind, being attended
by very few of the town's people, unto whom we suppose proper notice had not
been given. On the next First Day we attended a large meeting which is held
annually at Redditch; and thence we went to Worcester, staid over the
Third-day's meeting there, and proceeded to Camden to the funeral of a friend;
then to a meeting at Stow in the Would and to Cirencester, and attended the
meetings there on the First Day, which was a day of memorable favor to some
souls. We visited the meetings of Nailsworth, and paid a visit to my cousin M.
Fowler, at Minchin Hampton; whence we went to Sodbury, had a meeting there, and
proceeded to Bristol, where my dear husband was engaged in business: and
although I saw I must return into Gloucestershire, I was pleased to be
permitted to see him before his return into Cornwall. From Bristol we went to
the meetings at Frenchay and Thornbury on the First Day, and so to the
quarterly meeting for Gloucestershire, held at Cheltenham. As it was the season
for drinking the water of this place, many who were in it on that account,
attended the public meeting, unto whom the testimony of Truth was declared.
From Cheltenham we proceeded to Painswick, attended a large meeting, held on
account of the funeral of a friend, which was a favored opportunity, and had
also a meeting select with the friends of that place. I had a desire to have a
meeting at Gloucester with the people not professing with us, of which notice
was given; and although it was not so large as I wished, I had some open
service amongst those who attended and behaved seriously. We visited friends at
Tewksbury, and on the First Day, had an appointed meeting at Stoke Orchard,
where formerly there had been an established meeting of friends, returned to
Tewksbury, and next day went to Worcester. Thence my companion returned to
Bristol, being desirous to spend a little time at home before the yearly
meeting at Hereford. On the next First Day, being the 10th of the Ninth month,
I attended a large, and I hope a serviceable, meeting at Stourport; which was
appointed and attended by John Townsend of London, and Thomas Waring of
Leominster; and was the first meeting which had been held by Friends in that
place.

My mind not being easy respecting Bewdley, I proposed to the beforementioned
friends, to accompany me in a meeting there; which they being willing to do,
one was appointed to be held the next morning; and although it was not so large
as I expected, it was a favored season, and tended to the relief of my mind.
The 12th, John Townsend accompanied me to Droitwich, where I desired to have a
meeting with the town's people, which proved a memorable season of Divine
favor. The 13th, I went to Bramyard, and the 14th attended the monthly meeting
at Leominster, and staid with my relations there until the 23d. On the 21st,
the marriage of my niece Catharine Young, with George C. Fox of Falmouth, was
solemnized; and the meeting held upon the occasion was large, and the testimony
of Truth was exalted therein, to the Lord's praise.

From Leominster I proceeded to Hereford, where I was met by my companion L.
Hawksworth, and many other ministering friends and others, assembled to attend
the Circular yearly meeting, which was a large, solemn, and (to myself, and
many other friends) humbling season, under the sense of the fresh extendings of
Divine love and power toward Friends, and the people of other religious
societies. How frequently is the assent of the judgment given to the truths
preached in our meetings, by many who attend them, who do not profess with us!
But how few of these walk answerably to what they have been convinced is
consistent with the holy dispensation of Christ! Alas! the cross appears too
great to be taken up, even to gain an immortal crown. But be it considered who
it was that said, He that takes not up his cross, and follows after me, is
not worthy of me; and also, He that is ashamed of me, and of my doctrine, of
him will I be ashamed before my Father and his holy angels. It is not only the
unfaithfulness of many who have been born and educated amongst us, but that of
very many, who have been convinced of the truth of our religious principles,
which prevents the increase of our numbers. There was a time when many people
were weary of worshipping in the outward courts of religion, and could not
content themselves with shadows of it, and were willing to embrace the cross,
that they might obtain the substance; when many great and distinguished persons
and characters, bore testimony to the Truth as it is professed by us, as they
were thereto called of God; whose light shone brightly, and very conspicuously
through their great and numerous sufferings, for their testimony of a good
conscience toward Him and men. The present time is a season of ease, and
greater liberty to worship the Lord agreeably to the instruction of his pure
Spirit; but wherein many of the people are willing to hear, but few are awfully
inquiring "What is Truth," with an earnest desire to know, and sincere
intention to follow it. Pontius Pilate inquired, "What is Truth," but did not
wait for an answer from the Light of Truth. He was in part convinced of his
power and purity, yet he delivered him up to the Jews to be crucified, lest his
temporal interests should suffer, if he rescued him from their malice. And we
read, That the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends, who had before been
at variance with each other. Thus it has been, and is, with many who have been
partly convinced what is Truth. Temporal interests and pleasures have been
preferred to a possession in the Truth; and the joining with the world in
persecuting Christ, to the confessing of him before men. The testimony of his
servant is fulfilled in such; Whosoever will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. These will one day see and lament their great loss. May the Lord
in his mercy rouse many of them to consider the things which will make for
their peace with him, before they are for ever hid from their eyes. I believe
there will come a shaking time in these favored nations, wherein the false
rest of many will be disturbed, and the judgments of the Lord being in the
earth, the inhabitants thereof will learn righteousness; and many will be
gathered from the barren mountains of an empty profession of religion, and the
desolate hills of formality, to sit under the teaching of Christ, manifested by
his Spirit in their souls, and delight in the extendings of the wing of his
love and power; whereby they will be solaced, and sheltered in this state of
probation, and therefore sing salvation and strength thereto. O! that those
remaining under our name may be concerned to keep their lamps burning; that
they may attract the notice of those who in that day will sincerely seek the
way to Zion, saying, Let us be joined unto the Lord in an everlasting covenant;
that such may behold us, as a chosen people of God, abiding in our tents, under
the direction of our holy Captain, Christ Jesus: who raised us up to be a
people, that should bear an uniform testimony to his pure everlasting Truth. He
cleansed us from all the chaff and dross, which under a religious show,
remained amongst the professors of faith in him; as well as from all the
fragments of the legal dispensation, which with its ordinances and ceremonies
were appointed to pass away, when his pure spiritual dispensation of grace and
truth should be introduced and established. He stripped us of that fragment of
superstition wherewith the nominal Christian church was, and yet is in degree,
clothed. He abolished the false faiths and false trusts whereon many had
depended; and he clothed us with that true faith, which overcomes the world,
and is productive of fruits meet for his holy kingdom. And will he suffer us to
become extinct as a peculiar family to himself? Nay, verily. Although many of
us are as degenerate plants of a strange vine unto him; he will return and
visit them, and some of these will be ingrafted into him; and others will be
brought from far, to seek an inheritance amongst them; and the Most High will
acknowledge them, as the branches of his planting, the work of his hands, in
whom he will be glorified.

After taking an affectionate farewell of my friends at Hereford, my companion
and I went to Ross, had a meeting there, and to Bristol, where I left her; and
Ann Byrd accompanied me to Wellington. We staid the morning meeting there on
the First Day, and went in the afternoon to Collumpton; had a religious
opportunity with the friends living there in the evening, and early next
morning went for Exeter; in hope of getting there in time to go forward with
the Friends from that place to the quarterly meeting at Kingsbridge; but they
were gone, and we had to travel a lonely and long day's journey, which was not
accomplished without difficulty, and some danger, it being late at night ere we
got to Kingsbridge. And had not a young woman whom we met at Totness, taken us
into the chaise which she had hired, there was little probability of getting
there that night; as no other chaise was to be had in the town, and the fleet
lying in Torbay, the officers were revelling at the inn; so that we should have
had but an uncomfortable time amongst them. From Kingsbridge, I went to
Plymouth, where I met my dear husband; and after a meeting there, we proceeded
home, where we arrived the 9th of the Tenth month.

I have the more particularly noted my proceedings in this journey, because it
was amongst my friends and others who had heretofore so largely shared my
labors; and this being the last visit which I paid them so generally, it
appeared to me singular, that I should fall in with so many quarterly and
annual meetings; which afforded us an opportunity of seeing each other more
generally and repeatedly than we should have done, had it not so happened: and
be it commemorated with humble thankfulness to the merciful Fountain of
blessings, that it was a season of signal favor to many of our spirits.

I had been laboriously exercised for more than five months in this journey,
and except in attending our monthly and quarterly meeting, and occasional
services about home, I was excused from traveling more in this year. Indeed, I
had for some time, found my nature sinking under the load of exercises it had
long sustained; so that I did not go through services assigned me without many
painful feelings, but He who employed, supported me, to the praise of his ever
worthy Name.

In the spring of the year 1781, I wrote my brother Young to the following
import: -- 'My mind is so closed in regard to future prospects of duty, that I
am ready to conclude, that some family affliction may prevent my moving far
from home soon.'

In this I was not mistaken; for soon after I wrote that letter I was seized
with a cold, the effects whereof became alarming; and after its load was
removed from my lungs, it fell upon my joints, which have gradually stiffened,
and baffled all medical application; so that I am become an entire cripple, and
my fingers are so contracted that my being able to use my pen is admirable to
my friends. But although this is ultimately the consequence, yet I have been
enabled to struggle on for several years.

I was not so recovered as to appear equal to the fatigue of attending the
yearly meeting at London this year; and my husband also was easy to abide at
home, where he was so dangerously attacked with a quinsey, that it appeared he
very narrowly escaped death. His son was from home, and the weight of his
critical situation, together with the attention which was due to him, bore
heavily upon my weak body and spirits, and but that our cousin Frances James,
now Fox, was then with us, I know not how I should have sustained my fatigues.
She very tenderly and assiduously attended upon my husband, and assisted me in
this season of affliction; which I note with thankfulness to that good Hand
which furnished us with her help. My husband's first wife was her mother's
sister, and she being left an infant orphan, my husband, with other relations,
had cared for her, and a mutual affection subsisted; so that her services were
the more willingly lent, and pleasingly accepted.

When my husband's disorder was turned, he recovered strength but slowly, and I
continued weak, yet I could not be easy to omit attending the Circular yearly
meeting, which was this year held at South Molton in Devonshire. My husband's
health not admitting of his accompanying me, my niece Fox was my only
companion; but being in our own chaise we got along the more easily and in
safety to South Molton, where we hoped to have met my brothers Payton and
Young; but in this we were afflictingly disappointed. My brother's servant
brought us intelligence, that his master and my brother Young had come within
one stage of Bristol, where my brother Young was laid up extremely ill; and of
consequence my brother Payton was detained with him. This was afflicting
intelligence to us both; my niece his daughter was sunk too low to proceed
forward alone; and until the meeting closed, no friend could be expected to
accompany her, when my friend Hawksworth took her under her care. She found her
father extremely ill, and his case appeared for some time very dangerous, yet
it pleased Providence to restore him; but he was confined some weeks at the
inn, before it appeared safe for him to move forwards.

The people of South Molton very kindly welcomed friends amongst them, and
freely opened their houses to receive such as could not be accommodated with
lodgings at the inns. My friend Hawksworth and myself preferred lodging at a
private house, as our inn was likely to be very full of company; and as we went
to see a room at a considerable distance, a young clergyman joined us, and
appeared to interest himself in our being well accommodated. He told us the
people of the town were generally moderate and civil, and seemed pleased that
the meeting was appointed there. We were kindly lodged near the inn.

The meeting was very large, and the people behaved soberly: indeed many of
them seemed prepared to receive, or at least hear, the testimony of Truth; and
the power of it so prevailed in the meeting as to bind down the spirits of
others, who might attend from no better motive than curiosity. The spring of
gospel ministry ran freely, and I, though so weak, was enabled to take a large
share in the labor. Friends were comforted together, and the faithful amongst
them rejoiced in perceiving the extendings of the love of God, both toward the
members of our own society, and those of other religious professions; many of
whose hearts were affected under the testimonies delivered in the meetings.

I returned directly home, my friend A. Price accompanying me. Here, and in the
county, I continued for the winter, in a weak state of health, and my dear
husband tender, but mostly cheerful, which was his natural disposition. I do
not know that I have enjoyed one day's health since the spring of this year,
which, as I foresaw, was a year attended with much family affliction, wherein
our son Richard Phillips had a share before it terminated.

In the year 1782, I attended the Welsh yearly meeting, which was held at
Bridgenorth. My husband accompanied me to Bristol, and Lydia Hawksworth went
with me to Bridgenorth. We went direct, only called and staid a short time with
my brother, and returned to the yearly meeting at Bristol, and thence to London.

When I went from Bristol to Bridgenorth, my husband went to Swansea, and met
me in London, to attend the yearly meeting there. A general epidemic cold
reigned during the sitting of the yearly meeting. Many friends were seized with
it, but we were favored to escape it, until much of the service of the
meetings was over. We were both much indisposed, which detained us some time in
London; and when we were able to travel, we returned with our friend Lydia
Hawksworth to Bristol, and thence home. We recovered strength to attend the
Circular yearly meeting, which was held at Tamworth in the Ninth month. My
weakness and contraction in my joints increasing, my husband consulted Dr.
Ludlow, a physician of note of Bristol, upon the case, who ordered me medicine
to take on the journey, which, being of an invigorating quality, I thought
helped to strengthen me to get through the fatigue of the journey, and the
exercise of the meeting; although the principal help in the course of the
labor assigned me therein must be attributed to the Lord's power, which is
manifested in the weakness of his servants. The meeting was large, both of
Friends and those of other societies, and crowned with the Divine presence. The
testimony of Truth was exalted, and faithful friends were comforted, in the
sense of the continued extendings of the heavenly Father's love to the various
states of the members of our own society, as well as to other professors of
religion. Before the meeting was opened I had dislocated my left elbow, by a
fall down a steep and long flight of stairs, and was obliged to carry my arm in
a sling; although I had to take so considerable a share of active labor
through the course of the meetings. After their conclusion, we attended a
meeting at Birmingham, then spent a short time at Dudley, with my brother, and
returned to Bristol, where we again consulted Dr. Ludlow; who advised me to try
the effect of electricity on my contracted joints. After I had continued some
time under that operation, he ordered me to Bath, to try the effect of pumping
upon them, at the same time continuing the medicines he had prescribed. But all
was without the desired effect; and indeed I believe the Doctor had but little
hope in my case, for he intimated that I might probably become an entire
cripple, and live many years in that state: which has been my case.

1783. -- My husband accompanied me to the yearly meeting at London. Before I
left home, I had informed my friends that I was engaged to attend the yearly
meetings of Colchester, Woodbridge, and Norwich, which succeeded that at
London; and had obtained a certificate of their unity with me therein; and my
friend Lydia Hawksworth being under the like concern, we left Bristol on the
28th of the Fifth month, accompanied by our friend Mary Were of Wellington. We
proceeded to Melksham and Salisbury, where we left Mary Were, and went to
Poole, attended the meetings there on First Day, 1st of Sixth month, and the
2d, met Mary Were at Ringwood, attended the monthly meeting there, and
proceeded to Rumsey, thence to Alton, attended the weekday meeting there on
the 4th, and went to Godalming, and the 5th to London. On this day we intended
to have fallen in with the weekday meeting at Esher; but there being a funeral
of a friend at Kingston, most of the friends of Esher were gone to attend it;
so we pressed on, and got to the meeting a little after the time appointed; and
I hope it was well we were there. We attended the quarterly meeting, and
proceeded on our journey, taking meetings in our way to the beforementioned
yearly meetings. We also visited almost all the meetings in Norfolk, then
passed into Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely, visiting the meetings therein,
thence into Essex, and, visiting diverse meetings which I had not before
attended in that county, turned back through Cambridgeshire to Huntingdon. In
this journey I sustained much labor both in body and spirit, which was the
more painful from my increased and increasing weakness; which rendered it
probable, as indeed it proved, that this would be the last visit I should pay
to friends of those parts; as it was also the first I had paid to many of the
meetings which we attended. I was however thankful that the good Shepherd
influenced our minds to visit so many of his sheep in those counties, unto whom
our spirits were united in gospel sympathy; and we had also to bear the burden
of the spirits of formal professors, unto whom the alarm was sounded, to awake
out of sleep. I had some public meetings in this journey to my satisfaction,
and I hope to the edification of many people attending them. One of them was
held at Cambridge; which I hope was serviceable, although I was not favored to
rise in the exercise of the Divine gift bestowed upon me, to that height I did
when in that town many years ago.

That was indeed a singular time, and answered a singular end, viz. to convince
a man who had contemned women's ministry in Christ's church, of its weight,
efficacy, and consistency with the gospel dispensation. The same man, who did
not live in the town, was invited to attend this meeting, and he might therein
hear gospel truths published, and treated upon in a more argumentative way,
than it was common for me to be engaged in. The All-wise employer of true
gospel ministers knows how to direct his servants, both as to the matter, and
the manner wherein he intends it should be communicated to the people. And I
have admired his wisdom and condescension therein, when without forethought my
speech has been accommodated to the capacities of those unto whom it was
directed. To such as were illiterate and ignorant, I have spoken in very low
terms; and to those of more understanding, in such as answered its level; while
to the learned, and those of superior natural abilities, I might say with the
prophet, The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned; although I had
it not by education. I have not wanted eloquence of speech, or strength of
argument, wherein to convey and enforce the doctrines given me to preach; of
which I could say, as my Lord and Master did, My doctrines are not mine, but
his who sent me: and his love, life, and power, has accompanied them, to the
stopping of the mouths of gainsayers, and convincing of the understandings of
many, of the rectitude and efficacy of the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus.

O the depth and excellency of true gospel ministry! The Lord's prophet in the
prospect of it might well exclaim, How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of those who bring good tidings, who publish peace, who publish salvation,
who say unto Zion, Thy God reigns! These are not made so by human or literary
acquirements; but the Spirit from on high being poured upon them, under its
holy humbling influence they are enabled to minister, and compare spiritual
things with spiritual, or elucidate them by natural things, as occasion may
require, without forecast or premeditation; for they speak extempore, as the
Spirit gives utterance. When the ministry in the general thus returns to its
original dignity and simplicity, an education at colleges will not be sought to
qualify for it. No, those who are accoutred for the service of him who spoke as
never man spoke, must be educated in his school, and disciplined by his wisdom;
whereby they are made able ministers of the new testament, not of the letter
but of the spirit; for the letter kills but the spirit gives life.

Thus have I, with many of my fellow laborers, been assisted to minister in
the gospel of Christ; and now in the close of a laborious day's work, I may
commemorate the mercy, power, and wisdom of Him who chooses whom he pleases
for the various offices in his church. He appoints, of both male and female,
some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, for the wo^^^ of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ; until his members come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ; and may grow up into him in all things who is the
Head, from whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth, according to its effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in
love. Then, there is the highest rejoicing in him the heavenly Teacher, who
fulfils his gracious promise, both to those who minister under him, and to
those who are not called to this awful service, Lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the world!

Unto him all true gospel ministers direct the people, and endeavor to settle
them under the teaching of his pure Spirit. These disclaim the least degree of
ability to labor availingly in his service, except what flows from him, the
fountain of Divine power, love, and life; and, after they have done and
suffered what he assigns them. sit down in the acknowledgment, that what they
are, they are through his grace. And thanking him that they have not received
his grace in vain, humbly confess they have done but their duty. Thus from
early youth, have I traveled and labored, that the saving knowledge of God
may increase, through experience of the prevalence of the power of his Son;
whereby the true believers in him become crucified to the world and the world
unto them; and being th^^ dead, are raised by him in newness of life, to the
praise and glory of God. Freely I have received the knowledge of salvation
through the sanctifying operation of the spirit of Christ; and freely have I
testified thereof, and of God's universal love through his Son to mankind: for
he would have none to perish, but that all should be saved, and attain to the
knowledge of his Truth.

My views, with those of others my fellow laborers in the ministry, have, in
regard to ourselves, been simply to obtain peace with God through an honest
discharge of our duty; and in respect to those unto whom we have freely
ministered, that they might be turned from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God; and be favored with the experience of the remission
of sins, and obtaining a fixed inheritance amongst all those who are
sanctified. And we are not afraid to say, that the love of Christ has
constrained us to minister, unmixed with any temporal interested motive, or
view of reward. Through that love, we have been made willing to spend our
temporal substance, as well as our strength of body and of faculties, and to
suffer many hardships; yea, to leave what was dearest to us in nature, and be
accounted fools by the wise and prudent of this world; some of whom have poured
upon us contempt, but who professing themselves to be wife, have manifested
their foolishness; and by speaking evil of what they knew not, have evidently
been wise in their own conceits.

As to us, however we may have been favored by the Lord, who has accounted us
worthy to have a part in this ministry, and has at seasons clothed us as with a
royal robe, to the astonishment of even those who have had us in derision; all
boasting is excluded, by the pure humbling law of faith in Christ, the wisdom
and power of God, and we confess with his primitive ministers, that we have
nothing of our own to boast of but infirmities, nor have we ought to glory in
but his grace to help us; through which we have been rendered equal to the
arduous tasks assigned us; and willing to turn from prospects the most pleasing
to the natural mind, and to endure crosses, tribulations, and the contempt of
men, for his sake, who so loved us as to die for us; and has mercifully called
us by his grace, to become heirs with him in the kingdom of his Father: and
having done all, we have nothing to trust in but the mercy of God, manifested
in and through him; and under a sense that all we can do to promote his honor
is but little, and that little communicated by his strength, this is ultimately
the language of our spirits. Not unto us, O Lord! not unto us, but unto thy
ever worthy name, or power, be glory forever! Amen.

From Cambridge, one of the seats of learning, I wish I could say of piety, we
proceeded to visit some other meetings in this quarter, and coming to Ives,
attended the funeral of Samuel Abbot, an elder of good report. The meeting held
upon the occasion was extremely crowded, and many of the principal inhabitants
of the town and neighborhood attended it. It was a season of awful solemnity,
wherein the tide of gospel ministry rose high, even to the overflowing the
mounds of opposition; and I believe the people were so humbled, that many of
them could join us in supplication and praise to the Lord, who is glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders. Hence we went (as before hinted)
to Huntingdon, our friend John Abbot (son to the friend whose funeral we had
attended) accompanying us. From Huntingdon we proceeded to Ampthill in
Bedfordshire; and in our way passed through Potton, intending, if it was
convenient, to lodge in that town, with one professing with us. But alas! when
we came there, we found the town, which the day before, had been, it was said,
one of the prettiest in the county, in ruins. A terrible fire had raged all
night, and was not then in some places quite extinguished. Almost the whole of
a principal street, through which we walked (not without fear lest the
chimnies, or some other parts of the brick or stone-work left standing, should
fall upon us), and most of the houses in the marketplace were consumed. The
fire stopped at the next house to that which our friend had inhabited. He had
time to get his goods out, but had left them, and with his wife was gone to
another town where they had relations, and through which we had to pass, and
where, at an inn, we lodged at night, our friend Abbot accompanying us. The
view of Potton and its inhabitants was truly pitiable: the goods of the
sufferers were scattered about round the town in the fields, and some were
watching them. The countenances of some whom we saw in the streets were deeply
marked with grief; and the principal ovens being destroyed, bread was to be
fetched from a town some miles distant. Our friend John Abbot was so touched
with the countenance of one poor woman, that after passing her, he turned back,
and gave her something handsome; but she probably knew not where to buy
victuals if she wanted it. The principal inns being burned down or greatly
injured, we stopped at the house of an acquaintance of his, in a part of the
town which had escaped the fire, who readily gave us some refreshment; and in
return, we left with him, toward the present relief of the sufferers, so much
as excited his thankfulness. The next morning we visited our friends who had
fled from Potton, at their relation's; and had a solemn religious opportunity
with them and others present; and proceeding to Ampthill, attended the
First-day's meetings there. From Ampthill, John Abbot returned home, and we
went pretty directly to Melksham, appointing some meetings in our way thither.
Before I came there my strength was extremely exhausted, and having a concern
to attend the Circular yearly meeting to be held at From in Somersetshire, it
appeared necessary for me previously to take a little rest. We therefore staid
at Melksham with my affectionate relations Elizabeth Fowler and her son and
daughter, her husband being now dead. At From, I met with my dear brother
James Payton, and many of my relations and friends, and the Lord favored us
together with his presence. The meetings were large, solemn, and eminently
crowned with divine life and power, wherein the gospel was preached by several
ministers. Nicholas Waln, from Pennsylvania, attended this meeting, and had
acceptable service therein. I went directly home; and in my way had a favored
meeting with friends, and many others of the inhabitants of Exeter. My niece
Fox accompanied me from From to Truro, where my dear husband met me, to our
mutual thankfulness. I do not recollect any thing more worth remarking in the
remainder of this year, wherein I continued weak, yet attended services about
home as they occurred.

In the spring of the year 1784, my dear husband was much indisposed, and from
that time was frequently afflicted with a giddiness in his head; yet he
recovered so far as to attend the yearly meeting at London, and I accompanied
him in much weakness; yet I had cause to be humbly thankful for the Divine aid
vouchsafed to labor, although I was unable to attend all the meetings which
were held in the course of that solemnity.

From London we went to Bristol, where my husband had business; and as I had no
inclination to stay in that city, proceeded in company with M. and A. Moon, to
Wellington. Thence I was accompanied by my dear friend M. Were to William
Byrd's at Uffculm; at whose house we had a favored meeting with the town's
people, and returned to Wellington; where I waited, until my husband came to
me. I was strongly impressed with a concern to pay a visit once more to the few
professing Truth in the north side of Devonshire, as well as to hold some
public meetings in some of the towns which I had heretofore visited. My
husband knew of my having this prospect, but when he came to me at Wellington,
and saw how poorly I was, he almost feared for me, and would have been pleased
if I had been easy to have accompanied him directly home. This however not
being the case, we went on the First Day to Friends meeting at Spice-land,
which was attended by a pretty many sober people, not professing with us; and
the Master of our assemblies, favored with suitable doctrine and counsel, so
that the truly righteous rejoiced together; and, under the sense of the arm of
the Lord being extended to help in the seasons of weakness, we proceeded from
this meeting to South Molton; and our friends Nicholas and Mary Were, and
William and Ann Byrd, accompanied us; as did also Thomas Melhuish of Taunton.
We appointed a meeting to be held there the next morning; but the weather
proving very wet, there was some doubt how it would be attended; however it was
pretty large, and a solemn instructive season. No one professing with us lived
in this town, nor had any meeting been appointed there since the Circular
meeting was held there in 1781. But the remembrance and savor of that
solemnity might continue long upon the minds of religious persons.

We went that evening to Barnstaple (except T. Melhuish, who returned home),
and next day had a meeting there in the Assembly-room, which was large, solemn,
and highly favored with the Divine power and presence. I was wonderfully
assisted to publish gospel truths, in the demonstration of the spirit, and with
power; and it appeared that many who heard, understood and were affected,
amongst whom were some of the higher rank. O! that such heavenly visitations
might produce fruits of righteousness answerable to the labor bestowed; but
alas! they are too frequently like water spilled upon a stone, which although
it wets the surface, does not change the obdurate unfruitful nature of the
stone; and the rain which has descended upon it, is so quickly dried up, that
there remains no evidence of its having been watered.

Indeed the stone is, agreeable to its nature, unfruitful, and must remain so.
But what said the apostle unto those whose hearts were like ground, which,
although it was often watered, brought forth nothing more profitable than
briers and thorns. It is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

It is extremely dangerous trifling with the Lord's merciful visitation to the
soul, as time is uncertain: therefore those who hear, have need to be concerned
to obey the call of God to a renovation of mind and manners, that their souls
may live.

From Barnstaple, we went to Great Torrington, and had a large and I hope
serviceable meeting there, although not so distinguishedly favored as that of
Barnstaple had been. My dear friends A. Byrd and M. Were had acceptable service
in the beforementioned meetings; as well as in ministering to the few friends
who were scattered about the country, who met us at one place or other; and we
had private religious opportunities with them, so that they were generally
visited. I was favored with much freedom to speak to them in the love of
Christ, and therein to take my farewell of them; for this proved to be my last
visit. There were never many friends settled on the north side of Devonshire. I
know not of a meeting house having been built in any town I have visited there;
yet a few, some of them having been gathered from other professions of
religion, were scattered about in this quarter, and held meetings at their
houses.

W. Byrd and his wife left us at Torrington; but Nicholas Were and his wife
concluded to accompany us to Hatherly, twelve miles farther, where I had a
desire to have a meeting; and their being so disposed proved very serviceable
to us.

There having been a large fair for cattle the day before we came to Hatherly,
and the farmers scarcely all gone from the place, we found the inn in such
disorder as to render it doubtful how we should lodge. However, the landlady
got clean linen, and our friends Were and ourselves got lodging; but some men
friends who met us from Exon, were obliged to shift for themselves as well as
they could; and a young woman who accompanied them was provided for with us.
The town was small, and in such a hurry, that it appeared a poor time to get a
meeting. The weather was also very wet on this and the next day; but some of
the town's people being informed of our view in coming, interested themselves
in procuring us a meeting place, and we were furnished with one as commodious
as we could expect. Many assisted to seat a part of it; and the weather
continuing wet, prevented some of the inhabitants from going to their labor,
so that I know not but our meeting was the larger through that circumstance.
The people behaved well, many were content to stand, and we were favored with
a solemn meeting amongst them. No meeting had been held in this place for very
many years; so that most of our auditors appeared ignorant of our religious
principles and manner of worship; but our visit was received with expressions
of pleasure and gratitude by some, and we left the place with thankful hearts,
each of us settiog our faces homeward the same evening. My health continued
declining, and my husband's complaint of giddiness returned pretty frequently.
We did not go far from home for the remainder of this year.

In 1785 my husband was inclined to attend the yearly meeting at London, and
desirous of my accompanying him. I was so weighed down with painful sensations,
and my joints so much contracted, and he so subject to the giddiness in his
head, that I suggested to him the propriety of our considering whether it was
safe for us to venture upon such a journey: to which he replied, that his mind
was strongly drawn to the yearly meeting, and said, that it would be the last
he should attend. In our way thereto we were at the meeting of Bridport on the
First Day; and I appointed a meeting at Andover, which was large, and eminently
favored with the Divine power and presence. Samuel Emlen and George Dillwyn,
both of Philadelphia, attended this meeting; but the principal share of the
ministry rested upon me: indeed I had long had a view to a meeting in this
town, and this proved to be the last time I passed through it. When we reached
London, I was in a very weak state, but was enabled to attend the meetings in
their course. At the yearly meeting in the preceding year, our men-friends had
weightily considered the state of our women's yearly meeting; and it appearing
that it might become of more general service, if the queries for women-friends,
which are answered from their monthly to their quarterly meetings, were also
answered from the quarterly to the yearly meeting of women, they sent a minute
to the quarterly and monthly meetings to that import; and this year answers
were sent from some quarterly meetings, and women-friends attended as
representatives. But it being a new thing, and the propriety or necessity of it
not fully understood by all our women-friends, an epistle was written, setting
forth the rise and use of the discipline established amongst us, and
encouraging women-friends to attend to their share of it. As mothers of
children and mistresses of families, they have an extensive service to attend
to, and ought to be concerned so to discipline their families, as to be able to
answer the several queries relative to their situation.

My mind being drawn to visit the quarterly meeting of Hertfordshire, I
intimated it to my friend Elizabeth Talwyn of Bromley, who kindly took me and
my dear companion Lydia Hawksworth thereto in her coach; and this was my
farewell visit to Friends there. As I knew that my husband as well as myself
wished to leave London as soon as we could with ease of mind, I requested that
notice might be sent to the several meetings near to that of Chorley Wood, that
I hoped to be there on the next First Day, and should be pleased to see as many
as could meet me there. The meeting house was pretty full, it was a favored
season, and the last meeting I had in that part of the kingdom. That night we
lodged with our friend Robert Eeles near Amersham, by whom and his kind wife I
had several times been affectionately entertained. Next day we reached Banbury,
had a meeting with friends there, on the next morning, and after taking an
affectionate leave of my near relation S. Stone, we proceeded that night to
Warwick. My sister received us affectionately, though not without concern to
see me so much enfeebled. My joints were so contracted that it was become
difficult for me to walk; and throughout this journey I was assisted in
dressing; and my inward weakness was also very apparent, so that it appeared
probable that this might be our last interview, I attended one meeting with
friends at Warwick, wherein the Divine spring of gospel ministry was opened to
the refreshment of religious minds; and, after taking my last personal farewell
of my dear sister, we went to Coventry, had an evening meeting there, which was
pretty generally attended by friends and some intelligent people not professing
with us; and the Lord favored us together in a memorable degree. The subjects
given me to speak upon, were the awfulness and importance of passing through
time, considering the consequences depending thereupon, and the solemnity of
passing out of it, even to the best of men. For although such might be favored
with a well-grounded hope of participating in the inheritance which is
undefiled and fades not away; and might rejoice at the approach of the hour of
release from the pains and solicitudes attendant in this probationary state; it
was a season, wherein, from the consideration of the purity of Christ's
kingdom, they might think it needful to examine whether their spirits were so
clean, as to be meet for admittance thereinto. But to the wicked it was a
terrible hour. Many striking remarks, directed to diverse states, were given me
to make; and I was favored to deliver them in concise, yet strong terms, to
the affecting the minds of many present: and thus, taking leave of that city,
we proceeded next day to Birmingham, attended the First Day meeting there, and
thence to Dudley. We staid a few days with my brother, attended one meeting
there, and another at Stourbridge, afterward went to Worcester, and were at
the First Day meetings there.

As my case appeared alarming, and some of my friends advised my making trial
of Buxton water, my husband, when we were at Birmingham, took the advice of a
physician of note, who did not choose to prescribe for me, nor encourage my
going to Buxton; but advised our calling at Bath, but cautioned me against
drinking the waters, or bathing, without taking further advice there: so taking
leave of our brother James Payton and friends at Worcester, we proceeded
directly to Bath. The advice I there had was to return home, drink the Bath
water there, and pursue the course of medicine prescribed. The weather was then
too hot for me either to bathe, or drink the water there, but it was left to
further consideration whether I should return there in the fall.

Weak as I was, I had two meetings at Bath; in one of which I had a strong and
clear testimony directed to a state which in youth had been Divinely visited,
and made some advances in the path of self-denial; but in more advanced age,
had sought after worldly wisdom and knowledge, and the friendship of those in
that spirit, and had lost the heavenly dew of youth.

There was a person in the state described, in the meeting, who was much
affected, and died in a short time. How does Divine mercy follow the
backsliders from his holy commandment, with the gracious call of Turn ye, why
will you die?

From Bath, we went to Bristol, where my husband had business, and where I left
him, and went to John Hipsley's at Congersbury, was at the meeting of Claverham
on the First Day, and returning to Congersbury, staid there until my husband's
business permitted him to return home: to which we went directly, myself in a
feeble state, but my husband appeared to be as well as when we left it.

After our return from London, my husband's time and attention were very much
engrossed by business relative to the mining interests in this county. Some
alteration in the course of the trade appeared necessary, and as he had from
his youth been engaged in the copper trade, and was well acquainted with the
state of it, both in the past and present times, much regard was paid to his
judgment, by many who attended at the meetings held on the occasion: and his
solicitude for its settlement to the advantage of the laboring miners, as well
as for allowing the adventurers, and others engaged in the trade, a prospect of
a reasonable profit, was such, that under the continued exertion of his
faculties for several weeks, his strength evidently declined.

The Circular yearly meeting falling this year in Cornwall, had been at our
spring quarterly meeting appointed to be held at Truro, the 7th, 8th, and 9th
of the Eighth month, which was several weeks earlier than it was customary to
hold that meeting. This had occasioned some demur in the minds of some friends,
who doubted whether those of the distant counties might be so generally at
liberty to attend it, as if it should be held in its usual course; and some
friends gave a preference to another town for the meeting. But my husband
having attentively considered when and where to fix this important solemnity,
under a concern that the All-wise Director would deign to influence the minds
of Friends therein, was steady in his judgment that both the time and place
proposed were right: and the event showed that he was not mistaken. He with
other friends were engaged in preparing accommodation for this meeting, and the
town's people were very ready to assist. A large booth was erected to hold it
in, and other places were procured, if that should not be sufficient to contain
the people.

I was yet in a feeble state, and as it appeared to me improbable that the
meeting would be attended by so many ministers and friends of religious weight,
from the distant counties constituting it, and other parts of the nation, as in
some past years, my spirit was weighed down under a sense of the great
importance of the service, and the disproportion of my natural strength to the
labor of so large meetings. My faith was indeed ready to fail; but I cried
unto the Lord, in the language of Samson, If the testimony of his Truth might
but be exalted through me as an instrument, "let me die," if it be thy will, in
this great effort to overcome the Philistine nature in the people: and this
proved to be the last of those general meetings which I attended. In the night
before we went to Truro, my dear husband was so much indisposed with the
giddiness in his head, that he proposed to me to go to Truro, and leave him to
take an emetic, which he hoped might ease his head, and to come to me the next
morning. I was reluctant to leave him behind me, and it was well I did not, as
the straining to vomit would probably have produced instant death. He grew
bettter toward midday, and accompanied me to Truro, where we met with many of
our friends, and he regained his wonted cheerfulness and activity, and was very
serviceable during the course of the meetings, in regulating the holding of
them, settling the people, and taking share in the care that nothing might
happen amongst our young people at the several inns, which might tend to shade
the testimony of that pure Truth, which we met to propagate, from very distant
parts of the nation. The concourse of people, especially of those not
professing with us, was very great, and not a few of them of the higher rank.
Many came far to attend the meetings, and behaved with becoming decency,
consistently with so solemn an occasion. The booth, though as large as a good
voice could well extend over to be distinctly heard, would not near contain the
people; so that friends were obliged to hold a meeting in the afternoons of the
7th and 8th in another place.

This consequently tended to divide the ministers to the several meetings, and,
as I had foreseen, much of the service of the meetings in the booth devolved
upon me; yet not so, but that some other ministers had an acceptable share
therein. The testimony of Truth was largely and freely declared, and arose in
its native dignity, and clearness; so that very many not professing with us
assented to the truths preached. The public meetings concluded on the 9th
before dinner, under the overshadowing wing of Divine love, life, and power.
The minds of many friends were comfortably impressed with a sense of the
continued extendings of the heavenly Shepherd's care over us as a religious
Society; as well as of his condescension in causing his gospel call to go forth
amongst others, and they turned their faces homeward in the afternoon, in
humble thankfulness.

Here I may observe, as it has occurred to me when attending those large
general meetings, how different in their nature and tendency these meetings
are, to those which are appointed by professing Christians for amusement,
wherein there is much noisy mirth, and unchristian jollity: and if in some of
them, the entainments, in one part of the day, have an outward and pompous show
of religion, under the vain and false pretense of praising God with the voice,
accompanied with instruments of music, in the repetition of some of the most
sublime and instructive parts of Scripture; in another part of it, the
Christian name is shamefully dishonored, by the amusements, which succeed what
they call their sacred oratorios. I have been shocked in the consideration, of
the expressions of holy men of God, who penned them as the Holy Spirit dictated
them, and some awful instructive historical parts of Scripture, becoming
prostituted to the purpose of amusement; and furnishing occasion for many
nominal Christians to assemble, to gratify their inclinations to pride, vanity,
and pompous appearances, as well as in some instances, the practicing of gross
wickedness: insomuch, that it may be said with truth, the Lord of Purity abhors
their religious mockery, and their seemingly solemn meetings are iniquity; and
as such, an abomination in his holy eyes, who cannot be imposed upon by
specious pretenses, nor bribed by donations given for distressed objects, to
withhold his righteous judgments; which will assuredly be executed, in their
appointed season, on all the proud, and those who work wickedness. How
different to these (I say again and without ostentation), are the meetings, of
which in the course of these memoirs I have so frequently given an account!
whereto many friends resort, from very distant places and at a very
considerable expense, with a view to the edifying of others by the pure
doctrines which may be freely preached in their public assemblies, and by a
conduct consistent with Christian morality and rectitude; and with desires to
be edified together in the presence of the Lord, in whose presence there is
life, and at whose right hand there are pleasures, sublime, and everlastingly
durable. My spirit worships in the sense of the foretaste of them, which I have
experienced in the present state; and in the hope, which cheers in the painful
seasons and afflictive occurrences attendant thereon, that finally, the
immortal spirit will be solaced in the inestimable, and, by it unmerited,
reward which is appointed for the righteous, and is unmixed with sorrow.

From this, I hope not ill-timed, digression, I return to the 10th of the
Eighth month; when several of the ministers who had attended the meetings at
Truro were at ours at Redruth: amongst whom was my friend Hawksworth, worth,
who came with intent to spend some time with us, in hope that we might be
favored together with a little rest both of body and mind, which might tend to
the recruiting our strength. But alas! although this important solemnity was so
well over, and my dear husband's engagements in temporal concerns now sat
comparatively light, and we were cheered for two days, the third evinced the
instability of all human comforts. On the 11th, our friend, T. Bevington of
Worcester, came to pay us a short visit. He expressed an inclination to have a
meeting with the town's people; and my husband going, as he was accustomed upon
such occasions, to inform some of them that a meeting would be held that
evening, was observed to do it with rather more than common solemnity and
tenderness of spirit. I hope the meeting was serviceable, and we spent the
evening agreeably with our friends.

In the morning of the 12th, T. Bevington left his place pretty early, and my
dear husband arose before me in seemingly usual health, and ate some breakfast,
but was suddenly seized with an acute pain in his breast. He came and found me
dressing, and told me that the pain was extreme, but said that he conceived it
was only on the muscles, and might be rheumatick, but that he could cover the
spot affected with his finger. He chose to undress and go into bed, and
complained of cold. I sent for an apothecary who apprehended no danger in his
case, and gave him a small dose of paregoric elixir, which operated to quiet
him and stupify his pain. I left a servant with him, and got some breakfast,
and returning found him rather inclined to sleep, so, having some family
concerns to attend to, I left him again. The maid who was left with him said he
complained of a return of his pain and she soon perceived such an alteration as
occasioned her to ring the bell violently, on which my friend Lydia Hawksworth
and I hastened to the chamber. She came soon enough to see him draw his last
breath; but my lameness not permitting me to make so much speed, and the maid
preventing me from immediately approaching his bedside, I saw only a
breathless corpse.

Thus ended the valuable life of my dearly beloved William Phillips, in the
manner he had repeatedly expressed a desire it might end, that is suddenly;
though not altogether unexpectedly by himself, as may have been noticed by what
I have noted before we set out on our late journey. He intimated to me, that
his prospects in regard to service in the present state were much closed; and
that in respect to the future he had no cloud before him; and he would speak of
the solemn close with that ease that discovered he expected no sting of
conscience in his death: but the reason he gave for wishing (in submission to
the Divine will) that it might be sudden, was, that he had felt so little pain
in passing through time, until he had attained the common age of man, that he
doubted whether if tried with it in the awful season of death, he should
support it with that calm, patient dignity, which graces the close of a
Christian life.

By appearances upon his body when it was cold, it was evident that a large
blood vessel had broken in his breast; although not the least indication of
such an event appeared by any discharge from the mouth, whilst he was alive.
His desire of attending the meeting at Truro was gratified, which had not been
the case had it been held in its usual course. Neither is it probable that I
could have attended and labored therein with that strength of mind I was
favored to do, had this important stroke been executed before that meeting:
for although I was preserved from sinking into a state of condemnable sorrow;
the shock attending it could not be sustained without my already much enfeebled
nature suffering by it. We had lived in the tender endearing connection of
marriage somewhat more than thirteen years, after a friendship of about
three-and-twenty. The tie of natural affection betwixt us was strong, arising
from a similarity of sentiments, which was strengthened by an infinitely higher
connection. Indeed he was a man who commanded love, esteem, and respect, from
his numerous relations, friends, and acquaintance, in their different ranks and
stations. He was extensively useful without priding himself with it, and he
commanded the assent of the judgment of those, amongst whom he might be looked
upon as a principal, in the transactions of business, by sound reasoning rather
than by overbearing. Such was his public character, drawn, as far as it goes,
not beyond the life, though by his afflicted affectionate widow.

She also best knew his private virtues, and engaging manners, exemplified in
his family connections, friendships, and the general tenor of his conduct; and
therefore may say, that he was a kind master, an affectionate father, and a
warm and steady friend; always ready to serve his relations, friends, and
neighbors, by advice, or as an executor, or referee in disputed cases. An
affectionately tender husband -- Ah, me! how shall I delineate this part of his
character! Bound to me by the endearing ties of love and friendship, heightened
by religious sympathy, his respect as well as affection, was apparent to our
friends and acquaintance. His abilities to assist me in my religious
engagements were conspicuous; for although he had no share in the ministerial
labor, he was ready to promote it. His natural temper, though quick, was soft
and complaisant; a man of exact order in his business, and strict economy,
even to minute circumstances; yet prudently liberal in his expenses, and
charitable to the poor.

In his religious character, he was firmly fixed in his principles agreeably to
his profession, and concerned to act consistently with them; but, clothed with
charity toward all men, he rejoiced if a reformation of mind and manners was
wrought amongst mankind, whoever were the instruments of it. His experience in
the spirituality of religion was deeper than even some of his friends might
conceive; as it was sometimes concealed under the veil of cheerfulness, which
predominated in his constitution; or secreted, through his aversion to make any
ostentatious show of it; but when called up to some services in Christ's
church, it was evident that he had been instructed in his school. His faith and
trust in the Divine power, wisdom, and providence, were strong; which enabled
him to sustain disappointment and worldly losses with firmness. In this he was
tried in some instances, to a degree which would have shaken many minds; but he
would say, If a part is gone, I have many mercies left to be thankful for; and
he therefore endeavored to preserve his wonted calmness and cheerfulness.

And when Death's solemn shaft with swiftness flew,
Prepared he stood, and no confusion knew;
Sudden the stroke, but peaceful was his end;
Angels his consorts, and his Lord his friend.
Beloved and honored, see, his spirit soars
To heavenly mansions, and his God adores.
If any peruse what I have written, who had but partial knowledge of him, they
may perhaps conclude me too abundant in encomiums upon him. But there are who
can subscribe to their truth, and who might add their testimony to his worth
and abilities as a man, and a useful member of the community at large, as well
as an honorable one of the religious society of Friends: and if his
descendants in the natural line, succeed him in that of virtue and piety, they
will value this attempt to delineate his character.

My dear brother was fast declining in his health. He had lately received an
alarm, by a stroke of the Palsy, to trim his lamp, unto which I hope he
attended. He was now in part recovered, but in the succeeding spring was
revisited by that distressing disorder, which quickly terminated his life; in
the close whereof he was favored with the cheering prospect of his immortal
spirit's centering in everlasting blessedness. He was endowed with a very good
natural understanding, which in the latter part of his life was so much
employed for the assistance of his friends and neighbors, both of the town and
country wherein he resided, that he had as much business in accommodating
disputes about property, and other acts of kind aid as his strength would well
bear. He died beloved, and his loss was regretted by both the rich and poor.

A TESTIMONY from the monthly meeting of Friends for the Western division of
Cornwall, held at Falmouth the 6th of the Fourth Month, 1795, concerning our
late valued friend, CATHERINE PHILLIPS, formerly PAYTON.
IT appears, from accounts received, that she was born at Dudley in
Worcestershire, the 16th of the First month, 1726-7, Old Style. Her parents,
Henry and Ann Payton were honorable friends; and he an approved minister, who,
when in health, was much from home in the discharge of his religious duties;
but for many of the latter years of his life was confined to his chamber by a
paralytic disorder: so that the care of a large young family devolved mostly
upon his wife, a woman of eminent piety and prudence, whose anxious solicitude
for, and watchful attention to, her children, they have often commemorated with
filial tenderness. Thus instructed by example and precept, our beloved friend
was early engaged to seek the Lord for her portion, and to know the God of her
fathers to be the lot of her inheritance. And being much the companion of her
afflicted father, she was probably thereby preserved from many levities
incident to youth, as well as edified by his innocent conversation and virtues.
In this allotment she had also opportunity to cultivate a disposition for
retirement, so favorable to the growth of that good seed which the heavenly
husbandman had sown in her heart. Nevertheless, as she advanced in years, she
found the propensities of natural inclination and wisdom strongly opposed to
the manifestation of Divine grace; and through the conversation of some whose
minds were not sufficiently guarded by that fear which preserves from the
snares of death; together with the introduction of books inconsistent with the
simplicity of Truth, her best interest was greatly endangered. But it pleased
Him whose gracious purpose it was to separate her to his service, about the
seventeenth year of her age, to renew the powerful visitation of his love; and,
being favored to see the station designed for her in the church militant, she
was made willing to endure the baptisms necessary to that end. Under this
trying dispensation she experienced the enemy of her soul to be a subtle as
well as an open enemy; and earnest were her petitions, that she might be
enabled to center so deep in the resignation of her own will, as clearly to
distinguish his deceptive voice from that of the true Shepherd; and thus be
preserved from stepping forth in her service, before the appointed time. And
this petition was no doubt granted by Him who saw the integrity and dedication
of her mind: for having, as we believe, passed through this work of
preparation, the fruit produced was correspondently mature; and her progress in
religious experience and usefulness distinguishably eminent. Her first public
appearance was in supplication at Dudley meeting, on the 10th of the Second
month, 1748, being then in the twenty-second year of her age; and in the
following year she entered upon her travels in the ministry, which continued
with little intermission until within about nine years of her decease; during
which latter space she was mostly confined at home by indisposition of body.
Besides repeatedly visiting most of the counties in England and Wales, her
travels extended to Ireland, Scotland, Holland, and the continent of America:
in the course of which, according to accounts received, her labors amongst
friends and others were blessed, to the convincement, edification, and comfort
of many. In the year 1772, she entered upon the marriage state with our late
valued friend William Phillips, and removed into Cornwall; where she was much
engaged in religious labor, as well for the spreading of the testimonies of
Truth among strangers, as in repairing the waste places in the Society: being
often zealously concerned for the support of our Christian discipline, that
irremediable cases which have been too much neglected, and were as
stumbling blocks, might be removed out of the way of sober inquirers; and
particularly for the right establishment of women's meetings, in which her
service was considerable.

During her long confinement and illness, a little before which time her
tenderly affectionate husband was suddenly removed from her by death, she was
often deeply tried; yet had to testify that the Lord's hand was still at times
revealed for her support and preservation, and that his wisdom is stamped on
every dispensation of his Providence. And although it was not permitted her to
behold much fruits of her many arduous labors and secret baptisms amongst us,
we believe they have been blessed to some of us; and with regard to others, we
have a hope, as the Lord often sees meet for wise ends, to veil from the view
of his faithful laborers the extent of their usefulness, that the good seed
sown through the instrumentality of this highly favored servant will not be
lost; but in due season produce the desired increase to the praise of his own
ever worthy Name.

Some time before her decease, she thus expressed herself; I am going where the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest. Oh, these souls of
ours! that we should be willing to run the risk of losing them for any of the
enjoyments of this life. I may say to you, Follow me as I have followed Christ.
Beware of pride, and of the very ground of pride. When under pressure of great
bodily suffering, she said, This is a trial; Lord God Almighty sanctify it to
my soul. To one present she said, My dear child, the Lord God Almighty bless
thee in every respect; all things may be done, and all things may be borne,
through faith and faithfulness to the Author of all good. A few days before her
removal, being at dinner, one remarked how little she ate. She replied, it will
do its office as long as necessary; and I am thankful that I feel no cloud;
and, making a short pause, added, I have received a recompense at the Lord's
hand for sin: soon after which, the fits which attended her in this illness
returned, and continued till about half an hour before she expired, during
which space she lay very quiet, and drew her breath shorter and shorter to the
last. She died the 16th of the Eighth month, 1794, in the sixty-eighth year of
her age, and forty-sixth of her ministry; and, after a meeting of friends and
others of the neighborhood held on the occasion, was decently interred at Kea.

Read and approved in said Meeting, and signed by Thomas W. Fox Benjamin Wilkey
Richard Scantlebury William James James Hamilton Samuel Tregelles William
Jenkin Richard Fox George Fox Samuel Tregelles, jun. John Hamilton David
Richards Silvanus James Joseph Honeychurch Robert W. Fox Tabitha Fox Sarah
Tregelles Eleanor Richards Catherine Fox Frances Fox Mary Fox, jun. Grace
Dennis Eliza C. Jennings Elizabeth Hingston Hannah Fox Anna Fox Anna Price
Sarah James Rebecca Tregelles Eliza R. Fox Mary Hingston, jun. Mary J. Fox
Catherine Richards Catharine Hamilton Cath. Phillips Tregelles Elizabeth Philp.

Read and approved in our Quarterly Meeting for Cornwall, held at Falmouth the
7th of the Fourth month, 1795, and signed in and on behalf thereof, by GEORGE
FOX, Clerk. ANNA FOX, Clerk.


APPENDIX.
EPISTLE I. Copy of a Letter to that truly great minister, my ancient friend,
Abigail Watson of Ireland.
Dudley, 18th of Eleventh Month, 1751. My Dear Friend,
IT was not because I had not a due esteem for thy letter, that I did not
answer it from Dublin; for indeed I read it with pleasure, and am thankful thou
countest me in any degree worthy of thy friendship; but being pretty much
hurried, could hardly get a quiet hour to write. I now make use of the first
convenient opportunity to inform thee, that, through Divine favor, I have
safely reached my outward habitation, and was gladly received by my dear
mother, etc. whom I found in as good a state of health as I expected. My mind,
for the most part since I came home, has been quiet and easy, resting under the
enjoyment of peace in discharging my duty to your nation; which service, as
thou hintest, was not undertaken in my own will, nor performed in my own
strength; but He who sent me forth, vouchsafed to accompany me: and though he
many times saw meet that I should be deeply tried, he was with me in the deeps,
as well as in the heights, preserving in danger and distress. Unseen he helped
me, because he knew my soul looked to him for assistance, desiring to be guided
by his unerring counsel. I write not this boastingly, for my spirit is humbled,
under a sense of his goodness and unmerited love. What am I, that the Majesty
of heaven should thus condescend to visit me? A poor, weak, unprofitable
servant, unto whom belongs fear and confusion of face. Ah! my dear friend, what
are the best of us all, without the Divine presence or assistance? It is that
is our strength, our crown, and rejoicing; by that are we made beautiful; and,
divested of that, become as nothing: O! may I ever live in a just sense of the
necessity of seeking after it. O! my God, sooner cut the thread of my life,
than suffer me to fall from tasting thy goodness: let me not bring dishonor on
thy great Name, which I now reverence and adore. These, my dear friend, are the
secret desires of my soul, in joy and affliction; which in freedom and
tenderness of spirit, I at this time communicate. Whenever thou or thy husband
find freedom to write me a few lines, I hope, if health permit, you will not
forbear. My lot is cast in a barren land, and I want all the help that can be
afforded me: I am persuaded I need not request you to remember me, since I have
good reason to believe our spirits are united in gospel-fellowship; in which I
at this time both salute and bid you farewell, and am thy

affectionate friend, CATHERINE PAYTON.

EPISTLE II. To the few who have been convinced of the rectitude of waiting
upon the Lord in Silence, and accustomed to meet for that good end, in Cardiff.
Friends,
IN the love of my heavenly Father, joined with a sense of duty, am I engaged
thus to salute you; desiring your stedfastness in the unchangeable Truth: that
being grounded in right faith, you may not be carried away with every wind of
doctrine, but in stability of mind, may be able to distinguish betwixt what
proceeds pure from the Fountain of wisdom, and what is mixed with human policy,
and the traditions of men; which tend to alienate the mind from the simplicity
of gospel worship, and fix it in outward performances, amusing it with bodily
exercises which profit but little. By this means, many times, that tender
spiritual sensation, with which the soul in the infancy of religion is blessed,
in measure is lost, and the understanding clouded; the mind being either
plunged in a labyrinth of thought, or exalted above that diffident childlike
state, in which the humble followers of the Lamb delight to abide: because
therein they are capable of knowing his voice from that of a stranger; and
receive strength to follow him through the several dispensations of probation
he is pleased to allot them.

Many times since I saw your faces have I looked toward you, and I wish I
could say I have beheld all keeping their habitations in the Lord. But, alas!
instead of that, has there not been a swerving aside, and building again that
which you had taken some good steps toward abolishing; which, whosoever does,
makes himself a transgressor? May I not query, Why halt ye between two
opinions? I believe this to be one cause of your weakness, and, I fear, if
persisted in, will prove your destruction. I believe it was the merciful design
of the Almighty to redeem you from a dependency on mortals, and to bring you to
wait for the immediate teachings of his Spirit, and to confide in his power,
from a lively sense of its sufficiency: and had you simply followed him, his
Almighty arm had been exalted to the bringing down of your enemies, and the
enlarging of your understandings; so that you would not only have seen that
there was light, but the miraculous cure of blindness had been perfected, and
in the light you would have discerned objects clearly. Here you would have
grown in Christian experience, and having received the holy unction, you would
have found as you abode under it, that you needed not that any man should teach
you, for that this anointing was sufficient to instruct in all things. And here
you would have been able to distinguish betwixt words accompanied with, and
those without, the power of God, by the different effects each had in the soul:
the one tending to quicken unto God, and the other to bring death over the
spiritual life. According to the nature of things, a ministry out of the life
of the gospel can only beget its likeness: it may fill the head with notions,
but can never replenish the soul with grace. But, as it is the business of the
enemy to delude the judgment with false appearances, he will endeavor, by
puffing up the mind with vain conceits, to make a likeness of the effects of
the Truth.

The head being stored with knowledge, and Christianity in part understood in
theory, by working upon the imagination, the poor deluded creature may boast of
visions and enjoyments, and, soaring on the wings of deception, may abound in
rapturous expressions; but though he may talk of God and Christ from morning
till evening, it is but warming himself at a fire of his own kindling, being
destitute of the efficacy of grace.

Truth has a natural tendency to humble all the faculties of the soul, to make
it rejoice with trembling, and to clothe it with meekness, resignation, and
contrition; in which state it seeks to repose itself in the breast of the
Beloved; or in silent adoration to bond before his throne, and in tenderness
pour forth itself in mental prayer, or praises; but to address him verbally
with awful reverence and self-diffidence, knowing it is presumption so to do
but from the movings of his spirit. If it be long deprived of his presence, it
seeks him sorrowing; but as it advances in experience, is cautious of
disclosing its condition (as in the night) to the various reputed watchmen;
lest they, either through uncharitableness or unskilfulness, wound instead of
heal; by unveiling to the unregenerated the secret conflicts it endures; or
direct it to other objects, instead of informing it where to find him whom it
seeks.

These observations occurring to my mind, I hope you will receive them in
gospel love, in which I think they are communicated. I now conclude, with
desiring that if any instability has appeared in your conduct, you may for the
future keep more close to the Divine Guide; that you may be clothed with wisdom
and strength, and witness salvation and peace to attend you.

I am your real friend, CATH. PAYTON.
Dudley, 16th Third Month, (called March), 1752. I note upon this epistle,
that, although for a time there appeared a degree of convincement of the Truth
amongst these people, they were so scattered, that scarcely one of them
steadily and uniformly abode upon its foundation to the end.



EPISTLE III. To my brother Henry Payton, written on board the Alexander, 6th
of the Tenth Month, 1753, at Sea, Lat. 25 North.
Dear Brother,
HERETOFORE when absent, I have been easy in remembering thee with sincere
desires for thy welfare; but now a desire of writing thee taking place, I am
unwilling to stifle it, were it only for this reason, that I would do all that
is justly in my power, to strengthen that affection which ought to subsist
betwixt persons so nearly allied in nature. But alas! when I consider the
difference of our affections, pursuits, and sentiments, in right and wrong, I
am fearful to set pen to paper, lest I should not be read with candor and
understanding; yet am again encouraged to this conclusion, that thou will at
least receive it as the effect of my regard for thee. Regard, did I say? I will
alter the term to affection; which I have felt gently to spring in my soul
toward thee; not only as to a creature formed by the same Almighty hand as
myself, and for the same noble end, viz. to glorify him who gave us being, and
who has loaded us with a multitude of his favors (which loudly call for a
grateful return); but, as to a brother who has strayed from the path of peace
and safety, and is seeking satisfaction in the grasp of empty bubbles; which
have assumed the form, in his sight, of something substantial. But thy own
experience, if impartially traced, will tell thee, they have broken when
touched and dispersed in air; leaving nothing real behind them, but keen
remorse, and the painful remembrance that they are lost, with all the time,
pains and anxiety, bestowed in the pursuit of them. Yet in this idle
solicitude, (O! affecting but too just charge!) has a great part of thy life
been spent; ardently traversing the destructive mazes of delusive pleasure, and
industriously avoiding the One only Good, in the possession of which thy soul
might have found substantial happiness: a happiness which would have afforded
true contentment, in which is conveyed that fullness of joy, which only can
satisfy the immortal part, being itself immortal in its nature.

Thou will perhaps say that these are my sentiments. But suffer me to ask thee,
why they are not thine? Why do we differ in opinion and practice, but because
the desire and pursuit of sensual gratifications have blinded thy judgment, and
biassed thy actions? I will venture to assert that it was the kingdom or
possessions of this world, its friendships, vanities, and sensual pleasures,
spread in the view of thy mind, that drew it from its early love and allegiance
to Him who is truly worthy of love and obedience. Nature joined with the well
adapted temptation (being fond of present enjoyment, though it be forbidden
fruit), and renounced submission to the pure law of grace written in the heart;
which, had it been observed, would have rectified her impure and irregular
appetites, and have placed thee in the true state of manhood; as lord of, not
slave to, the creation; and governor of thyself, in happy subjection to the
Divine will: a will which invariably points out the everlasting felicity of
mankind. But, rebel to her own interest, nature, blinded by false affection,
and fraught with pride, like our first parents, does not like a superior that
shall control her perverseness, and prescribe laws for her direction; but
rather chooses to take the reins of government into her own hand, and plan out a
way for herself.

Here reason, blind fallen reason, enthroned by the power of Satan, usurps the
sovereign seat, as sitting in the temple of God, being honored as God; power,
wisdom, and discretion to direct, being ascribed unto it. This false king (who,
had he occupied his proper place, had made a good subject), joins in strict
league with the passions, and prescribes rules directed by these his allies.
Shall man (says he) be confined within the narrow rules of virtue and religion?
No, I proclaim him liberty. Let him indulge himself in what is desirable to
him; let him gratify the sight of his eye, and the pride of his heart, in
endeavoring to make himself agreeable to and admired by mankind; with whom let
him join in full society, and free communion, entertaining and being
entertained. Why may he not partake of the pleasures of sense, seeing he has
appetites for them; and satisfy his curiosity in knowing evil as well as good?

These are the genuine suggestions of the reasoning faculty guided by the
passions (though I confess that I believe the subtle deceiver of mankind,
sometimes teaches this reason to speak in a language more concealed than I have
here set down); but I think it will be no hard matter to prove, that this
boasted liberty is real bondage, and that this acquisition of knowledge is no
more than a sense of guilt, resulting from the loss of that innocence which
gave man boldness to appear before the face of Almighty justice and purity,
void of distracting fear.

Let us examine the extent of virtue and religion, and mark every passion
implanted by Providence in the nature of man; and we shall find that in them
alone it is possible these should be rightly gratified, and that whenever man
breaks from their bounds, he flies from the mark of his happiness.

I have looked upon love to be the governing passion in the soul, which, as it
moves, draws the rest in its train, and, being strongly fixed on a worthy or
unworthy object, is the cause of our joy or misery. This being granted, it is
next to be considered what object is worthy of our entire affection: in which
search let it be remembered, that this principle of love, or desire of
enjoyment, is so seated in the soul, as never to be struck from it; and it will
presently be allowed, that the object that is worthy of its spending its force
upon, or being united to without limitation, must not be dependent on time, for
that death deprives it of; but durable as its own existence, and so perfect as
fully to satisfy an everlasting desire of possession. This can be nothing else
but the Eternal Excellency, from whom this spark of affection was struck; and
if Divine order were not inverted, it would as naturally bend toward it
original as a stone to the center, where only it can find a happy settlement.
In this love of God, stands virtue; it is this inspires it. If we truly love
God, who is infinite in purity and wisdom, we shall naturally hate their
contraries, impurity, and folly; and shall hate ourselves because of them:
because whatever defiles the soul, destroys its likeness to the Divine Being,
and renders it unacceptable in his sight. Hence, as it is the nature of a true
affection to endeavor after the love of the beloved object, proceeds an ardent
desire of purification, and a filial fear of offending God; a fear the most
rationally founded, viz. in a deep sense of gratitude, considering him as the
Author of all the good we possess, or can rightly hope for, i. e. everlasting
felicity; joined to the knowledge of his power and justice, in punishing
transgressions, which self-preservation would teach us to shun: therefore,
whatever would amuse the senses, so as to draw the affection from this Fountain
of goodness, is dreaded and renounced as forbidden fruit.

In religion, the soul is enlarged, and set at liberty to exercise its most
noble faculty, in actions, or on an object, worthy the dignity of its nature;
when on the contrary, without it, it is in bondage, and debased in the pursuit
of what scarcely deserves the name of pleasure, being of no real worth or
lasting duration. Religion teaches us that we do not live for ourselves only;
but that in order to obtain the great end of our being, we must seek the good
of mankind and endeavor to be serviceable in society; yet mix in familiar
converse with caution, lest instead of rectifying the errors of others, we
transplant them into our own conduct. It instructs us to beware of vain glory,
or of seeking the applause of men; clothing the mind with humility, under a
sense that we have no good thing but what we have received from the bounteous
hand of our Creator; and raising a desire that all his gifts may be devoted to
his service. In short, religion places man in the sphere the wise Author of
nature designed him; directing his affections to ascend toward the Creator,
and to descend toward the creation. If the ascent be but sufficient, the
descent will be just. The creatures will be loved as the work and gifts of the
Creator; yet possessed with due caution from this consideration, that they are
allotted us but for an uncertain season; and that it is therefore our interest
to be able to surrender them when called for, with as little pain or anxiety as
is consistent with our state. On the reverse, the immoderate descent of the
affections ties us down to the earth and earthly possessions, shackles us in
sensual gratifications, effectually prevents the soul's ascending toward God,
and destroys its deputed sovereignty over the creation, to which it is in
bondage: so true is that assertion of the apostle, that while some boasted of
their liberty, or promised it to others, themselves were the servants of
corruption. I have sometimes considered how the excuse of these boasted
libertines bespeaks their slavery. We cannot help such and such conduct, say
they, or had not power to resist such temptations. If this were true, it were
acknowledging that they had lost that valuable blessing, the freedom of the
will; and are utterly destitute of power to withstand evil; and of consequence
are the devil's captives. Such indeed they are, though not necessarily, but
voluntarily: for wisdom and power, through the grace of God, is given unto man,
to discover and resist the temptations of his enemy; and if he will renounce
both, his blindness and subjection to the power of delusion is procured by
himself, as is its miserable consequence, viz. an everlasting separation from
the Fountain of all good.

Thou will easily perceive, that the intent of the foregoing hints is to
influence thy mind in favor of a more strict course of virtue than thou have
formerly pursued. I will add my earnest wish that it may be answered. What
shall I say to persuade thee to turn, and coolly and impartially look into
thyself? Shall I plead thy advance in years? Thou art now I conclude rather in
the decline of life, An allusion to a dream which the party had, wherein
(amongst other remarkable circumstances) he was met in a beautiful garden by
two women, representing (according to the interpretation which opened in his
mind when he awoke) Virtue and Vanity, who each solicited his company for a
walk: and though he strongly inclined to the latter, the former insisted on his
accompanying her, not only for a walk but for life; which rather than comply
with, he endeavored to escape out of the garden (which he called the world);
but coming to the gate, found it locked, and the key in her possession. So
being forced to a compliance, he accompanied her, and became gradually charmed
with her conversation, by which, he was won to a love of religion, and in the
end much delighted with the prospect of such a companion for life.
hastening toward the gate of the garden. O! listen to the dictates of virtue,
ere she withdraw her kind invitations and profitable instructions. Shall I
beseech thee by the mercies of God (a prevailing argument with a truly generous
and grateful mind, and which may with great justice be particularly advanced to
thyself), to return unto Him from whom thou have deeply revolted, and seek
reconciliation by unfeigned repentance, if thou can find room so to do; which I
have a lively hope thou may, though thou have so long, and distantly,
strayed from the fold of Christ.

I shall plead no excuse for the freedom with which I have here treated thee,
further than to say, that I think a true freedom in communicating our
sentiments, with a design for each other's eternal well-being, is a part of
that charity which should clothe the spirits of the followers of Jesus Christ.

The copiousness of my subject may apologize for my prolixity. Upon a review of
what I have written it will readily be observed, that the hints given are but
like heads of chapters, which, if fully expatiated upon, might fill a volume
instead of a letter: and, that the everlasting minister of the sanctuary may
enlarge them in the view of thy understanding, to lasting benefit, is the
sincere and ardent desire of thy affectionate sister,

CATHERINE PAYTON.

EPISTLE IV. To a young man in Ireland, who had been long under religious
impressions.
Amsterdam, 1st of Eighth Month, 1757.
THINE of the 5th ult. I received yesterday, and with a degree of satisfaction
have observed its contents; although it seems to breathe the language of
complaint, or at least fear of falling short of the mark thou have had in view,
and I hope art pressing after. Although this is a state painful to nature, it
is sometimes a state of greater safety, and more directly pointing to
perfection, than is that of ease, or even of the aboundings of sensible
consolations: whereby some have been induced to conclude themselves in a better
and safer state than they really were, and so have grown less watchful and
diffident of their own judgment; and spiritual pride and vainglory have
entered, wherein they have boasted above their measure of experience; and at
last "turned the grace of God into wantonness," and their latter end has been
far worse than their beginning. But in the seasons of the withdrawings of
Divine goodness, the soul that is earnestly bent to obtain the kingdom of God,
which stands "in righteousness" as well as "in peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost," is set upon searching what is the cause of its being thus deserted; and
so "digs deep" through the corruption of fallen nature, and lays its foundation
sure in the experience of the purifying operation of the Spirit of Truth; and
against such it is that The gates of hell shall not prevail: and that thou and
I may be of this happy number, is the travail of my spirit.

It is most certain that our journey through life is as through a vale of
tears, wherein various will be our conflicts, and numerous our trials, both
inwardly and outwardly; but we have this encouraging promise left us, that All
shall work together for the good of such as truly love and fear God. And as our
hopes and desires are fixed on an infinitely better country, the joys whereof
are pure and eternally permanent, let us not repine at the means used to secure
them to us; but with all possible cheerfulness take the cup which Divine
Providence hands forth to us, as The cup of his salvation; and steadily
endeavor for that mind, wherewith the blessed Jesus was clothed, which says
continually, Thy will be done; even in the bitter baptism of crucifixion, which
every true-born child of God must be partaker of; and under the bitter pangs of
death to the fallen nature, will have to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me. O! if this was the language of the Master, the immaculate Lamb of
God, who knew no sin; no wonder that it is the language of the servant, who has
been defiled therewith; and from which he must be washed ere he can have part
with the Son in his inheritance. I have looked upon it as an infinite mercy to
be led deep enough in humiliation, to be stripped of all that has any
appearance of what is good and excellent, and to have this the secret language
of the soul to him who sees in secret, I am a worm, and no man: and although
the consolatory portion of such as these may be sometimes hid, or withheld for
a season; yet they are sure, being in the hands of infinite Wisdom, Truth, and
Mercy; who, in the wise appointment of his providence, will give to his own
what they stand in need of; and when the days of fasting and humiliation are
accomplished, will assuredly bless the provision of Zion, and satisfy her poor
with bread.

I thought when I last left Dublin, if I were in debt to any one in it, it was
to thyself. Perhaps thy letter may open a way for me to pay it; although I do
not remember that any thing of the above was upon my mind for thee; but a hint
of advice seemed to bend toward thee, to beware with whom thou enterest into
the covenant of friendship, lest in the end thou should be wounded by their
backslidings: and let me also add, beware of looking out at the misconduct of
others, with a discouraging eye; for although thousands may fall as by thy
side, and tens of thousands as at thy right hand, yet if thou make the Most
High thy refuge, by a steady and faithful obedience to his will, he will
preserve thee.

Through mercy I am favored with a good degree of health and peace in my going
forward, although the present concern wherein I am engaged is attended with
some discouraging circumstances, yet I have faith that I am here in the
appointment of heaven.

If Lucy Bradly and companion have not left Dublin before this comes to hand,
please to present my dear love to them; and tell Lucy that I wrote her since I
came to this city, wherein I hinted my expectation of seeing York in my return
home.

My love in that which is unchangeable strongly attends thee, and the tried
remnant of spiritual Israel in your city and nation, who, although they are
few, are too numerous for me to particularise: shall therefore give thee a
general commission to present my love to such as thou have freedom; and
conclude myself

Thy truly well-wishing friend, CATHERINE PAYTON.

EPISTLE V. Extract of a letter to another young man, under religious exercises.
Esteemed Friend,
THINE of yesterday I just now received; and am concerned to find by its
contents, that indisposition prevents thy meeting us as proposed; but as
through faith and patience every affliction may be sanctified, I cannot but
hope the present may tend further to refine thy spirit and enlarge thy
understanding in Divine truths; which are not always manifested in the hours of
consolation, but must be painfully felt in the depths of experience.

That beautifully strong expression in sacred writ, that "The Lord makes the
clouds his chariots," has of late often been revived in my remembrance; with
this illustration, that when a cloud is over us, who have known and rejoiced in
the light, it is good to stand still, and hearken for that "small still voice"
proceeding from it, which alone can compose and settle the soul.

To be sure it is a necessary duty to search our hearts, and not in so doing to
evade the judgment of Truth; but it is also well to guard against too hasty
conclusions of the causes and ends of exercises; especially in an hour of
weakness, wherein the old accuser is not wanting on his part, to suggest the
most painful apprehensions, thereby to dispirit the mind that seeks to be freed
from his insupportable yoke.

The new discovery thou make of the delusiveness of thy thoughts, affords me
much satisfaction, as it gives good ground to hope, that the Lord designs to
lead thee to a state of perfection, which few, very few, have seen into; viz.
an entire abdication of self, even in its most pleasing and seeming lawful
appearances. That of an ideal satisfaction in something seemingly good, yet
short of the Divine perfection, is an exercise which attends many, and has
prevailed against some, at least to the diminution of that luster which would
have shone around them. It is a favor so quickly to see into it, and, having
seen, I hope thou will endeavor to avoid it, and the Lord will help thee.

There is no happiness here equal to perfect redemption from the world, its
spirit, and ourselves. To have no hopes, no desires, but in the will of God, is
fully giving ourselves into his holy hand, and to be swallowed up of him
(though of this, for want of Divine sensation, we may sometimes be ignorant).
Here methinks I almost hear thee say, This is the state I long for, but it is
distant, very distant, from me. But is it not as of yesterday thou saw into
it, and would thou be perfect at once, and enjoy a victory without a fight?
This my friend is the summit of the mount of perfection, which thou have lately
begun to ascend, and in thy journey I sincerely wish thee good speed; and from
the quietude which I at present feel about thee, I cannot but hope thou art in
the best of hands: may a sense thereof be communicated in the most needful time.

CATHERINE PAYTON.

EPISTLE VI. To Friends in Ireland.
Dear Friends,
AS I am prevented by contrary winds from paying a visit this fall, to some of
your Province meetings; etc. (for which end I proceeded as far as Liverpool) in
the strength of that unfeigned love of the brethren which drew me from my home,
am I endeavoring to salute you by a few lines: in hope the Divine wisdom and
mercy may direct my pen, to the present relief of my own spirit, and your help.

And first, dear friends, permit me to inform you, that the lamentable state of
our church, is almost continually before me. This in yours as well as other
countries, has suffered greatly by the baneful prevalence of the spirit of this
world; insomuch, that too few have their hands clean and strong for the Lord's
service; or can see to extract the motes from the eyes of their brethren,
because of the beams which are in their own. May not some of the instructors,
and seemingly zealous in our Society, be justly taxed with hypocrisy; seeing
while they cry against the reigning sins of others, they are inattentive to
their own? unto whom I would direct the advice of Christ, viz. Pluck first the
beams out of your own eyes, and then shall ye see clearly to take the motes out
of those of your brethren.

It is a sorrowful truth, that even the garments of some of the priesthood are
spotted with the world and the flesh; and they are therefore rendered unfit to
minister before the Lord in that sacred office. For whatever may have been
their former experience of the sanctifying operation of his spirit; or however
clear may have been their call into his service; yet if, like Judas, they have
betrayed their Master for the pieces of silver, or, like Demas, may in spirit
have forsaken his family for the love of the world in some of its alluring
shapes, theirs justly is the judgment passed upon Judas; who being fallen from
his station in the holy body of Christ, was to lose his bishopric or part in
the apostleship: such being rendered unfit to give testimony to the life,
sufferings, death and resurrection of the holy Jesus, who do not retain it in
their own experience.

Observe, brethren, the word retain. It is not enough that we have once known
the Lord, but we must retain him in our knowledge, by the renewed baptisms of
his holy Spirit: and of some who did not choose to do so, it is recorded that
God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to work those things which are not
convenient. And I believe there are in our day, who, having deviated from the
simplicity of Truth for sinister ends, have have gone wider and wider
therefrom; until their hearts are become so darkened that they call evil good,
and good evil; put darkness for light, and light for darkness; and, in their
pursuits after worldly interests, are obviously worshipping and serving the
creature more than the Creator: and yet these very persons would keep those
seats, and discharge those offices in the church, which were assigned them,
when in the days of childhood they were willing to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he led them.

O! for these blind guides, is my soul pained; and that not only on their own
accounts but that of others, who, apprehending the law to proceed from their
mouths (though they have in reality no right to take the word of the Lord
thereinto) and observing their conduct, may be influenced by their example, and
follow them as they follow the world. Is it needful, my beloved, to warn you,
as our Lord did the people respecting the Scribes and Pharisees, who,
notwithstanding they sat in Moses' seat, and administered the law, were not to
be regarded as examples; lest, being led by the blind, ye perish with them in
the ditch of error and perdition?

When I sat down to write you, I had no view of beginning with these
disagreeable remarks, but simply gave myself up to the direction of that Wisdom
which best dictates what to say, and when to say it: and although some may
object to their being inserted in an Epistle which points to a general
exhortation, I am convinced by undoubted experience, and the example of some of
the most eminently serviceable in the Lord's hand, that Divine wisdom sometimes
commands to reprove those that offend, let them be of what class they may,
before all, that others may learn to fear. In the authority of Truth I dare
assert that the time is come in our church, when it is necessary that judgment
should begin as at the house of God, in the very highest classes of the
society; and till that is laid to the line, and some therein are either
reformed thereby or removed from those dignified stations, there is little
probability of the Lord's work, being carried on to his own honor (in the
general) and the comfort of the faithful. O! says my soul, that all who are
concerned, or concern themselves, therein, would study to be quiet and mind
their own business, which is to take heed to themselves; for although the Holy
Ghost may have once made some of them overseers of the flock, they cannot
properly take heed thereto, unless this is the case; for being themselves
loaded with a secret consciousness of guilt, for worshipping of idols, some
obviously, and some having them concealed under a precise, formal, outside
appearance and deportment, as in the skirts of their garments, they dare not,
nay they cannot, search out the hidden things of Esau among the people, nor
administer judgment in righteousness, where it is obviously due.

Let me therefore, in the spirit of gospel meekness and charity, which breathes
for your salvation and enlargement in all the gifts and fruits of the Holy
Ghost, exhort you who are of the foremost ranks, whether ministers, elders,
overseers, or heads of families, that you would solemnly look into yourselves;
and with an impartiality, which ever accompanies those who are really concerned
for the establishment of the kingdom of Christ in themselves, ask yourselves,
individually, In what am I lacking? O! my friends, was this the case with us
all, and did we patiently wait for the answer of Truth, we should individually
be humbled into a sense of our shortness of that perfection, whereunto we have
been called, and wherein many of us have believed; and some would be so struck
with the view of their idolatrous revolting from the simple worship of the true
and living God, that they would go mourning many days in the bitterness of
their souls; and all would be animated to press after the mark for the prize of
their high calling in Christ, which is redemption from the world, the flesh,
and the devil. And the nearer we approach to this blessed and happy experience,
the more our hands will be strengthened in the Lord's work, and the more we
shall be enabled both by precept and example to build one another up in the
most holy faith, and in those things which edify; and our confidence in God who
is the Perfecter of his saints will increase, that, as he has mercifully begun
a good work in us, he will finish it to the praise of his own name.

It is impossible that self-examination by the light of Truth should hurt any
of us, and it may help all. I therefore once more earnestly recommend it, as a
means of our fulfilling this precept, "Purge out the old leaven," and enabling
us to keep the feast not with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. I shall conclude my exhortation to you
of these classes, with saying, Be faithful, and then will you be comforted* and
of one mind, and the God of Peace will preside amongst you. Amen.

Now to you who, not being in any of the beforementioned stations, may
therefore think yourselves more at liberty to gratify the desire of the carnal
mind, is my concern directed; with secret breathings to the Father of mercies,
that he may enable me so to point the word to your hearts, that being made
sensible of your own danger, you may flee for your lives, from those bewitching
vanities, and false pleasures which have held your souls in bondage to the God
of this world; who, by many secret snares, and more obvious allurements, seeks
to entangle the minds of poor mortals, and lead astray their affections from
that inestimable Fountain of light, life, and happiness, wherein is centered
all true joy, both in time and in eternity.

Dearly beloved! for so in the bowels of gospel compassion I call you; have you
ever seriously considered that you have no continuing city here; and that as
your souls are immortal, it is the proper, and ought to be the principal,
business of your lives, to seek for them a habitation, suitable to their being
and nature, wherein they may have a happy residence for ever: which is alone to
be found in God, who is the source and resource of his people? Now in order
that your souls may at last center with God, it is necessary that they should
be made habitations for Him through the sanctifying operation of the Spirit of
his Son, which alone can render us who have been defiled with sin (and
therefore unfitted for a residence with Him), fit objects of his favor. Allow
me therefore to ask you (and O! that you would ask yourselves), what you have
known of this work, in your experience? Has the spirit of judgment and of
burning done its office in your hearts? Have you passed through the first part
of the work of sanctification? I mean the administration of condemnation for
sin. Have you been bowed under the testimony of the righteous Witness of God in
your conscience? Or have you not rather depressed and contemned this heavenly
messenger; not suffering it to tell you the truth, or at least, disbelieving
the doctrine it preached, because it did not countenance some of your actions?
Nay, have not some gone so far as to slay the "two witnesses for God," the
internal evidence of his Spirit, and the external testimony of his servants;
and are perhaps at this hour exulting in their victory, and proclaiming to
themselves peace; when alas! a day of fearfulness, amazement, and unutterable
anguish, awaits them, and is near; when, if not sooner, the curtains of
mortality shall be drawn, and they shall see the Judge, tremendous in majesty,
and that righteous witness, which in time they slew, raised in power, to
testify against them for their rebellion, and assert the justice of their
exclusion from the realms of light and blessedness.

What effect this faint description of the day of judgment to the wicked, and
those who forget God, may have upon the minds of such, I know not; but my heart
being impressed with an awful sense of its certainty, is animated to endeavor
to wrest them from its eternal consequences; by persuading them to bow in the
day of God's merciful visitation to their souls, and to kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and they perish from the way of life and salvation, ere his wrath be
kindled but a little.

Do not vainly and proudly imagine, that you are able to stem the force or
Omnipotence. He is, and will be King, whether you are willing to allow him the
right of sovereignty or not: and his sacred laws of unchangeable truth, are as
manifest in the punishment of transgressors, as in the reward of those that do
well: and O! if it were possible to convey to you a sense of that sweet peace,
glory, and joy, which are, and shall be revealed to those who love and serve
God, you would be convinced that no punishment could be too great for such as,
by a contrary conduct, slight and cast away so great salvation and happiness.
But as no eye can see, nor heart conceive, the exceeding grace of God in Christ
Jesus, but such as have happily witnessed its sanctifying operation; I cannot
but invite you to Come, taste, and see, that the Lord is good, and that his
mercy endures for ever.

It is true, that in the way to this attainment you must pass through judgment;
for Zion must be redeemed through judgment, and all the converts with
righteousness, and a portion of indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish,
must (consistently with the law of Divine justice), be administered to every
soul that sins. But this judgment when received in the day of God's merciful
visitation, is succeeded by such inexpressible peace and assurance of Divine
favor, as abundantly compensates for the pains it may have occasioned: for of
a truth the carnal eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived, what
good is in store for those who manifest their love to God by their obedience.
Believe me, my beloved friends, when I tell you that my heart is strongly
engaged for your welfare, as you stand in your various classes. I feel much
more for you than I can write, and would beseech you by the mercies of God, as
well as by his judgments, that you would present the whole bodies of your
affections unto him, which is no more than your reasonable service.

Has he not dealt exceeding bountifully to some of you of the things of this
life? For what cause think you has he entrusted you with such abundance? Is it
to gratify the lust of the eye, and the pride of life? Is it to make you
haughty, and assume a superiority over such as, in this respect may be below
yourselves, but who perhaps may some of them be higher in the Divine favor?
Nay, surely: but in order that you may improve this gift to his honor, the
good of others, and your own eternal advantage; and may be humbled in a sense
of the disproportion of your deserts to his mercies. Has he (...) favored some
of you with superior natural abilities? And for what end, but that you might be
in a superior degree serviceable in his hand? Has he not afforded to all a day
of merciful visitation, wherein he has by various means endeavored to bring
you into that fold of immortal rest, wherein he causes his Flocks to feed and
lie down beside the clear streams of salvation?

O says my soul! that you may consider his mercies, and make a suitable return
for them; that the Most High may delight in the present generation, and dwell
among the people as in days past. O! you of the rising generation, Open the
doors of your hearts to that Divine Visitant, who has long stood thereat, and
knocked for entrance. Let him prepare them, and he will assuredly spread his
table, and admit you to be the happy communicants thereat. Think not that it is
too early in life for you to look steadily toward a future state of existence;
but consider, that the solemn message to summon you from works to rewards, may
be sent to you at an early and unexpected hour: and that it therefore behooves
you, to be prepared to meet the great Judge. My heart is particularly engaged
for your welfare, and pained in the consideration how widely some of you have
deviated from that path of primitive simplicity, wherein your worthy
predecessors trod. Let me therefore beseech you to seek for the "Good old way"
of holiness, and walk therein; that you may experimentally know the God of your
fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart and willing mind: so will his
blessing forever rest upon you, which makes truly rich, and adds no sorrow
therewith.

Let the cloud of witnesses to the power and unutterable riches of pure
religion, prevail with you to submit to its holy influence; that you may
rightly understand, and diligently pursue, the things that belong to your peace
here and hereafter. Let the examples of the righteous in all generations, let
their peaceful lives, let their happy conclusion, triumphing over death, hell,
and the grave, in a lively and full assurance of faith; let the solemn
importance of time and eternity, excite you while it is yet day, and light is
upon your tabernacles, to improve it: that you may be numbered amongst the
wise, who shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and may be
instrumental to turn many to righteousness, and be as stars for ever and ever.

The negligent and careless, the stout-hearted, and they that are far from
righteousness, may receive instruction from the event of the like-minded in all
generations. Such have not escaped the righteous judgments of the Almighty; who
has sealed it as a certain truth: Verily there is a reward for the righteous;
verily he is a God who judges the earth.

And now, dear Friends, as in plainness I have endeavored to communicate what
has freely opened to the several classes among you, I would warn all to beware
of putting their proper portion far from them; but let each examine, "Is it I;
Is it I?" And let not the iniquities of others, which some may observe to be
struck at, tend to fix any in a state of self-security; for assuredly every one
must suffer for his own transgression. Nor let those close hints which are
pointed to some of the foremost rank, be made use of to invalidate the
testimony of such, whom the Lord has preserved as "watchmen upon your walls." I
know and am thankful that he has a remnant amongst you, of all ranks, whom he
has preserved near unto himself; unto whom my soul is united in the
tribulations and rejoicings of the gospel; and unto whom a salutation reaches
forth, and seems expressed in my heart thus, Brethren and sisters, be of good
cheer, "be patient, and hope to the end:" for the hand of that God whom you
serve, is stretched out for your help; and if you abide faithful to him, in his
own time he will crown your sufferings with rejoicing.

Finally, dearly beloved, farewell; and may the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, Amen.

I am your friend and sister in the Truth, CATHERINE PAYTON.
Dudley, 10th of Tenth Month, 1758.
EPISTLE VII. Copy of an Epistle to the Quarterly Men's Meeting of Friends of
--
Dear Friends,
IT having lately been my lot to pass through your quarter, and with sorrow to
observe the declining state of the church therein, I find my mind engaged to
write a few lines to you who may be accounted its ruling members; to advise,
that you be careful to fill up the station of governors in all humility and
honesty, acquitting yourselves like men concerned for the cause of God. And in
order that each may find his hands made strong for the work, let first a strict
scrutiny be made into your own conduct, to see how far you are purged from the
abominations which are committed: for, except those who are rulers in Israel,
support their testimony by a circumspect conversation; it seems to me
impossible they should rule well. For, not preserving a sense of the necessity
of an entire purity subsisting in the church, they will be apt to admit of
things inconsistent with the nature of that holy principle we profess; and wink
at, instead of reproving, the conduct of backsliders. And, indeed, I see no
right that a man who breaks the law himself, has to sit in the seat of
judgment. He may plead the example of the Scribes and Pharisees, but no
Christian precept countenances such a practice: for except our righteousness
exceeds theirs, we shall in no wise enter the kingdom. And I think it may not
be amiss, in order to evince whether there be any resemblance betwixt us and
them, to examine what their righteousness was. It was only a bare external
righteousness, put or kept on with a base hypocritical design, to impose upon
the people. Spiritual pride was cloked under it. They loved the places of chief
presidency in the synagogues, etc. and to be called of men, "Rabbi;" oppressed
the distressed, and neglected the weightiest matters of the law, viz. justice,
mercy, and truth (without which no right government can ever be administered).
They were not possessed of holiness, though they made broad their philacteries,
and enlarged the borders of their garments. How different to this is the
character of a bishop Or, as it may be translated, overseer.
given by the apostle, viz. He must be blameless as the steward of God, not
self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre; but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate, holding forth the faithful word as he has been taught; that he may
be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and convince the gainsayers. An
excellent catalogue of necessary qualifications! May both you and I covet to
obtain them.

It seems to me that a great regulation is wanting amongst us, and judgment
must begin as at the sanctuary, before it can go on right. The camp is
shamefully defiled, and few fit to minister judgment in wisdom, to the
transgressors; which is very much wanting, for weakness has reached to the head
and the heart, and insensibility seized many of the members. Arise and shake
yourselves, lest you perish with the multitude; and being partakers of the sins
of Babylon, ye be also partakers in her plagues: for I verily believe, the Lord
is on his way to try the foundations of the professors of his Truth, that their
deeds may be made manifest, whether they are wrought in God or not; and the
cause of his suffering seed will be espoused and pleaded, and their wrongs
redressed.

Alas! my friends, it will not do for us to have been once called and animated
of God. Except we dwell under the teachings of that anointing, and wait for
renewed baptism to sit us for further service, we shall become dwarfish, dry,
and formal; and though to an injudicious eye, we may appear as flourishing
trees; upon examination by a wise observer, good fruit will not be found upon
us, such as that its flavor will demonstrate, that the tree has its
nourishment from the Eternal Fountain of life and wisdom.

Have a care, lest the world cast a mist before your eyes, and hinder your
keeping a sight of that transcendent excellency which is in the Truth; which
once engaged some of you to follow it, with sincere desires to know your
spirits leavened into its pure nature. Remember the day of your espousals, and
also, that, as says the apostle, If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him.

Let none judge that these lines proceed from a self-sufficiency in me; for I
think that I retain a just sense of my weakness, and unfitness as a woman for
such a service; but I trust some of you know that the wind blows when and
where it lists.

I am, with the salutation of unfeigned love to the true seed of God amongst
you, sincerely desiring their preservation, and that the unfaithful may be
warned in time, and turn to the Lord in the day of his mercy, your friend and
sister in the Truth,

CATHERINE PAYTON.
27th of 8th Month, 1761. N. B. This Epistle may appear close and sharp,
considering unto whom it was directed; but there was sorrowful cause for it, in
some individuals.



EPISTLE VIII. To a Friend of Ireland, written a short Time before I left it,
in the Year 1776.
Esteemed Friend,
AS I have had some cause to doubt the rectitude of our determination of not
spending a night at thy house, I am inclined to essay a few lines, as a
friendly salutation, as well as to intimate what appeared to me proper to
recommend to thy consideration and practice. As a member of society, disengaged
from the necessity of being much employed in worldly business, it behooves thee
to attend steadily to the filling up that station in the church, for which
Divine Wisdom designed thee; that, glorifying him with thy body, spirit, and
substance, thou may, in the conclusion of time, receive the answer of "Well
done good and faithful servant;" which those are not likely to be favored
with, who dwell in their cieled houses, and settled down in the enjoyment of
their temporal possessions, while the Lord's house lies waste.

There are so few who are of clean hands, and are therefore fit to take part in
the active services in the church; that I cannot but regret the loss of some
who are seeking concealment, contenting themselves with preserving a fair
character amongst men, and attending on the external duties of religion; but
who, had they devoted their faculties to the Lord's service, might have been
girded for it, and stood as in the front of the battle. Thus, clothed with
concern for the welfare of their fellow members in society, their zeal for the
promotion of Truth would, in an especial manner, be manifested by an engagement
to cleanse the camp from those who bring a reproach on our holy profession; and
for the preservation of our youth from the snares of the enemy. Well, my
friend, it is with me to query whether thou have taken thy proper share in this
work, or have been excusing thyself, and leaving it to others.

I know nothing by outward information, but as something like a jealousy rested
on my mind respecting thee, I am willing to intimate it; at the same time
assuring thee of my esteem for thee, as one of the Lord's visited children;
who, I hope, have been in a good degree preserved from the corruptions that are
in the world through lust; and have received a portion of that precious faith,
which in all ages has been delivered to the saints, through which some in the
present day have obtained a good report, and been rendered very serviceable:
whether thou might not have stood amongst those chosen, and (shall I say)
dignified servants, it behooves thee to inquire. Must the poor and the
illiterate, who are "rich in faith" and good works, be brought to condemn those
amongst us who have received much spiritually, naturally, and temporally? Yea,
verily: some of these have done so little that the sins of omission must be
chargeable upon them; whilst others who have had to struggle under difficulties
in regard to temporal things, and appeared comparatively to be of but low
understandings, have come up nobly in the Lord's cause, and shone as stars in
the firmament of his power. Well, my friend, look to thy part of the work, and
solemnly attend to the filling up thy measure in righteousness. Let no man take
thy crown.

Something of this sort seemed to point toward thee; and in that love which
seeks thy increasing in the increases of God, do I communicate it; and now
add a few words in regard to thy wife, for whom thou art doubtless tenderly
concerned, and, considering her delicate constitution, may justly fear the
consequences of her nursing unavailing sorrow. I wish she would imitate David,
who, when the child was dead, arose and washed himself and ate: for it is no
doubt acceptable to kind Providence, that when we are deprived of one temporal
blessing, we should humbly rejoice in those which remain, and say with Job, The
Lord gave and has taken away, and blessed be his name. Has he not a right to
recall what he has lent us? But unprofitably to sink under such strokes of his
hand, appears to me to savor of the sorrow of the world, which works death,
sometimes both to body and spirit, if persisted in. I therefore beg she will
look from the beloved object, now no more here is; and consider how graciously
the Father of mercies has dealt with him, in removing him thus early from this
state of conflicts. When our attention is rightly turned to consider what is
lacking in ourselves, we are not so subject unprofitably to ruminate on
circumstances like these; but, being principally concerned to be prepared to
participate in the happiness of those "who die in the Lord," shall desire that
all may finally work together for our good.

I now conclude in true love,

Your Friend, CATHERINE PHILLIPS.
N. B. These Friends had lately lost a young son.



EPISTLE IX. To a young man (an American).
Respected Friend,
I CONCLUDE this will meet thee preparing to return to thy native country; and
I wish thy mind may be impressed with a due sense of the mercies of God
vouchsafed to thee in this land, and with an awful inquiry whether thou have so
profited therein, as to return to thy own, wiser and better than thou left it.
I am assured that thou have been favored with a Divine visitation, intended to
subdue thy natural will, regulate thy affections, and bound thy pursuits after
the acquisition of either interest, pleasures, or knowledge, merely
terrestrial; and so to reduce the whole man, that thy mind, being bent upon
higher seize than what would only gratify the natural will and desires,
might become capable of enjoying the one only unmixed supreme good; and, being
devoted to the service of its bounteous Creator and Benefactor through time,
might participate with him in unchangeable happiness when it terminates. I
entreat thee to inquire how far this glorious end has been accomplished and do
not slight that great salvation, which in infinite mercy has been offered thee.
I fear thy views have been after that honor which is of men, and that the
wisdom which will one day be manifested to be foolishness, has been preferred
to that which is pure, and which therefore so recommends to the Lord's favor,
as to make men his friends. He has favored thee with natural gifts, which, if
sanctified by his refining Spirit, might render thee useful in time. Consider
how they have been employed, for be assured, thou will one day see that, where
much is given, much will be required, and that, "mighty men," if they
counteract the design of their creation, will be "mightily tormented" with
pungent and unavailing remorse. Therefore prize the day of the Lord's
visitation to thy soul, and solemnly attend to the "reproofs of instruction,"
as the alone way to true happiness, both in time and eternity.

As I intended consigning the enclosed to thy care, an unexpected inclination
arose thus to address thee, and express my desire for thy preservation and
welfare every way. If thou should be favored to attain thy native shore, thou
may perhaps have to remember my labor of love for thee: and O! says my
soul, may it, with that of others my fellow laborers, not be bestowed in vain.

My love to the several branches of thy family with whom I am acquainted. Thy
father's kindness, in accompanying me and my dear companion Mary Peisley when
traveling in America, is fresh in my remembrance. Remember me also to such
other friends of my acquaintance, as may inquire for me, who am

Thy real Friend, CATHERINE PHILLIPS*

EPISTLE X. To B. H. -- Yorkshire.
Dear Friend,
THY affectionate salutation of the 7th ult. I received and read with a degree
of satisfaction, as it evinced I lived in the remembrance of an absent friend.
When spiritual sympathy is felt with each other, it strengthens the hope of our
being continued in the holy membership of the living body of Christ.

Sometime before the receipt of thine, I had been closely tried, and, although
I am favored to know on whom to depend for succor and support, encouragement
from my fellow-travellers Sion-ward, is truly acceptable. There are seasons,
wherein I doubt not but it is a cordial to the most advanced; but as for me, I
many times fear I am behind some who have not been called to stand forth so
conspicuously in the front of the battle; but whose hidden life may be with
Christ, in a greater degree than mine, or some others who have moved in an
active sphere. Certainly to be called up into active service, is a token of
Divine approbation; but if any servants who have thus been frequently
distinguished, should measure themselves by the services they have been
assisted to perform, they may and will center in deception, respecting their
real spiritual state; and may clothe themselves with the Lord's jewels, when
they are not adorned with the truly beautiful covering of humility, and a fear
of endeavoring to appear to be any thing but what they are through his grace.
Thus self-consequence may get up, and if such are not watchful, it will get up,
and occasion pain to the truly feeling, though less active members of the
church. My sincere and earnest desire is, and indeed for a series of years has
been, for preservation from it, and that I may constantly center in my own
littleness, yea nothingness: for indeed in my flesh dwells no good thing. All
good, and the power of showing it forth, is of and from its own Divine source.
Who are great, but those whom the Lord sees meet to dignify? All is the effect
of his wisdom, power, and mercy: therefore to him be the praise, says my soul;
and may I ever humbly confess before him, that I am nothing, nor can do any
thing, but as he puts me forth.

Dear Friend, the work of purification is a great and deep work. May we attend
to it, and not seek great things to ourselves, either spiritually, naturally,
or temporally, that we may be distinguished among men; but be concerned, that
the inside-work of the temple may be completed; and the outside will not want
the ornaments Divine wisdom designed it; but we shall move and act in the
church in pure gospel simplicity, which will ever tend to its edification.

I was glad to receive a late account that T. Colley and his companion were
returned from their perilous voyage. I also hope that there may be some
occasion to rejoice, that the Lord is visiting his people in your country (once
distinguished for its worthies in Israel), because I hear there are diverse late
appearances in the ministry among you. May the spirit of the departed Elijahs,
so rest upon some of the present generation, that they may go forth in the same
spirit and power wherein they acted; and become instrumental to turn the hearts
of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just. A truly living baptizing
ministry, is much wanted among us; but except the Lord in mercy favor us with
such a ministry, silence in our solemn meetings is far preferable. Alas! few,
very few indeed, of the present warriors appear to be thoroughly accoutered for
the battle of the day. Some are essaying to go forth as in Readiness armor, the
wisdom of men decorated with literature; but it will not do the Lord's work.
Weapons despised by the worldly wise, are far more efficacious; and although
the users of them may be despised also, they are chosen to confound the human
wisdom of such, and, if they keep within the bounds of his appointment, will
glorify his name.

I doubt not but that many of my friends in Yorkshire, will be pleased to know
that I am better in health than when last in London. I had a long season of
weakness after that journey, and am yet weak, compared to what I have been.
Remember me affectionately to such of them, as thou know will be pleased to
receive that salutation; particularly to thy brother and sister, and my cousin
S. B. Thy wife and self will receive the same

From thy affectionate Friend, CATHERINE PHILLIPS.

EPISTLE XI. To --, who had been long in a distressed state of mind, from some
tenets esteemed religious.
Esteemed Friend,
THE sympathy I have repeatedly felt with thy exercised mind has raised
earnest desires in mine, that Divine goodness may vouchsafe more fully to open
thy understanding into the "work of righteousness," and so enlarge thy
experience therein, that thou may witness it to be "peace," and the effects
of it quietness and assurance for ever.

Many are the stratagems of the subtle adversary of our happiness to prevent
our attaining to this desirable state, which are only manifested by the light
of Truth; whereunto I have wished thy mind might be effectually turned, and thy
dependence fixed solely upon the one sure everlasting Helper. For while thou
art seeking after men for instruction, and a settlement in the true faith, thou will be liable to be tossed to and fro by the various and opposite doctrines
preached; and though ever hearing, may never come to the knowledge of the
Truth in its native simplicity. Permit me, therefore, in true love, to entreat
thee to cease from them, and humbly to wait upon the unerring Teacher, who can
and will "guide thee into all Truth," if thou art disposed implicitly to follow
him.

It appears to me more necessary now for thee to seek after resignation to the
Divine will, than to search into comments upon points of doctrine: for until we
attain to that state, we are not likely to receive the kingdom of God as little
children; who, knowing nothing, are to be instructed from one point of
knowledge and duty to another, and are passive to the direction of their
tutors. Those who are resigned to the Father's will, are to know of the
doctrines of the son: unto these they are marvellously opened and sealed, so
that they can say they believe, not because of the testimony of others, but
have the witness in themselves that they are the doctrines of Truth; and thus
believing they enter into rest, being certain that they have acquired the
knowledge of the Truth; and pressing forward under its influence, they
experience a gradual advancing to the stature of manhood in Christ.

It is this holy certainty I desire thou may be partaker of, with those who
are building upon the ancient foundation of the apostles and prophets; for such
there are in the present time as surely as there were in the primitive ages of
the church; who know Jesus Christ to be the "Chief Corner stone," and build
upon him, and rejoice in him, as their leader, feeder, and instructor; through
whom they worship the Father in spirit and in truth; and look up to Him in all
afflictions and exercises, in humble confidence, that as a tender Father, he
cares for them and will supply all their wants.

Thus it was, in the morning of our day as a people, that many sincere souls
who had long wandered upon the mountains of profession, and been exercised in
various forms of godliness, seeking rest, but not finding it therein, obtained
a settlement in the Truth as it is now professed amongst us, which they
possessed, and rejoiced therein. For although the public profession of it
exposed them to many and grievous sufferings both in person and estate; as well
as to the general contempt of the world, whose customs and manners they were
constrained to contradict, by a conduct and behavior directly opposite
thereto; they being devoted to suffering for the testimony of a good
conscience, were favored with that true peace which the world cannot give; and
in noisome prisons livingly praised Him who had called them, not only to
believe in Christ and his doctrines, but to suffer for him. Many of these have
left faithful records of their sufferings, exercises, and experiences of the
merciful dealings of the Lord with their souls; which may be as marks in the
way to those who are sincerely seeking the same city which was prepared for
them, and tend to strengthen their resolution to walk as they did; in holy
self-denial, in contempt of the world, and in reverence and fear of offending
Him, who had graciously manifested himself to them as a God of infinite
loving kindness. His compassion, my friend, fails not, but all who will come
may come, and upon the terms of submission to his will, experience Him to blot
out their transgressions, and be a Father unto them. In Him is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning: and if we of the present generation cleave steadily
to Him, and are willing to die that we may live, we may be witnesses in our day
to his power and mercy, and have to tell unto others, what he has done for our
souls.

I herewith send thee a collection of memoirs, etc. of one who had been under
various forms and professions of religion; and was in no mean station in the
several religious societies, which in quest of real peace he left; whereof I
request thy candid perusal. I was induced to this freedom by frequently
remembering thee, as I lately read some of them, which seemed adapted to an
exercised mind; and hope thou will construe it as intended for a help to settle
thine in a right engagement before the Lord; unto whose wisdom I commend thee,
only desiring thou may be baptized into that state, wherein, with the
Captain of our salvation, thou may be able to say, "Father, glorify thy
Name," by my entire submission to thy will.

I hope thou will not suppose from any of the foregoing observations, that I
confine the peculiar favor of God, to the members of our society, to the
exclusion of others. No, I believe that amongst all sorts of people, those who
fear God and work righteousness are accepted of Him: but as faithfulness
agreeable to knowledge is the terms of our acceptance, it behooves us to seek
earnestly for strength to do, as well as to be desirous to know, the heavenly
Father's will; and whoever is thus sincerely exercised is likely to attain to
his salvation. I am sorrowfully sensible of the great declension there is
amongst us as a religious society, from primitive purity and love to God;
nevertheless, the principle of light and life we profess, is unchangeably the
same; and there are yet with us, who, moving under its influence, rejoice in
the manifestation thereof to their souls. That others under the same profession
should run counter thereto, is no more than may be expected, though much to be
lamented; for as now many hold the profession from education, and are born with
passions like other men, until those passions come under Divine restriction,
they will produce their natural fruits.

I conclude with desiring, that the God of all consolation, who raised from the
dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great and true Shepherd of his own sheep, may
so manifest him as such to thy soul, that hearing his voice thou may follow
Him, and arrive to such an establishment in righteousness as to be favored
with true peace, and sincerely subscribe myself thy friend,

CATHERINE PHILLIPS.

EPISTLE XII. Extract of a letter to a Member of our Society, who had spent
much of his time very inconsistently with his profession of religion, and was
favored with a Divine visitation when far advanced in life.
Swansea, 6th of the Seventh Month, 1778. Esteemed Friend,
I HAVE several times thought of writing thee since our return from Bristol,
but till now have neglected it; and as I know not but we may pretty soon turn
homewards, it may appear the less needful for me to do it; but as my mind still
bends toward thee, in an affectionate concern for thy more firm establishment
in the Truth, I am willing to tell thee so, and earnestly request thy constant
attention to its dictates; that thereby thou may be led out of corrupt self
in all its appearances, and consequently, into that holy simplicity of mind and
manners, which characterises a disciple of Christ.

I have been much afraid lest thou should settle down in a partially converted
state, and after having deeply tasted of the terrors of the Lord for past sins,
which indeed were slagrant, should content thyself with forsaking them, and
neglect to press after inward righteousness.

I hope thou will excuse me for being thus plain with thee, and that I shall
explain my meaning in some degree to thy satisfaction, when I tell thee, that
the observations I have made at thy aiming after grandeur or show, in thy
appearance and furniture, has given me pain, as I know it to be the fruit of a
mind not truly or fully humbled.

In the general, in the infancy of religion, when conviction for past offenses
has gone deep enough, the mind is very scrupulous and fearful of receiving a
fresh wound by the indulgence of the natural inclination; and frequently is led
into so strait a path, that when it has been well disciplined by the cross, a
little more liberty is allowed in the use of some things, which in that state
it was restrained from. This has appeared to me as passing under the
dispensation of John the Baptist, which was preparatory to that of Christ, and
must be experienced in our religious progress. For, although the necessity of
the outward shadowy baptism cease, we must be plunged in Jordan, the river of
judgment: and as John appeared in great austerity and mortification, having a
garment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins, and his meat
was locusts and wild honey; so renewed minds must know that life to be slain,
which delights itself in grand appearances and delicacies, and be content with
mean things; so as to walk in contrariety to the world, and be sequestered from
it, as John was in the wilderness. And under this dispensation of
mortification, the mountains and hills are brought down, and the valleys are
exalted, and the way of the Lord is prepared; unto which, as the soul is
reconciled, rough ways are rendered smooth, and crooked paths straight; and the
salvation of God is revealed; and there is an entering into the innocent
liberty of the Lord's children, in the use of his creatures. For although John
came neither eating nor drinking, the Lord Jesus came eating and drinking, yet
in reverence and fear; and though he was Lord of all, he became of no
reputation, and took upon him the appearance of a servant.

Well, my friend, these things are written for our instruction, and are worthy
our attentive consideration, that we may see whether we are endeavoring to
enter through the gate into the city of the saints solemnities. We read, Strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads to life; and alas! few find it.
The indulgence of the fleshly mind and natural inclination, prevents many from
seeing it; and though some have seen it, they have not steadily persevered in
striving to enter in; and therefore have rested short of that perfected
righteousness they had once a prospect of. Let not this be thy case, but
earnestly desire that thy understanding may be fully opened into this holy
highway which leads to the kingdom, and thine eye be preserved single to God's
honor, that thou may be enabled so to run as to obtain the glorious crown
of immortality.

Consider thou have set out late in this important race, and therefore it
behooves thee to use great diligence in endeavoring to overcome thy spiritual
enemies; all of which will be manifested, as thine eye is single, for then thy
whole body will be full of light: so that thou will be preserved from entering
into a league with such of the old inhabitants of thine heart, as are appointed
to utter destruction.

The Israelites were deceived by the appearance of the wily Gibeonites,
thinking them to have come from a far country, when they were near neighbors;
as many, for want of cautious watching in the light, which makes manifest what
is hurtful in its tendency, have been deceived, and united with those
dispositions, in one shape or another, which were for judgment.

And it just presents further to say, Beware of that which is without the
sacred limits of divine prescription. So will thou be preserved from all the
snares of a subtle enemy, who, so long as he is permitted to tempt us, can suit
his baits to every station and situation of life, and to every stage of our
religious experience: which manifests the propriety of our Savior's precept,
not only to one but to all of his disciples, Watch and pray that ye enter not
into temptation.

EPISTLE XIII. To a Relation.
Redruth, 29th of Seventh Month, 1793.
ALTHOUGH I have not written to thee since the commencement of thy present
sorrowful state, thou can not be ignorant of my sympathy with thee; and
considering my increased debility for writing (of which I advised thy mother),
I might have hoped that thou would not have waited for my doing it before
thou had addressed me: if but with a few lines, they would have been very
acceptable; especially so, if they had breathed a spirit of acquiescence with
the will of the All-wise disposer of events. He knows best on what to lay his
hand, in order to facilitate his merciful designs respecting us; and if he
deprives us of what is most dear, and which also may appear to be the most
valuable and beneficial to us of all his temporal gifts; does he not therein
speak this instructive language, Set your affections on things which are in
heaven, and not on things which are upon the earth, which must all pass away in
their appointed season? They are only lent us as temporary assistants or
accommodations in our passage through time; and although they may be rejoiced
in and valued as his gifts, they are not to be depended upon or loved beyond
the appointed standard of his wisdom. It is our interest as well as duty, to
hold them by the tenure wherewith he has entrusted us with them, viz. to be
returned at his call; which always ultimately comports with our real happiness,
if we look not at the things which are seen, which, however high we may prize
them, are but temporal; but steadily behold, with ardent desire of possessing,
"those which are not seen" (save with the eye of faith), "which are eternal."
My principal concern for thee is, that this eye may be opened widely in thy
soul; that thou may see and rightly estimate all possessions which are
attainable by man; and, beholding and contemplating the transcendent excellency
of spiritual gifts, may covet them earnestly. This is the only allowable
covetousness, and the mind being thus engaged, becomes transformed from a state
of nature to that of grace: agreeably to the apostle's testimony and
experience, viz. And we all beholding as in a glass with open face, the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even by the
spirit of the Lord.

In this renewed state the will of the creature is so absorbed in the will of
the Creator, that its life is swallowed up in it; and it does not wish to enjoy
any thing which is not freely given to it of God; whose inscrutable wisdom
bounds its desires, and under a sense that it knows not what is best, it refers
all thereto, and thus it comes to experience new heaven and a new earth to be
created unto it, "wherein dwells righteousness;" and it abundantly rejoiceth
in that which God creates, as it is sensible that he creates Jerusalem (the
city of the solemnities of his saints), a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

Dear --, be not dejected at the present dispensation of affliction, nor
indulge reasoning upon causes or events, of which thy natural understanding is
incompetent to judge. Remember that the Lord has a way in the clouds, and a
path in the thick darkness, and his footsteps are not known; they can not be
fully comprehended by mortals. How vain therefore is the query, Why have thou
suffered this or that? Yea, is it not worse than vain, if our temporal
interests, pleasure, or convenience, are put in competition with his will and
wisdom? He can restore what he deprives of, or compensate for it; and often
does so abundantly to those who sincerely desire that the light and momentary
afflictions may work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
and tend to their increasing in the present state in that superlative blessing
which makes truly rich, and is unmixed with sorrow.

I am persuaded thou have seen this blessing, yea, have tasted of it; but
remember, this is not enough; thou must attentively behold and consider its
worth, and thy desire to attain it must be strong and steady. If thou possess
it and hold it fast, then will thou be enabled to say, "I will not be afraid of
evil tidings," nor of the consequence of the loss of temporal goods of any
kind, My heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, who upholdeth his children, and
provideth from one stage of life to another, what is meet for their
accommodations, and most conducive to their acquiring that inheritance which is
incorruptible and undefiled: whereon I earnestly desire thy attention and
affection may henceforward be so fixed, that thou may experience that what
has happened, however afflicting to nature, has worked together for thy real
permanent good.

I was almost afraid to write to thee, as it appeared like touching a sore
which might be a little healed; but I hope my pen has been directed to steer
clear of adding to thy pain. I saw nothing of what I have communicated when I
began to write. Receive it as a kind intimation from the Father of mercies, as
well as the cordial advice, and affectionate desire for thy experiencing thy
mind to be so stayed upon the Lord, as to become settled in true peace, of thy
sympathizing

CATHERINE PHILLIPS.

I could have wished that the following Letters from my Mother had been
inserted in the foregoing Memoirs. They are very expressive of her religious
care for me.

The first was sent me at Dublin, (see page 33); the two others to Philadelphia.

I.
Dudley, 8th of Fourth Month, 1751. My dear and tender Child,
THINE, with the agreeable account of thy arrival at Dublin, thy brother has
wrote thee we received. Thy other dated the 28th ult. which brings the news of
thy illness, also came safe; which thou may suppose was a great trouble to
me to hear; but although at present it is a hard trial to have thee ill so far
separate from us, yet I esteem it a favor that thy lot is cast among such
careful and good friends, which I desire to be thankful for. It is no small
satisfaction to me that thou have been so easy in thyself, and I would have
thee labor against every thing which the enemy in the time of weakness may
present, and I doubt not but the same peace will be continued to thee.

Do not think, my dear child, of my affliction on thy account; for as thou wast
satisfied it was thy duty to go, and I thought it my duty to give thee up; I
trust thou will be restored to me, and to thy health, and answer the service
the Almighty has sent thee upon to the honor of his great Name: then whenever
we meet again it will be so much to our comfort and thy satisfaction, that with
hearts filled with gratitude, we shall, I hope (for we shall have cause),
return thanks to Him who is alone worthy.

Although thou know that I am very short in expressing myself, yet, my dear
child, when I find my mind rightly exercised, my prayers are night and day for
thy preservation, as I believe thine are for me. I desire, when thou gettest
well enough to go on thy journey, thou will consider thy weak constitution, and
not overdo thyself.

My very dear love is to the friends with whom thou lodgest, not forgetting
their care of thee. I shall now conclude with my dear and tender love, thy
afflicted (but not without hope) affectionate mother,

ANN PAYTON.

II.
Dudley, 27th of Fifth Month, 1754. My near and dear Child,
AS I believe that a line from my hand will be very acceptable to thee, I send
this, by which thou may have the agreeable account, that through Divine
goodness I am as well, both in body and mind, considering what I have gone
through since I saw thee, as I could have expected, and beyond what I fear I
have deserved. And, dear child, I am ready to say in my heart at times, 'Lord,
what am I, that thou art thus favoring me with thy goodness? O! that me and
mine may ever dwell in nothingness of self, that thou alone may have the
praise, who art for ever worthy, says my soul!'

And, my dear child, although I count the time, and want thy company at home,
and in our poor little meeting, I dare not desire it before thou find
thyself clear of thy service, which I desire thou may truly observe. The
reading of thine notwithstanding it brought an account of the hardship thou
have gone through, although it affected me greatly, I was not cast down; but on
the contrary rather comforted, that thou have been so truly given up and
supported in spirit, to answer the requirings of the Almighty; who, if thou
continues faithful to the end, will be thy exceeding great reward. Then thou will receive that peace which the world can neither give nor take away, and a
crown of righteousness.

Dear child, I believe in the reading of this thou will find me near to thee,
as thou art to me, in that love, distance of place cannot separate; in which
love I dearly salute thee, and when my spirit is bowed before the Almighty, I
believe I shall have thee in remembrance, and now remain

Thy near and dear mother, ANN PAYTON.

III.
Dudley, 9th of Second Month, 1755. Dear Child,
HAVING this opportunity, I am willing to send thee a few lines, by which thou
may know that through Divine favor I am as well in health as I can expect;
and at times witness a renewing of strength in the inward man; but, dear child,
it is through a daily watch. I can find no safer way than a watchful state,
that many times prepares the heart for prayer, and helps to pray aright. This
is what I desire we may be found in, and then I believe the Almighty will hear
our prayers for each other; as I am sensible he has done mine, and answered
them in his own time, for which my soul desires to dwell in true thankfulness
to Him.

Dear child, I have little more to caution thee of, than what I have done
heretofore. Be careful to discharge thyself faithfully in the requirings of the
Lord, and be sure take care of thy health, and then I am not without hope but
we shall see each other again in his time.

My very dear love and thy sister's to Friend Pemberton and sons. I am much
obliged to them for their affectionate care toward thee, though have not wrote
to acknowledge it. As thou know my deficiency in that respect, would have
thee excuse it to them in the best manner thou can. Our dear love is to
Samuel Fothergill, John Churchman, William Brown, Jonah Thompson, and all
inquiring friends that know us.

Now, dear child, with the salutation of endeared love to thee,

I remain thy tender and affectionate Mother, ANN PAYTON.
P.S. Our dear love to M. Peisley when thou writes her. Thy brother's dear love
to thee.



THE END.

