AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798, IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
AT NEWARK, BEFORE A NUMEROUS AUDIENCE, ASSEMBLED TO CELEBRATE THE TWENTY-SECOND
ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY CAPT. JABEZ PARKHURST.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE CITIZENS OF THE TOWN.

NEWARK: PRINTED BY PENNINGTON AND DODGE,

M,DCC,XCVIII.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1798.
AT an era portentous of events the most momentous and alarming ever witnessed
by the American Republic since its formation -- At a period when the
inhabitants of our much loved country are so divided in political opinion, that
to express our sentiments freely to each other, seems to be of no other use but
to enkindle the flames of enmity and discord -- At this critical epoch, my
fellow-citizens, you have called upon me to deliver this Anniversary Address.
Conscious of my own inability to do justice to the office, particularly at this
perilous moment, I have with much diffidence and reluctance accepted the
hazarduous employment. A sincere wish to be instrumental in promoting harmony
and union among my fellow-citizens, and to avoid giving offense to any party,
are among the first and most ardent desires of my heart: But to please all at
the present day, when such opposition exists in political sentiments, is an
object (however desirable) not within the power of any one to attain. If,
therefore, I should be so fortunate as to obtain only the negative recompense
of general escape from censure, I shall esteem myself happy in the event, and
consider my small labors on this occasion as having been amply rewarded. It
must afford real happiness to every lover of civil liberty, to behold so
numerous, so splendid, and respectable an assembly convened within these
venerable walls, for the purpose of offering up to Heaven the annual tribute of
Gratitude for the great and distinguished Blessings we have so long enjoyed. To
retrace the operation, and describe the progress, of the memorable Revolution
which gave Independence to these United States -- To review the conduct of the
venerable Sages who planned it, or to admire the exertions in combat of the
patriotic Warriors who executed it, would be a pleasing, an agreeable task. It
would afford sufficient scope for admiration, and unbounded matter for
panegyric. But as these subjects have been so often, and by many so ably,
illustrated within these walls, my fellow-citizens will excuse me from making
them the principal subject of this discourse. Let us keep this truth ever in
our minds, that it is easier to atchieve a revolution which will give freedom
to a nation, than it is to preserve that freedom after it is once obtained. It
is easier to break down the ponderous walls of despotism, than to erect on
their ruins a permanent edifice of freedom. In breaking the chains of tyranny,
the business of liberty is but half accomplished. While we read the history of
mankind, our minds are enraptured with the various relations of the patriotic,
noble, and successful exertions in favor of Public Liberty. But, alas! when we
look around us, how few nations are to be found who enjoy the blessing! The
history of the revolutions in the Grecian states, whose inhabitants are justly
celebrated for their love of civil liberty, is little more than a story of the
people violently shaking off the burdens of one tyrant, and quietly taking on
those of another. The Romans drove into exile their Kings, to make way for the
oppression of the Patricians. This same people shook off the detestable tyranny
exercised by the Decemvirs, but tamely submitted to the despotism of their
Military Chiefs. But we need not go back to the ancients. Is there not a
dreadful example of a similar nature within our own knowledge? The people of
France, who had submitted to monarchical oppression for near one thousand
years, rose, as it were by inspiration, nobly broke the bands of tyranny,
heroically demolished the ancient castles of despotism, and enthusiastically
removed every badge and every vestige of slavery! But, alas! how soon do we
find this same people groaning under the horrid cruelties of one of their
leaders! This one removed, another succeeds him with a rapidity, the relation
of which will stagger the credulity of future ages! -- To develope the causes
of this strange phenomenon, to investigate the reason, and attempt to point out
the remedy, is, although an arduous. yet a necessary duty. The causes may, in
general, be attributed to the frailty of man, to unruly and ungovernable
passions, to prejudice and interest operating on our minds. A disposition to
better our own condition, is implanted in the very constitution of every man.
This disposition, exercised with moderation, is the source of both public and
private advantage -- but when carried to excess, is the origin of almost every
evil. This disposition operating on the minds of Rulers, requires great virtues
to restrain it within salutary limits. They have not only their own passions
and interest that call for gratification, but they are constantly exposed to
the undue influence of others, who artfully assail them under the specious garb
of patriotism, or the more seducing presence of private friendship. The danger
on the part of the people, arises either from unbounded confidence, or
unreasonable jealousy. A medium between these two extremes, is the only sure
path to tread. An unbounded confidence leads to an abuse of public trusts, and
unreasonable jealousy to anarchy and public convulsion. These are the satal
causes which have ruined all the free nations that have gone before us. -- If
they have escaped being dashed to pieces on the rocks of anarchy, they have
been gradually drawn within the more dangerous whirlpools of despotism. So that
one would almost be led to conclude, that mankind were doomed either to become
the sport of internal convulsions, or the deluded victims of systematic
oppression. The principal remedy for these horrid calamities, my
fellow-citizens, is EDUCATION -- A general diffusion of knowledge of every
kind, but more particularly that of our social rights and duties, and our
political interests. Let them not only be accurately marked out in our
political institutions, but fixed by early instruction in the minds of our
youth. Is there a subject on which our happiness through life, so much depends,
as on that of our social relations? and yet is there any subject so completely
neglected? In a course of education, is there any branch of learning so capable
of being reduced to scientific principles? and yet is there to be found a
single professor in the whole art? A tyrant will tell you, that it is your duty
to place unbounded confidence in your rulers, and that all knowledge and virtue
is centred in them, and that they cannot do wrong. On the other hand, a popular
demagogue will endeavor to persuade you, that all kind of confidence is
dangerous, and that the only way to be free, is to live in a constant state of
distrust and violent jealously, and be ready on the first alarm to fly to arms.
Thus parties arise, and the strongest arm decides the conflict. When if we had
been early taught the necessity of a reasonable confidence in our rulers, and
at the same time the safety and propriety of such a watchfulness over their
conduct, as would enable us to judge with some degree of accuracy, of the
propriety or impropriety of re-electing them, and that if they should act
unwisely or even unjustly, it is always much better to submit to the evil,
until it can be remedied by a new election, than to plunge the country into a
civil war. Society would be thereby saved from the scourge of intestine
commotions, and at the same time the liberties and rights of the citizens
secured. I am aware I shall be told, that the important affairs of a great
empire are beyond the reach of common capacities, and that men following
laborious employments have not leisure to acquire a knowledge of our political
interests. It will be admitted that every man in the nation may not be
competent to judge of the justness of every measure; but it cannot be denied,
that a large majority are capable of judging whether their affairs are well
administered or not.

But, fellow-citizens, one important principle in politics should never be kept
out of view. Although the government should pursue measures, which to us may
appear detrimental to the public interest, yet, as long as they keep within the
limits marked out by the constitution, their measures must be received as law,
and readily obeyed. This plain truth results from the very nature of every free
government. The laws constitionally enacted, must be considered as having been
made by the voice of the majority of the people, although the people were not
present and assenting thereto; for this, from numbers and situation, would be
impracticable, and from the impractibility results the necessity of a
representative government. The representatives chosen by the people, become
their agents, and act in their place. The majority of those representatives
are, therefore, on the principles of our constitution, a majority of the
people. It is of importance then, for the people to know how their agents
transact their concerns, and this is to be done by a free and public discussion
of the measures they may pursue. Any restriction on this head, is an inversion
of the natural order of things. It is setting up the agent as above the
inspection and animadversion of the principal: and although it is the duty of
the people to submit to and readily obey all laws enacted constitutionally by
their agents, whether these laws accord with their sentiments or not, yet it
would be the essence of all despotism, for these agents to set themselves up as
above the inspection and animadversion of their principals. In fact, it would
be tearing up by the roots the great principle of all free governments; for the
people, thus prohibited from enquiring into the conduct of their agents, would
be incompetent to judge whether their affairs were administered wisely or not --
They would also be kept in the dark respecting their qualifications, and
therefore would be incompetent to act in their proper sphere in the election of
their representatives. On drawing a correct distinction between inspecting the
conduct of our public agents, and refusing obedience to laws constitutionally
enacted, the public safety depends. For in the first place, should the people
be prohibited from enquiring into the conduct of their agents, slavery would be
the inevitable consequence; and on the other hand, to refuse obedience to laws
constitutionally made, would be to unhinge society and plunge us into a state
of anarchy and disorder. Therefore, the people have a right to animadvert on
the conduct of their public agents, and, in fact, it is their duty to do it;
but they have no right to refuse obedience to the laws, such a refusal would be
one of the highest crimes they could commit against the peace and safety of
society. Besides the advantages of education, and the free discussion of
political principles and measures, another means in the hands of a free people
to preserve their liberties, is a well regulated MILITIA, equal at least to the
defense of the nation against sudden foreign attacks or domestic violence. This
at least puts arms in the hands of every man, and I am bold to say, that the
moment those arms are wrested from them, that moment their liberties are
entombed in the most horrid despotism. While the Roman republic depended on its
militia for national defense, the liberties of the meanest citizens were safe.
When the Patricians at length began to oppress the Plebians, the latter, with
arms in their hands, nobly retired to the sacred Mount, determined to make
their way into some more favorable clime, and free themselves from the
injustice of their haughty lords, who knowing them to be the bulwark of the
nation, paved the way for their return, by placing them on the footing of
freemen.

Again, when the oppressions of the Decemvirs became intolerable, the people,
with arms in their hands, marshalled themselves under the standard of
Virginius, and again freed their country. But, alas! what was to save the
liberties of Rome from the standing army of Marius, of Sylla, and of Caesar?
Who could behold six hundred of the most venerable patriots and respectable
citizens, proscribed by the tyrant and butchered in their own houses in cold
blood in one day, without lamenting that Rome had ever depended for its defense
on any other means than its ancient militia institutions? God forbid, that I
should depreciate the merit of a band of veterans, that braved, as well cold,
want, hunger, and fatigue, as the weapons of their enemy, in our glorious
struggle for freedom; yet it is not to be forgotten, that the militia of
America immortalized their country by their brave exertions in defense of its
liberties. Shall I ask where has its prowess been displayed? No -- Rather let
me ask, where has it not? Has it not from Lexington, in Massachusetts, to the
Cow-pens, in Carolina? Need I bring to your view the scenes of Bunker's-Hill,
or the plains of Bennington, or Saratoga? No, scarcely a wall or hamlet in
New Jersey, but has witnessed their glorious achievements. And let me add,
that no spoiler of national rights will ever invade this country with impunity,
while the militia retain their freedom and their arms.

In presenting you my cordial congratulations on this festive Anniversary, it
would be pleasing to add an observation usual on such occasions -- "That on
this auspicious day, a universal joy diffuses itself from one end of this
extensive continent to the other." -- This has been our happy lot, while our
political horrizon remained tranquil and serene. But, alas! my fellow citizens,
the blissful scene is changed. Clouds and thick darkness have obscured the
prospect. The rolling thunder, which has hitherto been rumbling at a distance
in terrific horror, now approaches near, and with reiterated and tremendous
peals, announces the storm of war is at hand! The Furies have dipped their
snaky locks in human gore. Bellona has mounted her fatal chariot, and Mars
himself stands clad in bloody armor, ready for combat. Yes, fellow citizens,
the war-hoop is again founded on these peaceful shores, and we may perhaps
again behold the smoke of our conflagrated cities, towns, villages, and temples
ascending to the skies. The dreadful yell of the murderous savage, may again
grate our ears. The cries of the innocent offspring in the arms of the expiring
mother, a victim to the hatchet or bayonet -- The groans of our violated
virgins and aged matrons -- Our valuable citizens murdered in prison-ships and
dungeons, or coolly massacred after surrender, may again take place. Who can
smile at the loss of a father, a brother, a son, or husband slain in battle,
and look upon war as a pastime, calculated for amusement! -- Permit me to
repeat a passage from the speech of the patriotic Mr. Ames, on the floor of
Congress, against war -- "On this theme, my emotions are unutterable -- If I
could find words for them -- If my powers bore any proportion to my zeal, I
would swell my voice to such a note of remonstrance, it should reach every log
house beyond the mountains. I would say to the inhabitants, wake from your
false security, your cruel dangers, your more cruel apprehensions, are soon to
be renewed. The wounds yet unhealed are to be torn open again. In the day time
your path through the woods will be ambushed. The darkness of midnight will
glitter with the blaze of your dwellings. You are a father, the blood of your
sons shall fatten your cornfield -- You are a mother, the war-hoop shall wake
the sleep of the cradle." The sentiment of the celebrated Doct. Smith, late
member of Congress, were, only two years ago, as much averse to war as those of
Mr. Ames. These are his words -- "Call on the advocates of war, to point out
the advantages which are to indemnify you for a state of society, which sets
loose all the savage and brutal passions of man, and then drives him forth to
butcher those he does not even keow; which stains the fair field of plenty with
human gore, and changes scenes of luxuriance into a barren wilderness; which
either prostrates or converts the calm retreats of science, and the sacred
temples of the Almighty, into a polluted haunt of howling beasts. Examine well
if genuine patriotism again alone invites to darken this smiling land with the
funeral cypress, and to enlarge the sad sphere of widowhood and fatherless
distress; to convert the peaceful vehicles of commerce which whiten the ocean,
into the bloody caverns of death; to substitute, in short, poverty for wealth,
famine for abundance, anarchy for order, perfidy for faith; and exchange the
tranquil enjoyments of social harmony for the miseries of sieges, the
sustenance of putrid carcases, and the sight of mutilated limbs. Remember well,
that war, the dire scourge of other nations, is a calamity peculiary grevious
to America." Both Mr. Ames and Dr. Smith, have ever been allowed to be men of
extensive knowledge and great abilities. They have been considered as
enlightened statesmen, and their opinions have been resorted to as models of
political perfection. If then these sentiments are just, is it not still the
interest of America to remain at peace? Has war, within the small space of two
years, been divested of its horrors and attendant evils? No, my
fellow-citizens, war is still the greatest curse ever inflicted by Heaven on a
guilty land. But where sleeps the Guard an Genius of Columbia, while the
destroying angel is girding on his desolating sword? Is war our only
alternative, and must then our devoted country again bleed at every pore? If
this is to be our unhappy destiny, let us unite ("as a band of brothers") and
prepare for selfdefence -- It is the first law of nature. But while we brandish
the sword in one hand, let us still hold out the olive branch in the other, and
convince the world, that Americans are not a servile and submissive people, nor
yet a fool hardy race.

May the Almighty Ruler of the Universe mix mercy with his threatening
judgments, and amidst the shocks of war, devastation, and carnage, may he
graciously dispose the hearts of Americans to friendship and forbearance with
one another, and, above all, preserve our country from the most direful of all
calamities, a Civil War.

Newark, July 4, 1798.
FINIS.

