PROOFS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE Yellow Fever, IN PHILADELPHIA and KENSINGTON, IN
THE YEAR 1797, FROM DOMESTIC EXHALATION; AND FROM THE FOUL AIR OF THE SNOW
NAVIGATION, FROM MARSEILLES: AND FROM THAT OF THE SHIP HULDAH, FROM HAMBURGH,
IN TWO LETTERS, Addressed to the Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
BY THE ACADEMY OF MEDICINE OF PHILADELPHIA.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY THOMAS and SAMUEL F. BRADFORD, No. 8. SOUTH FRONT
STREET. 1798.

PREFACE.
IN submitting the following memorials to the public eye, the Academy of
Medicine have been influenced by a sense of what they conceive to be their
duty, not only to themselves, but to their fellow citizens. Persuaded, that,
where candor and good temper prevail, a collision of sentiments is by no means
unfavourable to the discovery of truth, they have ventured, with the less
reluctance, to controvert the opinion of the College of Physicians, respecting
the origin of our late Epidemic.

In support of all the facts, principles, and opinions, which their memorials
contain, the Academy are possessed of ample and satisfactory documents. Of
these, they have not thought it necessary to publish any, except such as relate
to particular points, which have, unfortunately, become subjects of
misrepresentation. To remove the errors and prejudices resulting from this
occurrence, the publication of a few of their documents was found to be
essential. The rest are carefully preserved among the records of the Academy,
and will, if called for, by the circumstances of any future emergency, be, in
like manner, submitted to the examination of the public.

The Academy are unwilling to neglect the present opportunity, of begging the
College of Physicians to be assured, that, in the following investigation, they
have been actuated by no sentiments of unkindness toward them, either in their
associate or individual capacity. Their only motive has been, in common, as
they presume, with that of the College, an earnest wish for the ascertainment
of truth, on a subject, in which the interests of both are equally involved.
Notwithstanding, therefore, the difference of opinion which prevails between
them on several important particulars, it is the desire of the Academy still to
cultivate and maintain with that learned body, such a degree of good
understanding and harmony, as ought ever to characterize both societies and
individuals, engaged in the promotion of the same branch of science.

PROOFS OF THE Origin of the Yellow Fever, IN PHILADELPHIA, etc.
Letter from THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire. Governor of the State of Pennsylvania, to Dr.
BENJAMIN RUSH.
Philadelphia, 6 th, November, 1797. SIR
I AM desirous to obtain, for the information of the Legislature, the most
correct account of the origin, progress, and nature of the disease that has
recently afflicted the city of Philadelphia, with a view that the most
efficacious steps should be taken to prevent a recurrence of so dreadful a
calamity. I have requested the opinion of the College of Physicians on the
subject; but, as I understand that you and many other learned members of the
Faculty do not attend the deliberations of that institution, the result of my
enquiries cannot be perfectly satisfactory without your cooperation and
assistance. Permit me, therefore, Sir, to beg the favor of you, and of such of
your Brethren as you shall be pleased to consult, to state, in answer to this
letter, the opinion which your researches and experience have enabled you to
form on the important object of the present investigation.

I am, respectfully, Sir, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, THOMAS MIFFLIN.

Dr. BENJAMIN RUSH.
Answer to the foregoing.
SIR,
IN compliance with your request, the subscribers have devoted themselves to
the investigation of the origin, progress and nature of the fever which lately
prevailed in our city, and we have now the honor of communicating to you the
result of our enquiries and observations.

We conceive the fever which has lately prevailed in our city, commonly called
the yellow fever, to be the bilious remitting fever of warm climates excited to
a higher degree of malignity by circumstances to be mentioned hereafter.

Our reasons for this opinion are as follows:

I. The sameness of their origin; both being the offspring of putrefaction. Of
this there are many proofs in the histories of the yellow fever in the
West Indies. Where there is no putrefaction, the West India islands enjoy a
perfect exemption from that disease in common with northern climates.

II. The yellow fever makes its appearance in those months chiefly in which the
bilious fever prevails in our country, and is uniformly checked and destroyed
by the same causes, viz. heavy rains and frosts.

III. The symptoms of the bilious and yellow fever are the same in their
nature. They differ only in their degree. It is no objection to this assertion
that there is sometimes a deficiency or absence of bile in the yellow fever.
This symptom is the effect only of a torpid state of the liver, produced by the
greater force of the disease acting upon that part of the body. By means of
depleting remedies this torpor is removed and the disease thereby made to
assume its original and simple bilious character.

IV. The common bilious and yellow fever often run into each other. By
depleting remedies the most malignant yellow fever may be changed into a common
bilious fever and by tonic remedies, improperly applied, the common bilious
fever may be made to assume the symptoms of the most malignant yellow fever.

V. The common bilious and yellow fevers are alike contagious, under certain
circumstances of the weather and of pre-disposition in the body. That the
common bilious fever is contagious, we assert from the observations of some of
us, and from the authority of many Physicians, who have long commanded the
highest respect in medicine.

VI. The yellow and mild bilious fevers mutually propagate each other. We
conceive a belief in the unity of these two states of fever, to be deeply
interesting to humanity, inasmuch as it may lead patients to an early
application for medical aid, and Physicians to the use of the same remedies for
each of them, varying those remedies only according to the force of the
disorder. It is no objection to this opinion, that that state of bilious fever
called the yellow fever, is a modern appearance in our country. From certain
revolutions in the atmosphere as yet observed only, but not accounted for by
Physicians, diseases have in all ages and countries alternately risen and
fallen in their force and danger. At present a constitution of the atmosphere
prevails in the United States which disposes to fever of a highly inflammatory
character. It began in the year 1793. Its duration in other countries has been
from one to fifty years. It is not peculiar to the common bilious fever to have
put on more inflammatory symptoms than in former years. There is scarcely a
disease which has not been affected in a similar way by the late change in our
atmosphere, and that does not call for a greater force of depleting remedies
than were required to cure them before the year 1793.

VII. And LASTLY. The yellow fever affects the system more than once, in common
with the bilious fever. Of this there were many instances during the prevalence
of our late epidemic.

The fever which lately prevailed in our city appears from the documents which
accompany this letter to have been derived from the following sources.

I. Putrid exhalations from the gutters, streets, ponds and marshy grounds in
the neighborhood of the city. From some one of these sources we derive a case
attended by Dr. Caldwell on the 9th of June -- one attended by Dr. Pascalis on
the 22d July, and two cases attended by Dr. Rush and Dr. Physic on the 5th and
15th of the same month; and also most of those cases of yellow fever, which
appeared in the northern parts of the city, and near Kensington bridge, in the
months of August, September and October. We are the more satisfied of the truth
of this source of the fever, from the numerous accounts we have received of the
prevalence of the same fever, and from the same causes, during the late autumn
in New York, and in various parts of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland,
Virginia and South Carolina, not only in sea ports, but inland towns. The
peculiar disposition of these exhalations to produce disease and death, was
evinced early in the season by the mortality which prevailed among the cats,
and during every part of the season, by the mortality which prevailed in many
parts of our country among horses. The disease which proved so fatal to the
latter animals, is known among the farmers by the name of the Yellow Water. We
conceive it to be a modification of the yellow fever.

II. A second source of our late fever appears to have been derived from the
noxious air emitted from the hold of the snow Navigation, capt. Linstroom,
which arrived with a healthy crew from Marseilles on the 25th of July, and
discharged her cargo at Latimer's wharf after a passage of eighty days. We are
led to ascribe the principal part of the disease which prevailed in the south
end of the city to this noxious air, and that for the following reasons.

1. The fever appeared first on board this vessel and in its neighborhood,
affecting a great number of persons nearly at the same time, and so remote from
each other that it could not be propagated by contagion.

2. There was in the hold of this vessel a quantity of vegetable matters, such
as prunes, almonds, olives, capers, and several other articles, some of which
were in a state of putrefaction.

3. A most offensive smell was emitted from this vessel, after she had
discharged her cargo, which was perceived by persons several hundred feet from
the wharf where she was moored.

4. A similar fever has been produced from similar causes, in a variety of
instances: we shall briefly mention a few of them.

At Tortola, a fever was produced in the month of June, in the year 1787, on
board the ship Britannia, capt. James Welsh, from the noxious air generated
from a few bushels of potatoes, which destroyed the captain, mate and most of
the crew, in a few days.

Two sailors were affected with a malignant fever, on board the --, capt.
Thomas Egger, in the month of March, 1797, from the noxious air produced by
wine that had putrified in the hold of the ship, one of whom died soon after
her arrival at Philadelphia.

In the month of June, 1793, the Yellow Fever was generated by the noxious air
of some rotted bags of pepper on board a French Indiaman, which was carried
into the port of Bridgetown, by the British letter of marque Pilgrim. All the
white men and most of the negroes employed in removing this pepper, perished
with the Yellow Fever, and the foul atmosphere affected the town, where it
proved fatal to many of the inhabitants.

On board the Busbridge Indiaman, a Yellow Fever was produced in the month of
May, 1792, on her passage from England to Madrass, which affected above two
hundred of the crew. It was supposed to be derived from infection, but many
circumstances concur to make it probable that it was derived from noxious air.
The absence of smell in the air does not militate against this opinion, for
there are many proofs of the most malignant fevers being brought on by airs
which produced no impression on the sense of smelling. This is more frequently
the case when the impure air has passed a considerable distance from its
source, and becomes diluted with the purer air of the atmosphere.

Several cases are related by Dr. Lind, in his treatise upon fever and
infection of the Yellow Fever, originating at sea under circumstances which
forbade the suspicion of infection, and which can only be ascribed to the
impure air generated from putrid vegetables.

So well known, and so generally admitted is this source of Yellow Fever in
warm climates, that Dr. Shannon, a late writer upon the means of preventing the
diseases of warm climates, in enumerating its various causes, expressly mentions
the putrid effluvia of a ship's hold.

We wish due attention to be paid to these facts, not only because they lead to
the certain means of preventing one of the sources of this fever, but because
they explain the reasons, why sailors are so often its first victims, and why
from this circumstance the origin of the disease has been so hastily, but
erroneously ascribed solely to importation.

The fever which prevailed along the shore of the Delaware, in Kensington, and
which proved fatal to Mr. Joseph Bowers and two of his family, we believe
originated from the noxious air emitted from the hold of the ship Huldah, Capt.
Wm. Warner. This air was generated by the putrefaction of coffee, which had
remained there during her voyage from Philadelphia to Hamburgh, and back again.
See appendix letter A.


In the course of our enquiries, we were led to suspect one source of our late
fever, to be of foreign origin. The fails of the armed ship Hind, on board of
which several persons had died of the Yellow Fever, on her passage from Port au
Prince, and which arrived on the 4th of August, were sent to the sail store of
Mr. Moyse. Four persons belonging to the loft were soon afterward affected,
with symptoms of a bilious Yellow Fever. We shall not decide positively upon
the origin of the fever in these cases; but the following facts render it
probable that it was not derived from the persons who had died of it on board
the suspected vessel.

1. The sails emitted an offensive smell; 2. three of the cases of the persons
affected in the sail loft were of a mild grade of the fever; 3. the fever was
not propagated by contagion from any one of them; 4. the sail loft was within
the influence of the noxious air, which was emitted from the hold of the snow
Navigation, being not more than fifty yards, and was in the direction of the
wind which blew at that time over her. The extent of this air has not been
accurately ascertained, but many analogies give us reason to believe that it
may be conveyed by the wind, in its deleterious state from half a mile, to a
mile.

In support of the opinion we have delivered of the origin of our late fever,
we must add further, that in that part of the city which lies between Walnut
and Vine streets, and which appeared to be free from the effects of exhalation
and the noxious air of the ships, there were but few cases of the fever which
appeared to spread by contagion, even under the most favorable circumstances
for that purpose.

Having pointed out the nature and origin of our late fever we hope we shall be
excused in mentioning the means of preventing it in future. These are,

FIRST, A continuance of the present laws for preventing the importation of the
disease from the West Indies, and other parts of the world where it usually
prevails.

SECONDLY, Removing all those matters from our street, gutters, cellars,
gardens, yards, stores, vaults, ponds, etc. which by putrefaction in warm
weather afford the most frequent remote cause of the disease, in this country.
For this purpose we recommend the appointment of a certain number of Physicians
whose business it shall be to inspect all such places in the city, the Northern
Liberties and South wark, as contain any matters capable by putrefaction, of
producing the disease and to have them removed.

THIRDLY, We earnestly recommend the frequent washing of all impure parts of
the city in warm and dry weather, by means of the pumps, until the water of the
Schuylkill can be made to wash all the streets of the city; a measure which we
conceive promises to our citizens the most durable exemption from bilious
fevers of all kinds, of domestic origin.

FOURTHLY, To guard against the frequent source of Yellow Fever from the
noxious air of the holds of ships, we recommend the unlading all ships, with
cargoes liable to putrefaction, at a distance from the city, during the months
of June, July, August, September and October. To prevent the generation of
noxious air in the ships, we conceive every vessel should be obliged by law to
carry and use a ventilator, and we recommend in a particular manner the one
lately contrived by Mr. Benjamin Wynkoop. -- We believe this invention to be
one of the most important and useful, that has been made in modern times, and
that it is calculated to prevent not only the decay of ships and cargoes, but a
very frequent source of pestilential diseases of all kinds, in commercial
cities.

In thus deciding upon the nature and origin of our late fever, we expect to
administer consolation to our fellow citizens upon the cause of our late
calamity, for in pointing out its origin to the senses, we are enabled
immediately and certainly to prevent it. But while the only source of it is
believed to be from abroad, and while its entrance into our city is believed to
be in ways so numerous and insidious, as to elude the utmost possible vigilance
of health officers, we are led in despair to consider the disease as removed
beyond the prevention of human power or wisdom. It has been by adopting
measures, similar to those we have delivered for preventing pestilential
diseases, that most of the cities in Europe, which are situated in warm
latitudes, have become healthy in warm seasons, and amidst the closest
commercial intercourse, with nations and islands constantly afflicted with
those diseases. The extraordinary cleanliness of the Hollanders was originally
imposed upon them, by the frequency of pestilential fevers in their cities.
This habit of cleanliness has continued to characterize those people, after the
causes which produced it, have probably ceased to be known.

In thus urging a regard to the domestic sources of the Yellow Fever, we are
actuated by motives of a magnitude far beyond those which determine ordinary
questions in science. Though we feel the strongest conviction that the value of
property, the increase of commerce and the general prosperity of our city, will
be eminently forwarded by the adoption of the foregoing propositions, yet these
are but little objects in our view, when compared with the prevention of the
immense mass of distress, which never fails to accompany a mortal epidemic. We
consider ourselves moreover as deciding upon a question, which is to affect the
lives and happiness, not only of the present inhabitants of Philadelphia, but
of millions yet unborn, in every part of the globe.

We are with the greatest respect, Sir, Your very humble servants, BENJAMIN
RUSH, CHARLES CALDWELL, WILLIAM DEWEES, JOHN REDMAN COXE, PHILIP SING PHYSIC,
JAMES REYNOLDS, FRANCIS BOWS SAYRE, JOHN C. OTTO, WILLIAM BOYS, SAMUEL COOPER,
JAMES STUART, FELIX PASCALIS, JOSEPH STRONG.


MEMORIAL OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS
To the Senate and House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Memorial of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia
respectfully represents:
THAT your Memorialists, deeply affected with the calamities produced by the
disease which has recently occurred amongst us, are impelled by a sense of duty
to their fellow citizens and themselves, to inform you, that they consider the
laws which were enacted for the purpose of preserving this city from malignant,
contagious disorders, as very imperfect.

The subject being of immense importance, they hope to be excused for stating
their sentiments with respect to it at large.

They are of opinion, that the disease which produced so much mortality and
distress in the year 1793, was imported into this city from the West Indies;
and they are confirmed in this sentiment, by the circumstances attending the
disease of this year, which they consider as of the same nature, and derived
from the same source.

Some of their most important reasons for this opinion, are as follow: -- The
disease in question is essentially different from the fevers that occur in this
climate, and which originate from domestic causes. This difference particularly
regards the general progress of the symptoms, and the mortality, as is evident
upon a comparison of its history with that of the ordinary diseases of this
city.

A disease which resembles the fever of 1793 and of this year, in many
important points, has long been known in the West Indies, and those parts of
America situated between the tropics; and in seven or eight different instances
in which a similar disease has occurred in the United States, in the course of
this century, there is good reason to believe that it was derived from those
countries. In most of the instances, the original history of the disease
contains the information that it was imported. In some cases, the infection can
be traced to the imported clothing of persons who died in the West Indies. In
most of the cases where the importation cannot be ascertained, the first
appearance of the disease has been, as in the other instances, in the
neighborhood of the shipping, or among persons connected with vessels.

The circumstances attending the fever of this year are extremely in point; and
the narrative which accompanies this, will, we trust, satisfy you that it was
imported.

The disease in question, commences invariably in our seaports, while inland
towns, equally exposed to the ordinary causes of fever, escape; and in the two
last instances of its occurrence in Philadelphia, the suburbs and the country
adjacent, were more healthy than usual at the same season; and at the
commencement of the disease, all the parts of the city, excepting the small
spaces to which it was confined, were remarkably healthy.

It exists in the West Indies, particularly in time of war, when great numbers
of strangers are to be found there; and reference to dates will show, that in
most of the instances of the occurrence of the disease in the United States,
there has been war in the West Indies.

Your Memorialists are aware, that cases may be adduced where the disease has
occurred in persons, who were not known to have been exposed to imported
contagions, but such is the subtle nature of this power, that it often exists
unsuspected; and similar difficulties occur respecting the smallpox, and other
contagions, allowed by all to be of foreign origin. There also occur, although
very rarely, solitary cases of malignant remitting fevers, the symptoms of
which resemble so much the disease in question, that they are often supposed to
be the same; but there is this essential difference, that a malignant remittent
fever has never been to our knowledge contagious in this climate.

The difference of sentiments among physicians, now so much regretted,
resembles that which almost always takes place, when the plague is introduced
into any of the civilized parts of Europe, where it is not well known. The
identity of the disease, its origin and its contagious nature have been often
the subject of controversy. Some physicians have considered it as of domestic
origin; but proper health laws, strictly enforced, have latterly protected the
commercial parts of Europe from its ravages.

With these sentiments of the nature of the disease, your memorialists cannot
but regard a proper law respecting the subject, as a matter of the greatest
importance, and although they are perfectly sensible of the imperfection of the
science of medicine, yet from a conviction that physicians are the best
informed, as well as the most interested in the subject, they approach you with
that respect which is due to your legislative authority, and declare their
belief, that the existing health laws of this Commonwealth are not such as are
best calculated to obtain the desired end, and that they ought to be improved.

Having lately communicated in writing to the governor their ideas respecting
the best methods of preventing the introduction of contagious diseases, they
beg leave to refer you to that communication. At the same time they tender you
their professional assistance in framing an efficient law for this purpose; and
thus having performed their duty, they hold themselves discharged from all
responsibility, on account of the evils which may arise from the present
imperfect state of the legislative arrangements respecting this important
subject.

By order of the College, JOHN REDMAN, President. Attest, THOMAS C. JAMES,
Secretary.

Philadelphia, Dec. 5 th 1797.
Narrative of Facts relative to the probable Origin, and Progress, of the
Malignant Contagious Fever which lately appeared at the junction of Penn and
Pine Streets.
THE ship Arethusa, Captain Keith, sailed about June 1, 1797, from Port Royal
in Jamaica for the Havannah, with slaves; during the passage two men died with
a fever, which Mr. Stephen Kingston, a gentleman of this city, who was a
passenger on board, and has frequently seen the disease, believes to have been
the Yellow Fever, one having the black vomit. After remaining some days at the
Havannah, the vessel proceeded for Philadelphia, and arrived in the stream
opposite to Pine Street, July 23, 1797. At the Capes of Delaware she took on
board a Pilot, and performed a quarantine of five days at State Island. The
Pilot was attacked with a fever, the day of their arrival at the city, and went
on shore the same day, when he was visited by Dr. Currie, who has been much
conversant with the Yellow Fever, and was so sensible of the resemblance of his
symptoms to those of that disease, that he mentioned the case as suspicious, to
one of his friends.

The Arethusa was moored at Mr. Joseph Russell's wharf, outside of two vessels
which lay there when she arrived, her crew left her immediately after she was
moored, and the next day returned for their clothing, etc. when they crossed
and re-crossed the above mentioned ships. Two boys only and the captain (who
was on board occasionally) composed the crew of the outermost ship, or that
immediately contiguous to the Arethusa; but the innermost vessels, the brig
Iris from Oporto, had a crew of the usual number. On the twenty ninth day of
July, five men of this crew were taken ill with fever, and attended by Dr. J.
Stuart, who states in his report to the College of Physicians, that the
symptoms were similar in all, though varying in the degree of violence; four of
these recovered, but one died with unequivocal marks of the malignant Yellow
Fever. A servant of George Latimer, Esquire. who lived about 100 yards to the north
of this vessel, and was frequently on the wharves, was attacked, July 30, with
a fever which was highly contagious and malignant, of which he died in a few
days.

Mr. N. Lewis, who kept a compting room which was about the same distance from
the Arethusa, was attacked about the same time, and died also in five days, of
a fever which was supposed to be of the same nature.

Mr. Dominick Joyce, who was much engaged on board a ship near the Arethusa,
was attacked, August 3d. with a fever of the same kind, but recovered. A man
who lived in a store on the South side of Pine Street, about 150 yards from the
river, was attacked with a malignant fever about this time, and died in a few
days.

About the sixth of August, Mr. Ferguson, whose yard adjoined the wharf where
the Arethusia and Iris lay, was attacked with a malignant fever, and the same
day Mr. John Plankinghorn's girl, who lived nearly opposite to Mr. Ferguson's
across Penn Street, and worked in a yard which was situated very near to the
above mentioned store in Pine street, was also attacked with fever, they both
died on the fifth or sixth day after the attack, Mrs. Ferguson with very
suspicious, and Mr. Plankinghorn's girl, with complete and unequivocal symptoms
of the Yellow Fever. In this manner the disease continued to spread, so that by
the middle of August, or within three weeks from the arrival of the Arethusa,
above ten persons had died, who either lived or were engaged in business within
300 yards of the Arethusa, and this at a time when the other parts of the city
were so healthy, that it is probable all the other deaths which occurred in it
were not equal in number to those which occurred in this small district. After
this the disease gradually extended itself to Southwark, and at the same time
became thinly scattered through the city, where its destructive effects are but
too well known.

December 26 th, 1797.
Facts relative to the sickly state of the ship HIND.
It appears from the depositions of Francis Tow, Nicholas Benson, and William
Cooper, seamen on board the armed ship Hind, taken before Chief Justice M'Kean,
that about the beginning of July 1797, the Hind sailed from Port-au-Prince,
bound to Philadelphia, with a cargo of sugar and coffee, and with 43
passengers; of which number 23 were whites and twenty colored persons, that
they touched at Cape Nichola Mole, where they remained eight days and
discharged a part of their cargo, in lieu thereof taking in a quantity of stone
ballast; during the time they lay at the Mole the passengers were occasionally
on shore. It would appear that they left the Mole between the 12th, and 15th,
of July, and arrived at this port, after a passage of twenty or twenty one
days. About three or four days after their departure from the Mole, five or six
white persons and one negro of the passengers were attacked with fever, the
white persons so attacked were observed to become very yellow. During the
passage four other colored persons and five of the crew fell ill of fever: on
or two of the latter number, after the vessel entered the capes of Delaware;
but only a colored boy and child died during the passage, and were thrown
overboard after the vessel entered the river. Upon the arrival of the vessel
opposite the Marine Hospital, in consequence of orders from the captain, four
sick persons were secreted and did not come under the inspection of the
Physician of the Port; exclusive of these, two women were sick in the cabin.
After passing the Fort one of the seamen was taken ill, went on shore, and was
afterward carried to the Marine Hospital; and two other and persons were taken
on shore sick. So far go the depositions.

From information obtained from the Health Office, it appears, that the Hind
was examined at the Fort on the second, and arrived at Philadelphia on the
fourth of August; and that Mr. Doughty, one of the Inspectors of the Health
Office, sent to the Marine Hospital on the 13th of August, Peter Malosio, one
of the crew of the Hind then residing in Love Lane, and on the 14th a
Portuguese from near the junction of Penn and South Streets, who had been
landed there; and that another person was sick of a suspicious fever at Mrs.
O'Connor's, in Almond near Front Street. Both these were from on board the
Hind, and the Portuguese abovementioned had been visited by Dr. Currie, who
declares his disease to have been Yellow Fever.

Letter from the ACADEMY OF MEDICINE to THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esquire. Governor of the
State of Pennsylvania.
SIR,
THE Physicians, who answered your letter of the sixth of November, respecting
the origin and nature of the epidemic fever which lately prevailed in the city
of Philadelphia, having, with others of their medical brethren, associated
themselves under the name of "The Academy of Medicine of Philadelphia," beg
leave, in that capacity, to address you again upon the interesting subject of
the said letter.

The Academy have seen, with regret, a memorial, from the College of Physicians
of the city, to the legislature, accompanied with a "narrative of facts"
intended to establish an opinion contrary to that, which the subscribers of the
answer to your letter, conceive they had therein proved in the most
irrefragable manner.

As the opinion appears to us replete with danger to the lives of our fellow
citizens, and to the prosperity of our city, we deem ourselves bound by the
principles of humanity, and the obligations of patriotism, to make a few
remarks upon it; and to show that it is founded upon partial investigations,
and mistaken ideas of the nature of the Yellow Fever.

The College have ascribed the origin of the late epidemic to the ships
Arethusa, captain Keith, from Havanna, and Hind, captain Patot, from
Port-au-Prince. The memorial sets forth that, the ship Arethusa, capt. Keith,
sailed about the first of June, from Port Royal in Jamaica, for the Havanna
with slaves; during the passage two men died with a fever, which Mr. Stephen
Kingston, a gentleman of this city who was a passenger on board, and has
frequently seen the disease, believes to have been the Yellow Fever, one having
the black vomit. Admitting the fact, which rests merely upon the belief of a
person not medically educated, yet the arguments hereafter to be adduced, it is
presumed, will destroy the probability of its being introduced by this ship.
That the island of Jamaica was healthy at the time the Arethusa sailed, appears
from the answers given by the captain of the said ship, to the official
interrogatories filed in the Health-Office relative to this subject; and from
those of capt. Henry Latimer, of the Brig Maria, who sailed from the above port
about the same day. That the disease of which the men died was not contagious
is rendered probable by its not having spread among the passengers or crew who
amounted to seventy, all of whom arrived in good health at the Havanna on the
twenty-first of June. But supposing the disease to have been of a contagious
nature, the precautions taken after the deaths, would have been sufficient to
have destroyed any remains of the contagion. From Mr. Brien's deposition it
appears, that The clothing, bedding and articles belonging to the deceased
were thrown overboard, and their births cleansed and well sprinkled with
vinegar. And we are authorized further to assert, that the ship underwent such
a complete cleansing while at the Havanna, after landing the slaves, as
prudence would dictate to a ship-master, in every similar case. The ship,
moreover, after lying at the Havanna fourteen days, during which time all on
board remained well, arrived opposite the Health-Office on State island, on the
eighteenth of July. During the whole of this passage her hatches were
constantly open, whereby the most ample means for a free current of air were
afforded, which could not fail to dissipate any remains of contagion which
could possibly have continued after her former purifications. The ship
performed five days quarantine opposite the Health-Office, on State-Island,
during which time the bedding was every day exposed upon deck and was once
washed by a rain. The crew moreover remained well, except the captain, who was
affected with a rheumatism, and the mate, with a lax, both of whom soon
recovered. The pilot who conducted this ship was attacked on the twenty-third
of July, and allowing three days for the time he had been exposed to the
contagion before his fever appeared, there will remain forty six days from the
time the ship left Kingston till her arrival in our river. From the known laws
of the contagion of the Yellow Fever, and the distance of time at which it
usually appears, after persons have been exposed to the contagion, the Academy
conceive it scarcely possible, if any portion of contagion had been left by the
beforementioned persons, that it would have remained inactive for above forty
six days, exposed as the crew were to the exciting causes of fatigue, night
watching and the vicisitudes of the weather. The perfect freedom from disease
which all on board enjoyed, must therefore be admitted as proof that no
contagion did exist, and consequently that the pilot and others could not have
derived their disease from that source.

The College further state that The pilot was attacked with a fever, the day of
his arrival with the ship at the city and went on shore the same day, when he
was visited by Dr. Currie, who has been much conversant with the Yellow Fever,
and who was so sensible of the resemblance of his symptoms to those of that
disease, that he mentioned the case as suspicious to one of his friends.

In addition to the arguments, before adduced, for supposing that the pilot
could not have taken his disease from any remains of contagion on board, the
Academy further remark, that the source from whence he derived his disease was
probably, and as he believes, from a current of cold air during the night,
while sleeping in the open cabin of the ship, after a warm day, which preceded
that on which the quarantine of the ship was ended. His indisposition came on
the next morning, and soon after his arrival in this city, a violent fever
succeeded, of a kind, which we every year observe in Philadelphia, from sudden
changes of the weather, in the summer and autumnal months, and especially from
similar exposure on the river. It may be added, that he was but a few days
confined, and that none of his friends who nursed him, or others who daily
visited him were affected by him; neither were there any precautions taken to
avoid contagion, nor the least intimation of danger given to those who
constantly attended him. Under all the circumstances which have been mentioned,
it is impossible to believe that the pilot's disease was derived from an
imported contagion.

The College in their memorial have insinuated that the crew of the Brig Iris
were infected with the Yellow Fever by the crew of the Arethusa passing across
her deck to the wharf. If this had been true or even possible, it must have
been in one of the three following ways: 1st. By the actual sickness of the
crew; 2d. By the contagion blowing off their clothes in passing over the decks;
or, 3d. By the contagion, which had adhered to the timbers of the Arethusa,
being conveyed by the wind over two intermediate vessels to the Iris.

It is not pretended that any of the crew of the Arethusa were indisposed,
therefore the first supposition must be rejected. They could not have infected
the crew of the Iris in the second mode, because it is not alleged that they
stopped a moment when passing over her deck. But admitting they did, it cannot
be believed, that a disease could be conveyed by their clothes, to the crew of
the Iris in the open air, when it is well known, that those clothes when worn,
and even washed in confined lodging houses afterward, did not infect a single
person, in any part of the city. Lastly, it is highly improbable that the crew
of the Iris could have been infected by the timbers of the Arethusa, because,
we have no proofs that the contagion of the Yellow Fever ever adheres to wood;
but admitting this to be possible, we reject the probability of it, because, as
we before observed, the ship had been well cleansed and freely ventilated on
her voyage from the Havanna to Philadelphia. We are the more disposed to
ascribe the destruction of contagion, if any had existed, to the pure air of
the ocean, from having so repeatedly observed the effects of country air in
weakening or destroying it in the United States. The Academy are moreover
authorized by Dr. Stewart to assert, that none of the family, with whom the
five men of the Iris boarded, were infected; but that they preserved their
health the whole time of the prevalence of our late epidemic.

As the Iris lay at Pine-street wharf, and entirely within the limits of the
exhalations from the snow Navigation, to which we formerly referred, it is
highly probable that they were infected thereby, and that the disease was
excited by their intemperance in the use of Port wine, with which the brig was
loaded, and by the practice of bathing themselves in the river while under the
influence of liquor, and heated by labor. From this conduct it is conceived by
the Academy, the peculiar violence of their diseases can be accounted for, as a
similar cause is always ranked among the most powerful, in the production of
malignant cases of bilious yellow fever; and Dr. Stewart authorizes the Academy
to assert his belief, that the Fever, in the cases he communicated to the
College, proceeded from exhalation; and he thinks most probably, that of the
snow Navigation Though at an early period of our late epidemic, Dr. Stewart
suspected that the crew of the brig Iris were infected by an intercourse with
that of the ship Arethusa, yet, a farther investigation and ascertainment of
facts, have since satisfied him that this was not the case, but that they most
probably, as above stated derived their disease from foul air issuing from the
hold of the snow Navigation.
.

Two of the other persons mentioned by the College, viz. Mr. Lewis and Mr.
Latimer's man, said to have been infected by the Arethusa, were much nearer the
snow Navigation than the Iris was, and were exposed to the exhalation from the
former vessel. With regard to Mr. Lewis, we shall observe, that he was absent
from the city when the Arethusa arrived, and did not return until six days
afterward, which was on the thirtieth of July. On the first of August, the day
of his attack, it is known that he complained very much of the stench of the
snow Navigation, which had now pervaded the whole neighborhood, and expressed
great concern at her being permitted to remain at the wharf. The Academy are
authorized, by Mr. Dominick Joyce, to express his surprise at the assertion of
his having taken his fever from the Arethusa; for, though his business led him
to the neighborhood of that ship, yet he was still within the sphere of the
extent of the foul air from the snow Navigation, and he acknowledges he was
almost every day upon the wharf at which this vessel lay, and from which he, in
all probability, derived his disease.

As all the other persons whose cases are mentioned by the College, lived
within the extent of the exhalation from the snow Navigation, there can be
little doubt, but that they derived it from the same air which affected the
persons, whose names they have mentioned. It is remarkable, that the disease
was in no instance propagated from any of them.

The Academy have good reason to believe, that the persons who were indisposed
on board the armed ship Hind, after her arrival, derived their diseases from
the noxious air of the snow Navigation, in common with the persons who were
affected on board the Iris, and in the neighborhood of Mr. Latimer's wharf. It
appears that none of them propagated the disease to any of their attendants in
the city, or in the hospital at State Island, to which place some of them were
sent, It is well known, moreover, that many citizens repeatedly visited and
spent whole days on board this vessel, none of whom were indisposed in
consequence of it.

From the depositions of the supercargo and of the pilot of the Hind, it will
likewise appear, that the whole of the testimony of the three boys is
disproved, except as to some unimportant particulars See Appendix, (B.)
.

We are unable to give credit to the traditional rumors of the foreign origin
of the Yellow Fever, in any part of the United States, inasmuch as from the
inaccuracy of the few records which have been preserved, of the places from
whence it was said to be derived, and of the manner in which it was said to
have been introduced into our country, we have reason to conclude they were
assumed without sufficient investigation. Had the proper steps been taken at
all times to investigate its origin, it is probable it would have been
discovered, in most cases, to have been the offspring of domestic putrefaction.
We cannot close the arguments against the importation of the Yellow Fever,
without remarking, that many recent facts and observations render it probable,
that the reports of its contagious nature have been exaggerated, and that it is
not so often propagated by contagion as has been supposed, more especially in
warm weather, when sick rooms are open night and day, to the constant accession
of fresh air.

We observe in the memorial of the College of Physicians an assertion, that the
Yellow Fever Is essentially different from the fevers that occur in this
climate, and which originate from domestic causes: but as no proofs are adduced
in favor of that assertion, we shall rest our opinion of the original sameness
of both those states of fever, upon the facts and arguments which were stated
in our former communication. We shall only observe, that the idea maintained by
the College, has been exploded by some of the most distinguished writers upon
tropical diseases; and by most of the American physicians of the southern
states, who constantly consider and treat both the common bilious fever, and
its higher grade, called Yellow Fever, as the same disease, varying only in
violence.

The Academy observe also, with surprise, another assertion made by the
College, that The disease in question, invariably commences in our seaports,
while inland towns, equally exposed to the ordinary causes of fever, escape. To
this we reply, it is well known, that in various parts of the United States,
remote from seaports, precisely the same disease, with all its characteristic
symptoms, has frequently prevailed.

The College in their narrative have taken no notice of the origin of the
Yellow Fever in Kensington, nor at and near Red-Bank upon the eastern shore of
the Delaware. Its origin in the former of those places from the noxious air
emitted from the putrid coffee of the ship Huldah, and in the latter from marsh
exhalation, we conceive to be fully established by the documents communicated
in our appendix See appendix (C.)
. The College have also observed a total silence in their report respecting
those cases of Yellow Fever, which appeared in our city, before the arrival of
the Arethusa, Hind or Navigation. These cases were evidently derived from some
of the numerous sources of exhalation, from putrid substances in and about the
city. They were attended by Doctors Rush, Physic, Caldwell, and Pascalis.

We cannot take leave of this important subject without expressing our earnest
desire for its candid and close examination, by the Legislature of the State.

Facts and arguments similar to those we have urged, have produced a conviction
of the domestic origin of the Yellow Fever, in Boston, New York, Baltimore,
Norfolk and Charleston, and many of the other towns of the United States. This
conviction has been followed by measures, in New York, which promise in future
years an exemption from the disorder.

With ardent wishes for the prevalence of truth, upon this important subject,
in the capital of the United States, we have the honor to add our most
respectful wishes, for your health and happiness.

Signed by order of The Academy of Medicine of Philadelphia. March 20, 1798.
PHILIP SING PHYSIC, President. FRANCIS BOWS SAYRE, Secretary.


TO THOMAS MIFFLIN, Esqr. Governor of Pennsylvania.
Appendix.
(A)
IN several interesting particulars, respecting the origin of the epidemic of
ninety-seven, misrepresentations of facts, have much deceived the public mind.
These misrepresentations, we believe to have been entirely the result of an
easy credulity, disposed to rest satisfied with popular report, and not of any
settled intention to mislead. They have been most striking and fallacious in
the accounts propagated, respecting the origin of the disease in Kensington,
and at Red-bank, on the Jersey shore, of the river Delaware On the subject of
the true source of the epidemic, in these two situations, the public are by no
means at present in possession of accurate information.
. To be able the more effectually to counteract the pernicious influence of
such mistatements, the Academy of medicine have found it necessary, to set on
foot particular investigations. The result of these, they now beg permission to
submit, in the form of a few documents, to the candid consideration of the
public.

It is known to have been very generally reported, and almost as generally
believed, that the late epidemic was introduced into Kensington by Mr. John
Bruster, who was said to have received the infection by going on board the
armed ship Hind, from Port-au-Prince. It is true, that Mr. Bruster was, at
least, among the first (if not, indeed, himself the very first) who was
attacked by this disease in Kensington, in the summer of ninety-seven; but that
he could not possibly have derived his illness from any intercourse with the
ship Hind, is a truth unequivocally established by the following documents,
particularly by the affidavit of Michael Lynn.

DOCUMENT. Proofs of the disease, occurring from exhalation in Kensington; from
marshy grounds; and from the hold of a ship.
From the books kept at the Merchants' Coffee-House, it appears that the
British armed ship Hind, Francis Patot Commander, from Port au-Prince, was seen
below the Fort on the 2d. of August; -- and at 10 o'clock of the same day she
came within sight; and lay off the Fort for examination.

The usual questions were this day (2d. of August) proposed, by the
Health-Officer, to the commander, as appears by the paper preserved on the
files at the Health-Office in this city. She came up to the city on the 3d; and
entered at the Health-Office on the 4th of the month.

As no mention is made, previously, of her being seen in the river; the
probability is that she had a speedy passage up the Delaware.

The person who first had the Yellow Fever in Kensington, was a young man of
the name of John Bruster. He is said to have taken the disease by having been
on board the Hind; and through him, the fever was said to have been introduced
into Kensington. Upon an examination into dates, this is altogether impossible:
Bruster died on the 2d. of August, after an illness of 4 days and 4 hours,
according to his father's account, which brings the commencement of his attack
to the 29th July, or four days previously to the arrival of the Hind at the
Fort. Exclusively of this fact, I have added the affidavit of Michael Lynn, to
prove that he did not go on board of any vessel in a voyage down the river to
Reedy Island. Some other source for his disease must then be looked for; and
this I derive from the marshy exhalations (arising from the low grounds and
meadows on one or both sides of the river) to which he was exposed in his
passage in a small Schooner, to and from Reedy Island in the middle and close
of July, aided by imprudent exposure, by sleeping upon the wet decks of the
vessel.

Wm. Reed, who died on the 5th of August after 7 days illness, appears in all
probability to have derived his disease from some of the local sources which
are numerous in, and about Kensington; although if common report had been
credited, we should have ascribed it to the picking up of a cask which was said
to have been thrown from the Hind. As however, he died on the 5th, after 7 days
illness; the story is altogether impossible, as it brings the commencement of
the disease to the 20th of July, or 4 days preceding the arrival of the Hind.
The same sources, which in Kensington, commonly produce in the Autumnal months,
remittents and intermittents, have this season by the peculiar constitution of
the atmosphere, (whatever that may be owing to) raised those diseases to the
more violent grade of Yellow Fever.

To these local sources I would also without hesitation ascribe many of those
cases which occurred in Kensington, and which were all asserted to be traced to
contagion.

In that range of houses, extending northward from the bridge over Kohocksing
creek, and to the west of the main York road, not less than six or seven people
died of the Yellow Fever. These houses it will be recollected, are bounded on
the west by that large portion of low marshy ground to the northward of the
bridge; and from this abundant source of exhalation, I think it most rational
to deduce the seeds of the fever which occurred there. And this is rendered
much more probable by the collateral evidence, of the same fever having existed
in the families of Mr. Boudinot and Mr. Leaming, near the Frankfort road, where
low and marshy grounds afford ample origin to those noxious miasmata which
produce intermitting and remitting fevers. The straggling manner also, in which
the disease occurred in Kensington, renders it more probable that it originated
from local sources, than that it was introduced and spread through the medium
of contagion.

The next persons who were attacked in Kensington, were in the family of Mr.
Joseph Bowers. These appear to have received the disease from the noxious
miasmata originating in the hold of a ship called the Huldah, which went up to
Kensington to clear out at Mr. Bowers' wharf, after discharging her cargo in
this city. The following is the statement which I have procured respecting this
ship, chiefly from the house of Summerl and Brown, to whom she was consigned.

The ship Huldah, Captain William Warner, sailed from this port for Hamburgh,
on the 18th of October, 1796, laden with coffee, sugar, and furs. After landing
her cargo, she does not appear to have cleared out her ballast, etc. but sailed
from Hamburgh for this place on the 11th of April, 1797, laden with hemp, iron,
cordage, dry goods, glass, and brandy. She arrived at New York on, or about,
the 1st day of July, where she discharged 109 pipes of brandy. On the 13th, she
sailed for Philadelphia, and entered at the Health-Office on the 17th of the
month, having thirteen seamen on board in perfect health, which had been the
case during the whole voyage of upwards of ninety days. She discharged hercargo
at Vannuxem's wharf, between Arch and Race-streets, and on Sunday the 13th of
August, she was carried to Mr. Bowers' wharf at Kensington, by the mate and one
of the sailors, (Joseph Way of Wilmington, nephew to the late Dr. Nicholas Way,
of this city) assisted by Nicolas Painter of Kensington. They proceeded to
clear her out the following day, August 14th. After getting through a quantity
of sand, which lay above the ballast, so nauseous and offensive a smell
proceeded from her, that the mate was indisposed for several days. Joseph Way
was obliged to lay by; and after drooping some days, he went down to
Wilmington, and there died, with a severe attack of the Yellow Fever, on the
same day with his uncle, in this city, viz. on the 2d of September.

Nicholas Painter and Christopher Rush, who assisted in cleaning her out, stood
the effects of this exhalation till Wednesday, 16th of August; when they were
seized with violent headache, especially above the eyes; sickness and vomiting,
and pain of the back; accompanied by fever. Rush says, he has never completely
regained his health since that period. He further says, that the smell of the
hold of the Huldah was so nauseous, that he could not get it out of his nose
for several days.

Upon investigation it appeared, that the smell proceeded from a quantity of
coffee, (which must have escaped during the voyage to Hamburgh) mixed with the
bilge water and sand, and which was in the highest state of vegetable
putrefaction; being very black, and containing worms or maggots nearly two
inches in length.

Mr. Joseph Bowers' boy was the first of his family who was attacked. He worked
in a schooner which lay along-side of the Huldah, and was seized on Tuesday,
the 15th of August, and died on the 22d. Mr. Bowers himself seems to have
received the seeds of the disease on Tuesday, the 15th, at which time he was on
board the Huldah, and noticed the very offensive smell proceeding from her
hold. He sickened on the Sunday following, the 20th of August, and died on the
25th. A maidservant and two children also had the disease; one of the children
died. It is possible that these last, took the disease by contagion from Mr.
Bowers or his boy; though I think it more probable, that they derived it from
the original source, viz. the ship's hold; as the wharf is not very distant
from the house, and as yet we know not the exact limits to which these noxious
miasmata may be carried, without losing their baneful influence by dilution
with the atmosphere.

Many cases which occurred in Kensington after this period, were, most
probably, derived from this source. The accounts of them are altogether wrapped
in doubt and supposition. Most of them are said to have taken it by contagion
from others; but this is rendered highly improbable by the very moderate degree
in which this fever has evinced itself to be possessed of a contagious power;
and more especially in so airy and extended a village as that of Kensington.

It would appear then, from the preceding pages, that the disease as it existed
in Kensington, had three different sources, viz.

FIRST; By Exhalation or Marsh-effluvia, derived from the low grounds on the
banks of the Delaware; as was the case with Bruster.

SECONDLY; From Exhalation or Marsh-effluvia, derived from the local sources of
low grounds in, and about Kensington; as evinced in those cases which occurred
in the range of buildings, to the westward of the York road: and,

THIRDLY; From the Exhalation or Noxious effluvia, proceeding from putrefying
vegetable matter, in the hold of the ship Huldah; as in the cases of Mr. Bowers
and his family, and perhaps in others.

The disease, possibly, in some few cases spread by contagion. King, a
coffin-maker, who assisted in putting the dead into their coffins, may have
derived his disease, of which he died, from this source. It is however
problematical; for he was with others, exposed to those causes which produced
it in them.

JOHN REDMAN COXE.
Philadelphia, December 1 st, 1797.
AFFIDAVIT of Christopher Rush.
County of Philadelphia ss.
Personally appeared before me, Peter Brown, one of the Justices of the Peace,
in, and for the country aforesaid, Christopher Rush; and being duly sworn upon
the holy evangelists, did depose, and swear, that, in working on board the ship
Huldah, at Joseph Bowers' wharf, on the 14th of August last, he perceived a
most offensive smell on board the said ship, arising from some putrefied
coffee, in the hold of the ship. That he, the said Christopher Rush, was made
sick for several days from the said smell, as also were Nicholas Painter and
Joseph Way, who worked with said Christopher Rush on board the ship Huldah. He
deposes further, that Joseph Bowers and his man were exposed to the said
smell, from working and attending on board the said ship; and further this
deponent says not.

CHRISTOPHER RUSH, C R. his mark.
Taken and subscribed before me, this 30th day of November, 1797. Signed,
(Seal) PETER BROWN. A true copy, J. R. Coxe.

AFFIDAVIT of Michael Lynn.
County of Philadelphia ss.
Personally appeared before me the subscriber, one of the Justices of the
Peace, in, and for the county aforesaid, Michael Lynn; who being duly sworn
upon the holy evangelists, does depose and say, that on the 17th day of July
last, he accompanied John Bruster from Kensington, at which place the deponent
resides, down the river Delaware, in a small schooner, and returned home on the
23d day of July, making an absence of six days; during which time, neither the
deponent nor the said John Bruster was on board of, or along side, of any ship
or vessel whatsoever; and that on the Sunday following, which was exactly one
week after their return, John Bruster was taken sick, and died the Thursday
following.

Signed MICHAEL LYNN.
Taken and subscribed before me, this 30th day of November, 1797. Signed,
(Seal) PETER BROWN. A true copy, J. R. Coxe.
Copied from the original documents, in the possession of the Secretary of the
State of Pennsylvania. J. R. C.



(B)
The Academy of Medicine cannot do otherwise than express their surprise, that
the College of Physicians, in their researches after the origin of our late
epidemic, should have thought it necessary to make the armed ship Hind an
object of attention. It is a truth well known, that the fever had prevailed in
our city several days previously to the arrival of that vessel; and it is, in
like manner, a truth which ought to be known, that none of those persons
supposed to have been infected by an intercourse with her, communicated their
disease to any of their visitants or attendants. Where then, the Academy would
beg leave to ask, is even the faintest evidence, of the ship Hind having been
at all instrumental, in the introduction of this disease? There certainly
exists none. Nor, in a candid investigation of the subject, does there appear
to be ground sufficient to authorize, even the mention of the name of this
vessel.

As the College of Physicians appear, however, by their late pamphlet, to have
directed to the Hind, an undue share of public attention, it has become
necessary to make their narrative respecting her, a subject of particular
consideration. The only evidence of which that learned body are possessed,
respecting the sickly state of this vessel, is derived from the affidavits of
three common mariners belonging to her crew; two of whom were nothing more than
boys. In opposition to the evidence delivered in these affidavits, we would
here beg leave to submit to the public, the affidavit of the supercargo of the
Hind. The report, delivered in his deposition, is farther corroborated by the
joint testimony of three other respectable characters, on board the same
vessel. From this document, it will at once appear, on how equivocal a
foundation, the College have thought proper to rest this part of their
investigation, respecting the origin of the disease in question.

AFFIDAVIT of the Supercargo of the Hind.
Personally, before me, Hilary Baker, Mayor of the city of Philadelphia, came
Thomas Badaraque; who, being duly sworn, does depose and say, that he was
supercargo of the ship Hind, captain Patot, from Port-au-Prince to
Philadelphia, in the summer of 1797. That they touched at Cape Nichola Mole,
and five days after, a child, about six months old, died from teething: that a
negro boy, of about nine years of age, died of the scurvy, the day before the
pilot came on board. That no other persons were sick during the voyage, except
Mr. Campan a passenger, who had been indisposed, before he came on board, with
a lax, and other chronic complaints. That no orders were given to conceal any
body, upon the arrival of the ship, by the captain, from the physician at the
fort.

T. BADARAQUE.
Sworn, the 15th day of March, 1798, before me, HILARY BAKER, Mayor.
The under-signed, passengers on board the ship Hind, at the time alluded to,
having been duly sworn, do depose and say, that the facts above related, by
Thomas Badaraque, are just and true. MATHIEU DUPOTEE. PIER VIDAU. PONIMIER.

Sworn, the 15th day of March, 1798, before me, HILARY BAKER, Mayor.

(C)
By some, the Yellow Fever, which prevailed at or near Red-bank, is supposed to
have originated from an imprudent communication with the shipping in the river,
while others allege, that it was derived from an intercourse with the city of
Philadelphia. That both these allegations, however, are equally unfounded, is a
truth, which the Academy of Medicine conceive to be satisfactorily established
by the following

DOCUMENT.
I do hereby certify, that I visited the farms at and in the vicinity of
Red-bank, situated on the eastern shore of the Delaware, for the purpose of
investigating the origin of the Yellow Fever, that raged so violently amongst
them, during the late autumn. I sought every possible information from the
attending physician, the families who had been attacked, and from their
neighbors. Knowing that a disease of this kind might have been derived from
domestic sources, from the city of Philadelphia, and, possibly, from the
shipping performing quarantine, I was exceedingly particular upon these points
of enquiry and investigation. After examining the documents upon this subject,
I do not hesitate to pronounce it the offspring of local causes.

The most valuable part of these farms consists in meadows, which had been
overflowed, for ten or twelve days, by a deluge of rain that commenced on the
first of August. The waters gradually disappeared, and deposited a scum that
was exceedingly nauseous. The roots of the grass were dead in many places for
an acre or more in extent; even six inches below the surface of the earth, they
were destroyed -- the vegetable putrefaction was great, and the smell arising
from it extremely disagreeable. To this source I attribute the disease that
prevailed amongst them. Twenty-nine persons were attacked in five families; but
so local was the calamity, that, although the neighbors kept up a constant
communication, by visiting the sick rooms, and rendering their services, no
person, that these families recollect, was affected with it, in consequence.
And there is but one possible case in which it could have been communicated, by
any one of these families to any of the others.

My opinion of the local origin of the Yellow Fever, derives support from its
being the idea of the Physician who attended the sick, and the universal
sentiment of those who have suffered by it. Documents, entering into detail, to
establish these, and a variety of other points connected with the disease, are
subscribed by all the persons alluded to, and deposited among the records of
the Academy of Medicine.

Signed, JOHN C. OTTO.
March 20 th, 1798.

