THE Prince of Brittany: AN HISTORICAL NOVEL. TO WHICH ARE ADDED, EDWARD and
MATILDA, MIRANDA, -- CHARIESSA, AND LEONTINE.

NEW YORK PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN HARRISSON. YORICK'S HEAD, NO. 3 PECK-SLIP.
1798

THE PRINCE of BRITTANY. A NEW HISTORICAL NOVEL.

THE PRINCE of BRITTANY.
IN the year 1442, when the feudal system was prevalent in Europe, died John
VI. Duke of Brittany. By his consort Joan, sister of Charles VII, King of
France, he left three sons; Francis, his successor; Peter, Count of Guingcamp;
and Giles Lord of Chantoce, whom, in the course of this history, we shall call
the Prince of Brittany. Their paternal uncle was the Constable Arthur, Count of
Richmond; an illustrious Nobleman, who could triumph at once over the English,
the most formidable enemies of France, and over the courtiers of Charles; a
conquest this last, which cost him, perhaps, greater efforts than the former.
-- Arthur had just quitted his beautiful retreat, at the Castle of Parthenay,
with his new consort, Catharine of Luxenburgh, in order to be present at the
approaching nuptials of the Duke, his nephew.

Before we proceed further in this history, it will be proper to give some idea
of the three Princes of Brittany. -- Francis, whose passions hespoke a weakness
and effeminacy of soul, was under the absolute guidance of his favorite, who,
according to custom, gave an ill direction to his very best dispositions. From
this defect in his character proceeded, in the sequel, that atrocious
misconduct, which has forever obscured the luster of all the good qualities he
possessed.

Peter was not distinguished by a more manly understanding than his elder
brother, A gloomy and petulant temper was rendered more disgusting still by a
devotion tinctured with all the superstition of the times. Extremes of every
kind, even the extremes of virtue, are to be avoided. Peter, although united to
a most beautiful Princess, lived in a state of absolute celibacy; and, toward
the end of his life, submitted to all the austerities of the most rigid
retirement.

The Prince of Brittany* on the contrary, was endued with an independent soul,
which disdained every appearance of obstruction. At the slightest impulse of
inclination he was instantly decided. Wishes the most trifling in reality were
ruling passions with this ungovernable mind. Inattentive to consequences, he
would regard the present object only, seize it with transport, and to the
acquisition of it sacrifice every consideration of the future. Even his
generosity was characterized by this excessive violence. -- He scorned those
political observances so necessary to all men, and especially to persons of his
exalted rank. Equally incapable of concealment and restraint, ever yielding to
the first sallies of his impetuous temper, he was hurried from imprudence to
imprudence, and from misfortune to misfortune; thus exhibiting to all the great
necessity of endeavoring to acquire the habits of moderation and self-command.
This indiscreet precipitancy of conduct, this dangerous vice (for we can hardly
give it another name) rendered even his virtues useless and unproductive;
virtues, that have only inspired a too late and unavailing pity, the poor
recompense of injured innocence^

Francis was impatient to be invested with the ducal mantle, and, as his first
consort was dead, to form a new alliance, that might flatter his ambitious
views. A daughter of James I, King of Scotland, in giving him her hand, added
claims to her dowry, which some future contingencies might realize; it being
settled, that if her father should die without issue male, Isabella should
succeed to the throne, and share it with her husband.

The double ceremony of the marriage and coronation of Francis had brought to
his Court the most illustrious of the French Nobility. The magnificent
entertainments, given on this occasion, were scarcely terminated, when the
Prince of Brittany requested a private audience of the Duke: -- "My brother,"
said he "it is impossible to restrain my impatience. You have now attained the
summit of felicity. You possess the lovely wife who was once destined for me;
John VI, his two eldest sons being married, had demanded this Princess for his
youngest; but the King of Scotland had then declined an alliances with this
family.
and one day, perhaps, I may see you on the throne of Scotland. My lot is yet
uncertain; but it is in your power to render it completely happy. I love the
most adorable of women. I shall become a prey to grief, if I delay any longer
to lead the charming Alicia to the altar. Forgive me; my passion has hitherto
been a secret to you. Unavoidable circumstances have obliged me to conceal it.
Her parents, bound by some indiscreet promise, extorted from them in a moment
of weakness, have been averse to this union. They are no more; and with them
every obstacle has vanished. The family of Dinan, you are sensible, may aspire
to an alliance with Sovereigns. Nothing is wanting but your approbation. As
your liege subject, I humbly solicit your favor: as your brother, I entreat it
with all that ardour of affection which we owe to each other. By either title.
I hope to gain your consent. My happiness, my life itself is at stake. Let my
nuptials now speedily follow yours."

Francis assures his brother that he would exert all his authority in his
favor. He embraces him with faternal tenderness, and is as warmly interested in
his happiness as in his own. The enraptured Prince already imagines himself the
husband of Alicia. -- He hastens to throw himself at her feet: "No
expressions," said he, "can describe my joy. The Duke is informed of all. He
knows, divine Alicia, he knows that I idolize you -- that I am impatient to be
yours. Ah! let the Duke reign over Brittany; let him allot me still no more
than the paltry establishment I enjoy, unworthy as it is of my birth and
rightful claims: I will never more complain. Have I not obtained the supreme
felicity of my life? O my adorable mistress, am not I superior to my brother --
to the greatest Monarch in the world? Ah! speak it, repeat a thousand times,
that the Prince of Brittany first inspired you with sensibility. Can Virtue
forbid the dear confession?"

He kissed one of her hands with transport. In the excess of emotion those
expressive tears escaped him, which have such a powerful empire over a young
and tender heart. -- "Prince," answered Mademoiselle de Dinan, "what do you
wish -- what can you require? Yes! I do not hesitate to say, it is you that
have taught me I have a soul, alas, but too susceptible. But do you forget that
my parents still live in an uncle, who inherits their power over me? Has not
the Marshal of Brittany an unconquerable aversion to you? Does he not compel me
to endure the courtship, or rather the persecution, of Arthur de Montauban? My
cruel guardian exacts implicit obedience. -- He urges the solemn engagement of
my parents in favor of my persecutor. It is my duty, he says, to fulfill that
promise -- live -- you shall be mine," eagerly resumed the Prince, "no power on
earth shall prevent our union. I adore you: your parents are no more: you are
free: you are mine: I have my brother's consent: I have yours. Will the
presumptuous Arthur still contend with the brother of his Sovereign? But, my
superior rank out of the question, who can boast a passion that can vie with
mine? -- Oh, my divine mistress, scatter those clouds: let us have no other
prospect but the altar. Every thing bespeaks our approaching happiness -- all
is propitious to an union which Heaven has already formed."

Such was the ardor, such was the impetuosity with which the Prince of Brittany
loved and spoke. He could divine no obstruction to his views. His happiness, as
it was exquisite in idea, was no less certain in expectation. He ran to
communicate his transports in his friend Tanguy, the Bastard of Brittany; while
the charming Alicia still refused to harbor the flattering illusion.

Her apprehensions, indeed, were not without foundation. The Prince was
surrounded at court by implacable enemies, who were secretly contriving his
ruin, and who were actuated by every motive of revenge. Arthur de Montauban,
hurried on by the effervescence of a passion, that heeded not the sanctity of
laws, was impatient to be rid of a formidable rival. John de Hingant, Gentlemen
of the Bedchamber, did not foster a less devouring flame; he had received some
affront from the Prince of Brittany; and offended Vanity is actuated by all the
rage of jealous Love. With these two persons was associated James d'Espinay,
Bishop of Rennes. They directed, at pleasure, the weak understanding of the
Duke; and, being informed of the conversation which he had just had with his
brother, they erected their batteries, in order to combat and destroy, if
possible, the object of their hatred.

Tanguy was not more sanguine than Alicia. He was not flattered by the
illusions of an imagination which Love had led astray. -- "My brother," said
he, addressing himself to the Prince, "if the laws have forbidden me to
prononce a name so dear, more indulgent Nature will permit it. -- Yes, the most
affectionate of brothers, the most zealous for your interest, speaks to you
now, Will you never open your eyes to the representations of truth? Your
passions hurry you away. How can you hope that Bertrand de Dinan will consent
to give you his niece, when he makes it a point of honor to fulfill the
engagement of her parents -- an engagement which they renewed in their dying
moments -- when Arthur de Montauban, in short, is named the happy" -- "Proceed
not, cruel man," interrupted the Prince; "Arthur do thou say! -- Arthur the
husband of Alicia! -- Alicia in the arms of another -- Dreadful idea! -- Thou
know me not -- thou know -- let me not be compelled to it -- I will not
call the English to my aid -- Brittany shall first swim in blood -- her towns
shall he laid in ashes -- Oh, my dear Tanguy, since the name of brother affects
thee, I conjure the by the tender ties that unite us, not to wound Alicia? The
Marshal must submit to the authority of my brother. Once more Tanguy, do not
deform with clouds the charming prospect before me. Thou delightest, my brother
to torment me -- Think how much I suffer" -- "Ah! my brother I suffer still
more than you. I contemplate with grief the variety of woes that await you --
You are sensible how much I love you. But I cannot conceal from you the depth
of the abyss into which you are hastening to plunge. You have enemies" -- "I
despise them" -- "I scorn the arts of a courtier; and I wish they may be
perfectly sensible, that my contempt for them is even greater than my
detestation." -- "You are a Prince, my Lord." -- "I am the lover of Alicia, and
all my wishes are to be the husband. My dear Tanguy, forgive my transports. I
am distracted when the least obstacle is presented to the most ardent love. I
have opened my whole soul to you. But I am very far from having recourse to a
vengeance which I myself abhor. So far from being instramental in bringing the
calamities of war on my Prince and country, as I have rashly said, they shall
never find a more zealous defender than your brother. You talk of (...) -- have
I deserved them? In one instance, indeed, I forgot myself: I affronted Hingant.
But was not fault immediately followed by the ample confessions? Ah? my friend,
I bear a too susceptible heart! Do not endeavor thus to deprive me at once of
my hope -- my life" --

The Prince could not utter this last affecting appeal to Friendship, without
letting drop some natural tears; and Tanguy perceived, that it was in vain to
combat the fervors of such a passion by expostulation, or to check the
impetuosity of such a temper, but by the language of soothing tenderness.

Nor was the charming Alicia less an object of compassion. Her irritated uncle,
to whom her partiality for the Prince of Brittany was no secret, overwhelmed
her with reproaches. He insisted with the haughty violence of authority, that
she should sacrifice the inclinations of her heart, by a passive compliance
with the dying engagement of her parents. " Our hearts," said he, "know no
other principle than Honor, no other law, no other passion. Love we leave to
the vulgar, who are at liberty to follow their capricious inclinations. In
being exalted above the rest of mankind, our duty is to combat, to subdue, to
sacrifice our passions. Our prerogative is to mine an example to all around us.
What are all the advantages of nobility, if we do not purchase them by the most
exalted virtues? Go to the altar with Arthur de Montauban -- let me never see
thee again but as his wife. -- What would I say -- I would rather see thee in
thy grave than -- but thou know thy duty -- I expect absolute obedience."

In vain did Alicia prostrate herself, all in tears, before the Marshal. --
"Oh, my Lord! deign to hear me -- you -- you are now my father. You cannot
doubt how much I loved my parents -- how much I cherish and revere their
memory. I am still impressed with the most respectful deference to their
commands. But could they dispose of my hand without consulting this poor heart?
Can my duty oblige me to render myself miserable for ever? Why did not the dear
authors of my being remove me far from the presence of the Prince of Brittany?
Why did they permit his visits -- his conversations? His princely rank has no
charms with me. Oh, did you but know him -- did you but read his heart like me
-- Oh, my uncle! let me rather die a hundred times than subscribe to this
barbarous promise. At least, let me be permitted, far from the court and the
world, to bury my grief in some deep solitude. There left wholly to myself -- "
"To yourself!" resumed the furious Marshal, as he retired; "you are not your
own -- you belong to your country, to your family, to honor. -- They claim
their victim, and they shall have it."

The Duke sent a messenger to his brother, to desire him to repair to the
palace. The Prince flew thither with an impatience, which bespoke a certainty,
that the commencement of his happiness was approaching. "My brother," said the
Duke, the moment he entered, "you know how much I have your happiness at heart.
The zealous affection of friendship would add, if posible, to the powerful
claims of Nature. But your brother, before he can listen to these claims; must
recollect that he is a sovereign. I have obligations to my subjects -- I have
obligations to equity. I have seen the Marshal de Dinan -- he is inflexible.
Montauban has received his promise, and the solemn promise of dying parents. In
spite of me, in spite of you, Montauban must the husband of Alicia. You must
subdue yourse and imitate me."

The impetuous Prince clapped his hand to his sword. "I have no longer then,"
said he, "any support but this. It shall chastise the insolence of Arthur.
Shall I yield Alicia to him? Cruel -- you are not my brother -- you are my
tyrant -- my executioner!" -- "Ah, my brother, my brother, I will forget the
sovereign to whom these expressions are so unbecoming. I pity your distress. I
weep with you. Shed your tears in my bosom. Lament the wretched fate, that has
plunged you into a passion, which the Prince of Brittany must absolutely
subdue. We must devote ourselves to our inferiors. So far from wishing to
render the Marshal perjured, it is our duty* my brother, to support, to
guarantee his promise. Let justice triumph, and leave the event to heaven. I
feel all the severity of this refusal. I suffer in your sufferings. But place
yourself in my situation -- be the sovereign -- and dictate to me my duty. I
appeal to your own decision -- I appeal to the Count of Richmond. I refer you
to that wise and excellent friend. He loves you. He understands the laws of
honor. I leave you to his advice, and to your own reflections."

The Prince of Brittany, distracted by the unexpected refusal of his brother,
flies to throw himself at the feet of Alicia. The servants of the Marshal in
vain oppose his entrance. He finds her alone, in her apartment, overwhelmed by
the most poignant grief. He pours forth all the transports of a heart,
distracted at the idea of losing all that was dear to him in life. Alicia avows
her passion for the Prince, with the beautiful ingeniousness of virtuous love.
But she urges the irresistible obstacles to their union, in the dying
engagement of her parents, and the obligations to her family and honor, which
the Marshal, her uncle, had been just enforcing. -- "Alas! Prince," said she,
"I must give my hand to another; but my heart is still -- " "Go then, said the
furious Prince; "let that heart instantly follow the present of the hand -- I
-- I will show you what it is to love." -- Then seizing his sword, he was going
to plunge it into his heart, notwithstanding all the cries and efforts of the
terrified Alicia, when, in that instant, he heard an unexpected voice: --
"Stop, stop, I come to recall you to life." -- The Prince beheld Tanguy. -- "Ah!
my brother," said he, "you love me -- and would you wish me to live? Do you
know the horrors that surround me?" -- "I know all; I know that the Marshal has
secured the Duke in his interest. But the Constable, your uncle, has sent for
you. He has had a long conversation with the Duke, and, I doubt not, was
successful." "My brother! Is it possible? Shall Alicia yet be mine? And you,
madam -- you weep -- divine mistress of my heart, forgive -- forgive me if I
have appeared to doubt your love." "Ah! Prince," said Mademoiselle de Dinan,
"how cruel have you been! But go -- claim the protection of the Court of
Richmond. Let him gain the Duke -- let him prevail upon my uncle -- and you
will see whether Alicia can love."

The Prince of Brittany hastened to the Constable. The seasonable interference
of Tanguy had restored him in some measure from death to life; and he was now
felicitating himself upon far different prospects. But the Constable, who
received him with all the expressions of tenderness and esteem, appeared,
however, to entertain the same ideas with the Duke, of the absolute submission
due to parental authority, and of certain indispensable claims of family and
honor. Sentiments, so fatal to the pleasing views which the Prince had once
began to entertain, excited in his bosom the same transports of desperation,
which we have seen so easily kindled. "I adore Alicia," said he; "the mere idea
of beholding her in the arms of another, drives me to distraction. If I should
implore the King of England -- " "Prince, to the King of England I send you. I
have importuned the Duke to entrust you with a negotiation, equally important
and honorable. I have offered to be responsible for you. The King of England
loves you. Brought up in his court, you possess peculiar means of conciliating
him. The object of your embassy is to give peace to two nations, to whom a too
long war is equally destructive. There cannot be a more glorious medi^tion; and
it is to you that we confide the destiny of the most powerful kingdoms in
Europe -- to you who inveigh against your brother, against me, against all
Brittany, and transported by an extravagant passion, have just threated to have
recourse to measures of violence and guilt. Judge, from this, whether I esteem
you." -- "Ah, my Lord," exclaimed the Prince, throwing himself into the arms of
his uncle, and weeping with admiration, "you know me! Yes, I will strive to
merit this excess of generosity. These tears speak how much I am affected by
this exalted conduct. Yes, I will justify your choice. I will employ every
expedient to reconcile two nations that are our allies -- to convince you that
the Prince of Brittany, distracted by an unfortunate passion, is yet incapable
of a dishonorable action. I hasten to execute my commission; and, after I have
fulfilled my duty, I return to claim my reward. Remember, I conjure you, I can
have no other than Alicia." "Hold, Prince: do not imagine that I purchase your
fidelity by flattering your hopes. I esteem you too well to apprehend any thing
for your resentment. No; I do not attempt to deceive you. I go still farther; I
declare that if your brother should have the weakness to consent to your
wishes, I will be the first to oppose them. You see that I speak to you with a
frankness, of which I am certain you will take no advantage. All that I can
promise, and that honor will permit me to grant, with a view only to prepare
you to conquer a passion incompatible with your duty, is to engage the Duke to
postpone the marriage of Alicia till your return."

"What, my Lord -- " "I have nothing more to say; I shall wait you at the
palace, that we may confer with you on your embassy."

The Duke, and the whole Council, greatly disapproved the choice of the
mediator. They represented to the Constable, that to entrust the Prince with a
negotiation of such a delicate nature, was to put arms in the hands of a
madman, and to hazard the safety of Brittany. They did not doubt that he would
solicit the King of England to support him in his pretensions, and to take part
in his resentment." "How little," answered Richmond, "do you understand
mankind! Nothing is so flattering to human pride as a noble confidence. It
necessarily inspires selfesteem; and whoever can esteem himself, is ever
cautious of descending to ignoble actions. Treason is the height of turpitude.
My nephew is violent and impetuous, but incapable of forgetting his honor. I
will answer for success. The frankness of a soldier is sometimes a more certain
resource than all the arts of a politician."

Francis confirmed to his brother the promise of their uncle, that the marriage
of Alicia with Montaubon should be postponed till his return, The Prince had
made the necessary preparations for his departure; but it was impossible for
him to leave Brittany, without having seen Mademoiselle de Dinan. He should
have encountered all hazards to procure with her a moment's interview. But a
variety of obstacles were to be overcome. Alicia, kept like a prisoner, at a
castle some leagues from the court, had only the liberty of deploring her hard
fate in secret. She waited for the fatal moment that was to subject her to an
odious yoke. She would wander in an extensive park, which seemed calculated to
cherish that gloomy melancholy, which is almost inseparable from an unfortunate
love. Her languid steps imperceptably led her to a little solitary wood, into
which the light of day could scarcely enter. It was divided by a transparent
brook, whose gentle murmurs lulled the soul to musing; and, at some distance,
was a seat of turf. There did Alicia go, to ruminate as it were, on the
sentiments that oppressed her. The unfortunate, and lovers especially,
experience an exquisite sweetness of sensation, in indulging their tears, and
cherishing their griefs; and whatever can deepen their sorrows, they meet even
with an eagerness of anticipation. For them has nature created "the haunts of
meditation," those solitary glooms, those torrents, those grottos, those
romantic scenes, that speak not to the happy, but which address with such
energy the souls, whose misfortunes exercise their sensibility.

Mademoiselle de Dinan held in her hand a letter from the Prince, which she
repeatedly read, and bedewed with her tears. She spoke to it, as if it were
capable of understanding and answering her affecting plaints. "Ah! too
dangerous writing," said she, "why cannot I have the resolution to cast thee
far from this impassioned bosom? Ah! what avails it thus to cherish a passion
which it will soon become criminal to avow? And could a flame so pure be
inspired only to become criminal? Sole object of my affections, alas! how
little is the unfortunate Alicia yet known to thee! Could thou ever imagine
for a moment that my heart -- thou art its only Lord. Thou will rule in it, I
perceive too well, to my latest sigh. I will repeat it to the Marshal, to
Montaubon, to the Duke. No, Arthur -- barbarous man! I never will pronounce the
fatal vows. I will swear, yes, I will swear to love none but the Prince of
Brittany; and I will die, I will be the victim of my hapless love." -- "You
shall live to receive my unceasing homage. I would die a hundred times for you,
divide Alicia. Oh! how dear are these sentiments -- these expressions -- how
delicious to my soul!"

Alicia is startled; but her terror is soon dissipated. She beholds at her feet
the Prince of Brittany, who seizes one of her hands, and, in the transports of
ecstacy, covers it with his kisses and his tears. -- "Is it you, Prince! you
have heard me?" -- "Do you reproach yourself with having made me the happiest
of men? Are you apprehensive that I shall not merit a tenderness worthy of
every sacrifice I can make? Be satisfied with yourself, dear mistress of a
heart, that beats only for the charming Alicia. My death is now postponed: the
Constable has passed his word: thy nuptials with a detested rival are deferred
till my return, and then -- thou never shall be Arthur's. Promise me only to
keep thy faith, thy heart, inviolate." -- "Preserve my heart for you, Prince!
Ah! is it for you to imagine I can ever give it to another? Can I take from you
a single moment of my life? Go -- go well assured that Alicia -- Prince, you
cannot too soon return."

They renew the solemn vow of everlasting love, in spite of every obstruction.
Mademoiselle de Dinan takes one of her bracelets, interwoven with her hair, and
presents it to her lover, who seizes it with rapture, and kisses it a thousand
times, puts it into his bosom: "Never," said he, "shall it leave my heart. It
is the seal of our engagement. Remember, divine Alicia, that I go far from you,
assured that all I adore will continue faithful. -- Let us retire, my friend,"
said he to Tanguy, who was waiting at some distance; "I am now at the summit of
felicity; I am beloved."

The two lovers are obliged to separate. The Prince had contrived to gain over
one of the servants of the Marshal, who had introduced him privately into the
park. This man runs to acquaint him that the Lord of Dinan is coming. The
Prince hastily retires, accompanied by Tanguy, who undertakes during his
absence, to send him intelligence of whatever related to his mistress. The two
friends, at length, embrace; they part; and the Prince of Brittany embarks for
England.

The Prince of Brittany, as the Constable had foreseen, met with the most
favorable reception from the King of England. He succeeded in every object of
his embassy; and Henry, to evince his extreme satisfaction in a mediator for
whom he had long entertained the greatest personal regard, conferred upon him a
pension of 2000 nobles.

Tanguy, in the mean time, corresponded constantly with his friend. The
charming Alicia, it may be supposed, was the favorite object of his letters.
But there was a subject less delightful, on which he found it necessary also to
expatiate. He gave the Prince a minute account of the various artifices that
were employed by his enemies, in order to ruin him in the estimation of his
brother. But the Prince, attentive to nothing but what related to Mademoiselle
de Dinan, paid no regard to the machinations of Arthur and his family.

Montauban, supported in his pretensions by the Marshal, repaired one day to
the apartmets of Mademoiselle de Dinan. At a visit so unexpected she could not
conceal some symptoms of perturbation. "Ah! Madam," said he, "can this
agitation, so ill concealed, be propitious to my hopes?" -- "Hold my lord; I
will give you a convincing proof of confidence: I think you worthy of it. It is
to assure you that you may be certain of my esteem, although a tender sentiment
cannot. -- "And what, Madam, can prevent you from rewarding with that tender
sentiment the ardent passion you have inspired? I impatiently long for the
happy ties." -- "They are not yet formed, my lord. I would fain regard you as
an object of esteem, and as such, open my whole heart to you. I am incapable of
dissimulation: I dread the injustice of deceiving you: I do not hesitate then
to confess it to you. The Prince of Brittany only is" -- "You have named the
author of all my torments. My suspicions then are but too well founded. But you
forget, Madam, that I have in my hand the solemn promise of your parents and of
your uncle; that I have the consent of your sovereign; that I have a right of
yours. Yes, Madam, you must be mine. Heaven has destined you to be my wife."
-- "Heaven, my lord! Heaven inspires the inclinations; and for you I can only"
-- "Proceed, Madam," said Arthur, whose character was not less impetuous than
that of his rival, proceed; tell me that you detest me, that I am the most
odious of men -- your enemy -- your persecutor. Yes, I will be then the tyrant
you detest. My sole object now shall be to justify an aversion I have so little
deserved. Never, never more will I speak to you in the langauge of love. You
shall witness now the furious transports of resentment. Your fate is decided.
The Marshal and the Duke have ordered it. Ungrateful woman! I will enjoy the
tears I make you shed; I will feast on the pleasing sight; and from this moment
-- adorable Alicia, and is it you that compel me to such language? No, no;
think not that I can entertain such sentiments. They never have approached --
they never will approach my heart. From my mouth only have escaped expressions
so extraordinary to every sentiment of my soul." -- "It is useless, my lord, to
repeat it: Mademoiselle de Dinan was never formed to encourage a passion by
illusive hopes. Load me with reproaches; but you shall never accuse me of
artifice and treachery. Be supported by the consent of my uncle, and of my
whole family: have recourse too to the authority of your sovereign: dispose,
like a tyrant, of my hand: my tears are all I can oppose to you; but my heart,
that heart which you would tear, which you would destroy -- it never can be, it
never shall be yours. The Prince of Brittany -- it shall know no other lord,
till death release me from my woes. After this declaration, drag me to the
altar.' -- "Yes, I will drag you to the altar, a victim devoted to my just
resentment. Yes, I shall know how to torture that heart which will not love --
which my rival possesses. Henceforth will I listen only to the dictates -- to
the suggestions of vengeance."

Nor were the threats of Arthur ineffectual. The ruin of the Prince of Brittany
was now pursued with an inveteracy, if possible, still more determined. His
enemies were even so sucessful, as to excite in the breast of his brother, all
the jealousy and resentment of self-love. This sentiment, which among all men
is, perhaps, the most predominant, when it actuates the conduct of a sovereign,
is the dreadful spring of the most extravagant excesses. Francis was persuaded
to believe, that his brother had expressed himself concerning him in very
disloyal terms, and that he only waited for an opportunity to excite a revolt.
Nor did they forget the friendship of the King of England, whom they
represented as a foe impatient to fall upon Brittany, on the first intimation
from the Prince. In a word, these detestable countries found means to stifle
the voice of nature, and to dissolve its most tender recollections. Weakness
now assumed all the atrociousness of guilt; and every day strengthened it in a
character which was the sport of perfidy and malice.

The King of England continued to lavish upon the Prince a thousand marks of
unbounded friendship. One day he surprised him musing in a melancholy attitude
over a letter he had just received. Henry, with the affectionate earnestness of
a friend, insisted upon knowing the cause of a grief which was so visible in
his countenance. The Prince, who could not resist the generous instances of his
august friend, related the whole history of his passion for the beautiful
Alicia, and the various obstacles to his happiness. The letter which he had
just received, informed him that Arthur and his partisans, were exerting all
their influence to hasten the solemnization of that marriage, which by an
engagement, was not to take place till his return. It was added, that the Duke
was on the point of yielding to their pressing solicitations, notwithstanding
the Count of Richmond, who defended his absent nephew, and urged the inviolable
sanctity of a promise. Henry, who immediately entered into the resentment of
his friend, united perhaps some political views to those of personal esteem, in
the offer which he made of supporting his pretensions by force of arms. "I am
sensible," said the noble youth, "of the generous warmth with which you
condescend to enter into my concerns. Yes! I adore Alicia; and she shall be
mine, or my rival and all his partisans, I myself shall expire under a thousand
wounds. But, my lord, can I forget the glorious commission with which I am
honored? Can I, the minister of peace, whom the count of Richmond thought great
enough to soar above humanity, can I carry war into my country? Shall a brother
see me again, at the head of hostile foreigners, devoting our fairest provinces
to all the miseries of slaughter and desolation. Alicia -- I should forfeit all
her tenderness she would overwhelm me with her hatred -- with contempt. And
what must I appear in my own eyes? A monster of horror! You love me, Sire:
(...) nothing to me that can tarnish my glory. (...) would sooner die." -- "At
least," interrupted Henry, "receive a slender proof of my esteem. I will give
you the sword of Constable of England." --

I can only answer, Sire, by a new refusal. This high dignity would oblige me
to draw the sword against the king of France, my uncle; and never, never shall
he have to reproach me with such a violation of duty."

The intelligence which the Prince received from Brittany accelerated his
return. He had scarcely left the English court when he learned that the Marshal
De Dinan had departed this life His fortune seems now to assume a different
aspect he indulges a thousand pleasing reveries: he anticipates a thousand
scenes of exquisite delight and uninterrupted joy.

Proceeding toward Nantes, accompanied by his gentleman, he perceived a crowd
of spectators, near a castle, a few leagues from that city. He discovers a
splendid procession: he sees a young lady weeping, and encircled by many female
attendants, who were supporting her in their arms: he approaches, he recollects
-- it is the adorable Alicia, whom Montauban was conducting to the altar, with
the consent of her family and of Francis, who had suffered himself to be
overcome by the persecutions of his favorites. It is hardly possible to
describe this scene: the Prince, followed by his attendants, hastens to
Mademoiselle de Dinan, beholds her fainting, and forcing her from the arms of
her women, places her, with the same precipitation, in those of two chevaliers
that were devoted to him, and whom he ordered to commit her to the care of one
of his female relations, whose residence was near the spot. And now the arms
were glittering: Arthur, enraged to see his prey thus forced from him,
endeavored to repossess himself of it, and, at the head of his party, to wreak
his vengeance on the little troop that attended his rival. The latter exclaims,
"Hold; suspend your rage: it is mine to combat for Alicia: Montauban is my only
object. Approach, rash youth: I will derive no advantage from the respect which
thou owe to the blood of thy sovereign. I love I adore Alicia, and thou
dare to dispute her with me! Be my equal now, that thou may measure swords
with the man who most detests thee. Let one of us tinge this ground with his
blood, and Alicia shall be the conqueror's."

He instantly draws his sword, and, bidding Montauban to do the same, he
commands his attendants to remain impartial spectators of the combat. It begins
with mutual fury. The Prince receives a wound: the blood slows; and the
attendants were going to interfere. "Forbear," said he, "I have still strength
enough to pierce the bosom of my enemy." -- Their rage rekindles: Montauban is
overthrown; "I die," said he, with a faltering voice: his friends raise him
from the ground, and carry off their vanquished lord; while the conqueror and
his escort hasten to the castle to which Alicia had been conveyed.

Who can imagine the consternation of the beautiful Alicia, when she beheld her
lover, now sinking under a wound, which, in his impatience to fly to her, he
had utterly disregarded. In the severe illness that followed, he experienced
all the affecting assiduity, that unbounded tenderness could inspire. To his
the noble youth, perhaps, was indebted for his recovery: and, in proportion as
the apprehensions of Alicia, when her lover was at the worst, had bordered upon
despair, were her endearing ecstacies of expression when he was pronounced to
be out of danger. "Divine Alicia," said the Prince, in one of these delicious
moments, "I cannot yet be restored to life, till I am permitted to call you my
wife. Let us prevent the return of a kind of incessant fatality that pursues
me. If I have only a few days to live, let me at least die on the bosom of all
I love. Let it be read on my tomb, The husband of Alicia reposes here.

How weak must be the suggestions of prudence to the ardent solicitations of
such a lover! In vain did Mademoiselle de Dinan represent to him the fatal
consequences of an union, to which the duke, his brother, had not yet
consented. The Prince would listen only to the violence of his love. He
assembles some of his gentlemen to be witnesses of the ceremony, which was
performed by his chaplain. The Prince of Brittany is at last the happiest of
men. He has wedded -- he possesses the dearest, the most adorable of women; and
Alicia, on her part, rejoices in a husband, or rather in a lover worthy of all
her love.

Montauban had experienced a kind of resurrection. The thirst of vengeance had
restored him to life. He was distracted by all the emotions of rage, when he
learned that his happy rival was united to Alicia by ties which death alone
could dissolve. Every thought, every effort of his soul was now devoted to the
destruction of the Prince.

The great object with Arthur and his partisans was to poison the weak mind of
Francis with suspicions of which it was too easily susceptible; and, so well
did their artful insinuations succeed, that the duke no longer regarded his
brother, but as a guilty subject, whose punishment it was necessary to hasten.

It must be confessed that appearances were not very favorable to the prince.
His marriage, accomplished in some measure by violence, was represented as an
outrageous defiance of the sovereign authority of his brother. His absence from
the court seemed also a tacit declaration, that he intended no more to appear
there. The principal head of accusation, that was urged against him in all its
forms, turned upon his unbounded partiality for the English. He had been so
imprudent as to send one of his gentlemen, Thomas de Lesquen, to London, to
solicit the payment of his pension, which had been for some time in arrears. He
even complained in his dispatches of the severity of his brother to him; and he
more than once touched upon the scanty establishment of his household. These
letters, being intercepted, were so many demonstrative proofs to Francis, that
his brother was courting the protection of the King of England. This
apprehension gave reality to all the phantoms which it pleased the artful
Montauban to present to his sovereign. He continually imagined that he saw the
English invading Brittany, and tearing the ducal coronet from him, to place it
on the head of his brother.

The prince, however, so far from being occupied by a single object of
ambition, was sensible to no other happiness (...) that of possessing Alicia.
"No," would he often say to his charming wife, "there is no happiness equal to
that of loving and being beloved! One look from thee, my dear Alicia conveys
ecstasy to the inmost recesses of my heart. My soul, my whole soul is thine."
-- "Ah! my lord." answered Alicia, "you know that it was not the prince of
Brittany that could captivate me, but the most susceptible, the most amiable of
men. Can you think it possible, however, that my happiness is diminished by
continual apprehensions? Your enemies are not disarmed. The vengeance of Arthur
can never be appeased. I dread every thing." -- "Dear mistress of my soul, my
love is more servent than thine. I behold nothing that encircles me. Alicia,
Alicia alone engages every thought. They have reason to envy me. It Is supreme
felicity I enjoy. Banish then these anxious apprehensions. It Is bliss -- it is
heaven to be with thee."

Thus did these happy lovers cherish the sweet intoxication and illusive
security of the present hour. The Prince spent with Tanguy those moments which
he could not devote to his dear Alicia, This faithful friend was come to visit
him in his retirement at Guildo, which was one of the estates that formed the
dowry of Mademoiselle de Dinan. He endeavored in vain to inspire him with that
discreet and necessary caution, which we are by no means to confound with
dissimulation. The Prince openly expressed his discontent, and in his
invectives against the favorites, he did not spare his brother. He had sent
for some skilful English archers from Normandy, with whom he exercised the bow
and arrow; a diversion of which he was very fond, and which was one of the
causes of his ruin. His enemies represented these foreign archers to the Duke
as so many secret emissaries, who kept up the spirit of dissension and revolt
that actuated his brother. Stronger circumstances of irratation were added,
upon no better foundation.

The Constable, to whom the Prince had given an account of his embassy, in a
very circumstantial letter, had retired dissatisfied with the Duke his nephew.
He could not forbear, however, to write a letter of expostulation to him on his
unnatural conduct to his brother; and while he urged every argument with the
dignity of the Constable and the Uncle, he forgot not the respect which was due
from the subject to the Sovereign. This letter seemed to make a great
impression on the Duke, but Montauban, Hingant, and d'Espinai, soon recovered
their wonted sway. They would not appear openly to contradict a nobleman in
such high credit as the Count of Richmond, who could not but have a great
ascendancy over his Sovereign. It being requisite, therefore, to employ all the
arts of (...), they prevailed upon Francis to write to the Prince, and to
command him to repair to court. At the same time, they contrived that anonymous
intimations should be sent to him, representing his ruin as inevitable if he
complied with the invitation of his brother. The latter suffered himself to be
governed by their suggestions. His letter, replete with insulting menaces, was
confided to the care of Hingant, who undertook to deliver it himself at Guildo.
They doubted not that all possibility of reconciliation was cut off from the
unfortunate Prince; and that, on the perusal of such a letter, he would fly
into the most ungarded invectives, which they would not fail to report. The
plot succeeded beyond their most sanguine expectation. When Hingant arrived at
Guildo, he found the Prince in the midst of his English archers. He presented
the letter to him: scarce had the Prince read it, than the impetuosity of his
character burst forth at once: "What! write to insult me to such a degree!
Forget that I am of his blood -- that I am a Prince! Yes, he shall see me again
-- I will fly to him -- but with arms in my hand. My rightful revenue has been
but too long withheld from me. The English" -- "Ah my lord," exclaimed, his
wife, "what are you saying? You mean no such thing." -- "I swear to it, Madam:
in the presence of these brave fellows, I swear that my brother shall not
insult me with impunity. And thou," addressing himself to Hingant, "if I
consulted my just resentment, I should make thee instantly repent of thy
temerity. I know that thou have the presumption to rank thyself in the number
of my enemies. I know that I did affront thee; but I offered thee the most
ample reparation. If thou were not satisfied with that, speak instantly: I am
ready to regard thee as the private gentleman only, and will wave every
advantage of the Prince." -- Hingant answers with the most flattering
expression -- "Vile courtier," proceeds the noble-minded, but ill-fated Prince,
"do not add meanness to persidy. I have nothing more to say to thee. Be content
with the character of informer. Let the Duke know in what manner I have
received his message. Go -- fail not to tell him that my resentment is
unbounded."

Hingant left the apartment. Alicia runs after him: Believe not the Prince: his
desperation distracts him. I know his heart: assure the Duke that he can never
forget his loyalty -- his affection." -- She returns to her lord: she conceals
not, she cannot conceal her excessive anguish. Tanguy, Millon, and Brabr^ssu
(these two last were attached to the Prince from his infancy) lay before him,
with tears in their eyes, all that faithful servants owe to their masters --
the truth. -- "Ah, my lord, to what a passion have you given way! You would
then precipitate your own ruin -- the ruin of the Princess! Hingant, be
assered, has not suffered one of your expressions to escape him. He will report
them to your brother, and paint them in the blackest colors. Alas! perhaps it
was their wish (for of what are not the wicked capable) to involve you if
possible in guilt. The Princess was right: you spoke not the sentiments of your
heart. How often have you repeated, that the Duke and your country was dear to
you: and that you would shed your blood for the good of your house and of the
state. It was not you that spoke -- and yet they will judge you from thee
expression you have suffered to escape you. You weep" -- "Yes, my friends, you
see me weep. My dearest wife, forgive thy lover! That transport of rage could
proceed only from my tenderness for thee. Oh, my unhappy temper! Why cannot I
subdue it? Into what dangers it involves me! Oh, my friends -- My dear Alicia.
I reproach myself for it a thousand times more than you can do. But the Duke --
do you know that he threatens to dissolve the ties -- let them take my life
before they tear me from Alicia. The miscreants, how they sport with my
irritable temper! How well they know me! Barbarians! they have deprived me of
my brother's heart! They have given him their own ignoble and detested souls! I
perceive it -- I have lost him for ever -- I foresee the event. But, Oh, my
Alicia, love me still, and I will defy the utmost rigor of misfortune." -- He
runs to his wife -- he folds her to his bosom -- he bathes her with his tears:
"Ah! how wretched am I! They have forced me to blush for myself."

They take advantage of this ingenous sorrow. They prevail upon him to write a
letter to his brother, pathetically expressive of sensibility and regret. His
answer to Hingant he imputed to the violence of his love. He promised to go
with his wife to throw himself at the feet of his Sovereign and Brother, whose
forgiveness he earnestly implored, and whose affection he reclaimed.

This humiliating step did not disarm the anger of Francis whom the enemies of
the Prince continued incessantly to exasperate. He did not delay to repair to
the Court of Charles at Chinan. He indisposed that Monarch toward the Prince,
by representing him as the most zealous friend of the King of England, and an
unnatural brother, who was on the point of revolting. He mentioned the offer
which Henry had made him of the sword of Constable of England; and, at length,
he prevailed upon Charles to send a troop of horse to arrest him. The Duke and
his base accomplices had contrived, that this stretch of authority should be
exerted by the King of France in order that the prisoner might be regarded, as
a state-criminal.

The Duke of Brittany had left the Court of France: the Count of Richmond,
displeased with his conduct toward his brother, had not been reserved in his
expressions of dissatisfaction, and had even forborne to visit him. He is
informed that a conspiracy has been formed against his nephew, the author of
which had found means to interest in their plan the King of France. He
forthwith repairs to that Monarch: "Am I rightly informed, Sire? The ruin of an
unfortunate Prince is in agitation. A brother lifts up his hand against his
brother, and meditates his ruin; and shall the protector of persecuted
innocence, shall a King of France, countenance such odious proceedings with his
sacred support?"

The King loved the Constable; far from being offended at the freedom with
which that great man addressed him, he was much affected by his manly, yet
pathetic representation. "Noble cousin," said he, you must hasten to
countermand my orders. I have sent 400 troopers into Brittany, under the
conduct of Admiral Coetivi, who has orders to arrest the Prince at Guildo. They
have represented him to me as a seditious spirit, that panted for nothing more
ardently than for an opportunity of inviting the English into his country;
that, moreover, he detested the French and their Sovereign." -- The King added,
that this last circumstance had particularly affected him. -- "Sire," answered
the Count, astonished at what he heard, "you have been deceived. I know that my
nephew loves and reveres you. That he might not be obliged to bear arms against
your Majesty, he refused the sword of Constable of England which Henry offered
him. What dreadful strokes of calumny are these! I fly to his succor. I will
lay him and his confort at your feet. Sire, you will behold their tears -- they
shall speak -- they assure you themselves how much they are devoted to you."

The Count, profiting of the King's permission, loses not a moment. He repairs
with all expedition to the Duke of Brittany, at Dinan. He perceives an air of
affliction in the countenance of those, whom he had been accustomed to respect.
In the Duke's favorites he beholds the insolence of exultation, and in the Duke
himself an evident embarrassment at his appearance. In a word, he learns that
the unfortunate Prince is arrested.

Nothing was more certain than this dreadful news. The Prince, as if lulled
into the most perfect security, continued to hope that time and his inoffensive
conduct, would procure a reconciliation with his brother, engaged in a variety
of the most innocent diversions. He was playing at tennis win his Esquires,
when intelligence was brought to him that a body of horse were at the Castle
gates. As soon as he was informed that these troops came from the King of
France, he ordered the gates to be instantly opened. "Welcome, gentleman," said
he, while they were yet at a distance; "what news from my dear uncle?" -- What
was the answer he received? What did they desire him to peruse -- his Majesty's
order to arrest him -- "Ah!" exclaimed the Prince, with a deep sigh, "I did not
expect this stroke from the dearest relation I have." The Admiral takes
possession of the keys of the castle, and of all the gold and silver plate, and
seizes the person of the Prince. His distracted consort, all in tears, with
Tanguy and his faithful attendants, follow him with a fixed resolution to be
the companions of his captivity.

With what indignation it the Constable transported! -- "Can a Sovereign, said
he to the Duke, "so ill employ his power* as to oppress an innocent victim,
abandoned to the malignant fury of ignoble courtiers? Can a brother forgetting
the sacred claims of nature* thus plunge a brother into misery and a prison?
Duke, I do not accuse you. I persuade myself that nature will yet prevail in
your bosom. She speaks to you; but they will not suffer you to hear her voice.
It Is you I question -- you have so fatally led astray your Sovereign -- you,
who thus cover your own private animosities, your latent treachery, and your
infernal plots, with the specious pretense of reasons of state. Arthur,
Hingant. d'Espinay, answer me if you dare -- of what crimes do you accuse the
Prince of Brittany? He has complained of the slenderness of his establishment;
he has expressed a grateful predilection for the English, among whom he has
been brought up. I do not pretend to conceal his faults. Montauban, I do not
wonder you are his enemy; he is the happy possessor of the woman you loved; but
do not add injustice to hatred. Be great enough to confess to your Sovereign,
that this is the sole motive of your conduct, and that you pant only for the
destruction of a rival. And you, ignoble Hingant, since you still foster a
resentment, which the most manly reparation could not disarm, go, and with your
sword demand satisfaction of my nephew. He will not insist upon the privileges
or his rank: he will obey you without hesitation. Barbarians, plunge your
daggers into his breast; but do not assassinate him by shameful calumnies; do
not ruin him in the affection of his brother and his Sovereign. And you
d'Espinay, the minister of the altar, so little worthy of that sacred
employment, blush at the part they make you act, and resume the character of
your function. Does Heaven command you to arm a brother against a brother? Ah!
Duke, do not listen, do not listen to them. Attend to the voice which you
stifle, Pursue your natural inclination. Your own heart, I am certain, solicits
you in his favor. His impetuosity may have hurried him into faults, but of
crimes he is incapable. I know you: they take advantage of your weakness. You
will triumph over it; you will hear the sentiments of nature. Come, Prince,
come with me to open the prison of a brother. Hasten to pardon and embrace him."

At this instant a beautiful women, with dishevelled hair, her eyes swimming in
tears, and anguish in her face, rushes into the circle, and prostrates herself
at the feet of the Duke. He perceives the consort of the Price of Brittany: he
would raise her; "No my Lord, I will not rise -- I will die here if you refuse
to grant my request. Alas! my husband, your brother, is dragged into prison
like a crimnal! My Lord, I alone ought to be punished for the only fault they
can impute to him. I have inspired him with an unfortunate love -- which I
could not feel for Montauban. The Prince has formed, without your consent,
those sacred and endearing ties that must attach me to misfortunes. It is I --
I who now languish in all the horrors of captivity. Alas! are they not
sufficiently revenged, since they have deprived him of your affection? Oh, my
Lord, he pities, loves you, notwithstanding all the injustice he endures.
Indeed, it is not my husband that can forget a moment you are his brother!"

The Count of Richmond interrupted his niece: "Thy tears shall not flow in
vain. Come, Duke, resist not these tears. Give me your hand; let us instantly
go; and you will be indebted to me for an act of beneficence and justice." --
The Duke suffered himself to be led by the Constable, but not without
reluctance; and he looked at his courtiers, as if he endeavored to read in
their eyes whether they approved his conduct.

The Prince thus cruelly deprived of liberty, is doubtful for a while, whether
he is not the sport of some idle dream. He hears a noise at the door of his
prison. It is opened. He beholds the Constable, leading the Duke by the hand,
and followed by Alicia and Peter of Brittany. They were accompanied by many
Lords. -- "I see you again, my dearest Alicia," exclaimed the Prince. She
flings herself, weeping, in his arms. -- "Nephew," said the Constable, "I bring
your brother to you: ask his pardon, and he will restore you to liberty." --
"Ask his pardon! And wherefore should I reduce myself to that abject state!
What can they reproach me with?" -- "Crimes," answered the Duke, all whose
hatred was now rekindled, "perfidy, rape, ingratitude; you have courted the
protection of the English; you have garrisoned your castle with them; you
maintain a constant correspondence with Henry. You have torn from the arms of
Montauban a wife that ought not to have been yours. In open defiance of all
laws you have married her. And to fill up the measure of your crimes, you hate
me and my faithful servants; you would deprive me of the sovereign power, and
perhaps of my life." -- "Ah! my brother," interrupted the Prince, "and can you
think that your life is not as dear to me as my own? No one can accuse me of
such horrible crimes. I have ever respected, I have ever loved you. It is true
that I am partial to the English: I have been bred up amongst them from my
infancy: I have imbibed in their society, that spirit of frankness and liberty
which is unknown in this country. Their taste, their amusements are mine. Their
monarch is my zealous friend. But I appeal to him whether I have yet forgotten
that I was your brother, your subject, the nephew of the King of France, and
that Brittany is my country. Let Henry, let all England speak, and my accusers
must be confounded. I will not conceal the excess of my passion for Alicia. I
forced her from her ravisher. We loved each other -- and did not you yourself
engage your word that her marriage with Arthur should be delayed till my return
from England? I regarded this promise as an inviolable oath; and I learned that
they were dragging Alicia to the altar* I perceived her in the arms of the
perfidious man who has deprived me of your heart. Then, I confess it, I
listened only to that passion, which can never be extinguished but with my
life. Ah, my brother, have you never loved? Love, love is capable of all."

Francis seemed to listen more favorably to the Prince: "Ah, my lord," said
Alicia, "I have already assured you that I alone am guilty. If a victim be
necessary, go no further. Let me here fill the place of my husband. Let me be
loaded with chains, let me end a wretched existence here, provided the Prince
be free. Let this sacrifice disarm the malice that is bent with such inveteracy
on his ruin; let it restore to my dear husband the lost affection of his
brother -- I shall carry to the grave the sweetest satisfaction if my death can
be useful to him." --

The Prince will not permit this angel-wife to finish: he hastens to her: he
bedews her with his tears. -- "Throw yourself," said she in a whisper, "at your
brother's feet." -- The Prince, in silent action, expresses his reluctance.
Alicia utters only these words; "Do you love me?" and the Prince instantly
prostrates himself before the Duke: -- "What more can you require? Your
brother, my Lord, is at your feet. Can you be inexorable?"

The Duke is very sensibly affected: he cannot conceal his emotion. On a
sudden, Alicia, the Count of Richmond, and Peter of Brittany, embrace his
knees. -- "Can you yet hesitate to pardon him?" exclaims the Count: "We do not
blush to humble ourselves: your uncle, the Constable of France, implores the
pardon of your brother on his knees."

The Duke, at last, opens his arms to the prisoner. He promises to forget all
that has past. Nature triumphs over that aversion, the unhappy result of so
many odious machinations.

The happy moment when the prince was to leave the prison was now impatiently
expected. The Duke had scarce retired, when the Prince thus addressed his wife,
who had been left alone with him: "Judge, my dear Alicia, of the empire you
have over me. I have obeyed you: I have annihilated myself, as it were, at your
command, to submit to the most humiliating posture. And before whom did I
prostrate myself? Before my brother -- before my tyrant! Did you observe him?
It was evident that he only acquiesced in that ascendency which the constable
has obtained over us. With what regret, it was apparent, he permitted me to
embrace him! No, I never shall regain his friendship. He will not long preserve
that sensibility which you and the Count of Richmond could only inspire! --
"What cruel mistrust, Prince, do you thus permit to embitter a happiness, of
the certainty of which every thing assures us! Why do you impute such
inhumanity to the Duke? Ah! who would not have been melted by your situation?
No heart could have been so obdurate as to resist such affecting prayers. The
Duke, I doubt not, has been apprehensive of showing you how much he was
affected. A consciousness of wounded superiority only could have prevented him
from mingling his tears with yours. My dear Prince, your good fortune is
beginning. Your enemies will now be confounded They will be witnesses of this
reconciliation. It is now the blessed moment to pardon them. I know the
greatness of your soul; and on the day of our happiness every one should be
happy."

Such a wife must easily persuade. The Prince banishes his suspicions, and
indulges himself in that sweet intoxication of joy, with which his wife is
inspired. They resolve to retire far from the court, and to find their whole
happiness in love and rural pleasures. "What is grandeur," said they, "compared
to that pure and permanent tenderness which adds a sweeter charm to every
moment we enjoy!"

Several persons are heard approaching. -- "They are coming to release you,"
said Alicia: "dear Prince, do not forget to fly once more into your brother's
arms."

What a deplorable revolution! Some guards appeared -- "Madam, we have orders
to separate you." -- What is not my husband at liberty?" -- "We obey, Madam,
the commands of our Sovereign. We are to hold no conversation with you. Be so
good only to retire." -- "I fly to the Duke: it is impossible that he can so
soon have changed his sentiments." -- She embraces her husband; she presses him
to her heart with a silence all expressive of terror and suspense; she leaves
him. The Prince remains motionless; he is thunderstruck. Fetters are brought to
him. -- "Fetters? Fetters to me! -- The guards, in fastening them on, can
hardly refrain from expressing the emotions they feel. -- "There is nothing
then in nature unfeeling but my brother! Tell me, I conjure you, what can have
drawn upon me this excess of injustice and barbarity? Whither do you lead me?
To death? Ah, dear Alicia! I shall never see thee more."

The guards answer only by some expressions of compassion, which seem to escape
reluctantly from them. They remove their prisoner from Dinan to Rennes; thence
to Chaetau Briant, and many other places* and finally to the fortress of
Hardouinaye.

The motive of this barbarous inconsistency in the Duke's conduct may easily be
divined. His return to nature had not been sufficiently decided, to overcome
the representations of his brother's persecutors. Every thing he had said, in
the moments of passion, was repeated to the Duke with all possible
aggravations; or rather, the most absurd calumnies were invented; and even
witnesses were suborned to prove, that this victim of human malignity had
formed the project of introducing the English into his country. In a word, they
so far succeeded, that a persecution was commenced against the Prince and it
was determined at all events to find him guilty.

The Attorney General Du Breil received orders to prosecute him. This
respectable magistrate hastens to his Sovereign's feet, paints to him all the
horrors of the proceedings in which he was about to engage, and refuses to give
his sanction to this iniquitous plot. The inflexible Duke urges him to obey,
and adds menaces to entreaty. Du Breil, at length, accepts the dreadful
commission, but with the laudable design to divert the storm, or at least, to
weaken its effects.

Alicia had hastened to throw herself at the feet of Francis: -- "Ah, my Lord
by what unexpected fatality have your sentiments changed in so short a time?
You permitted my husband to weep in your bosom; you even seemed to be affected
with his tears; you were so gracious at last, to grant us his pardon; and now
-- now, Sire, they have loaded him with chains; he is dragged from prison to
prison. He is accused of a thousand excesses of which he could never be guilty
even in idea. Have you determined, my Lord, to take his life? I am come to
offer mine. Let me die rather than support the dreadful sight. My Lord, have my
nuptial* drawn down your anger on my husband's head? Well then! shall I speak
it? I consent -- let the ties that unite us, the ties so dear to me, be
dissolved: my heart will still be mine -- my heart will never cease to adore
him. I regard not myself: let him -- let him be free. If his persecutors are
apprehensive he may escape from their hands, (for you, alas, have abandoned
them to their implacable hatred) I offer them a second victim. You have in me
an hostage who will be responsible for my husband." -- "I accept your proposal,
Madam. You are my security of the fidelity of a brother whom I no longer regard
by that title. My eyes are now opened. I see to what a degree the spirit of
enmity and rebellion may laid him." -- "The Prince rebellious! He, my Lord!
Alas, how much have they misled you! He hates you not. I will remain here: I
will expect every punishment if the slightest accusations against my husband
have a shadow of truth. Alas, his only crime has been to love me too much. Once
more, I alone am guilty. On me only ought to be wreaked the vengeance of
exasperated jealousy. Let Arthur de Montauban come and pierce my bosom -- but
let my husband, my poor injured husband, be released."

In vain had the princess thus sacrificed her liberty, to secure that of her
husband. This heroic action did not mitigate his sat. His prosecution was
continued; and the heads of accusation were transmitted to the Seneschal of
Rennes, in order to be laid before the States of Brittany.

Before this august assembly the Count of Richmond appeared, like a tutelary
god that would hasten to the protection of a mortal. He addressed the States in
a speech replete with the manly, unaffected, and pathetic eloquence of a
soldier. He entered into a full vindication of the character and conduct of his
nephew; and he demonstrated that the accusations against him had no other
source than the implacable hatred of his enemies. Then addressing himself to
the Duke, he urged all the considerations of justice, and all the claims of
nature. His speech produced the most sensible effect on the whole assembly; and
the Constable retired, not doubting of their effectual interposition in favor
of his nephew. The moment he had left the hall, the Viscount of R^han went to
the Duke: "My Lord, said he, "may I presume to hope that my voice will be heard
after the Count of Richmond's? You must be sensible, that as the relation of
Arthur, I might be permitted to take part in his quarrel; but I am the first to
disapprove of his proceedings against the Prince. From this moment I declare
myself his avowed enemy, if he does not prostrate himself before you, and
solicit the return of your fraternal tenderness. Yes, Sire, I conjure you, I
entreat you to forgive the Prince. I forget the affront he has offered to the
house of Montauban; and I am sensible only to those emotions of pity and
tenderness which the situation of the Prince your brother must excite." -- The
Viscount now throws himself at the feet of Francis, and seems still more to
influence the whole assembly in favor of the unfortunate Prince.

The Count of Richmond did not doubt that his speech would produce the happy
effects that might be expected from it. He received a letter from the king of
France, who ordered him to repair to his court immediately; as the English were
making new efforts to retake the places we had captured from them. The
Constable, who prided himself in a rigid attention to his millitary duty,
obeyed the summons without delay; after having left in Britanny some trusty
friends; to carry on the good he had begun, and which he considered as nearly
finished.

But this great and good man was mastaken. The States of Brittany refused to
decide on this important affair. The Prince continued still to groan in prison;
nor was his wife much less a captive than himself. The heart of Francis became
more obdurate than ever. The favorites, by their infamous intrigues, pre^ented
the slightest appearances of any return to sensibility.

The Duke caused memorials to be published in the Court of France, in which his
brother was painted in the blackest colors. He was desirous of infusing in the
breast of Charles the too unrelenting hatred by which he himself was actuated.
Dissatisfied with the conduct of the States, he pretended to establish the
prosecution upon new informations; the first having afforded insufficient
proofs. He saw with regret that the assistance of the Attorney General was
indispensable. He sent therefore for Du Breil. When this respectable magistrate
appeared, he loaded them with compliments and carresses. He then endeavored to
color his proceedings against the Prince with the appearances of justice; and
at the same time he promised, what such atrocious characters are apt to think
irresistible, all the honors and emoluments which ambition and avarice could
desire, in order to persuade Du Breil to enter into his views -- "Ah! Sire,
said this virtuous magistrate, "you have been pleased to applaud me for my love
of justice: but can I deserve that applause, if I consent to adopt your present
views? Shall I be worthy of the high office which you have already honored me?
Sovereigns, Sire, are superior to other men; but the laws are superior to them.
I am ready to devote my life to your service, as the best expression of my
duty. But the rights of justice I dare not violate. And what, my Lord, can you
require of me? It is justice? My whole conduct has been actuated by its
motives. Your brother cannot long be detained in prison. It is not my province,
who am to acknowledge only the inflexible power of the laws; it is not my
province to become the organ of compassion; to plead the birth and youth of the
Prince your brother; nor to enforce the tender and inviolable claims of nature.
I contemplate neither rank nor age; I listen to no voice but the voice of
truth, whose minister you have appointed me. It is my duty, therefore, to
declare, that the charges brought against the Prince are insufficient to
convict him." -- "What!" interrupted the Duke, "dare you resist my authority?"
"I obey, my Lord, the voice of my conscience. No human authority can silence
that voice, to which all men, whatever be their rank and condition, must
attend." -- "What contumacy is this! But I know how to punish it." -- "Here, my
Lord, is my head; a head grown gray in the exercise of my functions. Strike --
let it fall at your feet. I am seventy-eight years of age. I will not dishonor
the few days I have yet to live. You cannot wish that the last moments of a
faithful subject should be blasted with eternal infamy. My life I abandon to
you; but my honor, my honor is my only real existence, and no power on earth
shall deprive me of it." -- "Away, rebellious subject!" -- "Rather say, my
Lord, a subject who would give his life to recall you to yourself." -- "I want
not either your counsels or your assistance; I shall find sufficient means to
satisfy my just resentment." -- "Ah, my Lord, dread the terrors of remorse: it
is more powerful than Kings." -- "Dread the effects of my indignation --
Retire."

Du Breil, at these words, left the exasperated Duke. There were moments when
the latter meditated the ruin of the venerable man; but he soon adopted
different thoughts. The bad man, in spite of himself, feels a certain respect
for virtue; and this, indeed, is not one of the slightest torments that
distract him. Francis despairing of success by legal methods, dropped the
persecution he had commenced, and, in concert with his base corrupters, formed
some projects to effect the ruin of his brother.

In the mean time the unfortunate Prince was exposed to all the sufferings
which ingenious cruelty could devise; and these sufferings were augmented by
the dreadful reflection that his Alicia, his adorable Alicia was subject to the
same unrelenting inhumanity. One day he received a letter from a sentinel,
which this man, in a whisper, desired him not to open till he was alone. He is
impatient to read it: the gaolers retire: trembling and precipitately,
notwithstanding his fetters, he opens it. From his beloved Alicia! He lavishes
a thousand kisses upon it. He reads all the affecting effusions of tenderness
and grief. He learns that this angelic wife, who had given herself as an
hostage for her husband, is herself in captivity; she deplores her fate, in not
being permitted to share, in his prison, the sufferings of her much injured
Lord. She assures him of that invariable love, which, even this accumulation of
calamity, is still the delight of her life; and she implores him by all his
tenderness for her, to write to the King of France, to entreat his intercession
with his brother; and for her sake too to forget himself as it were, and to
endeavor by every mode of submission, to disarm the anger of that unnatural
brother, and by repeated letters, if possible, to conciliate his affection. --
How often did the Prince read again and again this pathetic letter! How often
kiss it, and bedew it with his tears. The soldier, who brought it, furnished
him with the means of writing. His slackened fetters permit him to use his
hands; and he writes to the charming partner of his soul all that augmented
tenderness, and admiration, and sensibility could inspire. For her he promises
to live; for her to forget the proud feelings of his heart; and her injunctions
in every instance to fulfill.

The hatred of Francis increase with every day; and as disappointed love is
inexorable, Arthur de Montauban, on his part, continued to flatter himself,
that the death of the Prince would again put Alicia into his power. Impatient
with this hope, he flies to the Duke who had sent for him. He finds him
attended by Hingant and Oliver du Meel, a gentleman devoted to the house of
Montauban, and one of his favorites in whom the Duke placed implicit
confidence. They were declared enemies to the Prince of Brittany. "My friends,"
said Francis, burning with ungovernable rage, "the laws, you see, refuse to
serve me." The high credit of my uncle has prevented the states from coming to
a decision, and has even silenced my Attorney General. Arthur, this wretch has
cruelly injured you -- he has robbed you of your wife -- could not you
undertake to revenge?" -- "How, my Lord?" -- "You may easily understand me.
Cannot you imagine what ought to be the fate of an enemy, who is absolutely in
our power?" -- The countenance of Arthur flashes with indignation. There is a
gradation in profligacy, at which the most abandoned may shudder. -- "My Lord*"
said Arthur, "I have reason to detest the Prince; but my hatred would never
suggest to me such a step. I wish him torments equal to those with which he has
distracted me. As a state criminal, impatient to betray his country and his
Sovereign into the hands of the English, doubtless merits death. But I! 'shall
I be his executioner! Shall Arthur de Montauban degrade himself to such a
degree? Sire, you have not a subject more devoted to your service: But I dare
disobey my sovereign, when he commands an action, that would cover me with
eternal infamy.' Permit me to retire."

The Duke appears astonished. He cannont conceive the motives of this refusal;
that a rival should hesitate a moment to get rid of a rival, when he is put
into his power. From extreme weakness results a cruelty as extreme; which was
absolutely what rendered Francis more barbarous than Montauban. The Duke
persists in his dreadful project, and addresses himself next to Hingant, who
seems to consent to gratify the inhuman wishes of his master.

It is with regret, we confess, that we draw the picture of such horrors; a
sovereign, a brother, permitting himself to be hurried into such dreadful
excesses! but it is the voice of history herself, which is here faithfully
recorded; and we cannot too often repeat to men, to what a degree their
passions, or rather their weaknesses, may mislead them. Francis, who,
surrounded by other courtiers, might have displayed the virtues of Antoninus,
is become the execration of posterity.

Hingant, on the first appearances of consent that had escaped him, felt all
the horrors of remorse. As soon as he returned home, he sent at midnight to the
Attorney General, requesting him to come immediately, as he had an affair of
the greatest moment to communicate. To this venerable magistrate, in the utmost
disorder, and with a faltering voice, he explained his embarrassing situation.
The language of Du Breil, in return, was that of virtue herself when she
endeavors to preserve her wandering votaries from inevitable ruin: "There is no
room," said he, to hesitate. It is far preferable, at all events, to disobey
the Duke, than to offend your conscience and humanity. It is the voice of
conscience that now expostulates with you -- that voice which would pursue you,
were you seated on a throne. The favor of a Sovereign is not to be compared to
that sweet peace, that sunshine of the soul, which attends the happy man,
unsullied by reproach." -- In a word, after a variety of other excellent
observations, he exhorted the hesitating courtier to absent himself immediately
from court, and to fly, in course, from guilt and infamy, and remorse.

Hingant followed this advise: he absented himself from court. Francis
exasperated to find his cruelty thus disappointed, addressed himself next to
Oliver du Meel, who, less scrupulous than Hingant, undertook every thing in
concert with Robert de Boussel, one of the guards of the Prince of Brittany.

The unfortunate Prince had found means to send to the King of France a very
long letter, which contained all the particulars of his dreadful situation. He
informed that Monarch, that for three year past, he had been wasting away his
life in fetters, without having once had the liberty of producing his defense.
His approaching death, he said, was inevitable, unless some protector of
suffering humanity would interpose in his favor. He concluded his letter (in
which all he felt for his beloved Alicia was pathetically urged) by imploring
the King to summon him to France, and to be himself his judge. "From your
majesty only," said he, "I expect justice. If I am guilty, you will punish me:
if innocent, I shall be justified by equity itself."

This letter was blotted in many places by the Prince's tears. Nor could
Charles read it without weeping. In this situation he is surprised by his
Chamberlain. William de Kosnyvinen, a Chevalier of the highest probity: -- You
weep, Sire! This writing." -- "Alas, it is a letter which I have just received
from the Prince of Brittany; he is guilty no doubt, but his situation is truly
deplorable!" -- "Oh, Sire, do not stifle those compassionate emotion, which do
so much honor to Majesty. Listen to the voice of pity in preference to the
suggestions of an ill-founded resentment." -- The Chamberlain then entered into
a full justification of the Prince: he refuted all the atrocious calumnies that
had been invented to destroy. him: -- "and can your Majesty," he proceeded,
"abandon this injured nephew? Is not a King of France the representative of
God? Does he not extend his protecting hand to all the unfortunate that implore
it? His throne is the altar of benificence: and the most pitiable of men, a
prince, your nephew, solicits your compassion. The constable joins his
entreaties to mine: he is at this moment at the head of your army: he has
written to me to intercode in favor of this victim of an inexorable cabal.
Sire, give your orders. Let the Prince come to prostrate himself before you;
and you will pronounce, as he desires, his acquittal or condemnation. Do not
demand the advice of courtiers* I know them: they are seldom the side of mercy
and humanity. It is yourself, Sire, it is your own feeling heart, it is the
King of France whom you ought to consult. Oh, my Sovereign, be the protector of
innocence. To wipe one single tear from the wretched, is a glory preferable to
all the splendour of conquest. Why is it in the power of Monarchs to enjoy more
happiness than their subjects? It is because they have a greater power to do
good; and unfading pleasure follows but one single act of benificence. Sire, I
will not quit your knees till you have granted my request. It is an old servant
prostrate before you, who is emboldened at this moment to demand some
recompense for his services; but it is to your generosity only that he will be
indebted for your favor to the Prince of Brittany." -- "Rise, Chevalier, and
embrace your friend. Yes, you are perfectly right. No circumstances of my life
will ever afford me such unmingled satisfaction; I will consult my own heart: I
will consult such a worthy subject as you. You assure me that the Prince is the
victim of calumny: I should wound you too sensibly, if I suspected a moment
that you have deceived me. Let my Admiral repair immediately to the Court of
Brittany: let him speak to the Duke in my name: let liberty be restored to my
nephew: I will send for him here: I myself will hear him.

The Chamberlain, delighted with the success of this conversation, had hastened
immediately to the Admiral, who delayed not a moment to repair to the Duke at
Vannes, and in the King's name, to desire the enlargement of the Prince. This
interposition was too respectable to be opposed. Alicia in her retreat, or
rather in her prison, received this intelligence, with transports of joy. Nor
did the unfortunate Prince experience a revolution less satisfactory. He had
been informed (but by what means is unknown) that the heart of the Duke, had
relented, and that his imprisonment was soon to terminate. Who can speak his
sensations -- the exquisite joys of anticipation? The Constable, moreover, and
the other friends of the Prince, the virtuous few that were still less in the
court of Brittany: gave way to the most lively demonstrations of joy. In a
word, the courier had already departed from the Duke, with orders for the
immediate release of the Prince his brother.

By what fatality have Malignity and Hatred resources, of which Benevolence can
form no conception? the enemies of the Prince of Brittany were confounded:
their prey was on the point of escaping from them; and they were ever to be
witnesses of his triumph. This last idea augmented their rage: it suggested an
expedient which one may call the masterpiece of infernal machinations. They
discover the execrable talent of an old wretch, named Peter de la Rose, who
could counterfeit any hand whatever. He had resided a long time in England, and
studied with singular success the style of the dispatches of the court of
London. To this detestable being the conspirators had recourse; and him they
bribed to fabricate, in the name of Henry, a letter addressed to the Duke of
Brittany, demanding the instant enlargement of the Prince, and threatening, in
case of refusal, to pour a considerable army into his dominions. The Duke,
highly exasperated at this letter, of the authenticity of which he had not a
doubt, instantly revoked the order he had given to release the Prince; and,
listening only the dictates of his rage; he vowed from that moment his
destruction, which he said, he had but too long deferred. In a word, the
Admiral of France was dismised, without that success in his negotiation of
which he had not once made a question. The cabal moreover, by their secret
intrigues, had contrived to irritate the English, who actually declared war
against the Duke, and demanded the enlargement of his brother; a circumstance
which could not fail to augment a thirst of vengeance that was now become
insatiable.

The unfortunate Prince was anticipating the happy moment of deliverance: he
hears a noise: his heart dilates with the sweet suggestions of hope. -- New
attendants, more inhuman than the former, entered with Oliver du Meel at their
head, in order to drag him from his chamber, and plunge him into a dungeon. The
unfortunate Prince demands the reason of a revolution so contrary to what he
had expected. Can it be imagined? -- But History attests the fact -- a violent
blow was the only answer that the Prince of Britany received, Then all his
fortitude forsook him: he burst into a torrent of tears. "Great God! could I
ever expect to be treated with such indignity? has my brother given such
orders? Could he not be satisfied with the sufferings I have endured? Must he
add infamy to them?" -- But these monsters, so far from being disarmed by
expostulation and complaint, repeated their ill treatment. They removed from
him that kind attendant who had enabled him to write to his wife and to the
king of France; and he was utterly deprived of the sweet satisfaction of
hearing from Alicia, who was now more strictly guarded than ever.

The most abandoned men are incapable, sometimes of resisting the impressions
of pity; so much is that sentiment natural, as it were, to the human heart. Ah!
wretched mortals, why do you not oftener lend an ear to that affecting voice,
which solicits you in favor of the unfortunate? Would you augment the number of
your pleasures? Barbarity is an impression that is foreign to you: it fatigues
the soul, and is ever productive of disgust and remorse. Du Meel, that
inflexible monster, is overcome by the entreaties and tears of his prisoner. He
furnishes him with the means of writing to the Duke, to whom the Prince
addresses the following letter: My Lord,
I dare not call you my brother: my enemies, perhaps, would impute a new crime
to me, were I again to claim the rights of blood. I will no longer plead then a
name that is yet so dear to me. I will only present to you the lowest of your
subjects, the most humble and unfortunate of men, who embraces your knees, who
bathes them with his tears, and who seeks only to excite your pity. I might
urge my innocence, which has been proved by so many witnesses; I might appeal
to your justice; but I will only implore your clemency. I will even consent to
appear guilty in your sight, if that confession be conducive to your
generosity. Alas! I have no longer any pride! Subdued by the iron rod of
adversity, I throw myself entirely on your compassion. Plunged into a deep
dungeon, watering my bitter bread with tears, whose source will be soon dried
up, without consolation, without hope, torn from a wife whom I love more than
ever, and who shares my dreadful lot -- O Heavens! what an idea! Alicia, Alicia
too is persecuted! such is the situation of the Prince, who has committed but
one fault, a fault dictated by Love -- but what was I saying? My intention, I
repeat it, is to humble myself before you as the greatest criminal. Your
clemency in forgiving will then be more conspicuous; and I submit, without
reserve, to all the horrors of my fate. My connections with Henry and the
English have displeased you: those connections I renounce: I renounce every
thing: I devote myself henceforth to the most implicit obedience to your will.
None but you and Alicia shall occupy my heart. Do you refuse to see me? Would
you banish me from your Court, from Brittany? Let me be exiled then to the
remotest corner of the world, to the most dreadful desert: let me live there
with my wife; I will still bless your goodness; and never, never shall the
least murmur escape me. -- Ah! my brother, (I cannot resist, I cannot resist
this tender appellation) if our father were to rise from the tomb, and behold
me in this deplorable situation, could he believe -- But I forbear from the
slightest appearance of reproach. Call to mind only, I conjure you, what an
English Prince said to the inexorable William. You have often spoken to me with
pleasure of that affecting circumstance, which did so much honor, you said, to
human nature. Prince Henry, afterward Henry I, King of England, being
disgusted with the little care that was taken of his interest, in an
accommodation between himself and his brother William Rufus, then on the English
throne, and Robert Duke of Normandy, retired to Michael's mount, a strong
fortress on the coast of that province, and infested the neighborhood with his
incursions, Robert and William with their joint forces besieged him in this
place and had nearly reduced him by the scarcity of water, when the elder,
hearing of his distress, granted him permission to supply himself, and also
sent him some pipes of wine for his own table. Being reproved by William for
this ill-timed generosity, he replied, "What, shall I suffer my brother to die
of thirst? Where shall we find another when he is gone?"
-- Alas! if you are sensible to the pleasure of being beloved, who will love
you better than a brother? and you would sacrifice that wretched brother, who
invokes you as he would invoke God himself; and to whom, in spite of all his
sufferings, you are still so dear. Oh! forgive, forgive me! These expressions
should have irresistible power over the human heart. And can yours be so
rigorous as to forget their influence? The barbarians, my brother, would have
you actuated by their own unworthy souls. Recollect, oh, recollect, that there
was a time, when you would deign, to fold me to your bosom. How often would you
say, "My brother, I will never cease to love you." And are these the fruits of
such tender professions? But I do not mean to utter one complaint that may
wound you. If the confession be necessary to disarm you, I have merited these
suffering. Your pity only I implore. Let these chains then, these too heavy
chains, be broken; or at least, let a speedy death deliver me from such
insufferable woes.

The Prince of Brittany.




How omnipotent is Love! Had he been affected by his own suffering only, the
Prince certainly would never have descended to such humiliating expressions:
but the fate of his beloved Alicia was to be decided; and the heart that truly
loves, is sensible to a kind of pride, in thus voluntarily humbling itself for
the dear object of its affection. What sacrifices are there which cost more
than that of life! Humiliation is the sad consummation of misfortune; and, when
pride is the victim, we have no other left to offer.

The unhappy prisoner counts the day, the hours, the moments: he receives no
answer. In the anguish of despair, he writes another letter, if possible more
humiliating and affecting still. He implores the speedy sentence of death as a
relief from insupportable misery; he implores his inexorable brother not to
extend the pursuit of vengeance beyond the grave; but to spare, at least, his
memory; and to protect in her widowhood the wretched and forlorn Alicia. -- But
instead of these letters, which, one would imagine, must have melted the most
obdurate bosom, the Duke had received others full of reproaches and menaces.
These were counterfeited by the execrible Peter de la Rose. Francis,
exasperated by these letters, no longer affected moderation. It had been
reported to him that the Prince, in a fit of despiration, had declared that he
would put an end to his life. "He may dispose of it as he pleases," coldly
answered the barbarian. The slightest expressions of a Sovereign are gathered
with avidity; nor are Courtiers wanting to give them with ease an
interpretation favorable to their Master's views. The words which the Duke had
dropped, did not escape the enemies of the Prince, who instantly concerted the
detestable project of getting rid of their prisoner. They prepared an order in
the name of Francis, for the execution of the Prince. This order was carried to
the keeper of the Great Seal for the necessary sanction. Eon de Baldwin, which
was the name of this excellent man, (and such names, for the honor of humanity,
and the consolation of virtue, ought to be transmitted to posterity) Eon de
Baldwin, peremptorily refused to put the seal to this act of imposture and
iniquity. He lost his place, and, gained immortal honor. The order, at length
received its legal form from a more complaisant hand, and Oliver du-Meel was
charged to put it in execution.

The Constable, who was still obliged to be at the head of the army, could only
continue to importune the King of France by reiterated dispatches. The enemies
of the Prince wanted not resources to prejudice Charles against his nephew,
notwithstanding the incessant representation of the virtuous Kosnyvinen. By
what strange fatality has falsehood thus almost ever an access to the great?

Du Meel was now given to understand, that he must hasten the unravelling of
this abominable plot. He observed to hesitate, whether from the powerful
influence of remorse, or from his apprehensions that the Duke might afterward
repent, and punish him for a pliability so fatal. Promises, rewards,
governments, a variety of dazzling anvantages for himself and his accomplices,
are all displayed, and are too powerful at last. The Prince is now thrown into
a dungeon still deeper, and full of water. The grated window here overlooked
the ditch that surrounded the fortress. It being now determined to starve their
wretched victim, several days elapsed without supplying him with any kind of
food.

The unfortunate Prince feels all the horror of his approaching fate. He utters
the most lamentable crimes: he implores the assistance of all the passengers
whom he can perceive on the other side of the ditch: he extends his suppliant
hands through the bars. "It is the Prince of Brittany," he cried, "it is the
Prince of Brittany, who beseeches you for God's sake, to bestow a little bread
and water." -- No one durst stop even to hear him; so much were all
apprehensive of suffering the smallest indication of pity to escape. How few
are the exalted minds that can venture to undertake the defense of humanity, at
the expense of personal interest* And how much easier is submission to the yoke
of tyranny!

A poor woman, who was wont to solicit charity near the Castle, was greatly
affected by the deplorable situation of the Prince. The name of this
respectable creature is unknown; while the world is pestered with the names and
surnames of so many illustrious villains, who in reality, should he the
reproach and execration of mankind. Are ingratitude and cruelty then natural to
the human heart? Or, are the unfortunate alone endeed with sensibility? This
woman, who had scarce a morsel of bread herself to support a miserable
existence, had the resolution to descend by night into the ditch, and to convey
to the prison (...) his window, or rather spiracle, that morsel of bread, and a
small jug of water. -- "My Lord," said she, "I give you all I have. I would die
to serve you. Speak -- what can I do for you? Alas! the great folks are then
sometimes as much to be pitied as we are! Oh, my Lord, cannot I be yet more
useful to you?" -- The Prince is so affected by this generous action, that the
tears, for some moments, interrupt his voice: at last, broken by sobs, it finds
a vent: It is you, excellent creature, that thus come to succor me, while
every one else -- my brother" -- He cannot proceed: he is choked by tears. --
"My Lord," resumed the good woman, "I am certain the Duke cannot know your
situation: I am deeply affected with it. Believe me, I will go and beg my bread
with greater earnestness than ever. I will bring every day whatever I can get.
Oh, my Lord, it shall all be yours -- a very little will suffice me." -- The
Prince now experienced some mitigation of misery. How consolatory is pity! He
incessantly repeated: "This then is the only bosom I have been able to soften!"

This woman, the heroine of sentiment, waited for the hour of darkness, to
bring her nocturnal tribute of bread and water to the Prince. He could not see
her again without apprehensions for her safety: "If you should be discovered,"
said he, "your life is in danger." -- "Ah, my Lord," she answered, "what is the
risque of my life, compared to the satisfaction of prolonging yours" -- The
Prince asks her several questions: he would fain learn from her what was the
situation of his wife: she cannot give him the least information on this
interesting head. -- "You endeavor to prolong my life," said he to his
benefactress; it is necessary to think also of the concerns of my soul. The
barbarians have even denied me this succor. I conjure you to procure some
charitable Friar to confess me; for I perceive my dissolution approaching,
notwithstanding all your compassionate endeavors."

The good woman ran to throw herself at the feet of a Cordelier, who was her
confessor. She related to him what she had done for the Prince of Brittany: she
described the situation in which she had found him? and she soon prevailed upon
the good Friar to repair to the prisoner. This man, worthy to fulfill the sacred
functions of his ministry, and who was actuated by its benevolent spirits,
exposes himself to the danger of being apprehended, and follows the woman, who
conducting him in the dark, brings him to the grated window. She calls the
Prince, who can find no words sufficiently expressive of his grateful feelings:
"My Lord," said the Cordelier, "I only fulfill my duty; and who ought to fly to
the succor of misery, if not to the ministers of Religion! Religion is the
friend of the unfortunate: her bosom is open to their complaints; and she
teaches us to sacrifice all, even life itself to her. The dictates of religion
are more powerful than the common impressions of humanity. Command then my zeal
and best services. Gracious God! what savages! Are they men, are they
Christians that treat you thus?" -- The prisoner with an affecting air, extends
an arm wasted away, to the Friar: "Alas, it is my brother! -- I perceive,"
added he, "by these sentiments, the character of that true religion that
inspires you. Yes, Religion only could have rendered you so compassionate, so
charitable! I am forsaken by all the world. There are none to whom I can
express my sufferings but God; and from him alone can I hope for compassion.
Believe me, generous souls," addressing himself to the Friar and the woman,
"should Heaven restore me to the world, my whole existence shall be employed to
convince you both how deeply I am penetrated by your heroic goodness. Ah! I
have found then two friends before I die." -- "Oh, my Lord," answered the
woman, "we are the persons obliged. Till now I never thought there were any
pleasures on earth for poor folks. You have convinced me, that in the greatest
distress, one may yet enjoy happiness: I am the happiest creature in the world:
I have been able to save your life."

The prisoner now thought he could trust this worthy creature with a commission
that required some address. It was to gain admittance to the Princess, and to
engage her to come there to see her dying husband. "If her hand," said the
Prince, "could close my eyes -- if she could receive my last sigh -- go, my
worthy benefactress, exert every effort. May I once more enjoy the sight of my
wife!"

The good woman leaves the Prince with the Cordelier, and hastens to find some
means of gaining admittance to Alicia. The Friar is now engaged in
administering, according to the custom of the Romish Church, the last
consolations of Religion. His penitent gives an ingenious recapitulation of his
faults, and deplores them with the most sincere contrition. He then adverts to
the horror of his situation: "My Father, I am certainly guilty in the sight of
God: you behold the contrition of my soul: but you assure me that my tears, my
repentance, will obtain that pardon from Heaven, which men have the cruelty to
refuse me. Alas! who has thus plunged me into such a gulf of misery? My brother
-- a brother I loved -- a brother" -- At these words he bursts into tears. "My
father," he resumes, "God commands it by your mouth: it is my duty then to
pardon him." -- The priest represents to him all that religion prescribes to us
on this head. -- "I forgive him: but since he obstinately refuses to hear the
proofs of my innocence; since he rejects my cries, my tears, my last sigh; I
appeal to the tribunal of the Supreme Judge, the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. I cite him to appear before the throne of God in forty days. This is the
superstitious language of the dark ages. The pure Religion of Christ knows no
reserve in the forgiveness of injuries.
Go, and tell him in my name, to what an avenger I have appealed. Tell him that
you have seen his brother plunged in stagnant water, bathed with his tears,
wasted by famine, on the point of exha^ing his wretched life, and -- forgiving
him, and even loving him still. Yes, my father, he is still dear to me. This
augments my sufferings. I know that my enemies have taken advantage of his
weakness. They have forced him, I am convinced, to detest, to persecute his
brother. Tell him also that I implore at least some compassion for my wife.
They will not surely, extend to her this unmerited persecution. If Heaven, my
father, should permit your voice to touch him; If I should be allowed to
prostrate myself at his feet, to -- but I shall soon be no more. Oh, my father,
forget not in your prayers the most wretched of men. I leave to God the care of
rewarding you. Take this ring, it is of small value; the only thing of which my
executioners have not deprived me. Deign to preserve it in memory of an
unfortunate man, who is deeply sensible of the invaluable service you have
rendered him."

The good father had not the power to answer; he wept bitterly with the
prisoner, who took his hand through the bars, and bedewed it with his tears:
"Adieu, my dear benefactor, adieu once more. See the Duke, and forget not to
say to what a tribunal I have cited him. But I have done with men: I now bid
adieu to the world; I throw myself into the arms of God: he only can know the
truth: he alone is the avenger of innocence."

The jailer and his attendants, who had hoped that hunger would rid them of
their prisoner, are astonished to find him still alive. He had concealed, in a
corner of his dungeon, some pieces of bread, and a jug of water. Alas! what
sustenance for the brother of a Sovereign!

Oliver du-Meel cannot divine by what kind of prodigy his hopes are thus
defeated. The wretches who breathed nothing but the death of their victim, and
who dreaded that a return of fraternal tenderness, in the heart of Francis,
might deprive then of the fruit of their vengeance, gave du-Meel to understand,
that he must hasten the end of his prisoner. It was resolved therefore to
poison him. They affected therefore to compassionate his situation; and some
soup was brot, which so far from reviving him, was to put a period to his
existence. But the strength of his constitution overcame the effects which
du-Meel expected from the poison; and the Prince strugged against death, which,
as it were, invested him on every side.

He yields a moment to the violence of such complicated woes. That sleep which
springs from the excess of sufferings, and which may be regarded as the bounty
of nature, that tender mother ever intent to aid us; this overpowering sleep
closed the eyelids of the prisoner. He hears himself called by an affecting
voice: he hastens to the window: "Is it true? By what miracle? It is you, dear
Alicia, it is you! In what a dress! A faint light of the moon permitted him to
destinguish objects. The Princess, (for it was indeed no illusive vision) the
Princess could not forbear from uttering a piercing cry, when she beheld her
husband in this deplorable situation. She sunk, clinging to the bars, which she
bedewed with her tears: "Dear Prince -- dear husband -- is it thus a barbarous
brother treats you? Oh! I will hasten to demand death." -- "Alas!" said the
Prince retaining her hand, "every effort is in vain. I have already done too
much. Our humiliation has been too abject. My death is inevitable. But I have
seen you, dearest, best of women. It was the favor I implored of God, my soul
protector: he has granted it, and I now die content."

The good woman had found means to conquer every obstruction. She approached
the Princess, as they were conducting her to church; and, under pretense of
begging charity, she had found time to communicate her husband's wishes.
Alicia, by means of a sheet cut into a proper disguise, had contrived to leave
her apartment in the night; and having put on the dress of the poor woman, to
whom she had left her own clothes, and been instructed in what manner she
should cross the ditch; she had gained, under this concealment, the dreadful
habitation of her lord! "No, dearest Prince," said she, impressing her kisses
and tears on one of his hands, "you shall not die: I will go and embrace the
knees of the cruel author of our woes: I will either soften his obdurate heart,
or he shall plunge the dagger in my bosom. It is my husband -- my husband who
suffers all these torments, who eats the bread of poverty! -- Oh, Heaven!
Heaven! can thou permit injustice to enjoy such a triumph?"

A sudden noise is heard: torches are perceived; and a number of guards are
distinguished. In an instant, these savages rush through the ditch, and seize
the Princess, who shrieking, clings to the bars, determined not to be torn from
her husband: "Oh, merciless tigers, let us die at least together. Will you
refuse us even this consolation?" -- "Barbarians," exclaims the Prince, "come
hither; plunge your weapons in my bosom; let not an innocent wife be the object
of your rage. On me, on me only wreak your vengeance!"

The guards are deaf to both. The poor woman, in a dress so unsuitable to her
condition, had been apprehended; but neither menaces, nor even more violent
treatment had been able to extort her secret. A child, who was accidentally
near the spot, where Alicia had exchanged her dress, discovered all. The good
woman was thrown into a dungeon; and the almost expiring Princess was conveyed
back to her apartment, where she was treated with the utmost severity of
confinement.

The Duke had just taken Avranches from the English: he was on the point of
setting out to sleep at Mount St. Michael, when he was informed that a Friar
desired to speak with him in private. Already did his soul experience the
torments inseparable from guilt. In vain he removed from place to place, the
idea of his brother incessantly pursued him, (...) into his heart, and excited
that anguish, that terror of himself, which nothing could dissipate. He heard
or fancied that he heard, the most lamentable cries: it was, if one may so
express it, an insurrection of all his senses; and every object, as it were,
assumed a voice, to reproach him for his inhumanity. Nature, then, cannot be
offended with impunity. How sweet the reverse which Virtue knows: under the
most calamitous trials, she preserves her wonted serenity, and, in the
favorable testimony of conscience, finds a consolation for every woe!

When the courtiers had retired, the Friar was introduced to the Duke, who thus
addressed him: "My good father, what is your business with me?" -- "To prevent,
my Lord, the height of injustice and barbarity; to urge the rights of Nature
and Religion. I am charged with an unpleasing commission; but my duty commands
me to execute it without reserve. The Prince your brother, whose dissolution is
fast approaching, summons you to that inevitable, that irrevocable judgment, to
which all mankind must submit -- the jugdment of God: he cites you to his
tribunal in the space of forty days." -- "You dare" -- "Every thing, my Lord,
that may turn you from the brink of this dreadful precipice, that may open your
eyes, and restore you to yourself. Picture to yourself the Prince bending under
the weight of his chains; buried, as it were, in a ditch full of water: and
condemned, by the barbarous instruments of your vengeance, to expire of hunger:
he is now languishing under all its horrors. The charity of a poor woman only
has hitherto prolonged his miserable existence. She has secretly given him the
slender pittance she has been able to procure by begging -- a morsel of bread,
scarce sufficient for her own sustenance, which she has parted with for your
brother, who is this moment moistening this little nourishment with his tears
-- who is extending to you his two arms wasted away by hunger. Oh! my Lord, it
is your brother that is reduced to this extremity -- he yet endeavors to
justify you: he is persuaded that you have been deceived; that his enemies have
employed your sacred name, to make him endure torments, that would not be
inflicted on the most abandoned of mankind. Alas! what crime has merited such
unparalleled sufferings? Yes, notwithstanding these sufferings, of which you
are the author, he cannot hate you -- you are still dear to him -- his dying
voice invokes you still. Oh, my Lord, my Lord, open your bosom again to this
unfortunate brother: recall, if possible, his last sigh. Has he offended you?
Mercy, my Lord, is the most shining attribute of the Deity. And are not
Sovereigns his august image on earth? In clemency, in benificence only they are
superior to other men. If you permit this last crime to be perpetrated --
tremble. I am bound to forwarn you, that your bosom will be distracted by
everlasting remorse; a terrifying spectre will ever haunt you; his plaintive
accents will instantly strike your ears. Nor rest, nor consolation, will ever
be yours. You will perceive the emptiness of all your grandeur. The
magnificence and pleasures of sovereignty can never restore serenity of soul.
You will endeavor to fly from yourself; but in every scene you will find
yourself again -- the most wretched -- the most guilty of mankind. Yes a little
while, and you may be rescued from the abyss of misery. Submit to Truth, to
pity, to Religion; which all conjure you by my voice, by my tears, to put a
period to the punishment of an unfortunate man -- My Lord, sooner or later you
must appear before God: and how can you stand in his tremendous presence, all
covered with the tears, the blood of a brother!" -- "Oh;" cried the Duke,
bursting into tears, and sinking into the Friar's arms, "my father, my father,
whatever you desire -- give my orders -- my brother -- I am impatient to see
him, to embrace him again -- it is I who now implore my pardon from him -- I
will entreat you to obtain it for me." -- He calls his attendants: "Come hither
instantly: let du-Meel set the Prince at liberty. Make haste -- make haste --
let me fold him in my arms! And you, venerable man, so worthy of your sacred
function, you recall me to Religion, to Humanity, to Nature; you remove from my
heart a burden that overwhelmed it. Ah! how much it costs to be inhuman! But
how great the satisfaction in yielding to the suggestions of pity. How sweet is
it to pardon, to love, to listen to Nature, whose soft suggestions we endeavor
to stifle. A voice incessantly whispered within me to spare my brother. My
father, you must never leave me. Subjects who speak the truth, these are the
faithful servants in whom a Sovereign should confide. For ever far from me be
those infamous courtiers. My father, they have dug the abyss in which you see
me plunged: they have rendered me odious to Brittany, to myself. Oh, my
brother, my dear brother, I will repair all the injuries I have made thee
suffer. I will dry up thy tears by unceasing proofs of tenderness. I shall
enjoy a restoration of happiness that -- "

The Constable whom he imagined to be at the head of the French army, hastily
enters the apartment, trembling with rage: "Wretch," he cried, "thou have now
arrived at the consummation of thy crimes!" -- "My uncle, they will not be
committed. I have sent this instant to release my brother." -- "Release him! he
is assassinated!" -- "Go, run, see his dungeon overflowing with his blood; and
it is by thy orders" -- "Oh, Heavens! what do I hear" -- "What thy barbarity
might have foreseen, what thou have doubtless commanded, what will draw down
upon thy head the dreadful vengeance of Heaven. Yes, du-Meel perceiving that
neither hunger nor poison could destroy my nephew, has caused him to be
assassinated by wretches, worthy of executing thy abominable pleasure. Yes, all
is over! Thy brother is no more! The King has permitted me to fly to his
succor; and I am come to behold his corpse, to weep over his sad remains!
Prince, unworthy of thy rank and family, I renounce thee for ever. I will
instantly repair to the King, who is now sensible how much he has been
deceived; and I shall demand justice on thee and thy vile accomplices."

The Constable, without waiting for a reply, hastily retired. The Cordelier was
going to follow him: "My father," cried the Duke, already struck with the most
dreadful terror, "stop; remain with me; support me under this excess of misery.
The prediction is fulfilled: I hear -- I see him -- the dreadful spectre -- he
pursues me! Where shall I hide myself? Great God! is there now no hope for me?
Can thou pardon a wretch sullied by his brother's blood, polluted with every
crime? Oh, my father, what sufferings! Hell, hell is in my bosom!"

In fact, remorse, and superstition united their dreadful force; and persecuted
the Duke with unceasing terrors. Murmurs were heard in every part of Brittany:
they augmented every day: the soldiery felt a degree of horror in marching
under the banners of such a leader. The faults of the unhappy Prince were all
forgotten: his misfortunes were the melancholy theme of every tongue. The
detestable favorites of the Duke did not escape the vengeance of Heaven: most
of them came to a violent death. Arthur de Montauban, prosecuted by the
Constable, quitted Brittany, took the habit of the Celestines at Morcoussy, was
afterward Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and died of grief. Hingant was imprisoned
many years. Oliver du-Meel, John Rayart, Male-Tousche, La Chese, and Robert
Roussel, were beheaded, and their quartered bodies exposed on the highways.
-- No expressions can describe it. Francis perceiving his end approaching,
sent for his brother Peter of Brittany, and declared to him his will, in
presence of the principal Lords and officers of his household. He expired soon
after in the arms of the Cordelier, who had never quitted him. He often
pronounced before he died the name of his brother, whose pale and bloody
apparition he constantly imagined in his presence. Sometimes he conjured him to
grant his pardon; and often he would cast the odium of his guilt on the wicked
Courtiers that had misled him. By a codicil to his will, he ordered a
foundation to be established for the repose of the soul of Giles of Brittany,
at the Abbey of Boquien, where that Prince was interred. But ah! of what avail
was this slender reparation, the deplorable resource of guilt, and terror, and
superstition?

We may add, that however guilty Francis might be, his Courtiers were still
more so. These are the great criminals whom humanity can never pardon, and whom
posterity must hold in everlasting detestation. -- Men of letters have been
sometimes asked, "What moral can result from the relation of such an event?" --
Were this question to be now proposed, I would answer; "Can any moral be more
striking, awful, and irresistible, than that which this history contains?"

EDWARD AND MATILDA. A MORAL TALE.

EDWARD and MATILDA.
E'n love itself is bitterness of soul,
A pensive anguish pining at the heart;
Or, sunk to fordid interest, feels no more
That noble wish, that never-cloy'd desire,
Which, selfish joy disdaining, seeks alone
To bless the dearer object of it is flame.
THOMSON.
AT the age of twenty-two, Mrs. Falkland being left a widow, with an only
daughter, retired into the country, that she might devote her future life to
the education of her Matilda; an employ she was well qualified to undertake, as
she joined to the accomplished lady a well improved mind, and an elegant
understanding.

Under the tuition of such a mother, Matilda made a rapid progress in every
branch of useful and ornamental knowledge; but unhappily for her, Mrs. Falkland
was determined to raise the declining (...) of her family by a profitable
marriage.

The beauty and accomplishments of Matilda, who had now reached her seventeenth
year, were the topic of conversation among all the neighboring gentleman, and
many offered themselves as canditates for her affection. In this number was
Edward Stanley, the only son of a gentleman who lived near the mother of
Matilda. He possessed a fortune sufficiently above the reach of want; was
handsome in figure, and elegant in address. These however, were his least
important qualities -- his temper was open and generous; his mind well stored
with useful learning, and gifted with every virtue that dignifies the nature of
man. He had long admired Matilda. There seemed to be, in her, a mind above "the
level of the vulgar great." She had also been an attentive observer of Edward;
and discovered in him, a disposition, and education, much superior to that of
any other gentleman. Mr. Stanley was, what every country gentleman should be, a
man of real sense and sound morals. He had bestowed the greatest care in
educating his son, and had the abundant satisfaction to see the blessing of
Heaven attend his endeavor. He often admired the great understanding of Mrs.
Falkland, and the amiable character of her daughter; as persons possessed of
far more sense and accomplishments, than many to whom Providence had given
abundance of wealth, and bestowed greater means of improvement. He had
commenced an acquaintance with Mrs. Falkland and it was at these little
interviews the flam^ (...) love caught the heart of Edward. He was (...) longer
the same; the rose of health, which before bloomed in his countenance, forsook
his cheek; he was never happy, but in the company of Matilda. She saw the
anguish which distracted his heart, and often the tear of pity stole down her
check when conversing with him. But she knew her mother's determination; and
reflected that, by encouraging a hopeless attachment, she would only bring
misery on both. She revealed to her mother the situation of Edward; and
desired, as the only remedy, she might be sent to London, to try whether
absence would not obliterate her from his mind.

The departure of Matilda was carefully concealed from Edward. After waiting
three days, in hopes of seeing her, his anxiety could no longer be sustained.
He ventured to enquire whether she was gone; and could ill conceal his
agitation, at the information. "To London!" said he; "and when will she
return?" -- Not these two months," replied Mrs. Falkland. "Two months!"
exclaimed Edward, and rushed out of the room.

He begged of his father to let him go to London for a few days. Mr. Stanley
would have granted any thing else. "No, my dear Edward," said he; "I cannot
consent you should mix in those scenes of riot and dissipation with which that
city abounds, without a proper guide to steer your course. I intend shortly to
go thither myself, and you may accompany me." Edward thanked his father, with a
heavy heart; who never guessed the reason of his son's demand.

Matilda returned; and he embraced the earliest opportunity of paying his
respects. She received him with such indifference, as shot a dagger through his
heart. He parted from her nearly in a state of madness; sleep fled his pillow,
and he spent the night almost bordering on despair.

But the ensuing day fully explained the fatal cause of her behavior. An
elegant carriage, with four horses appeared at Mrs. Falkland's door,
accompanied with a proportionable number of attendants in splendid liveries.
Lord Oglethorpe was ushered in, as the lover of Matilda.

Edward scarcely believed what he saw. He took particular care to review his
lordship, as he entered his coach, and gave him a look of merited contempt: his
lordship was the very essence of a modern beau -- too fine to be a man.

During a month, Lord Oglethorpe paid the greatest attention to Matilda; he
then solicited her hand. Mrs. Falkland, elated to the very pinnacle of
imaginary bliss, would now hardly own acquaintance with Mr. Stanley; who
foresaw, with infinite concern, the ruin of her daughter. But all his friendly
cautions were treated with disdain.

At length, the day was fixed; (...) Matilda, by marrying a nobleman, would
(...) the height of her mother's ambition.

Edward had been diligent to gain every information concerning Lord Oglethorpe;
and the arrival of a gentleman from London, who came on a visit to his father,
afforded an opportunity.

Mr. Melville was the son of an eminent merchant in the city; a youth of a
virtuous mind, and liberal education: by him he learned, that his lordship
possessed a plentiful portion of riches; and this was all, for he had neither
understanding or virtue. Edward perceived, in the mind of Melville, a
congeniality of sentiments with his own, and determined to make him the friend
of his youth. He related to him the whole of his love for Matilda, and her
intended union with Lord Oglethorpe; then asked his advice concerning his
future conduct.

Mr. Melville advised him to go some distance from home, during the nuptials,
as the spectacle would be too painful for his feelings: but first to obtain an
interview with Matilda, and know how far her inclinations were in unison with
her intended marriage. If he should find it impossible to see her before he
departed, to write a letter, which he would engage she should receive.

Edward used every means in his power to gain admission to Matilda. Finding all
his efforts vain, he wrote the following letter -- I AM about to leave my
father's house, to avoid a sight of all others the most dreadful to me. What
can you think! Surely, the elegant mind of Matilda can never be dazzled by the
trappings (...) wealth and splendor! Can you ever esteem a man destitute of
every quality that adorns the human mind? or is it the false ambition of a
mother, who would barter her daughter's happiness for wealth, and a title? You
may never see me more! I have loved you tenderly. But, alas! who could behold
such a mind, such a form, and not fall a martyr to their charms! Let the tear
of pity solace him, who can never cease to love you.

EDWARD STANLEY.




He left this letter with his friend; who faithfully delivered it to Matilda,
the morning preceding her nuptials. The unauspicious morn now arrived, when
Matilda was to fall a victim to her mother's power. The ceremony was performed
by his lordship's chaplain, at her mother's house; after which, they departed
to a house belonging to a relation of Lord Oglethorpe's, some miles farther in
the country.

Three weeks passed, with all apparent happiness; when, one morning, his
lordship, promising a speedy return. A week had elapsed, in the greatest
anxiety, when Matilda received the following letter -- I WILL no longer keep
you in suspense -- You are not my wife! The person who performed the marriage
ceremony was not a clergyman, but hired to fulfill the office. I was astonished
that you could believe my intentions serious, or suppose a nobleman would marry
a girl whose only portion was her merit. The person at (...) house you are, is
no relation of mine. If (...) will consent to live with me a life of honor,
every advantage love and riches can afford are yours.

OGLETHORPE.




"O! what a wretch!" said she, after reading the letter; and sunk almost
lifeless on the floor. At this moment a servant entered the room, to inform her
that a gentleman wished to see her. The notice was scarcely delivered, when
Edward appeared. At the sight of him, she shrieked violently -- "Merciful
Father!" cried Edward, "what disaster is this!" She could make no reply, but
gave him the letter. Infamous villain! his life shall pay the debt of justice,
and revenge! -- Take particular care of that lady," said he, to the servants;
"I will reward you."

In a few hours she recovered, sufficiently to proceed to her mother's; but
waited at Mr Stanley's, while Edward unfolded the dreadful scene to Mrs.
Falkland. "Good God!" exclaimed her mother, "Matilda ruined! The crime is mine.
It was my miserable pride that has caused this; and the remaining days of life
will now be "few and evil!" But where is my unhappy daughter?" -- "Be
comforted," replied Edward; "she is at my father's. I will bring her
immediately."

The interview was too affecting for words to describe. "Generous youth," said
Matilda, your services I never can repay: if I had loved you as much as your
merit demanded, I had never seen this day!" -- "You must forget," said Edward,
"that there is such a wretch as your seducer in being; he will meet his
punishment."

When he returned home, he wrote as follows to Lord Oglethorpe -- BASE, and
unmanly wretch! think not that you shall triumph over seduced innocence; or
that your elevated rank in life, which only serves to make you more despicable,
shall secure you from the arm of justice. I command you to meet me next
Thursday, provided with a brace of pistols. The bearer will settle time and
place.

EDWARD STANLEY.




Lord Oglethorpe returned the following answer: Your challenge is accepted, tho
I despise the giver: but let this convince you, that I am not so unmanly as you
amagine.

OGLETHORPE.




Edward communicated his design to no one till the challenge was accepted; then
he informed Mr. Melville, that he should soon need an unequivocal proof of his
friendship.

Mr. Melville sincerely regretted the step he had taken; but, as it was now
past recalling, he consented to accompany him.

The Wednesday preceding the duel was spent in the company of his father and
Melville; and the tear started from his eye, probably, from the reflection,
that he might never see another day in the house of a father whom he tenderly
loved, but dared not acquaint with the impending danger.

On the Thursday morning he rose at five and remained adjusting his little
affairs till seven; about eight, he breakfasted with Matilda and her mother. He
appeared serene and cheerful in conversation; said he was going on a shooting
party into the country; and added, clasping the hand of Matilda -- "I will
bring you the laurels my skill may obtain." He took his farewell.

It was then that his conntenance assumed a mournful aspect. "I fear," said
Matilda, some accident should happen!" -- "If it be for your good," said
Edward, embracing her; "I shall not repine. This life is uncertain!" At these
words he parted; and proceeded, with Melville, to the place agreed on.

They arrived a little before Lord Oglethorpe, who was attended by a gentleman,
as his second, and two domestics. The ground being measured, it was agreed that
Edward should fire first. He advanced with a firm step, and serene countenance.
Lord Oglethorpe seemed much agitated. Edward discharged his pistol without any
effect; but the ball of his antagonist entered his body, and he fell. His
lordship mounted his horse; and fled, with his attendants, to the continent.

It was some time before Mr. Melville could procure assistance, to remove the
body of his friend, whose father he dreaded to meet.

The intelligence of his son's death had, however, reached his ear, before the
arrival of Mr. Melville; for Matilda had followed, soon after their departure,
and met the servants of Lord Oglethorpe, who informed her of Edward's unhappy
fate. She had just strength to arrive at her mother's, and relate the event to
her and Mr. Stanley, who endeavored to repress his grief at at the loss of
Edward. "These," said he, "are the mysterious dealings of Omnipotence toward
his creatures, and I must submit to his pleasure! -- Edward, in thee have I
lost a son, who was the ornament and delight of my years; but it is enough!
such is the will of God."

Mr. Melville arrived with the corpse of Edward. "Sir," said Mr. Stanley, "why
did you not inform me of my son's resolution? I shall never forget, though I
may forgive you."

In his room were found three letters; one to his father, begging forgiveness
for not acquainting him with the circumstance -- "And I hope," added he, "my
errors will be buried in my grave:" -- a second to his friend Melville,
thanking him for his kind assistance; -- and a third to Matilda, as follows --
Thursday Morning, 5 o'clock. DEAR MATILDA,
AFTER my death, you will receive this letter. That I have ever loved you
sincerely, the cause will, I think, put beyond doubt. There is, in my mind, a
strong foreboding that I shall fall a victim. I am content! It is for you, it
is in defense of injured virtue. Heaven sometimes permits, for ends human
reason cannot penetrate, the wicked to escape the punishment they merit in this
life. The time is drawing near, when I must part with you. I have resolved to
exercise all the composure I can: but, I fear, it will be too much. From me,
learn this truth -- that noble qualities are not confined to opulence, but
oftener thrive in the soil of sufficiency. Adieu! -- for ever!

EDWARD STANLEY.




The pressure of so many calamities was too great for the delicate frame of
Matilda. She is now lunatic, but not so as to occasion confinement. A beautiful
melancholy is seen in her countenance, and not an evening passes, but she
visits his tomb, and sheds the tear of love on his turf; but chiefly by the
pensive light of the moon, she will spend hours at his grave! sometimes singing
extemporaneous verses in the sweetest notes of wildness!

To see her at such a time, you would think her more than mortal. A deep
consumption has seized her mother; to which, it is thought, she must soon fall
a prey.

Mr. Stanley, with a resignation truly admirable, never repines at the
dispensations of Heaven, but is thankful for the mercies he has left. His house
is now the home of Matilda and her mother, and his time is employed in
procuring them every comfort in his power. As for the wretch, Oglethorpe, he
has at last fallen a victim to his licentiousness. A letter lately received by
Mr. Stanley, from a friend in Portugal, says -- "Lord Oglethorpe was stabbed, a
few nights since, by some hired assassins. An adulterous connection with the
wife of a Portuguese, was the occasion of this catastrophe." Thus we see, that
although wicked men may for a long time go unpunished, the arm of Justice will
seldom fail, sooner or later, to overtake them.

MIRANDA, OR THE DISCOVERY. A TALE.

MIRANDA, OR THE DISCOVERY.
CAPTAIN INGOLDSBY was a soldier of fortune; the younger son of a younger
branch of a great and respectable family; but his sword was his patrimony; and
having entered early into the profession of arms for a maintenance, he pursued
it with that enthsiuastic spirit of honor, which is dictated by the
considerations of family pride, the hope of fame, the dread of disgrace, and
the most ardent love of glory, and of his country.

He married, too, like a soldier: interest made no part of his composition. He
saw and admired his Emma; he formed an acquaintance with her; and found her
mind the counterpart of her person: young, handsome, and gallant, he met with
no difficulty in inspiring mutual regard, or in obtaining the consent of her
father, a venerable, respectable, unbeneficed clergyman.

Happiness is neither confined to fortune or condition: the amiable couple
loved, and love supplied all deficiencies. Love restrained the gaity of Mr.
Ingoldsby's disposition; and taught his amiable partner the prudence necessary
to regulate expenses, which were to be bounded by the pay of a lieutenant of
foot.

Nor did the increase of their family, (for Heaven blessed them with a female
infant within the first year after their marriage) add to their difficulties;
it served only to augment the attention of the father, and the circumspection
of the mother; and they rejoiced in the participation of their scanty
possessions, to the offspring of love, the pledge of the tenderest affection.

In the care and superintendance of their darling daughter, did their years
roll on in peaceable and humble content. If they heaved a sigh, it was for
their Miranda's future welfare, if they breathed a wish, it was to see her
placed in a situation which might guard her against the attacks of poverty, and
the designs of iniquity: from the former they were aware beauty and
accomplishments would prove no shield; and they trembled when they reflected,
that they might prove the most powerful incitements to the latter.

The sweets of life are not to be enjoyed without its accompanying
emb^^^^erments. These disquietudes were augmented by a circumstance as
unexpected as it was alarming: they were in a moment destined to be torn from
each other's arms; or to purchase a continuance of the joys they had
experienced in sixteen years society, by incurring an expense they were unable
to support, and risquing dangers and difficuties which female delicacy is
little calculated to encounter. The regiment in which Mr. Ingoldsby served,
received orders to embark for America in transports already prepared for their
reception.

On the communication of this intelligence, so subversive of their little plans
of economy and felicity, Mrs. Ingoldsby earnestly entreated, that she and her
daughter might be the companions of his voyage; she enumerated in the most
lively and affectionate terms, all the advantages that might be derived from
keeping their little family together; and she displayed, in all the eloquence
of feeling grief, the horrors that must await her and her daughter at the
moment of their separation. No arguments were necessary to convince him that
what he wished must be right; he folded his Emma and Miranda to his bosom; and
whilst he wept over the distresses to which all he held dear might be exposed,
a smile of approbation burst through the manly cloud, and he exulted in such a
wife and such a daughter. All the difficulties which the narrowness of their
finances suggested, were obviated by a thousand arrangements, the ingenious
devices of love; and the command of a company, which was conferred on Mr.
Ingolsby before the embarkation, relieved them from no other anxiety than what
concerned a future provision for their Miranda.

Few events, differing enough from the common occurences of life to be worth
recording, happened either in the course of their voyage, or on their arrival
at Boston: except that the assiduities of a young officer of another regiment,
who accompanied them in the same transport, seemed to have made some impression
on the heart of the gentle Miranda; who listened to tales of love, sanctioned
by the approbation of her parents, and sighed out her own confession in strains
of artless and irresistible harmony.

Mr. Monson was formed on the model which Capt. Ingoldsby had in idea fixed on
for the husband of his Miranda. His manners were as mild as his soul was brave:
he carried command in one hand, and affection in the other; and his orders were
obeyed with that mingled fear and love, with which inferiors in every station
look up to those who neither exert their powers in tyranny, nor suffer them to
fall into contempt by in prudent and ill-timed indulgence. To the
qualifications of a soldier he added those which most highly adorn private
life: he was lively, yet steady; generous, without profusion; and, if his
expenses ever exceeded the strictest limits of prudence, the excess might be
attributed to some acts of benevolence, to which his heart and his purse were
always equally open. Nor was his income limited: for he was the only son of a
gentleman of fortune, who had indulged his propensity to arms at the expense of
the most acute and agonizing sensations; and who, with a parental affection as
laudable as it is uncommon, subjected to no restrictions but in the choice of a
wife, and in this grand object of the happiness of his life, had only enjoined
him to consider birth, education, and virtue, as the most valuable possessions
she could bestow on him.

But both Captain Ingoldsby, and Mr. Monson were too regardful of decency and
propriety to hasten an event of so much importance, till the father of the
young gentleman had been acquainted with the attachment; and letters from Mr.
Ingoldsby and the lover were prepared to be dispatched by the first ships which
should sail for Europe: and the young soldier conquered his impatience, by the
suggestions of conscious dignity and rectitude in this discharge of his filial
duty.

But alas! these precautions were soon rendered fruitless, by events which
dissolved the bands of affection, rent asunder the ties of mutual love;
darkened the fairest prospects of future happiness, and involved in a gloom,
apparently everlasting, connubial joys, present and promised!

On that day, which will ever he marked with horror in the remembrances of
those who feel for their country; and which will never revolve without renewing
the most acute anguish in the bosoms of those whose fathers, husbands,
brothers, or relatives suffered in the dreadful conflict! that day, when the
attack of Bunker's Hill occasioned a carnage which thinned the British ranks,
and laid her heroes in the dust! Captain Ingoldsby, and Mr. Monson, stood
foremost in the bloody contest; accident had placed them in the same brigade,
and they sought and fell together; the body of the young officer being carried
of by the Americans, and the mortally wounded Captain conveyed to the
habitation of his wretched wife and daughter!

To attempt the description of such a scene, would require a pen inspired by
pity herself: let those who wish to paint it, figure to themselves a brave
officer, unstained by a single act in life which he could possibly recollect
with regret, expiring of wounds received in the service of his country; and
with all the dignity of virtue, administering consolation to the objects of his
latest affection! let them represent the wife sinking under the load of
accumulated woe, on the bosom of the dying possessor of her heart, and calling
back his fleeting spirits to guard her against giving way to the impulses of
grief, and the impressions of despair! let them pourtray youth, beauty, and
virtue, stabbed with a double blow; and bereft, in one moment of a father
unequalled in affection, of a lover unrivalled in fidelity, exclaiming by turns
for each, and with all the frenzy of inarticulate rage, arraigning the justice
of Heaven, and the villainy of man! And, if they desire to revel in all the
luxuries of woe, let them attend to the heart-piercing shriek, which announced
the departure of the brave, the regreted Ingoldsby.

We shall not follow the unfortunate mourners through the various progressions
of grief, from keen and piercing anguish, to silent and corroding melancholy:
in the last state, they embarked for England; after having received every
attention which the governor and garrison could offer, as a tribute to the
memory of the deceased, and to the virtues and excellencies of the survivors.

On their arrival in England, the case being made known to their benevolent
sovereign, they were soon relieved by his bounty from the apprehensions of
indigence; and on a pension granted to the mother, and continued to the
daughter in case of her death, they retired to a village very remote from the
metropolis, and rendered desirable to them by its being the residence of a
maiden (...) of Captain Ingoldsby, who possessed a considerable portion of the
virtues of her brother, and an affection for her niece which could only be
exceeded by that of her mother.

As the fortunes of this lady, though large enough to gratify her wishes, were
limited, she and the widow agreed to join their narrow incomes, and as Miranda
was their mutual care, so it was the earnest wish of the aunt, that she might
be accommodated at their mutual expense; and they entered on their little plan
with the most affectionate intentions of rendering it as agreeable and
comfortable to each other, as the nature of a situation, in which they each
felt, though in different degrees, the pangs of softened but unabated grief,
would admit.

But as no retirement will conceal the charms of beauty, nor any circle,
however confined, prevent the fame of accomplishments from spreading beyond its
limit; Mr. Maxwell, a neighboring gentleman of fortune and character, was soon
captivated with the reports of Miranda's excellencies, and as he was a widower
not much past the prime of life, and had yet an inclination again to wear the
silken chains of matrimony, he determined to visit the fair; and if he found
her worthy his heart, to offer his hand; an offer which be doubted not would be
accepted, as his person was far from being disagreeable, his manners polished
and elegant, his character unexceptionable, and his fortune very far above any
expectations which orphan indigence could form.

To a man of Mr. Maxwell's consequence, few excuses were necessary for a
liberty, which however improper among people of equal fortunes, custom has
unworthily commissioned the possessors of wealth to take, with those whole
situations in life are less eminently favored by the smiles of the blind and
undistinguishing goddess.

But Mr. Maxwell was not of a disposition to avail himself of this unmerited
superiority, he languished for a proper introduction, and suffered all the
pains of impatience till accident threw in his way the gratification of his
wishes. The house which the ladies inhabited was advertised for sale; and,
under pretense of an intention to purchase, he obtained permission, in
consequence of a proper request, to inspect it on a particular day, which at
his instance had been named by the fair tenants.

On that day, Mr. Maxwell hastened to the village, and in the earliest moment
that had been mentioned; he alighted at Mrs. Ingoldsby's door, not without the
most flattering expectations that the politeness of the ladies would prove
instrumental to the attachment of the only object he had in view.

Nor where his hopes disappointed; after he had viewed the house and gardens
with an air of an intended purchaser, the refreshment of tea was proposed to
him, and being accepted without hesitation, he was introduced to the fair, the
amiable, the still mourning Miranda.

Prepared by the universal voice to admire, love was the immediate consequence
of a visit, which he requested leave to repeat in terms with which civility
could not refuse to comply; and a very few days confirmed Mr. Maxwell the
ardent, and the professed lover of Miranda.

But her heart was still engaged, nor could she abandon even an hopeless
passion; she wished to indulge her regrets through life, and was averse to
every proposition which tended to turn the edge of her melancholy, and most to
those which offered a new object for the affections.

Yet the character, the fortune, the unobjectionable person of Mr. Maxwell,
were urged to her by her only friends, with such energy, but mildness of
persuasion, that, enforced by the declarations of her admirer, that he hoped
not to inspire her with love, but to engage her friendship, and opinion, that
in accepting the hand of a man advanced in years, she offered less violence to
her former engagement, than if she yielded to the solicitations of a young and
pleasing lover; she was prevailed on to promise Mr. Maxwell the accomplishment
of his wishes; and a day, at no very considerable distance, was named for the
completion of his happiness.

The necessary preparations now engaged the attention of Maxwell and the two
matron ladies; whilst Miranda, like a sacrifice adorned with garlands for the
altar, passively yielded to the assiduities of her friends, and suffered the
ornaments of her person, and the intended provisions of settlement, to be
adjusted, without interfering in the management, or participating in the result.

But, a very few mornings before the appointed day, when the intended nuptials
were to take place, as Miranda was at breakfast with her mother and aunt, a
servant put into her hands a letter, which being known by the superscription to
be from Mr. Maxwell, she immediately delivered it to Mrs. Ingoldsby, who, to
the utter astonishment of both her auditors, read aloud the contents of it as
follows: MADAM,
THAT your heart is not at all interested in the the intended event, you have
with that candor, which renders your character the object of universal
admiration, frequently acknowledged to me; you will not therefore even wish to
receive an apology for my releasing you from an unsuitable engagement: but as
my heart still holds you dear, and your virtues and beauties will ever possess
my mind with unalterable regard; so I think it my duty to explain to you the
motives by which I am influenced, in a conduct, which however censurable it may
appear in the public eye, will, I am persuaded, find a full justification in
your goodness of heart, and in the sensibility of your worthy relations.

My long lost son! my son, who I had for years resigned to Heaven, is restored
to me; and Providence, which has bestowed on me this consumate of happiness,
will not permit me to add to it a wish which concerns myself.

But I have another explanation to make, in which I am to bespeak your
forgiveness for an imposition, which however innocent with respect to myself, I
must (...) to have been rather improper with regard to you. My real name is not
Maxwell, which I assumed upon the supposed death of my son, when I retired from
my usual place of residence, in a distant part of the kingdom to avoid the
importunities of some worthless and disagreeable relations; and this secret I
entrusted to only one friend in the metropolis, from whom my son procured
directions to his concealed and almost forgotten father.

It is at the particular instance of this son, that I take the liberty to
enclose an order on my banker for three thousand pounds, which I entreat you to
accept as a small tribute of my gratitude, for your intended goodness to him;
who, till he has the honor to disclose to you in person his real name, begs
leave to subscribe himself, Madam,

Your most devoted, obliged, and Obedient servant, J. MAXWELL.
P. S. Let me entreat you to suffer me to introduce my son to you in the course
of our morning's ride.






Before the three could recover from the surprise which this extraordinary
epistle had occasioned, the arrival of Mr Maxwell and another gentleman was
announced: and the former entered the room, he presented his son to Miranda*
who, having uttered the words* "Mr. Monson!" fell motionless into the arms of
his father.

The conclusion of the story is obvious. He who held the welfare of his son in
higher estimation than his own happiness, could have no objection to a match
which heaven itself had ordained: and where worth, honor, beauty, virtue, and
fortune, are united, happiness must be the sure, the constant attendant.

CHARIESSA, OR A PATTERN FOR HER SEX. By Mr. HAYLEY.

CHARIESSA
CHARIESSA was the youngest child of a worthy and active gentleman, who, though
his name had a place in the will of a very opulent father, suffered many
hardships, in the early part of his life, from tne scantiness of his patrimony.
His father was infected with that rediculous, or rather detestable, pride, by
which many persons are tempted to leave their younger children in absolute
indigence, from the vain and absurd prospect of aggrandizing an eldest son; a
project which was suggested to the old gentleman we are speaking of by his
discovery of a genealogical table, which unluckily enabled him to trace his
progenitors to the reign of Edward the Fourth, when it appeaaed that one of his
ancestors was high sheriff for the county in which he resided.

As the father of Chariessa had keenly felt all the evils arising from an
unjust distribution of property, he (...) to leave whatever fortune he might
himself acquire, in equal proportions among his children. From a very fortunate
marriage, and much unexpected success in life, he was enabled, at his decease,
to leave to his son, and to each of his daughters, a portion equivalent to
sixteen thousand pounds.

The son had been educated in one of the first merchantile houses in London;
and, at the time of his father's death, was just returned from a tour to the
continent, where he had been engaged in fixing his future correspondencies,
before he settled as a merchant.

He had passed some few years in trade, when his uncle the eldest brother of
his father, died without issue, and left him the family estate, on the
condition of his quitting commerce entirely, and residing at the ancient seat
of the Trackums. He obeyed the injunction of the will, and retired into the
country with his wife; who, tho a celebrated beauty, was a lady of infinite
discretion, and distinguished through life by the most prudent attention to a
numerous family.

Squire Trackum, as we shall now call him, changed his manners with his place
of abode; and quitted the grave address of the important merchant, to assume
the boistrous jocularity of the Esquires that surrounded him. In a short time
he was so completely metamorphosed, that, in his first visit to town, he
greatly astonished and entertained his old acquaintance of the city; but his
real character remained the ^^me.

He now concealed, under the mask of rustic jovialty, that uncommon share of
worldly wisdom, which he formerly hid under the mantle of serious and solemn
frankness: he even carried into the field of rural sport that incessant
attention to interest which he used to exert upon Change; and, in the very
moment when he was galloping after a hare, would calculate the chances of
settling a daughter in marriage, or letting a farm to advantage. In one
unguarded moment of real frankness, when he was warmed by the bottle, he
boasted, to an intimate friend, that he never passed ten minutes in the company
of any man, without considering how he might derive some degree of pecuniary or
interested advantage from his acquaintance.

Before the squire assumed his rural character, Erinnis, the eldest of his two
sisters, had married a gentleman of a distant county, who was respected as the
descendant of an ancient family, and the possessor of a large estate.

The unmarried Chariessa, whose temper, suitable to her pleasing, elegant
person, was sprightly, generous, and unsuspecting, conceived a most lively
attachment to the wife and children of her brother, whom she always regarded
with such affectionate confidence, that she suffered herself to be guided, in
all important points, by his judgment and advice.

The provident ^^^ire, considering that a rich maiden aunt is an amiable prop
to the younger branches of a very fruitful house, had very early determined
within himself, that his sister, Chariessa, should pass her life in single
blessedness; and he doubted not but that he had sufficient address to confirm
her an old maid, by the artful device of perpetually expressing the most
friendly solicitude for her marrying to advantage. He had persuaded her, on his
leaving London, to choose for her residence a provincial town, in the
neighborhood of Trackum Hall; and by thus securing her within the reach of his
constant observation, and studying to increase the influence which he had
already acquired over her frank and affectionate spirit, he took the most
effectual precaution for accomplishing his wishes. As Chariessa was in that
rank of life, in which matrimonial approaches are made rather in a slow and
ceremonious, than a rapid and ardent manner, the watchful squire had sufficient
time and opportunity to counteract the attempt of every man whom he found
guilty, or whom he suspected, of a design on the heart and hand of this devoted
vestal.

By inducing his innocent sister to believe, that he most heartily wished to
see her well married; and by persuading her, at the same time, to think highly
of his penetration into the real characters of men -- he brought the good and
credulous Chariessa to see all her lovers exactly in that unfavorable point of
view, in which his own interest and artifice contrived to show th^^. In
consequence of her affectionate reliance (...) assiduous counsel, she
absolutely rejected the overtures of three gentlemen, who were generally
esteemed unexceptionable; but the friendly zeal of the vigilant squire had
discovered that they were all utterly unworthy of so excellent a creature as
Chariessa.

The mean designs of self interest are frequently punished with the heavy tax
of solicitude, concerning the many dangers to which they are commonly exposed.
It happened thus with our prudent and successful squire. He triumphed, indeed,
by putting every suitor to flight, while Chariessa resided within the reach of
his indefatigable attention; but then were periods, in which he was tormented
by the restless apprehension of losing all the fruits of his ungenerous labor.

Attached as she was to the person and family of her brother, Chariessa did not
cease to love or to visit her sister Erinnis; and she resolved to pass the
summer of every third year at the house of that lady, who was settled in a very
distant part of the kingdom. Erinnis was one of those extraordinary women, whom
nature, in a fit of perversity, now and then produces, apparently for no
purpose but that of proving a burden to themselves, and a torment to all around
them. Erinnis had possessed, like her sister, youth and beauty, opulence and
understanding; but she possessed them only to show that, valuable as these
endowments are, they are utterly insufficient to secure happiness or esteem,
without the noble blessings of a ^^^^volent heart and a regulated mind. She was
^^rly married to Sir Gregory Gourd, a placid and honest baronet, who, in rather
an advanced season of life, had united himself to this young lady, by the
advice of his relations, for the two following purposes: first, to pay off an
encumbrance on his ancient estate with a part of her ample dower; and,
secondly, to provide a male heir to that honorable house, whose antiquity he
contemplated with a complacent and inoffensive pride. The luckless knight was
doubly disappointed in these his two favorite projects. As to the first,
indeed, he paid off a mortgage; but soon found himself involved, by the
profusion of his wife, in much heavier debts. As to his second hope, whether he
had entered too far into the vale of years to be gratified in such an
expectation; or whether nature, who had certainly given no maternal tenderness
to the temper of Erinnis, had therefore wisely determined that she should never
be a mother, I will not pretend to decide; but certain it is, that, vehemently
as she panted for this event, Erinnis had never any near prospect of producing
a child. This disappointment, from what cause soever it might proceed, had such
an incessant tendency to inflame the natural contemptuous malignity of her
spirit, and she insulted the poor submissive old knight with every humiliating
outrage which an imperious wife can inflict on a terrified and unresisting
husband.

Her passions, naturally vehement and acrimonious were inflamed into fits of
frenzy by her wishes in this point being disappointed* but, in the moments of
her most intempe^^^^ absurdity and extravagance* she constantly retained a
considerable portion of hypocritical cunning; and, however insolent and
injurious in her treatment of all her other relations, she for ever expressed,
though in a disgusting manner, the fondest affection for her sister Chariessa.
This affection was partly real, and partly pretended. There was, indeed, so
engaging, so pure, so sublime a spirit of indulgent benevolence, in the
character of Chariessa, that it could not fail to inspire even malignity and
madness with some portion either of love or respect. But this passionate
attachment of Erinnis to her sister arose chiefly from a mercenary motive.

Though Chariessa was, in general, blessed with good health and good spirits,
she was frequently subject to certain feverish attacks, in which her life was
supposed to be in danger; and Erinnis, who had squandered enormous sums in the
public display of much awkward magnificence, and in many private articles of
expense, was grown so needy and rapacious, that she looked forward, with all
the eagerness of avarice, to the several thousand pounds which she was sure of
gaining if the good angel Chariessa took her flight to Heaven. In her most
stupifying fits of intoxication, and in her most furious sallies of ill-humor,
she never lost sight of this expected legacy. Chariessa, whose pure and
generous mind could hardly have been induced to believe that such an idea ever
entered into any human breast, not only never suspected the profuse professions
of this pretended love, but gave a very singular and touching proof of the
genuine sisterly affection and confidence with which her own heart was
inspired. It happened that she was attacked by a very dangerous fever, at the
house of Erinnis. After many days confinement to her bed, being alone with her
physician, she said to him, in a very calm and unembarrassed manner -- "Pray,
Sir, tell me very frankly, do you think I shall die?" As her distemper had just
taken a favorable turn, the doctor very cheerfully replied -- "No, indeed, my
good Madam." Upon which she exclaimed, in a very affectionate tone -- "I am
glad of it, for the sake of my dear sister!" Nor was this the exclamation of a
feeble mind, afraid of death, and disguising that fear under the mask of
affection.

Chariessa was a genuine Christian, who, having weighed both this world and the
next in the balance of reason and of faith, was at all times perfectly prepared
for her natural dissolution. Her exclamation was the dictate of a most generous
and disinterested tenderness. She had seen the artful Erinnis counterfeit such
inordinate sorrow during the course of her malady, and she so fondly believed
the truth of that well-dissembled affection, that, totally free from every
selfish idea, the innocent Chariessa considered only the joy with which she
supposed her sister would contemplate her unexpected recovery.

Though her own affectionate and unsuspecting temper made her receive with an
amiable credulity, all the lavish endearments of Erinnis, Chariessa was very
far from being blind to the many glaring faults of her turbulent sister; but
she generously found an excuse for them, which converted them at once into
objects of the tenderest compassion. She persuaded herself, that the sallow and
ferocious appearance, in the altered countenance of Erinnis, proceeded entirely
from a disease in her liver; and that all the furious perversities of her
temper were owing either to the internal pain of this cruel disorder, or to the
medicines which she was tempted to try.

Under the influence of this kind idea, she most assiduously labored, not only
to apologize for the offensive irregularities in the conduct and manners of
Erinnis, but to counteract, to the utmost of her power, all the mischievous
effects of her capricious and vindictive ill-humour. She raised and comforted
the poor knight, whenever she saw him reduced to a painful state of humiliation
by the frantic insolence of his wife; she consoled and rewarded the innocent
and unfortunate domestics, whenever she found them stripped and discarded by
their turbulent and offended mistress; in short, she endeavored to maintain a
degree of order, justice, and decency, throughout a numerous household, under
the chaotic dominion of a malevolent, intoxicated fury: and whoever has seen
her in this trying situation, has seen a perfect image of Charity; "believing
all things, hoping all things, enduring all things."

Although the peaceable and cheerful spirit of Chariessa could find but little
pleasure in a house like that of Erinnis, a compassionate affection to her
sister made her very exact in her stated visits: their duration always extended
to six months, and sometimes amounted to seven; a circumstance which did not
fail to increase the tormenting fears of her distant brother Trackum, who
always contemplated the return of Chariessa into his neighborhood with that
sort of satisfaction which is felt by the tamer of a bird, on seeing it, after
fluttering to the limits of an extensive chamber, return, in an easy and
voluntary manner, to the open door of its cage.

Chariessa, however, was very far from feeling any degree of constraint: she
departed on many of these distant visits, and returned as often to her own
mansion, without once suspecting the inquietude which her long absence never
failed to excite. Indeed, the fearful squire might have saved himself the pain
of many teazing doubts, and many private perplexing enquiries, had he been
capable of forming a just estimate of the heart and mind of Chariessa: but
this, indeed, he was not; and though he knew that the magnificent but lonely
habitation of Erinnis was as much avoided as the den of a savage, yet he
trembled at the idea of the lovers that the unguarded Chariessa might meet in
that pompous solitude. He was assured, that a rustic apothecary, and a more
rustic divine, were the only frequent visitors at this dreary castle; but, as
he had no confidence in female delicacy or discretion, and as he found that the
man of physic and the man of God were both single men, and that each would have
many opportunities of being alone with Chariessa, he greatly feared that she
and her fortune might fall a sacrifice to one or the other of these formidable
assailants. This groundless terror, instead of being diminished by time,
increased with the increasing age of Chariessa. The squire was very coarse in
his idea of old maids: he concluded, that no virgin turned of forty, and left
entirely to her own discretion, could resist any matrimonial offer whatever;
and, as his sister had reached that decisive period on her last visit to
Erinnis, his spirits were not a little depressed by his despair of her return
in that state of vestal purity which he had so zealously wished her to
maintain. At length, however, his apprehensions were effectually terminated by
an event which, though much more probable than the dreaded marriage of
Chariessa, was not so stongly anticipated by the imagination of the distant
squire. This event was the death of Erinnis; who, having utterly worn out a
good constitution by the most absurd and disgraceful intemperance, died, as she
had lived, in magnificent misery.

The tender Chariessa paid the last office of affection to her unworthy sister;
and returned in a calm and pious state of mind from the abode of joyless
grandeur, whose vanity was now most completely shown, to her own peaceful and
comfortable mansion. Her disposition was still remarkably cheerful; and she
took too kind and too virtuous an interest in the general happiness of the
living, to think affected sorrow a proper compliment to the dead. She had too
clearly seen all the various infelicity of Erinnis, not to consider her release
as a blessed event; and it pleased Heaven to reward the long and indulgent
attention which she had paid to the bodily and mental infirmities of that
unhappy relation with many years undisturbed tranquilities to contemplate her
interesting character at this season of her life; and, as I believe her to have
been, for several years, one of the happiest of mortals, I shall enlarge on the
particular circumstances which constituted that happiness, and minutely examine
that invaluable cast of mind which enabled her to gain and to secure the rarest
and most precarious of all human possessions. -- Chariessa was about forty-two
when she returned to a constant residence in her own quiet and comfortable
mansion. She was naturally fond of society; and her easy fortune enabled her to
enjoy it in that temperate and rational manner which suited her inclination.
Having made many just remarks on the different conditions of female life, she
was perfectly convinced, that she had great reason to be satisfied with her own
single state; and no incidents arose that could make her wish to change it. Her
patrimonial fortune had been much increased by some considerable legacies; and
she enjoyed an income which by her prudent regulation of it, not only supplied
her with all the usual comforts of affluence, but furnished her with the
exalted pleasure of conferring happiness on a selected number of industrious
poor. She had a spacious and cheerful house, that peculiarly pleased her own
fancy; and a set of intelligent and good-humored domestics, who were attached,
more by affection than interest, to her person; and the neighboring seat of her
brother afforded her a young flourishing family, whom she frequently surveyed
with all the tender delight of an affectionate parent.

Such were the external circumstances that contributed to form the happiness of
Chariessa; circumstances, indeed, highly desirable in themselves, yet utterly
insufficient to make a woman happy, without those noble internal blessings
which were the true riches of Chariessa. She possessed, in the most eminent
degree, a cheerful simplicity of heart, inexhaustible benevolence, and
unaffected piety. It was by the constant, yet modest exercise of these
admirable qualities, that Chariessa secured to herself, not only more felicity,
but even more public regard and attention, than was obtained by some single
ladies of her neighborhood, who were undoubtedly her superiors in the
attractive endowments of beauty, opulence, and wit. Chariessa, perhaps was
never known in her life to utter a witty repartee; but such is the lively
influence of genuine goodnature, that her conversation never failed to
delight, and her house was frequented as the abode or benevolent vivacity.
Though she had passed the gay period of youth, and never affected to disguise
her age, she took a particular satisfaction in promoting the innocent
amusements of the young: indeed, she was a general friend to every season and
every rank of life; even the common acquaintance of Chariessa, if they had any
occasion to wish for her assistance, were sure of finding her, without
solicitation, a zealous promoter of their prosperity and pleasure.

There was a period in her life, at which some of her uncandid neighbors
conjectured, that the subtle vice of avarice was beginning to infect her; she
suddenly parted with her chariot, and reduced her establishment, without
assigning her reasons for a conduct so surprising. In a few years she resumed
her equipage, and recommenced her usual style of living, with as much, or
rather more splendor than ever.

This still more engaged the attention of the neighborhood; and the very people
who, on the former alteration, had accused her of avarice, now exclaimed, that
she was either seized with the frenzy of extravagance, or was endeavoring to
allure a husband. It was, however, proclaimed upon her death, by the worthy
family of a deceased merchant, that, under the promise of the most absolute
secresy, she had allotted to his assitance, during the years of the
abovementioned retrenchment, a full moiety of her income; by which generous
exertion she had supported him through the most cruel and undeserved
distresses, enabled him to retrieve his circumstances, and preserve his family
from impending ruin.

Though her spirits were naturally quick, and her affections strong, I never
heard an instance of her being at any time of her life betrayed into an
uncanded animosity. The town in which she resided was frequently distracted by
ecclesiastical and parliamentary contentions. In those uncharitable struggles
for power, the relations of Chariessa were often hotly engaged. Her
affectionate heart never failed, indeed, to take a lively interest in all their
pursuits; but she never ridiculed or vilified their opponents with those eager
and illiberal invectives which have been known to flow, upon such exasperating
occasions, from the lips of many a quiet spinster, and of many a sober matron.
The enmity of Chariessa was as generous as her friendship; and, when ever she
heard such petty abusive tales, as are basely fabricated in every popular
contest, for the purpose of the hour, although they favored her own party, she
would discountenance that circulation, or expose their absurdity. Nor was this
liberality of conduct without its reward: Chariessa had the satisfaction of
perceiving, th^^ she conciliated to herself the perfect respect and (...) will
of the most opposite contending characters. Perhaps their never lived a human
being so fairly and fully possessed of general esteem; and, to a mind truly
amiable, there can hardly be a state of earthly enjoyment superior to what
arises from incessant and open proofs of being universally beloved. Having
possessed for many years this tranquil and pure delight, the tender Chariessa
began to sink under natural infirmity. She sustained a short but severe illness
with exemplary composure: and, in the close of (...) ^ith that calm and
cheerful devotion which had distinguished her life, she resigned her benevolent
spirit to the Great Parent of benevolence.

The influence of her virtue was far from ceasing with her mortal existence;
though twelve years have now elapsed since the decease of this admirable woman,
her excellent qualities are still fresh in the memory of all who had the
happiness of her acquaintance; and they hardly ever pass the house in which she
resided, without bestowing a sigh of regret, or a sentence of praise, on the
merits of Chariessa.

LEONTINE, OR THE IMPIETY OF MURMURING AGAINST PROVIDENCE.

LEONTINE.
THE murmurs of mankind against the degrees of Omnipotence are as unjust as
they are impious. Resignation to the will of his Creator in the duty of every
human being, who by presuming to censure the unequal distribution of good and
evil in this world, discovers a weak head, or a depraved heart; sometimes both.

Short sighted as we are, how childish are our complaints, how absurd are our
repinings! repinings and complaints into which we surely should never fall, did
we seriously reflect on the infinite and amazing vicissitudes in human affairs,
did we consider that the severest afflictions, according to our hasty
apprehensions, are often eventually the most substantial blessings.

Against the degrees of Omnipotence I once murmured myself. The unequal
distribution of good and evil in this world, I once censured -- I repined at
the sight of beings in a more prosperous situation, and complained of my own
hard fate in the bitterest terms. I am now in another, in a better frame of
mind, and sincerely hoping that many of my discontented fellow creatures may be
rendered otherwise by reading the following narrative, written with the pen of
experience, I beg the favor of you to give it a passport to the public.

I was born to the inheritance of a small paternal estate, the income arising
from which would, in this age of luxury and dissipation, be reckoned a trifling
one. Little, however, as it was I could not hope to see it increased as I was
not, being an only and a fondled child, with a tender constitution, bred up to
any business, though I received a very good education.

Having lost my father and mother as soon as my education was finished, I could
not help thinking that what had served us all three, would undoubtedly, be
sufficient for me alone; especially as I looked upon my orphan situation in a
desponding light, and had no desire to live in an expensive manner.

So violent was my grief, so deep was my affliction, on being deprived of my
parents, that I gave myself up to despair, and accused heaven of cruelty for
snatching them away from me instead of being thankful for having enjoyed them
so long. Time however, and the tenderness with which the gentleman whom my
father had appointed to be my guardian, treated me, alleviated my sorrow -- My
friendship too for that gentleman's son, who was remarkably formed to please,
who was as amiable in my eyes, as he was agreeable, and who professed the
sincerest esteem for me, not a little contributed to its alleviation.

The happiness which I enjoyed with my young friend was excessive, and I
thought that nothing could make any addition to it: but while I was pluming
myself on my peculiar felicity, and depending upon its continuance, I was
extremely disappointed; for the most esteemed companion of my heart was obliged
to make a voyage to Lisbon, his father's affairs rendering his presence at that
place absolutely necessary.

During his absence, which affected me greatly, I became acquainted with one of
the most amiable girls in the world; and soon fell so desperately in love with
her, that I had no rest night or day, because I had reason to believe that her
father would think my fortune too small; and that he would expect a more
advantageous match for a girl with her person and accomplishments -- Then --
then I wished, more ardently wished, that I had been thrown in a way to improve
my patrimony, and to make it more worthy of the acceptance of the only woman
with whom I could be happy: without whom, indeed, I should be actually wretched.

I had been fortunate enough, as I thought, to find several opportunities to
make my address to the lady; but the dread of being rejected by him, who had
alone a right to dispose of her, kept me for a considerable time in a state of
the most racking uncertainty; and I was weak enough to affront the memory of my
once beloved and reverend parents by accusing them of having been cruelly
inattentive to my future welfare -- "Had I been brought up to business, I might
have enabled, perhaps, to offer myself to this adorable creature, without
fearing a refusal either from her or her father!"

I was not, indeed, too far advanced in life to settle to business; but love
engaged my thoughts so much, and forbade me also to embark my little all on a
precarious bottom, that, instead of endeavoring to increase my income by
industry, I abandoned myself to despair.

Despair, at length, drove me to ask the father of my Maria for his consent.

I was as I feared I should be, repulsed with a peremptory denial.

This was a finishing stroke; I could not support it -- I murmured at
Providence for not having given me the exact sum I wanted, fretted myself ill,
and was soon pronounced to be in danger.

My guardian and his family, who had ever behaved in the tenderest manner to
me, well knowing the cause of my disorder, informed Maria of my situation.

She, who had never been averse to me, on being acquainted with it, flew to her
father and with tears in her eyes, entreated him to let her come and see me.

Moved by her sorrow, he complied with her request; but he was so much more
affected, at her return, by the account she gave of my indisposition, that he
consented to our union.

Our marriage was to be solemnized as soon as my health was restored; and I
believed myself to be the happiest of men.

My wife's fortune was but little, if at all superior to mine. Her parents,
however, reckoning upon her person and accomplishments, had higher views for
her, and had flattered themselves that she would be raised considerably by her
exexternal attractions cooperating with her intrinsic merit: they were
consequently, at first, rather chagrined to see their schemes defeated; but
finding that she was satisfied with her lot, and that I continued extravagantly
fond of her, they also became more contented.

In a short time after our marriage, her grandfather died, and left her only
five thousand pounds; but, at the same time, ordered five thousand more to be
paid on the birth of a son; and in case of our having only girls to be made
over to another branch of the family.

This unkind, this unjust procedure, rouzed my sentiments, and I insulted the
memory of the deceased old gentleman with the keenest invectives -- I ought to
have been thankful for his having remembered us at all, as he had a large
family, who wanted what he had bequeathed to us more than we did.

We were now perpetually wishing, and wishing with anxiety, to have a boy, to
bring so good a legacy home to us; but heaven, justly offended, no doubt, at
our unreasonable disquietude, sent us only a female, who was to me, in
particular very disgusting merely as a female; and her mother was so much
displeased with her sex as to deny it nourishment from her own breast. The poor
child, though as fine a one as ever was born, was turned out of the house at
the tenderest age, not only to partake of the rude accommodations and homely
fare of one of the lowest cottagers, but to run the risque of imbibing, with
the milk of a stranger, all the ill-blood and ill-humors with which that
stranger might be filled. -- Thus did we throw away a treasure, of which we
were not capable of estimating the value.

My wife, not finding herself breeding again, soon began to take a fancy to a
different style of living -- She had hitherto been satisfied with privacy, and
paid a proper regard to domestic economy, as we were by no means in splendid
circumstances; but her disappointment arising from the birth of her daughter,
had made a change in her temper; and the society of some gay people of her own
sex, with whom she struck up an acquaintance, at first, in order to dissipate
her uneasiness, inspired her with too strong a passion for pleasure -- Yet was
not my fondness in the least abated by her new propensities. -- I still doated
on her, and indulged her in the gratification of her heart's every wish. Just
about this time I received a great deal of pleasure, pleasure very little
expected, from my friend Theodore's return from Lisbon: his arrival gave me the
greater delight, as I had flattered myself that he would, as a sincere friend,
enjoy by the force of sympathy, the happiness which I felt in my lovely Maria's
company.

I flew to him, therefore, immediately, and presented him to my wife with the
highest encomiums on each other, which, indeed, they both deserved, and which
they both soon felt, neither proceeded from the extravagance of love, or the
romantic ardour of friendship. -- Few men were more agreeable than Theodore;
few women more amiable than Maria.

I now began almost to forget my late disappointment in the arms of my wife,
and in the conversation of my friend, between whom I spent all my happy hours
-- My felicity was, in truth, so complete, that I even thought not of the
diminution of our fortune. -- My felicity, however, -- (how can we expect
permament felicity here?) was soon interrupted. -- My wife fell sick of a fever
-- In a few days afterward she was declared to be hastening to her
dissolution, and in a few more expired in my arms.

It is impossible to describe the agonies which my soul endured when I beheld
the woman whom I had ever loved to distraction stretched out before me a
lifeless corpse -- I behaved like a madman, and, in the height of my frenzy
dared, impiously dared, to accuse the Almighty of having given her to me only
to make me a thousand times more miserable than I should have been, if I had
never known her, by an early separation. I stamped -- I tore my hair -- I
committed innumerable irregularities. When I grew somewhat less disturbed, I
sunk into a sullenness which nothing could remove.

Soon after the death of my wife, my friend Theodore was obliged to settle
abroad -- His departure occasioned new murmurings, new impieties.

There was now but one object left to attract my attention; that object was my
little girl, against whom, from her birth, my bosom was steeled.

Maria now had just entered into her fourth year; but having been shamefully
neglected both by her mother and me, had contracted a great many low ways,
under the tuition of her vulgar nurse. I went to see her -- but O, sharp
reproach for having so long stifled parental affection in my bosom -- she
screamed at the sight of me -- I was, indeed, a stranger.

Pitying the poor child's situation, I took her home: however, as I gave myself
no trouble about her education, she only exchanged as she grew up, the coarse
dialect of the nurse, for the pert language of the chambermaid -- Forced by
recollection to dwell on the losses I had sustained, certain of never seeing my
beloved wife again, and doubtful with regard to the reappearance of my friend,
I sat either stupefied with sorrow, or raving with despair; unmindful of my
mouldering fortune; unmindful of my injured daughter.

One day the maid came into my room telling me, that Miss was cutting her
double teeth, and was very ill, adding, that she wished I would give her an
anodyne necklace, which she knew her mistress had in her cabinet.

On being thus unnecessarily, I thought, reminded of my wife, I was thrown into
a violent rage and in the first transports of my passion, severely reprimanded
the maid for her officiousness; but passing soon afterward through a room in
which the young Maria lay on her lap in extreme pain, I was struck with the
resemblance between her and her late lovely mother, a little while before she
expired.

A sigh, which I could not suppress, heaved my bosom; and as I hung over the
innocent, the tears of paternal sensibility rushed from my eyes, and rushed
down her pallid face. -- I then hastened to the cabinet to search for the
necklace, or any thing that might probably relieve her.

In turning over several papers, which were intermixed with my dear Maria's
trinkets, I recognized the hand of Theodore.

Astonished beyond expression at so unexpected a sight, I opened the letter
with precipitation, and read it with horror -- I was stabbed with the perusal
of it -- Every word planted a dagger in my heart -- It was -- Oh, heaven! I
still tremble at the recollection of it -- a letter from Theodore, the man whom
I believed to be my firmest, sincerest friend, to Maria, to my wife who doated
on me, I also believed, as fondly as I did on her -- After having thanked her
for the great regard which she had discovered for him, he thus proceeded --
"You need not be in the least afraid of your husband's suspicions, for I do not
know upon the face of the earth a man who has a stronger confidence in any
person than he has both in you and me; nor is there a man in the world, in my
opinion, more easy to be duped."

This heartbreaking discovery made me quite furious -- I now exclaimed against
Providence in the most daring and irreverent terms, for having suffered me to
be so deceived, and despised; so grossly imposed upon, and injuriously treated.
I declared with much vehemence that no human being had ever been so cruelly
used, and swore in tremendous accents that no man should so use me with
impunity.

Could I have reached Theodore in those moments of madness, when I smarted with
resentment, and breathed nothing but revenge, I should have certainly murdered
him; but luckily he was at a distance, and I had leisure to grow cool -- My
rage gradually subsided; but the misery I felt by reflecting on the undeserved
treatment which I had received from two persons the dearest to me in the world,
threw me into a violent fever.

From that fever, I, with great difficulty, recovered, and sunk into a
dejection which almost rendered me incapable of doing any thing. I neglected my
affairs -- life became burdensome to me -- all the efforts of my acquaintance
to raise my spirits, and to put me in humor with existence, were ineffectual --
I at last grew so disgusted with society, that I only admitted the visits of
the old gentleman, who was a man of exceeding good sense, and irreproachable
morals. By his frequent visits I found myself by degrees less and less
embarrassed in his company; and at last I grew so unguarded, that I made a
discovery of the true cause of my melancholy, which I had till then concealed
from every living creature.

No sooner was he acquainted with the source of my sorrow, than he told me that
I was in his opinion, very deservedly punished -- "Learn henceforward," said
he, "to submit without the least murmuring to the will of the Supreme; for you
may be assured, that every thing in this world is ordered by unerring wisdom;
and that we poor, imperfect beings, know not what is best for us. You thought
yourself the most miserable of men when you lost your wife; but had she lived,
what torments would you have endured! you would have seen her prefer your
friend to yourself: you would have known that she had been guilty of a very
atrocious crime, and the continued sight of her would have doubled your concern
as well as your aversion. -- Had you been divorced or only separated from her,
the talk occasioned by it, and the apprehensions with regard to your meeting
somewhere, might have produced the most painful sensations in your breast.
Besides, with what propriety could your daughter have been educated under the
eye of a mother who had violated her conjugal vows; and how severely must she
have been shocked at the idea of a woman whom she could not, without being
scandalized at her conduct, acknowledged as a parent! You, ought, therefore,
fervently to offer up praises to heaven for having delivered you from so much
unhappiness by the death of your wife: and not with less fervency ought you to
pour out your thanksgivings for the absence of your friend -- Had your friend
been within your reach at the time when you discovered the treachery, you would
have, it is highly probably, challenged him in the heat of your resentment. You
might by so doing, either have been answerable for his death as a murderer, or
have been sent yourself, unprepared and loaded with guilt, into the awful
presence of Him, who has expressly prohibited revenge in these emphatical
words: Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. Look up, therefore, with
devotion and with gratitude to that Being, who is as merciful as he is
almighty; think, seriously think, how unworty you have been of his
interposition in your favor; and may you be always ready to say, for the
future, on the most trying occasions, Thy will be done, without feeling your
heart at variance with your lips."

I was struck with the good sense and piety uttered by my valuable neighbor,
who had taken the most efficacious measures to restore the tranquillity of my
mind by setting things before me in a proper light, and by endeavoring to make
me sensible, that under the pressure of any misfortunes whatever, a thorough
submission to the dispensations of Providence is as much our interest as it is
our duty.

I now began to reproach myself severely for having behaved in so unbecoming,
so unjustifiable a manner; and tried to atone for my past ill conduct, by
making myself as well satisfied as the situation of my affairs, which had been
considerably injured by the extravagance of my wife, in consequence of her
immoderate love of pleasure, would suffer me to be. -- Yet still I could not
bring myself to behold my little daughter with the eyes of an affectionate
parent -- I repined continually because my child was not a son, as I should
have had, during the minority of a son, the management of five thousand pounds,
which would have been of the greatest service to me. Setting aside her having
been estranged from me for so long a time, Maria had none of those whinings,
fond yearnings after me, which children generally have who are trained up under
the inspection of their fathers and mothers. Of this want of filial sensibility
in my daughter, I complained in the bitterest terms, to my good old neighbor,
who told me that I had brought upon myself the disquietude which tormented me
-- "At the very time," continued he, "that the tender affections take root, you
cast your daughter from you as if she had been an alien; from your unfatherly
behavior, therefore, to her, during her infancy, arises her attention to you.
Folly is its own punishment -- However, it is not yet too late to make her
sensible, by a proper carriage, that you are her best friend; and possibly,
that despised girl may turn out every thing you can wish her to be."

I listened a second time to the voice of reason -- I began to apply myself to
the education of my child. I hired, in the place, an elderly woman, recommended
by my friend, who had been bred a gentlewoman, but having met with misfortunes,
was glad, with a moderate allowance, to undertake the care of my family, and to
teach my girl all kinds of needle work: in reading, writing, accounts,
geography, French, and music, I was her only instructor; and by accompanying my
instructions with many rewards and few punishments, I at length carried my
point so far, as to make her love the father, while she revered the master. I
had at the same time the satisfaction to see that she improved every day in her
person and manner, and became a very fine girl.

When she was about eleven years old, my excellent friend and neighbor (to whom
I was indebted for all the pleasure I at last received as a parent, and to whom
my daughter was also indebted both for her father and her education; as I
should not, probably, have behaved to her in a paternal way, or have taken any
pains to render her an accomplished woman, if I had not been acquainted with
him) was suddenly taken ill, and died in a few days.

The first news of his death was a blow which almost stunned me -- So deeply
was I affected by it, that I gave myself up again to murmuring and despondence.

While I was throwing out some very melancholy effusions, dictated by despair,
I was informed that he had left my daughter in his will, having few relations
of his own, and none who were not richer than himself, ten thousand pounds;
five of which I was at liberty to improve by any sort of business or traffic,
the most agreeable to me, till my daughter was six and twenty: with the other
five she was to be invested on her being of age. I had, however, only the use
of my five thousand during the stipulated term of years, on condition that I
tied up a part of my estate which would produce an equivalent sum at the
expiration of them, in case I should be guilty of any embezzlements, or be
disabled by unforeseen contingencies from making a restitution.

This was a noble legacy, as unmerited as it was unexpected; but it
administered no consolation to me for the loss of the worthy testator. The
generosity of my excellent friend I remembered every hour with the sincerest
gratitude, and his separation from me eve^^ hour with the sincerest regret.
However, as I paid too great a regard to the memory of him whom I had so justly
and so highly esteemed when living, to neglect the improvement of the sum for
which I was responsible, I offered myself to a sober careful man, who had been
his book keeper, to go into partnership with him, provided he would thoroughly
instruct me in his business; and he cheerfully complied with my proposal, as
the stock advanced by me would be of considerable advantage to him.

In this manner I obeyed my dear deceased friend's injunctions, and made an
honest old servant of his happy. By strictly attending to the duties of my new
employment, I not only kept my mind from dwelling on any disagreeable subjects;
but, in a few years, trebled the five thousand committed to my stewardship.
When my daughter came of age, I made over ten thousand pounds to her, and
married her to a very amiable and deserving young man, for whom she had a great
affection. With the remaining sum, added to my little patrimony, I resolved to
spend the rest of my days in doing all the good in my power, as my daughter and
her husband were in too affluent circumstances to wish for my decease. In acts
of benificence, therefore, I have spent my time from that happy era, in
supplicating the Almighty's pardon for my past offenses, and in pouring forth
praises to Him for all the blessings which he has showered on my undeserving
head. -- Never am I so happy, never do I feel such transporting sensations, as
when I am offering up my fervent thansgivings to the throne of grace -- More
and more am I every hour convinced, that the goodness of the Deity is equal to
his power; that we ought ever to pay the most implicit submission to his
decrees; and that whatever he permits to be is permitted for the wisest ends.

LEONTINE.

FINIS

