AN ACCOUNT OF THE Contagious Epidemic Yellow Fever, WHICH PREVAILED IN
PHILADELPHIA IN THE SUMMER and AUTUMN of 1797; COMPRISING The questions of its
causes and domestic origin, characters, medical treatment, and preventives.

BY FELIX PASCALIS OUVIERE, M. D. CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY
OF CONNECTICUT, AND RESIDENT MEMBER OF THE PHILADELPHIA ACADEMY OF MEDICINE.

Figulus quidem figul^ incidet, juxta trit^m proverbiium, et r^^^ est concordia
fratrum. Sperare tamen licet publicam utilitatem ^o^is omnibus cordi esse
satis, ut re^^tis (...), huic (...) operam. (...) Comm. in ^^errh. Aphor. 1412.
de Morb. lipid. PHILADELPHIA: FROM THE PRESS OF SNOWDEN and M'CORKLE NO. 47,
NORTH FOURTH-STREET. 1798.

COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

(...) THE Medical Society of Connecticut THIS ACCOUNT OF THE CONTAGIOUS
EPIDEMIC YELLOW FEVER Is Respectfully Inscribed (...), BY THEIR DEVOTED FRIEND,
A CORRESPONDING MEMBER.

Philadelphia, February 12, 1798.
ERRATA.
Page 20, third line of the note, for introduced, read adher^^^.

Page 34, twenty-third line, for Vide case No. 4, read No. 8.

Page 45, fourth line, for that and (...), read sple^^, etc.

Page do. do. for their last ana(...) read the last (...).

Page 59, eighth line, for pe^^^bae, read pe^^^bi^.

Page 70, twenty-third line, for suppuration of the gland, and parotid^, read
of the parotid gland.

Page 97, first line, for (...), read (...). This word and its derivatives have
several times been thus used, which the reader is requested to correct.

Page ^^, third line, for two very remarkable, read four very.

Page 114, seventeenth line, Vide case No. II. to be struck out.

Page 132, eleventh line, for lumbary regr^^, read lumbar (...).

Several (...) may have escaped, for which the indulged reader will make the
necessary corrections.

INDEX
INTRODUCTION, page 1 SECTION I. Opinions of various writers on the yellow
fever, and the arguments by which they have been supported or refuted, page 3
Apparition of the ma^^^y of S^^^, or yellow fever, on board of a French street,
page 4 Its ravages in Martinico, Hispaniola, and other islands, ibid. Cases of
the malady of Siam, page 6 Assertions of West India practitiners against the
contagious nature of the yellow fever, page 14 Dr. Ru^^^ doctrine of its
domestic origin, page 15 Historical account of a contagious fever in a French
fleet, page 23 Generation of the plague, (...) of the year, page 26
Observations resulting from the first ^eet^^^, page 27
SECTION II. (...) page 28 (...) and ^ymptoms of the (...) page 29 Certain
prognostics from deceiving symptoms, Page 32 Periods and symptoms of the
disease in cases of recovery, Page 38 Extraordinary symptoms observed in the
yellow fever of West India islands, Page 41 The yellow fever is but a high and
malignant degree of the bilious epidemic, Page 43 Causes of the black vomit,
note, Page 45 Conclusive reflections, Page 46
SECTION III. Method of treatment of the yellow fever, Page 49 Specific
remedies of bleeding and mercury, Page 50 Indications of the treatment, Page 51
Application of the remedies and indication^ to a related case, Page 53
Propositions derived from this section, Page 61
SECTION IV. Practical cautions for the treatment of the yellow fever, Page 63
Cautions on bleeding, Page 65 On exhibition of mercury, Page 68 Singular case
of a resolutive crisis of the malady, note, Page 71 Cautions on salivation,
Page 76 Comparative statement of resolutive and spontaneous ^rises, note, Page
78 Cautions on emetics, Page 79 on blisters, note, Page 80 Necessity of early
application to medical aid, Page 82 Case of death mistaken for recovery, Page
83 Previous complaints fatal in the yellow fever, Page 85 Conclusive
reflections, Page 88
SECTION V. General means to prevent the generation and introduction of the
yellow fever, Page 90 The disorder is often generated on board of ships, and
being contagious may be imported, Page 91 enumeration of sources of infectious
exhalations in Philadelphia, Page 93 Chemical principles and results from
putrid exhalations, Page 101 GENERAL MEANS, Page 106
SECTION VI. Particular preventives against the yellow fever, Page 108
Desertion from infected places; its distressing consequences, Page 109 First
means of preventive cautions for the bile, Page 111 Second, by removal of the
sick, Page 116 Third, various and useful means proposed Page 120 ABSTRACTS,
Page 125
SECTION VII. Histories of Cases. CASE, No. I. of death with a previous
complaint, Page 127 CASE, No. II. the same, Page 130 CASE, No. III. of death,
supposed to be the same, Page 132 CASE, No. IV. of death without violent
symptom, Page 136 CASE, No. V. of death with previous complaints and violent
symptoms, Page 137 CASE, No. VI. with violent symptoms recovered in three days,
Page 141 CASE, No. VII. recovered with one bleeding and considerable
evacuations, Page 148 CASE, No. VIII. recovered by a spontaneous salivation,
Page 149 CASE, No. IX. remarkable for excruciating pains in the bones, Page 153
CASE, No. X. Very alarming, recovered spontaneously, Page 155 OBSERVATIONS on
the insufficiency of human knowledge, Page 156 CASE, No. XI. of a female cured
by spontaneous salivation, Page 161 CASE, No. XII. of a gangrenous eruption,
Page 163 CONCLUSION, Page 166 POSTCRIPT, Page 170 Controversy on the origin of
jaundice, ibid.



A Short History of the Yellow Fever has been lately published in Philadelphia,
in which the number of deaths has been brought, by an aggregate total, to only
988. By a comparison with previous information, this number appeared to me
inaccurate, and I procured an authentic extract from the records of the
health-office, by which it appears that the above total is deficient of 278;
which number, added to the former, truly corresponds with my computation of
about 1300.

AN ACCOUNT, etc. TO THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF CONNECTICUT.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU have been informed, that, in the beginning of August last, the yellow
fever broke out in Phildelphia; that, according to authentic records, this
malignant scourge devoured about thirteen hundred of its inhabitants; and that,
early in the month of October, it had happily and absolutely disappeared.

You have known also what measures were adopted by our executive, by the board
of inspectors of the health-office, and by the college of physicians of this
city, to check its progress.

No doubt you have likewise read several publications on the cause of origin,
and on the nature and treatment of that malady. You must also have observed,
with much concern, that learned men, eminent professional characters of the
faculty, were absolutely and systematically divided both in their theoretical
and practical opinions on the subject; so that, those desirable improvements
which would check its progress, and justify and establish the best mode of
treatment, were unhappily retarded. But, gentlemen, the public alarm will soon
subside; and it is my hope that all regular physicians, without any party
spirit or ambition to dictate to each other, will very soon surrender to
striking facts, and submit to fundamental and beneficial rules.

I shall, therefore, dispense with any historical details, conceiving that they
more properly belong to the province of a public recorder, or to an official
authority. My only view is, to promote medical knowledge, on that interesting
subject; and it admits of nothing foreign to the obligation which is imposed
upon every physician, to afford, if he can, by the means of a candid
investigation, some improvements to the healing art. To physicians and to
natural philosophers, in fact, the public, with confidence, entrust the task of
researching the laws and evils of nature, that they may thus be enabled to
protect the lives and health of their fellow creatures. My opinions and
observations, however, I submit to your examination and judgment; not
pretending to dictate to any one who may think himself better informed.

I shall trace the design of my subject in order to comprise the different
views under which it may be considered; in all of which I shall confine myself
to well known facts, instead of arranging new theories and systems.

Firstly, I shall examine most of the opinions entertained by writers on the
yellow fever, and the arguments by which they have been supported or refuted.

Secondly, I shall give a physiological description of the yellow fever, as it
appeared, at different periods, in Philadelphia, and enquire into the causes to
which it may be ascribed.

Thirdly, I will describe our method of treatment for the cure of the yellow
fever.

Fourthly, Practical cautions for the cure, will be enumerated.

Fifthly, General means to prevent the introduction and generation of the
yellow fever, will be proposed.

Sixthly, Particular preventives against the yellow fever will be recommended.

Seventhly, History of cases. -- Conclusion, etc.

SECTION I.
VARIOUS and numerous are the opinions on the origin and nature of the yellow
fever. The first is, that it was imported from the empire of Siam, into the
West India islands by a French squadron, returning from thence, in the year
1689; and which was obliged, by stress of weather, to put into Fort Royal, in
Martinico Vide Description de la party Franc, de St. Domingue par Moreau de
St. Merry, p. 700.
. It is true, indeed, that, as soon as these ships arrived, their crews, as
well as the crews of many others, were much infected with a very malignant
fever. Great number perished, together with many inhabitants of the island.
From Fort Royal the malady was imported, by some commissioned ships, into St.
Christopher's and into Hispaniola, where it made great havoc. In Port-de-Paix,
and several other places, its effects were so dreadful, during many years
after, that, in the year 1692, a royal edict, from the king of France, ordered
a quarantine for all ships coming from Martinico. Two years after, and even so
late as 1708, penal laws, inflicting the punishment of death, were passed in
commercial towns against any seaman or passenger who should come on shore
without a legal examination or permit. The malignancy of the disorder was such,
says Mr. Morean de St. Merry, "as to cause corrupted blood to run out from all
the organs, and even from the pores of the skin, which was afterward covered
with bloody spots." Since that fatal epoch, several accounts have been
published of a particular kind of malignant fever raging, at certain periods
and seasons of the year, in all the tropical countries; which, in all its
symptoms was nearly like the yellow fever. One of the oldest and most
satisfactory accounts which we have of the malady of Siam, or of the yellow
fever, is that of Mr. Pouppe Desportes Vide Maladies de St. Domingue.
, a French physician, sent to Hispaniola, by the king of France, in the year
1732, to superintend the regulations and establishments of the hospitals in the
colony. It is true that some symptoms of the fe^er described by that candid
writer, seem never to have occurred in the American yellow fever; but they
cannot constitute a material difference. They only lead to prove, that the same
disordered may take various shapes, and characters, according to circumstances
of soil and climate. Pouppe Desportes called the fever an pestilential one, and
had no doubt of its contagious nature. He enumerated more dreadful diagnostics
than any we know of. Besides the black vomit, and the j(...)ice, he observed
that suppurations and mortifications on the joints were often its forerunners.
The successive stages of the disease, as described by him, correspond with what
we have experienced here; and, from a comparative statement of the temperature
and variation of the atmosphere, during many years, he drew the decided
opinion, that the malady of Siam was always an immediate effect of noxious
exhalations, produced by the united agency of storms, rains, and great heats.

Another respectable witness of the same disease, is Mr. Dazille, physician
appointed by the king in Hispaniola, about twenty years ago Vide Observations
sur les Maladies des Negres.
. He reports that he was called in, at Cape Francois, with three other
physicians, to consult on the case of a Mr. Lambert, who had lately arrived
from Europe, and thus expresses himself. "On the seventh day of his sickness,
Mr. Lambert was standing up in the middle of his room, not complaining of any
kind of pain. He appeared much displeased at our meeting for consultation, and
affirmed that the was not sick. His pulse was intermitting, and a little
febrile; his conversation was somewhat incoherent; and his eyes were tinged
with a light yellow hue. I firmly declared to the physicians, that, in the
evening, he would die. We met again at twelve o'clock; when we found him as
yellow as a marigold and in a state of coma. His ^^glutition was already
difficult, and he died at ^ half after seven in the evening!

"I was sometime after, requested, by the viscount de ^^hoiseul, to visit Mr.
de Sainthenay, knight of St. Louis, etc. I found him sitting at his desk
counting money. Since the fourth day of his sickness, he had been yellow and
over his body. His countenance was anxious and much altered; his pulse very
bad; and his skin had already that cold moisture which so peculiarly designates
the last stage of this kind of malignant fever. I immediately sent word to the
viscount, that Mr. de S. would die on the same day, which was, unfortunately,
the case."

Experience had taught Mr. Dazille the insidious and deceiving appearances
peculiarly remarkable in the malady of Siam, or yellow fever; and he cautions
his medical readers not hastily to prognosticate the fate of their patients. He
and several other French writers have positively asserted that this fever was
introduced into the West Indies from Asia, about a century before. Although it
has all the features of a contagion, to prove that opinion, yet it is very
strange that it never has been imported into Europe, notwithstanding the
uninterupted intercourse of all the European powers with their islands. Time
and experience have proved to them, that the malignancy and frequency of fevers
in the tropical countries could not reach Europe. However, it cannot be
inconsistent to suppose, that, if the malady of Siam had been imported from so
distant a region as the East Indies into tropical America, it might, of course,
have been received in the south of Europe; since there is no great difference
between the climates of New York or Newhaven, and those of Cadiz or Marseilles.
Indeed, if there is a difference, it surely will he favorable to the
hypothesis, that such a fever could have been imported often into the southern
latitudes of Europe. This was never the case, I believe, however, but once;
when, in the year 1757, an English man of war from Quebec arrived in Plymouth
with the yellow fever, which was very soon subdued by the climate, and did not
leave the least marks of contagion.

But it may be said, that, by its nature, this fever is confined to tropical
countries, and seldom or never can spread in the northern latitudes, unless it
should there meet with an uncommon degree of heat, as is often the case in
North America. Such objections may be refuted, by considering, that the yellow
fever does not precisely break out during the heat of our tropical days, but on
the return of the variable days of autumn. Shall we not then say, that the
yellow fever may arise from some source colder and nearer than Siam or other
tropical countries?

I find that Hypocrates has known, and mentioned the chief symptoms of this
kind of malignant fever; and has noticed the spontaneous vomitings of the bile,
the jaundice, and the black vomit, etc Vid. Aphor. Hypocrat. Aphor. 22, 23, and
62, sec. iv.
. The warm climate in which he lived, could, indeed, give him frequent
opportunities of observing all the effects of any infecting effluvia on the
human body. His rules and precepts still hold good in the symptoms of our
yellow fever. Why then should we search for its origin in distant countries,
whilst we are surrounded with the same causes and circumstances that generated
the yellow fever in the island of Cos, in the West India islands, and in Siam,
as well as in America?

It is an unquestionable truth, that a contagious disorder may be imported; and
that this frequently happens, can be proved by many historical and recent
facts. Against these we do not pretend to oppose any dogmatical assertion. But,
if the malignant scourge has always been introduced by extraneous causes, and
could never exist in our climate but by importation, why does it reach our
shores, so late as the month of August? Why is the plague of the American
tropical islands increased by the mild and moderate temperature of our autumn?
If it be answered, that the contagion must acquire its growth during the hot
summer of the islands, before it can be transported, they thus asse^^^ positive
contradiction. On one side, they cr^^^ the fever in the hotest country of the
earth; on the other, they support its progress in cooler p^^^ and seasons.
Should it be acknowledged that the yellow fever often breaks out, in the
islands, during their winter, or early in their spring, it nevertheless would
not explain, why we do not receive it, on the return of our hot days.

An imported contagion might, indeed, be more heightened in certain places than
in others; but as the contagion of the plague, the venereal lues, the itch, the
scurvy, the small pox, etc. are active in any part of the world, why does not
this complaint spread to our inland places, country seats, and towns; among our
robust farmers and the numerous inhabitants of our back countries? Are these
places so perfectly airy and refreshed, that this kind of contagion cannot
reach them? Should it be answered, that in maritime towns only the atmosphere
can receive and transmit the seed of contagion, it is obviously admitting that
there is an unquestionable ground to assert, that the fever is generated among
us.

Why is it that people, attached to a certain mode of life, and careful in the
use of certain preventives, may expose themselves to the floating contagion,
without fear as well as without effect? Are they more favored by nature,
disposition, and constitution? If it is said, that a perfect state of health
does not admit this kind of contagion, is not, what we suppose, admitted, that
an imperfect state of health will easily be acted upon by an impure atmosphere,
or by exhalations from corrupted animal, or vegetable substances?

Infine, there are authentic proofs that the yellow fever has sometimes,
appeared in isolated cases, in Philadelphia, and other towns. It did not
spread, however, except in the years 1762, 1793, and 1797. Doctor Hilary has
also observed, and positively ascertained, that once in Barbados the yellow
fever was not communicated even to the attendants of the sick. As this strange
circumstance cannot be explained, except by the state of the air, is it not
enough from his assertion, and from the repeated instances in which it did not
spread, to derive the grounds of our opinion, that this fever is sometimes
generated by principles contained in our own atmosphere? After all these
arguments, gentlemen, against the importation of the yellow fever, from Siam or
from the West India islands, it would be unfair not to take notice of the
arguments by which it has been deduced from a different origin. These grounds
or proofs are but few and equivocal, and most of them will contribute to
support our opinion. It is said, firstly, that, in all places and towns in
America, which have been infected with the yellow fever, it has been easy to
trace its origin to certain ships from the West Indies, etc. Now, I shall not
recapitulate to you those tedious enquiries into facts that every party have
ingeniously and with equal success controverted; for, should they prove the
possibility of the importation of the contagion, it will not affect our
doctrine. Such facts, indeed, ought rather to impress upon our minds, the
important truths of the dangerous effects of any kind of effluvia from
corrupted vegetable or animal substances, which are so often unavoidably
engendered in the cargoes of ships coming from tropical countries in the hot
seasons of the year. Of this, there are as many instances as there are eminent
medical writers, on the subject of contagion.

Secondly, The importation of the yellow fever cannot be doubted, when it is so
often known to have raged on board of vessels both at sea and in port. Indeed,
the French have derived their name of this fever, from its peculiar frequency
among seaman; and several of their writers have called it la matelote. Be this
as it may, two reasons are obvious, even in our opinion, to render the yellow
fever more frequent among seamen. One is, that they are constantly predisposed
to bilious complaints, as we shall hereafter explain; and the other, that they
are continually exposed to putrid exhalations.

Thirdly, If these towns and places had not received, the contagion from
tropical countries, we should find in our historical records more frequent
instances of a malady that is supposed to be of a domestic origin. Formerly our
summers were still hotter, and more insupportable than they are at present; and
our towns, or rather villages, were destitute of any improvement, were often
filthy and necessarily neglected; yet they were remarkably healthy. Against
objections so obstinately urged, I could oppose undeniable proofs of great
changes in many towns and places, of variations in the air, winds, and
atmosphere, from wholesome to pestilential, and vice versa; but we have no
certain data from such fluctuating premises to direct our enquiries. It is,
therefore, unnecessary to insist on them here, while we can, in a few words,
satisfy our reason and judgment from well-known facts, more applicable to the
point in controversy. Is it not true, that putrid effluvia, infections vapors,
and poisonous miasmata, must be more abundant and permanent, more often
generated, and more fully diffeminated, in populous and large towns than in
villages or thinly inhabited places?

I do not find, gentlemen, among the English medical writers, any other
peculiar opinion, on the origin of the yellow fever, except that of Dr. Warren,
who implicitly believed, that it had been first brought from Palestine to
Marseilles, and from thence to Martinico and to Barbados, about thirty or
forty years ago. All the works I have read, agree generally in the support of
the doctrine of local exhalations. It is now time, however, for me to dwell a
little on the opinions which, though much divided, have nevertheless prevailed
in Philadelphia, both among physicians and others. The college of physicians of
this city, had officially expressed, in the year 1793, an opinion, that the
fever had been imported from the West India islands, and that it was very
contagious. They have, by no means, departed this year, from that declaration.
As we have not any publication, collectively, from that body, that could
exhibit more, and stronger arguments than merely their opinion of its
importation, I suppose, that it is unnecessary for me to say any thing either
for or against the opinion. An almost equal number of physicians, among whom
are many eminent characters, have uniformly supported the contrary doctrine,
that the fever was of a domestic origin; and that it resulted from corrupted
substances in the cargoes confined in ships' holes, as well as from those
impure exhalations to which we are exposed. Among these last, however, a
distinction should be carefully made of those who acknowledge its highly
contagious nature, and the few who yet think that it is not of such a malignant
character. I hasten to observe, that this assertion has been repeatedly
published by a few European and West India practitioners, who have had but few
opportunities of seeing many instances of the malady of Siam, at least in
Hispaniola, where it has very seldom appeared for these last twenty years, and
where they have a better opportunity of treating the amphimerina biliosa of
Savage, or what they call la fievre lipyrienne, or the Tritacophya Americana
Savage's Nosologia, cla^^, ii. febr.
. These are simply reduced to an inflammatory typhus, and to the putrid
malignant fever. This capital mistake has been, consequently, connected with
assertions destitute of necessary demonstration; it has exposed to doubt, and
almost denied, some fundamental principles of phisiology and practice,
respecting infectious disorders and epidemics of camps, jails, ships, and of
all crowded places It has narrowly reduced medical assistance to the
insufficient method of diluting, cooling draughts, and feeble cathartics.
. In a word, this mistake has erected a doctrine void of the deference due to
the authority of writers in the healing art of the former and present age.

I shall analyze, with more pleasure, the contrary opinion, for which
documents, enquiries, and liberal and candid discussions, have been procured
and unremittingly pursued by several physicians. Among these Dr. B. Rush
deserves particular notice; because he has supported it, since the year 1793,
both in his lectures of the institutes of medicine, in the university of
Pennsylvania, and in several treatises he has since published on the yellow
fever. He has never ceased to warm his fellow citizens of the presence or
proximity of the cause of this contagion, in their seaports, wharves, streets,
and stagnant waters. He has explained the phenomena of exhalation from a
combination of vegetable and and animal putrefaction; and, being aware, by long
experience, and an elightened judgment, that the inhabitants of this place
were particularly subject to billious fevers during the autumn, from sudden
changes, and the extremes of the climate, and from the grossness and
indigestive quality of their aliments, he early understood that infectious
miasmata could aggravate the bilious remittent, and convert it into a malignant
and contagious fever. On this judicious ground he founded his theory and
practice, and we shall see hereafter of what importance it has been to the
discovery of truth, and the improvement of medical practice.

Having hitherto stated, gentlemen, the historical opinions of the most
enlightened physicians of Europe and of America, I must observe, that it was my
purpose to point out such of their opinions as were more congenial to the true
basis of the theory to which I have confined myself; and to illustrate a
position which has already occupied so greatly the public attention. I shall
add a few more arguments to support the local origin of the yellow fever and
its highly contagious nature.

A striking circumstance was formerly exhibited by Pouppe Despartes, a French
physician, sent by the king into Hispaniola. During many years he accurately
observed the state of the atmosphere in the spring and summer. He noticed, that
frequent and heavy rains, interrupted by serene weather, and intervals of heat,
in those tropical countries, was productive of more dangerous exhalations from
the earth. He was thus enabled to foretell the appearance of the pestilential
malady of Siam, as he called it. He observed, also, that, after heavy rains,
the noxious effects of exhalations were checked by winds, or other
circumstances. A few cases from this very just authority, will serve to warn
the inhabitants of our towns of the terrible effects of the exhalations to
which they will be exposed, by the concurrence of rains, after long draughts,
with the intense heat of the summers, if they retain among themselves all the
materials of vegetable and animal corruption. These materials seem to increase
with our population; and, in Philadelphia, I believe, there are more of them
than in any other town in the union. They may consist of the logs which form
our wharves, and which project to a considerable distance in the water; of the
boards with which almost all enclosures of lots and houses are surrounded; of
the roofs of all our houses; of numerous privy-houses which are seldom emptied;
and of many ponds and stagnant waters, both in the city and suburbs. If it
should appear strange to point out, among the sources of exhalation, the very
wood which we necessarily make use of for our dwellings and ports, I entreat my
reader, before he rejects my assertion, carefully to enquire into the natured
laws and effects of exhalations from wood, timbers, new ships, cellars,
forests, etc. of which he will find ample documents in the writings of doctor
Lind and others. Let him call to mind the number of wooden works in all our
cities and ports, where the tide successively uncovers and exposes the wharves
to the schorching rays of the sun, and then let him draw his conclusions.

In proof of the fermentation of animal substances, particularly during the
heat of summer, which I have already suggested, I shall propose an experiment.
Let a candle be lowered into a ditch, by means of a line, and it will be found,
that the mephitic ascending gas, will put out the light in proportion as it
approaches the surface of the earth, and this effect will be much more certain
in the latter end, than in the beginning of the hot season. When this gas
ascends and is received into the atmosphere, it doubtless breeds contagion and
death; and I am fully satisfied, that many people have, as well as myself,
perceived and smelt its effluvia, chiefly during the calm and clear nights of
the month of September. Several interesting publications have appeared in the
papers of Philadelphia on this subject It has been strongly contended in same
of them, that the waters of the wells of Philadelphia are rendered noxious by
^utial grounds and others causes. I confess I have not yet heard sufficient
objections to destroy this opinion. By the effect of some local impregnations,
several of our wells are particularly remarked for their bad waters. A
respectable chemist of this city, analyzed the water of his own well, and found
that it contained a quantity of magnesia, muriatic salt, and uncombined alkali.
This certainly does not prove much in favor of our waters; and I am fully
aware, that this subject requires a more particular investiation. I hope,
therefore, (...) all attract the attention and fix the observation of some of
our learned and philanthropic citizens.
. From this short sketch we may conclude, that the opinion of the yellow fever
being generated among us, is founded upon good ground; and that it would be in
vain to attack this opinion by the objections which have been mentioned and
refuted above. For further satisfaction, we shall add, that the circumstance of
its having appeared but once in Philadelphia, before the year 1793, does not
imply that it cannot be of a domestic origin; since it is obvious, that it
might have actually subsisted in some or few cases, among those bilious fevers
that are endemic among us in the autumn, without having been much taken notice
of.

Would it be just to say, that this epidemic has never made its appearance in
Philadelphia, except in 1762, 1793, and 1797, while there are creditable
witnesses who have positively seen and observed it, every year since the
attention of physicians and others has been kept up by the recollection of the
calamity? This fever, though so highly contagious as to be compared even to the
plague, may, like the plague, be widely propagated or entirely imp^ded by
causes that favor of oppose its progress; for unaccountable changes and
variations of heat and weather, have sometimes put an end to the latter in the
heat of the summer, and they have also increased it in the middle of the
winter. The case No. 1, was that of a father surrounded with a numerous family
of whom not one was infected but himself. The same fact has occurred to my
observation, in almost every family, in which the disorder proved mortal. In
such cases, the patients secret very little of the putrid miasmata; they are
much less infectious, because the poison is kept in their body to destroy the
functions of life; and one of the most deceiving symptoms is, that they seldom
emit any disa^^^^able smell. It is quite the reverse, however, when they
recover; and physicians and nurses are well acquainted with the insupportable
foetor, peculiar to that fever, which exudes from their bodies, and continues,
for a long time after, in their bed and clothes. Consequently one or many
mortal cases of the yellow fever may have happened, without having been
followed by contagion.

But it is further objected, that the traces of the importation have been
visibly marked in Philadelphia; where the fever, having been communicated by
somebody from Southwark, has infected the most distant part, which is
Kensington, and the houses on the Frankford road; meanwhile there were but few
scattered cases in the center and northern parts of the city. This last
mentioned theater of the disease, would, however, have been preserved from
contagion if the epidemic was of a domestic origin; for the place is quite
open, and presents a view of many country seats, and being not on the same
straight line of the town, it cannot receive its exhalations. However striking
and conclusive this whole objection seems to be, yet what will be thought at
last, by an unprejudiced reader, when he recollects that Kensington, and all
the adjacent grounds, are wholly a kind of naval yard, full of timber, and more
than any other part of our suburbs, surrounded with marshy grounds, and
stagnant waters. The adjacent banks of the river are, besides, filled up with
all the rubbish of new and old timber. So much for the origin of the yellow
fever in Kensington, etc.

In support of the opinion, that the yellow fever is of domestic origin, why
should we not derive, gentlemen, some authority from the medical doctrine
already known and promulgated in all the schools of the world; of the possible
infection of disorders generated in places where people are crowded, or where
unwholesome exhalations are produced? The history of jail distempers, of fevers
on board of fleets, and of various disorders in camps, teaches us that it is
not requisite to search for the origin of our calamity in distant countries. We
must not be unaccustomed to the id^^, that our atmosphere may be poisoned as
easily as a plant growing in our fields. From all the corners of our extensive
continent, winds, may blow (...) as dreadful as the (...) of Arabia and as the
Harmattan of oriental Africa. Barren and uninhabited lands, thick and extensive
forests, have been known to spread, even to the distance of many miles into the
sea, miasmata of contagion and death. To incredulous and systematic theorists,
I shall exhibit the faithful evidences which we may derive from the instinct of
ominous birds. If my mind was not distracted by error and prejudice, I saw,
repeatedly, during the two instances of our calamity, vultures flying over our
afflicted town. These kinds of volatile and carnivorous animals, never wander
but in the currents of miasmata and putrefaction. This is the means by which,
in a few hours, they reach their distant and putrid prey. This is also a proof
that our atmosphere was infected with the corruption which created our
epidemic. For an imported disorder cannot infect the atmosphere, any more than
our sources of exhalation.

It remains now with me, gentlemen, to make a few more observations on the
contagious power of the yellow fever. I have already notice, that very few
opponents have appeared against that opinion; and it is certain, it will meet
with none in the schools of America. The doctrine of the noxious qualities or
substances of which the air and winds may be the vehicles, has been handed down
to us by Hypocrates; and wonderful improvements in chemistry have still letter
explained this truth, and all its phenomena; for the idea of contagion implies
nothing else but the transmission of certain principles of disorder, whether
conveyed through the medium of the air or by an immediate contact. When this
effect takes place, bodies are said to be infected; and surely as many
disorders as by their particular effluvia always excite the same morbid state,
so many must be contagious. Happily, in the long catalogue of diseases to which
we are subject, these are, comparatively, few. Although contagion may arise
from noxious effluvia, floating in the air, yet it seems that the same
principles acquire more malignancy when they are propagated by the channel of
diseased human bodies. In them, the contagious miasmata regenerated and
multiply; and, if they were not checked by favorable changes in the
atmosphere, who could foresee an end to a malignant contagion Dr. Poissonier,
and Dr. Lind have transmitted us the following memorable account of the
contagious fever which ravaged the fleet of Mr. Dubois de Lamotte, in the year
1757, in the town of Breast.

This fleet was, at first, joined at Breast by two ships of the line, the
Gl^ri^^ and the D^e de B^^rgogne, both of which had received on board some men
from the hospital at Rochefort. During their stay at Breast, the contagion was
so rapid, that they were obliged to send four hundred of their sick on shore.

On the 3d of May, the fleet sailed from Breast to Louisbourg, but both during
their passage to, and stay in that port, the fever became general, and was
attended with a considerable mortality. On the 20th of October, the fleet
sailed from Louisbourg, taking on board their sick, but leaving about four
hundred in a dying stare. At sea, the contagion acquired new vigor In a very
short, time, the whole squadron was disabled; and, on their arrival at Breast,
on the 22d of November, the few remaining seamen were scarcely sufficient to
navigate their ships, having no less than four thousand men ill. All their
surgeons and almoners were either sick or dead; and, when they arrived, seamen
were immediately sent on board to bring them to anchor, and surgeons to assist
the sick. Unfortunately four thousand more arrived, at the same time, from
Quebec, in the Bizarre and Celebre, two men of war, into which the sickness was
communicated by the above squadrom. During the general confusion, they had been
promiscuously crowded into the town of Breast, wherever they could get
admission. Fifteen hospitals were at last sitted up. Physicians and surgeons
came from all parts of France, and voluntarily gave their services, besides
those who were commissioned by the court. The hospitals were so crowded, that
at last the mortality spread among the attendants. Five physicians, one hundred
and fifty surgeons, and two hundred almoners and nurses, fell victims, together
with a great number of slaves, who were engaged to assist the sick, upon a
promise to receive their liberty. From the attendants, the fever passed to the
lower class of people in Breast, among whom it quickly diffused itself. The
havoc then became general; and the houses were filled with the dying and the
dead. A proclamation from authority, had promised the sick, that they would be
provided with the attendance of a physician, or any other necessary means of
assistance, if they would give proper notice. But, it was soon found, that, in
many houses not one was left who could give the nonce, and that, in others dead
bodies had remained without burial. In sine, the month of April brought a
gradual and absolute cessation of this contagious epidemic, which, in less than
five months, swept off ten thousand people in the hospitals alone, besides the
inhabitants who ^ied in the town of Breast, and who could not be numbered!!!


! Such are, alas! those contagious poisons, the elements of which are heavy and
fixed; they are independent of our control, and from generation to generation
they perpetuate among men, and afflict or blemish the noblest family of the
living creation.

But the yellow fever, gentlemen, has manifested such particular characters of
a highly contagious malignancy, that it suggested to many, no doubt, the idea
of importation, which could not indeed, be denied, were there not so many and
such powerful reasons to invalidate it. It was not like an epidemic which
strikes only at certain individuals, of the same disposition, or defects of
constitution; and thus discloses, at last, what kind of victim it endangers. It
does not, like the ague, threaten those of lax nerves and fibers; like the
catarrhs or influenza, falling upon the humourous; like the autumnal fevers,
afflicting the bilious; and like inflammatory disorders, seizing upon the
plethoric; no, the yellow fever has spared neither sex nor age. The infant in
the cradle, as well as the most aged, were alike exposed to its attacks. It
seemed, indeed, very general among poor, intemperate people, and in filthy
houses; but we have seen also its power on those, who, among all the comforts
and coveniencies of life, were unfortunately reached by it. Its irregular march
and progress, its appearance in opposite extremities of the city, without any
visible way of propagation, could not be explain (...) it been an epidemic
resulting from general external causes, and not possessing any contagion.

Moreover, these principles and facts cannot, in the least, be invalidated by
objecting, that a contagious disorder could not remain confined in maritime
towns; and that, like the plague, it would have found its way to populated
country places; for even the plague abated entirely in Aleppo in the height of
the summer, when the extreme heat, dilating too much the pestilential miasmata,
probably rendered them harmless. It disappeared in Vienna, in 1713, as soon as
tempestuous winds blew away its aerial venom. By other unaccountable causes, it
equally broke out during the winter and summer, and also equally disappeared,
during each contrary season, in Oksacow, in the years 1737 and 1738. If the
plague could be checked by contrary changes of season, and even by the heat of
the summer, who will be astonished at finding that some reasons also excludes
generally the yellow fever from the country? These reasons are not
incomprehensible^ for the pure, open, and elastic air of the country, must
dispel the infectious miasmata. And there, with all the balsamic and wholesome
fragrance of a useful vegetation, with all the benefit of exercise and salutary
labor, preventives enough may be found against contagion.

Let us now enumerate the fundamental observations which result from this first
section.

1 st, The yellow fever is generated by putrid effluvia from vegetable and
animal fermentation.

2 ly, The opinion that it was imported, one hundred years ago, from the
kingdom of Siam, into the West India islands, and from these islands to North
America, cannot be admitted exclusively, to its being generated spontaneously
in every warm country, from the abovementioned causes.

3 ly, We may more affirmatively pronounce, that the yellow fever may be an
indigenous disease among us, since it was observed by ancient physicians in
similar climates, and probably under similar causes; since we are exposed to
such exhalations as seem adequate to its generation; and finally, since, in the
past progress of the disease, there must have been some place and time in which
it was generated and not imported.

4 ly, The yellow fever is of a highly malignant nature and contagious power.

SECTION II. Physiological and Pathological Description of the Yellow Fever.
FROM all the documents which have been transmitted to us, both by English and
French writers, there is no room to doubt, that the disorder which they have
called the malady of Siam, the matelote, or the yellow fever, is exactly the
same which has, in several instances, raged among us. It seems, however, that
our epidemic, differs, though not materially, in some of its symptoms, from
that of the tropical countries. Dr. Johnson, has, indeed, acknowledged three
kinds of yellow fever. With respect to them, I shall, just simply remark, that,
if there are three distinct and apparent degrees, they must be owing to the
following obvious circumstances. First, that of its effects or attacks on a
patient who quickly becomes its victim; second, of one who, without great
difficulty, or danger, passes through its stages; and lastly, if those, who,
with proper assistance, get over the resolution and crisis. These three
characters, are, undoubtedly, the natural result of the different degrees of
contagion, or of the constitution, habit, and previous complaints of the
patient. There is consequently out one sort of yellow fever. This malady
should, besides, be considered only during two of its periods, that of its
symptoms and that of the crisis. In practice, this division (...) a very just
one. It traces, exactly, the limits of medical treatment, and is a sure mean of
suggesting true prognostics I beg those of my medical readers who are
professedly attached to the system of Dr. Brown, and which appears to have been
i^ed into the university of Pennsylvania, to direct the us^l^^ of prejudice
against a theory, and to examine with candor a work, written in the good old
scientifical language of Hypocrates, Boerhaave, and Cullen; for I have not any
prejudice myself against them. Till this day, theories have often changed,
while practice remains the same: and it was the doctrine of a celebrated author
(Dr. Cullen) that medical hypothesis is but a chain to link facts together, (
Analytical Review, Arg. 1789, Art. viii.l I have often been endured to
contemplate this doctrine, either from the consideration that men of great
genius and information have adapted it, or from a determined resolution not to
condemn, what, perhaps. I did not properly understand. With great reluctance,
however, I would have exchanged those simple elements that so easily explain
the laws of nature, the phenomena of life and vegetation, for a metaphisical
theory, which, from the positive qualities of bodies and substances, carries us
into a series of complex and occult modes of action. If a person can understand
all the phenomena of health and life, by the obscure ideas of excitement being
always evolved in a ratio to the quantity of the excitability, and exciting
powers, which must always bear a due proportion to each other, etc. let him
enjoy his conviction. But, why cannot the same conviction result from the
simple laws of human life, as anatomy and phisiology exhibit them to our
observation? As for the success, which might in practice be derived from that
theory, it is a delicate matter, and I will not avail myself of those sarcastic
comments upon it which I have frequently read. This much I can say, that I
believe the doctrine may be of some advantage with men of genius, but I am
satisfied that it leads to capital mistakes, those who direct themselves by it,
whilst they do not (...) sufficiently the (...) of nature.
. When death is unavoidably the final result of this disorder, it is equally
horrid and insidious. Penetration and attention are, therefore, the first and
most essential requisites to keep us from indulging those erroneous and false
hopes, which, both the patient and his friends, are too apt to entertain. A
turgency of the blood vessels, or what we call a plethoric state, may, during
one or two days, precede the attack, but is seldom taken notice of by the
patient; and no other previous indisposition can be remarked. Whatever then may
be the state of the body, the fever suddenly and tumultuously breaks out.
Spontaneous vomitings of yellow, green, and glutinous bile; a depressing head
ache; a numbness of the limbs, and joints; a burning heat in the face; and
redness in the eyes; immediately take place. Such rapid and violent changes in
the whole frame, are, I believe, uncommon in any kind of fever, and belong only
to the plague. During the two first days, this state admits of but little
change. Short intermissions, are, however, sometimes obtained by means of the
remedies which are administered. The patient may possess all the other febrile
symptoms; but I have seen none of them more frequent than delirium and coma. We
next discover an ominous and absolute prostration of strength, an abatement in
the pulse, an entire ce^ation of feeling, and an insidious security in the
patient, who fancies himself fast approaching to a recovery, and who only
complains of a want of strength. He soon after, however, experiences frequent
and short chills; and his evacuations are colliquative, foetid, with yellow or
white matter. He then sighs deeply; is restless; and he cannot even bear the
weight of a covering upon his body. He next appears totally insensible either
to heat or cold; his skin is dry; there is no kind of exhalation of
disagreeable smell about him, and even very little is perceived from his
breath. He has no thirst, but he can drink any thing. Nauseous medicines, or
agreeable food, are alike received into his stomach without sickening it. His
tongue as yet portends nothing alarming; it is covered, however, with a kind of
thick white crust, from the root to the edges, which remain perfectly red. In
this state his urine seems stopped, although he drinks much; and, if he voids
any, it is generally purulent. This period of the disease, in which the
delusion of the patient exists, notwithstanding the cessation of his regular
functions, is highly expressive of the disorder being unconquerable; and I
venture to assert, that when it is observed in the second or third day, it
ought to determine the physician to give over, without hesitation, the least
hope of a recovery. The patient will be in the agonies of death as soon as the
third day arrives, and never later than the fifth.

Another more insidious stage than the former, may take place in the beginning
of the dis^^^e, and last two or three days. It is not so (...) in its progress,
but is equally fatal in its issue. In this case, an ardent fever, which,
however ^y be occasionally abated by judicious re^^^^ is the only
characteristic. Under such circum^tances, how anxiously ought the physician of
^^^^r to bring on a change or a crisis! On this (...). I cannot too strongly
insist: for here the (...) of that sickness lies, in which it is so difficult
to recover any dangerous symptoms. Several of them are, however, to be remarked.

First, Although the patient may be acted upon by medicines, he is certainly
deprived of salutary evacuations; and chiery of those which we shall hereafter
describe as the only proof of a successful treatment. To be deprived of them,
before the third day, is a sure prognostic of death.

Secondly, The patient complains but little; and a kind of stupidity, resulting
from the slowness of his ideas, forms a striking contrast with the watchfulness
and the confusion of his countenance. This symptom is more alarming, and is
directly opposite to the inquisitive anxiety and irresistible uneasiness of
patients in common cases. Those, therefore, who are best acquainted with the
natural disposition of the person who is sick, will be best able to judge of
this decisive symptom.

Thirdly, In all his actions the patient shows an uncommon degree of strength;
while repeated exacerbations of fever, frequent bloodlettings, and want of
nourishment, should render him very weak. This very strength, however, is
unnatural and contrary to the appearance observed in favorable cases. It is
the effect of an universal spasmodic constriction of the nerves, and indicates
the dreadful action of the morbid cause upon the viscera, and its manifested by
a kind of trill in the nerves, or by an involuntary fluttering in the muscles,
which we may evidently perceive, if we keep, attentively, during a few minutes,
the hand or the arm of the patient in our hand. This last sign claimed my
particular notice, and it has always proved singularly useful to me.

Fourthly, and lastly, we may always discover, that each of the exacerbations
of the fever are preceded by horripilatio, or violent chill. After these four
symptoms have taken place, we should never put any dependence either on the
pulse or the tongue; for, whether the pulse be febrile or not, intermitting or
regular, it prognosticates nothing decisive for the patient, unless we can
distinguish it hard, and tense, and possessing a spasmodic and fatal
constriction. The tongue also presages nothing conclusive; it will be found
white or soul all over its upper surface, and its edges red. If the patient
remains for some time without drink, a triangular red spot will appear from the
edge to the center of the tongue. But after a diluting draught this disappears;
and these states take place, both in cases of death and recovery. One
appearance of the tongue, however, is ominous in the first days of the disease;
which is, when it turns black or brown, before the last exacerbation of the
fever, which generally subsides on the fourth day. Iliccough or an absolute
suppression of urine, are likewise very dangerous symptoms, if they take place
before the time of the resolution of the fever; but if the first happens after
it, it happily constitutes the final and salutary crisis.

Another symptom usual in malignant fevers, but particularly in this, is a kind
of small red petechiae, very similar to free bites. They appear on the hands,
the neck, the breast, and also on the face. Many suppose that they are from the
bites of musquitoes, or of other insects. A physician may know better, but
cannot derive from them any thing further than a proof of the malignancy of the
fever. (Vide case No. 4.)

I dwell more particularly upon these apparently trifling circumstances,
because they are of the utmost importance toward assisting us in our
enquiries. Physicians are, alas! pecularly liable to error in a disorder so
difficult to judge, and so violent in its attacks. From an affectionate regard
to their patients, or from a reasonable pride in their own medical skill, they
are sometimes over confident of their success; and too frequently, in the
event, the friends of the patient, are unhappily plunged into despair, at the
disappointment of their expectations. Would it not be more prudent, then, in
cases of iminent danger, to caution them against it; and thus, when the utmost
of our skill is baffled, to deserve their confidence and gratitude by our
candor?

I now arrive at that fatal period, when, by the deadly effect of the
decomposition and mortification of the animal fluids, all the struggles of
nature are entirely overcome. On the fourth day, this period is announced by
the paleness of the s^^^ and the extreme debility of the pulse; unless, indeed,
as it frequently happens, a still more violent degree of contagion has, through
uncommon circumstances, produce these symptoms sooner. The feelings of the
unhappy patient have now lost so much of their power that he is totally
incapable of giving any account of his confused sensations. His skin becomes
gradually tinged with a yellowish color, while his lower extremities become of
a deep red and are a little swelled. The eyes loose that remarkable animation
which they before possessed, and appear desponding; while the countenance
becomes confused and grim. Nausea^ at this period, is a common symptom. If
drink be thrown up, it is not altered from the state in which it was taken,
unless indeed, by having acquired a ropiness, and being mixed with small flakes
of dark colored matter. A black or brown fluid, much like coffee grounds, is
next vomitted. If this does not take place, it is only owing to a want of
strength; and the stomach is, then, much more oppressed; and the patient may be
expected to die early in the fifth day, or sooner. Stools are also frequent and
easy, but very offensive. They are yellow, gray, and of a sooty color, and
contain a few flakes of white or red. Delirium in this stage is very common.
Frequent instances are also seen of patients preserving their reason till the
last moment, (Vide case No. 4,) when a cloud suffuses their eyes, and makes
them averse to the light. During all this time, the pulse is in a deceiving
state. It keeps, for the most part, quite calm, and is a little febrile, or
perhaps not so at all. It occasionally, however, appears intermitting, unequal,
and different on one side of the body from what it is on the other. This is
generally its last expression of energy, and may be owing to a spasmodic
constriction. In such cases, it sometimes rises to an unexpected vigor, and is
the forerunner of a temporary relief. The patient talks much of his expected
recovery, and will sometimes even try, with success, to give deceiving proofs
of it. He wishes to take exercise and to pursue his business. He will get up;
want to dress himself; and will walk very freely. I have seen a few who, on
these occasions, were able to set in company. Every one was astonished, and
would remark no other alterations than that of a deep orange color all over
his body, an incoherence in his conversation, and a very confused look. How
short, alas! and deceiving is this last spark of life? A cool moisture and a
total prostration of strength succeeds, and suddenly conquers this elasticity
of the fibers. On a sudden, the pulse disappears; the extremeties cool; the
convulsions of the stomach are renewed, with accute pains, caused by a slight
pressure in the abdomen; and a deplorable, though short agony, terminates the
disorder, after having diffused a putrefying poison in the blood, and destroyed
the noblest viscera by mortification. (Vide case No. 5.)

Such are the periods and symptoms of the yellow fever, which has been
distinguished, by several writers, as a particular species of the most
malignant kind. When there exists an error in the treatment, or any dangerous
circumstances in the constitution of the patient, he must certainly fall a
victim. The disease remains the same, however, in its nature and operation; and
we will find, among those who happily recover, no other changes than those
which constitute an issue prompted by accidental or unavoidable causes, and
which take certain modifications from the constitution, the sex, the age, or
previous indisposition of the patient. Let us now direct our enquiry further,
by a review of the different stages of the malady, when it can be conquered by
nature or by art.

It was the doctrine of Hippocrates, that, on the breaking out of any acute
malady, there were symptoms pointedly prognosticating its fatal issue, or the
probability of its cure. Thus he remarked, that, if the patient, on being
taken, was discovered involuntarily to shed tears, or if he was seized with
convulsive fits, he would either die, or labor under a very long and dangerous
attack. Medical practice, in our day, is, however, greatly improved, and is
attended with far different and happier results. We have seen and known many
who have recovered from pestilential and malignant disorders, who, at first,
had exhibited the most portentous symptoms. (Vide cases No. 6 and 7.) Whatever
these symptoms may be, in the first day of the disease, any unfavourable
judgment must be suspended. In fact, if obvious indications have been
faithfully followed, on the second day, we may discover beneficial and critical
perspirations, remissions of the fever, and salutary evacuations. The latter
must be repeated, copious, and of a dark green color. Instead of that
prostration of organic strength, which we have noticed above, the patient
complains only of a natural weakness; and when he takes refreshment, by a few
hours of sleep, he keeps a peaceable situation in his bed. Upon comparative
observation, it must be acknowledged, that, instead of weakening the organic
sensations, the yellow fefever irritates and heightens their powers; for, if
but a sight dose of physic be given to the patient it will be very powerfully
felt. His taste is likewise equally affected by nauseous medicines, by
refreshing liquors, and by the most wholesome nourishments. The coma and
delirium may take place, without being ominous; the pulse may be rapid and
revulsive without a convulsive constriction. The least noise provokes in him a
sorrowful anxiety; but this symptom is for better than a deceiving security and
a portentous cessation of his complaints. The fever keeps the patient,
generally, in this situation for three days. On the fourth, the change
operates; and is, indeed, connected with some apparently dangerous
circumstances, which are very critical; but, which, in the end, become
salutary. The chief of these are, the affection of the stomach, and its
repeated nausea, joined to frequent vomitings, attended with a pain which a
gentle pressure accutely exasperates. Proper medical assistance gradually
relieves this and other acciedents; but, until the sixth day, no safe proofs of
a good issue are to be perceived. Should, however, a few paroxisns of fever be
repeated, so much the better, provided they are unattended with a chill. These
will serve to determine a happy resolution; for the yellow fever, when treated
with succes^, runs (...) the c^^^es or febris ardent, and is remitting during
seven days. The yellowness of the skin usually appears after the exacerbation
of the fifth day. It is not interspersed with any shade or red spots, and there
are scarcely any which are apparent on the extremities. This jaundice begins to
disappear on the seventh day. In the beginning, the tongue does not much differ
from what I have above described in the worst cases. In these cases however, it
every day acquires a more uniform paleness, or small red spots; and upon the
whole seems of a more spongy and porous substance.

It is a general observation in medicine, that in proportion as the resolution
of an acute disease is perfect, the weaker the patient afterward feels
himself. This state of the body is also, one of the best means by which we can
judge of the safety of organic life. Agreeably to these principles, the patient
who recovers from the yellow fever undergoes great exertions and a very
difficult struggle. In this exhausted state, he is doomed to a tedious
convalescence, and may esteem himself happy if he recover from it in a space of
time equal to that of the disease.

Several other circumstances more particularly designating the character of the
yellow fever, when carried to a successful issue, remain to be mentioned.

The West India writers have observed in this disorder, some singular symptoms,
many of which were seldom seen in the American epidemic. They may, however,
from obvious circumstances, become symptoms of death, or crises of a cure.
These are,

1 st, Hemorrhage from the nose.

2 dly, Swelling and suppuration of the parotids.

3 dly, Anthrax, or any other eruption on the skin.

4 dly, Aperture of the orifice after bleeding, attended with a mortification
of its edges.

5 thly, Acute pains on the limbs, and suppurations on the joints.

6 thly, Spots of dry mortification.

I frequently saw the first of these in Philadelphia, and it proved fatal or
not, according to the pathological rules of Boerrhaave: "Si Tertio vel quarto
die parca, Lethalis; optima fiet die decretorio." ^41.

The second has occurred, though seldom, in my practice. When it did appear, it
was perfect, and generally succeeded on the fifth day, and always immediately
resolved the malady.

The fourth presented itself as an hemorrhage. This I attributed to obvious
circumstances. The mortification of the orifice of the veins, however, I have
seen in almost all the dying subjects; of the third and the last I have met
with but one instance.

The fifth frequently took place as a pain, but never as a suppuration.

Upon the whole, the only critical diagnostics which have been peculiar to the
yellow fever of Philadelphia, were, the hemorrhage and the swelling of the
parotids The first were commonly from the nose among men, and from the uterus
among women of a competent age.
; but these very diagnostics, together with the jaundice, were either
favourabble symptoms of forerunners of certain death, according to the time in
which they appeared. In fact, we learn, by the pathology of the human body,
that, in all acute disorders, Nature requires a certain space of time either to
cure, to resolve, or to disperse the morbid cause under which the body is
laboring; and the most perfect proof that the attempts of art or of nature
have failed is when we too early discover incomplete effects or a false crisis.
Of these however, an explanation will be given in the section on the treatment
of the yellow fever; notwithstanding I shall explain the real pathology of one
of the most horrid disorders that ever afflicted the human race. I here repeat
with confidence that nothing but facts will be the basis of a theory that has
no connection with any new system, and which will be an answer to these
questions why the yellow fever is attended with spontaneous vomitings of the
bile, with a jaundice, with black vomit, etc.?

The opinion that the yellow fever is a true bilious one, and differs only in
degree, which is the highest and the most malignant, has been already known and
satisfactorily proved by Dr. B. Rush Account of the bilious remitting yellow
fever, etc. in the year 1793, by B. Rush. M. D.
. With this principle as a guide, many errors, systems and conjectures might
have been long since dispelled, or at least better explained. The history of
its symptoms, exhibits, in the plainest manner, the corruption and malignancy
of the bile. As soon as the patient is seized, he spontaneously vomits bile;
and if he recover, it is by the means of successful and copious evacuations of
hepatic and cystic bile. If he die, it is evidently in consequence of the
mixture of the bile with the blood, and the mortification of all its viscera
and reservoirs. All the anxieties, nausea, pains, obstructions, and
exacerbations of fever, in every case, seem evidently caused by the
fermentation, the stagnation, and the acrimony of the bile. In short, if morbid
bodies be examined by defection, new ravages of the bile are also discovered.
From these facts, what other inferences can be drawn, but that of fixing the
pathology of the yellow fever in those laws and accidents that are connected
with the bile. In order then to establish some reasonable ground, let us first
enquire to what uniform cause we may attribute all the above mentioned symptoms.

Hippocrates has observed Aphor. 62. Sect. IV.
, that autumnal fevers were attended with jaundice, in consequence of people
living upon rich beef, and Boerhaave admits acrid bile and poison among the
causes of the worst kind of jaundice. The liver, from its nature and functions,
receives a great quantity of blood from the venaporta, to prepare the bile; we
may therefore conclude, that diseases of that viscera, might disturb or alter
the bile, and vice versa. But, if a poisonous exhalation has, by its affinity
with the bile, diffused itself in the alimentary canal, it is very probable
that the infection will early reach, by many known passages, its very source;
and the liver, the gall bladder, the duodenum, the stomach, etc. will then be
diseased by a poisoned (...) which stimulates, inflames, and corrodes th(...)e
the spontaneous vomitings of the bile. Besides, before this infected bile could
be sufficiently diluted, neutralized, and evacuated, it is obvious to think,
that the whole liver, Icterus multiplex. 916.
being affected either directly or indirectly, will no longer be so easily
infiltrated nor receive that mass of blood it ought to admit; and this, by
revulsion, will pass down the iliac and mesenteric veins to the^^ last
anastomoses with the smallest arteries; and hence the violent and inflammatory
fever with all its attending symptoms. Nature has but two or three days to
support the violence of such a struggle. The poison ceases not to act upon the
very texture and membranes where it is enclosed; it may perhaps be poured again
I have it in my power clearly to prove, that the black vomit is the hepatic
bile itself, which is completely corrupted in the liver, and consequently mixed
with the blood, by an authentic fact, taken from an account of the dissections
of Dr. Physic and Dr. Cathrall, published in Dr. Rush's account of the yellow
fever of 1793, page 121.

In two other persons, the stomach contained, as did also the intestines, a
black liquor, which had been vomited and purged before death. This black liquor
appears clearly to be an altered secretion from the liver; for a fluid, in
(...)espects of the same qualities, was found in the gallbladder. This liquor
was so acrid, that it produced considerable inflammation and swelling o^ the
operator's hand, which remained somedays. The viscous membrane of the
intestines, in these last (...) bodies, was found inflamed in several places.


from the liver into the duodenum and the stomach, with stronger acrimony; and
there is always enough of it to contaminate the blood in the venaporta and that
of the vena cava, from which it mixes at last with the general mass, and
produces the black vomit and the icterus. I need not to relate all the other
accidents of gangrene, hemorrhage, eruptions of any kind, and of death;
because, to my medical readers, this theory, founded upon facts, will be
sufficient to account for every thing. Another striking proof in favor of this
theory, may also be drawn from the march of the disease in a recovering
patient. His cure will either be rapid or tedious according to the efficacy of
his evacuations, which, at first, being chiefly composed of the cystic bile,
appear very green, but afterward turn to a yellow color, owing to the
hepatic. It must, however, still be remembered, that no symptom, diagnostic,
crisis, or accident, can better designate any future success, than a continued
and uninterrupted evacution of the bile. After all these physiological and
pathological arguments, we must undoubtedly conclude,

1 st, That the yellow fever is the first and highest degree of malignant
bilious fever, the proximate cause of which is a contagious gas received into
the alimentary channel, and into all the viscera of the bile; and that this
original circumstance distinguishes it from the plague, which is produced by a
poison immediately received into the blood.

2 dly, The contagious miasmata which constitutes the yellow fever, is, at
first, received into the bile. I^ there alters i^^nd stops its circulation,
excretion, and secretion; and it afterward, by its acrimony, inflames and
produces a mortification of the abdominalia, and a decomposition or
putrefaction of the blood My dissertation in answer to the honorary
prize-question proposed by the Medical Society of Connecticut, in the year
1795, on the chemical properties of the yellow fever of New York, etc. contains
a theory apparently contrary to the above physiological and pathological
arguments. It is consequently requisite for me either to make some apology or
to give a proper explanation. Were no improvement to be expected from repeated
instances of the same facts, any scientifical attempt would no longer the
praiseworthy, nor repeated investigation meritorious. My theoretical
conjecture, however, that the calorie of a hot summer, might produce, by the
absorption of aqueous particles, the fermentation or putrefaction of the blood,
and thus create a malignant fever, is the natural result of adopted elements
and principles. By the help of these, we never fall into contradictory
opinions, although we are liable to mistaken applications. Besides, I had long
since suspected that contagious effluvia might contaminate and corrupt the
animal fluids, as well as that they might be altered by the loss of some of
their component parts; and this was my belief in the above mentioned
dissertation. "It may be said, that contagious miasmata, whether imported or
locally produced, when admitted into the blood, will cause its putrefaction. We
know that there are some proofs of such dreadful effects, and we are acquainted
with the deleterious qualities of mephitic air. There are, no doubt, other
causes, which also destroy the equilibrium of our component parts. There are,
in fact, chemical phenomena, which may arise in any town or neighborhood where
there are pestilential effluvia." Vide Dissertation on the prize-question
proposed by the Medical Society of Connecticut on the chemical properties of
the effluvia of the contagion of (...) in New York, A^^. XI. p. ^^.
.

3 dly, It appears, also, that there is but one sort of yellow fever; that its
different degrees of malignancy originate from obvious circumstances; and that
the disorder will prove fatal or not, according to the mode of treatment, or to
the nature of the constitution and previous state of the body of the patient.

4 thly, There are but two periods of the disorder, that of the symptoms, and
that of the crises. The first generally last three days, seldom five, and
instances have even occurred of but one day. The crises always prove mortal if
they appear before the third day.

The symptoms are, spontaneous vomitings of the bile, or nausea; violent fever;
sickness of the stomach; florid state of the face; restlessness; pains in the
limbs and in the back; and a prostration of strength.

The crises are, hemorrhages; swelling and suppuration of the parotids;
petechiae; jaundice; fluxes from the bowels; and black vomit.

5 thly, In cases of recovery, the fever is remittent during seven days, like
the causos or febris ardens; all the crises may safely take place on or after
the fifth day, except the black vomit; but early and profuse evacuations of
hepatic and cystic bile are the only critical signs and proofs of next recovery.

SECTION III. Method of Treatment of the Yellow Fever.
WITHIN these last five years, the period in which the yellow fever has made
its general appearance in America, several methods of treatment have been
published here; and the same subject has also been ably discussed by many
eminent West India writers. I will not, gentlemen, attempt to comment or decide
upon the respective merits of either; but, I must confess, that I have never
yet been able sufficiently to discover by what indications the use of their
remedies was to be directed. Thus it frequently happens that they sometimes
succeed and sometimes not; and the mercury, bleedings, bark, cold or warm
baths, acids, blisters, etc. often failed even in the hands of those who
contended the most warmly for their application. If they afterward attempted
to explain under what circumstances their proposed method has failed, they have
generally offered vague pretenses and uncertain rules. Let us then, with
candor, declare this unexceptionable rule in medicine, that no method of cure
should ever be depended on, unless it be founded on such rational grounds that
the remedies employed will answer, under every circumstance, the indications of
the disease. Experience has, at last, proved that bleeding and mercury are
sufficiently powerful to conquer the most malignant degrees of the yellow
fever; yet, in the use of these remedies, the greatest care and circumspection
are requisite in order to insure their success. Before I enter upon the
explanation of my method of treatment of the yellow fever, and of the proper
mode of administering these fundamental remedies, suffer me, gentlemen, to
observe, that, in America at least, Dr. B. Rush has the honor to stand
foremost in support of their efficacy. While no other method seemed equally
successful, that of venesection and calomel was supported, during the two
instances of our calamity, notwithstanding the most bitter invectives and
sarcastic publications were continually levelled against it. Some unfortunate
and unsuccessful cases were held out as proofs of its danger; and the charge of
profuse and indiscriminate bleeding was exbited as a murderous practice. These
objections, however, when weighed with impartiality, will be found to result
from the unavoidable inconveniences of a temporary and violent epidemic. One
may arise from the method of indications, which cannot, in cases so uncommon,
be equally well-understood by every physician; and the other, from the
impossibility of conducting the sick with regularity and dispatch, among so
great a number of patients, who are often deprived even of the necessary
accommodations, or who frequently mistake their own cases; and who, in the
height of their despondency, communicate their terrors to the attendants. Too
profuse and indiscriminate bloodletting, may have occurred in several
instances; but I am happy in asserting that, as far as I am acquainted with
them, they could not be fairly derived either from the private or public
opinions of Dr. Rush. It is, therefore, peculiarly pleasing to me, that I am
thus able, in some measure, to vindicate the character of an eminent and humane
physician; and more especially so, because in some points of theory I may be
found to dissent from him.

It is only from the pathology of the yellow fever, that any safe or
efficacious rules for its cure can be derived. For every judicious observer,
will heartily acknowledge, that, if the numerous remedies which have hitherto
been recommended for the yellow fever, have produced a cure, they have likewise
too frequently failed. If then it be a fact, that the contagion peculiarly
connects itself with the bile, and corrupts it, we may clearly and safely
establish, as a first indication, that the bile ought to be speedily evacuated,
purified, and renewed. If it be true, that the morbid state of the bile causes
its stagnation, produces obstructions in the liver, and prevents the entrance
of a considerable quantity of blood into that large viscera, we may point out
as another fundamental indication, the necessity of speedily opposing the
immense revulsion of the blood in the arterial system, which increases the
general spasms, together with all the symptoms of inflammation, and which
continually endangers the life of the patient I find with pleasure that the
theory of this pathology has been already adopted by respectable writers, and
has been ascribed to the bilious fevers of warm countries, among which our
yellow fever is of the first and most malignant degree.

Whenever there is a deficiency in the powers of the circulating system, the
larger vessels are distended, particularly the vena portarum; this causes the
bilious evacuations in warm climates. Critical Review for May, 1795, on Rush's
bilious yellow fever.


. Infine, if it be a fact that the bile, when infected, will contaminate the
blood, and vice versa; and when the whole frame, labors under iminent danger
of putrefaction, that the animal fluids must undergo a depuratory crisis within
a certain space of time, and that by the means of natural or artificial
exertions, it will be necessary to be well-acquainted with all the accidents
attending malignant and putrid fevers, to accomplish all the secondary
indications, and to obtain, as regularly as possible, a perfect resolution of
the malady, without unnecessary or dangerous means. To give, however,
gentlemen, a more explanatory view of primary and secondary indications, for
the mode of treatment of the yellow fever, suffer me to exemplify them by the
following historical case, wherein I shall notice the minutest circumstances,
both with regard to the disease and to the medical prescriptions which were
administered.

T... B... about twenty-two years of age, was of a sound constitution, and of a
regular life. He had lately lost his father and a brother in the prevailing
fever. After their death, he, with the rest of the family, went into the
country; but he had already been infected with the contagion. This was soon
manifested by all the alarming symptoms, but chiefly by the spontaneous puking
of the bile. He was immediately carried back to town, where proper assistance
might be obtained; and, before a physician could be sent for, an experienced
nurse had ordered him to be copiously bled, and had given him a dose of salts.
These orders were good but insufficient, and nothing further was done until the
evening of the second day. At this time I was called in, when I found him
extremely ill, and very nearly approaching to that prostration of organic
action which does not even give time for an exacerbation of fever. Having just
lost his parent and a brother with this same disease, he could not but consider
himself also as a devoted victim. His spirits were, therefore uncommonly low,
and he appeared involuntarily to shed tears. This circumstance, agreeably to
the rule of Hippocrates, I considered as an ominous and fatal prognostic. A
confused and gr^^n c^^ntenants, cold extremities, and a hard and low pulse,
marked the rapid progress of the disease, during only thirty hours of sickness.
All the good effects that might have resulted from the first copious bleeding
had been lost; since no proper help had been (...)ed for the evacuation of the
bile. My first consideration was, therefore, to endeavor to ra^se
(...)cervation of the fever to its natural co(...) the disease can never go
reg(...)y the ^^gh^^^ different periods, and the patient will irrevo^^bly die,
if he is so much exhausted that it cannot be produced. To obtain, therefore,
this desirable change, I depended much upon the action of the mind on the
nerves, and eadeavoured much to raise the hope and confidence of the despairing
patient. Whi^^ I kept his pulse and hand within n^^e, they acquired a sensible
energy. His extremities became warm; and, wishing to remove every obstacle to
the operations of the treatment, I immediately ordered a carminative and
nitrous (...) Thus I considered that the previous congestion^ of the foeces
might be discharged, and that the subsequent and necessary evacuations could no
lo^^^r be retarded. At night, the patient was, agreeably to my wishes and
expectatations, seized with a violent exacerbation of fever, attended with
delirium. This state gave the positive, indication of a copious bleeding; for
by it I fulfilled the second fundamental indication abovementioned, viz. that
of emptying the blood vessels, when the blood can be no longer admitted into
the liver, and when the large vessels are in a state of infection. Agreeably to
this indication, the patient lost fifteen ounces of blood on the night of the
second day. Without losing-time, the bile was to be evacuated; for a favorable
relaxation, and an absolute cessation of spasms, irritation, and inflammation,
always succeed a copious bleeding, and at this time the medicines have
consequently more power. I directed the patient, therefore, to take
immediately, and every two hours after, a dose of calomel gvi. jalap, gx. and
scamm. of Alep. gii.. This prescription was to be alternately followed with
proper diluting and cooling drinks. On the third day, the medicine operated
satisfactorily; for a prodigious quantity of green or cystic bile was
evacuated. The pulse, however, exhibited a state of constriction, and the
stomach was sick.

Let us now venture a few conjectures on these unfavourable symptoms. Among the
remedies which we employ, there are many, whose power and efficacy we can
understand and analyze; but there are others also which may answer all our
wishes, without our being able to account for their successful operation. Thus,
if in the remotest foldings and cavities of our viscera, there exist a
corrupted fluid which we wish to evacuate, it is obvious that venefection,
affecting the whole system and distending the nerves and the vessels, will
operate on each diseased part; yet how does it happen that a mercurial powder
so effectually obtains the secretion of the hepatic and cystic bile? This
circumstance, as well as that of the same effect being produced by the regulus
of antimony, when taken into the stomach, cannot as yet be explained. In the
case now under contemplation, twelve grains of calomel, mixed with other
drastics, was sufficient to evacuate a great quantity of cystic bile. It was
not, therefore, improbable, that by a continued action of the mercury another
quantity of bile might be forced out and secreted from the liver to the
duodenum and the stomach. It was the acridity of this bile which caused the
constriction of the pulse, and which sickened the stomach. Under these
circumstances I considered it safer to effect its evacuation by a vomit than
otherwise; and I consequently ordered an emetic. It produced the happiest
effects; for, at the close of the third day, the patient had scarcely any
inflammatory symptoms, and enjoyed a visible remission of fever. His skin
appeared moist; and his countenance was more cool and placid. All his
sensations were agreeably affected by the comforts of a good bed, and a room
warmed and purified by a chimney fire.

It should appear, gentlemen, that our patient is now brought, from the most
perilous state to the point of recovery. The moles movenda of the arterial
system, and of the large infarcted vessels; have been relieved, and the
contaminated bile evacuated. Thus, therefore, two important indications have
been timely fulfilled; and the actual state of the patient appears to be that
of the vis vitae, which always marks the beginning of the convalescence. But
you will remember that the last indication has not yet been obtained, and that,
within a certain space of time, it must be effected either by natural or
artificial exertions. This indication has already been described as relating to
the depuratory crisis of the whole fluids, when they have been more or less
contaminated; and it comprises all the secondary ones for the treatment of
malignant and bilious remittents. It is beyond the power of medicine to abridge
the courses and periods of these fevers. But, notwithstanding their different
stages cannot be so accurately traced as would enable us to form a
nomenclature, yet some general rules have been deduced; and, upon the authority
of these, it must be allowed, that the bilious remittent, like the causos or
febris ardens, must last four or seven days, and may even be protracted to nine
or fourteen. Exceptions to this march are very scarce; and the case No. 6,
which was perfectly resolved in three days, I never could account for in any
other way than the following. By the primary effects of the contagion on the
bile, the patient did not receive its secondary transmission into the blood,
and had not consequently the elaboration of nature to suffer, but was cured as
soon as the evacuations of the hepatic and cystic bile were obtained.

But, gentlemen, the illness of my young patient did not end at the point I
have last mentioned; for I soon discovered another paroxism of fever. For the
relief of this I prescribed gentle remedies, such as carminative injections and
diluting draughts; and previous warm bath had been applied to the inferior
extremities and abdomen. You will thus perceive, that I consider mild
operations only as desirable, during the exacerbations of the fever, except
that bleeding is requisite when its inflammatory characters are too high. In
the present case, I could see no urging necessity for venesection; for the bile
had already been evacuated, and the remission of the symptoms and fever had
been regular and uniform. Besides endeavoring to preserve the life of his
patient, a physician should be careful in the use of those means which, by
their frequency, may create other diseases, or render the convalescence very
long and perilous. On the night of the fourth day, the fever of the patient was
so violent, that, in his delirium, he got up and went naked into several
corners of the house. How wonderful, gentlemen, are the exertions of Nature
when she is properly assisted! As soon as this exacerbation was over, the
patient had seveveral copious discharges of bile; red petechiae were observed
on his breast and arms; and his salivary glands being a little affected, he had
a salutary and frequent spitting. The crisis peculiar to the malady was now
beginning to appear. The redness of the skin began gradually to change to a
whitish hue, which I judged would, at a proper time, turn yellow. What were
then my observations; what was I to do; and what had I to expect? The revulsion
of the blood from the veins into the arterial system was certainly finished;
and the corrupted bile, by which the liver was infarcted, was secreting and
diffusing partly in the bowels, and partly in the blood. Mercurial drastics
were still necessary; and, by their means, I again procured copious evacuations
of yellow bile which was probably from the liver. On the fifth day, the
yellowness was visible; a quantity of this stagnant bile having mixed with the
blood. It was then necessary to accelerate and stimulate the circulation by
sudorifics and tonics; and the stomach, being languid and exhausted, some
restorative and nourishing substances were to be administered. Thus, from the
fifth to the sixth day, the patient was assisted, and enjoyed some natural
sleep. His fever had been very moderate and attended with but little delirium.
On the sixth, observing no further existing cause of irritation, I ordered a
mild nitrous cathartic to keep up the motion of the bowels, and to prepare, by
natural evacuations, if possible, the approaching final resolution of the
malady. This took place, during the night of the seventh day, by an equal and
profuse perspiration, by copious urines, containing a thick yellow sediment,
and by repeated discharges from the bowels.. I then desired that the patient
should be put in clean linen and in another bed. I must not, however, omit
observing, that the sheets and clothes with which he had been covered during
the last days of his illness, were spotted with a kind of yellow purulent
matter, and had a very offensive smell. This circumstance is always a striking
proof of the final depuratory crisis terminating a malignant fever, and more
peculiarly exhaling the contagious miasmata of the yellow fever.

From this moment, the patient could not, with any probability, experience any
further exacerbations of fever; and he wanted no further assistance than such
as is necessary to convalescents. He was in this state during five or six days,
and a gradual nourishment, with two grains of opium, given at night, were for
some time administered. This remedy is very restorative after acute and
dangerous diseases. It calms the general irritation of the viscera; it fixes
the oscillation of the nerves; it procures repose and comfort; it gives some
tonic power to the alimentary channel; and, infine, it helps the dispersion of
the yellow serum remaining in the cellular membranes.

A scrutinizing perusal of the preceding case, will, perhaps, gentlemen, afford
a better idea of my method of treatment of the yellow fever, than any treatise
I could give. I shall, therefore, conclude this section with the following
propositions.

1 st. The pathology of the yellow fever suggests three indications to be
observed in the method of treatment. The first is the speedy evacuation and
renovation of the corrupted and acrib bile; the second, to counteract the
progress of inflammation and to discuss the congestion of the large blood
vessels, which cannot discharge into the liver; and the last, to assist the
depuratory crisis of the whole system, which is to be effected within a certain
space of time, and by natural or artificial means.

2 dly, The calomel is a specific of unexceptionable success, to evacuate the
hepatic and cystic bile; provided its action be directed toward the bowels, by
being united with other drastics. As a sialagogue it may be favorable: and the
mercury, applied externally, cannot be useful but in the last indication.

3 dly, The first indication will be also successfully assisted by the use and
action of an antimonial emetic; but, before this and the calomel could be
efficaciously administered, the systom must be brought to a considerable
relaxation and temporary cessation of the inflammatory symptoms.

4 thly, Profuse and repeated bleedings are the only sure means of abating the
inflammation, and of fulfilling all the views of the second indication, which
occur at the exacerbation of the fever. There may, however, be some advantage
in sparing the blood; but, during the three first days, not to take enough of
it would be fatal.

5 thly, The last indication requires all the medical rules for the treatment
of malignant fevers within a certain space of time; but the two first must be
completely observed within three days; for, in the latter period, the
contagious miasmata may already have contaminated all the animal fluids and
mortified several viscera.

6 thly and lastly, With the above indications, rules, and remedies, in
conjunction with the following practical cautions, the treatment of the yellow
fever cannot fail of success, if the patient be free from previous complai^ts
of diseased viscera or vitiated constitution.

SECTION IV. Practical Cautions for the Treatment of the Yellow Fever.
OMNE NIMIUM NATURAE INIMICUM. Hip. Aphor. 51. Sect. 2.
THIS was one of the cautions laid down by the immortal father of the medical
art, who was possessed of all the treasures both of judgment and experience.
All that is too much is contrary to Nature; and even our important discoveries
of a specific and of remedies for the yellow fever, will become dangerous if we
administer them without proportion or restraint. I shall, therefore, gentlemen,
proceed to consider a few important cautions in venesection and the use of
mercury for the cure of the yellow fever, and then enumerate such other objects
as relate merely to the patient.

It is a well authenticated fact, that frequent success has attended profuse
blood letting in the yellow fever. If the injudicious and illiberal attacks
that have been levelled against it during our late calamity, have destroyed the
confidence of some of the patients and their attendants, it has been owing to
the force of ridicule which is too apt to seduce unreflecting minds. But time
and experience lead to truth and will surmount every obstacle. When the
celebrated Moliere had, by several dramatic pieces, painted the medical
profession in the most ludicrous colors, the public laughed at the ignorance
of pretended physicians. But the result was, that a more just discrimination
was afterward made between them and practitioners of genuine respectability.
However, the public will doubtless readily acknowledge that facts and
principles will always stand forth against every sarcastic assailant. To those
who think that indiscriminate bloodletting was recommended as a specific in the
yellow fever, we would remark, that the principles held out by physicians,
ought always to be examined with impartiality and attention. We say, it is
true, that, for the cure of the yellow fever, we must bleed early and as
copiously as fifteen or twenty ounces at a time; that, in each exacerbation of
fever, during the three first days, bleeding ought to be free in proportion to
the apparent inflammatory symptoms or elevation of the pulse; that the
stagnation of the bile in the liver and other viscera infarcted, suspending the
circulation of the blood in the large vessels, ought partly to be considered as
an immediate cause of mortification, and partly requiring a great depletion of
blood; that the power and efficacy of mercurial drastic doses, being always in
a ratio to the relaxation of the system, it will be previously necessary to
relax by bleeding, and this perhaps as often as they are administered; that the
measure of bloodletting has no bounds but that of a visible and favorable
change, and no terms to its reiteration, but the marked period where the
effects of the malady are irrevocably fixe^ for death or recovery. After
admitting these general rules, two cautions arise from pathological principles,
viz. the time of bleeding and the quantity of blood to be taken. If venesection
produces such powerful changes in the equilibrium of the animal fluids, and if
it relaxes the solids, we ought not to have recourse to it, without a strict
attention to the stage of the malady, to the exacerbation of the fever, and to
the formation of certain crises. 1 st, During the three first days of the
fever, this remedy will doubtless answer all the aforesaid indications and
purposes; but, when the effects of the contagion are diffused in the viscera
and blood, as is generally the case after the third day, bloodletting may
answer very well for certain secondary symptoms, but would then be useless for
primary indications; and even if the patient was likely to recover, such means
as have an enweakening tendency, would only retard the favorable event. Hence
arises the practical caution of sparing blood, if possible, after the third
day. 2 dly, As the exacerbation of the fever exhibits all the extent and
degrees of the inflammatory symptoms, it affords the best opportunity of
judging of the necessary quantity of blood to be taken. At this period, also,
the blood vessels are infarcted or are in a state of congestion; while, at any
other, nature seems to rest, and it is perhaps better to let her help the
patient without disturbing the crises and operations of the fever. Hence arises
the practical method of bleeding at the very moment of exacerbation; but seldom
before and never immediately after. For, in the first case, we may retard it,
when it is essentially necessary, and in the second, we intervert its effects
and render them incomplete. 3 ly, We have already noticed, that the admission
of the bile into the blood, the hemorrhage, eruptions on the skin, etc. were
crises of the disease, and that when one or many of them take place, the fate
of the patient is decided. If he has not, however, been bled, before these
symptoms take place, it is seldom in his favor; and if a case should happen,
in which nature, without the assistance of bloodletting, should effect the
resolution of the disease, it must be owing to the uncorrupted state of the
whole mass of forces and fluids. If then, these happy effects can be ascribed
to such a state, we must be careful not to commit the issue of a recovery, or
create irreparable accidents, by a diminution of these forces and fluids. Hence
arises another practical caution of sparing the blood after the appearance of
one or more of the crises. It would be very difficult and almost impossible to
trace all those circumstances, which are to be discovered and determined by
accurate attention and judgment. One instance, however, in the case of T. B.
above related, may serve to illustrate the caution upon bloodletting. His
situation seemed to require a third bleeding, and but little danger could have
resulted from it. It will be remembered, that he had been copiously bled at
first, while in the country, and that, deprived of any further advice, he
remained without medical assistance till the latter end of the second day. At
this time, he was in the most alarming situation, and I waited anxiously for
the second exacerbation, which took place in the night, and indicated a second
copious bleeding. Its effects were so favorable, and it produced so happy a
change, that, at the time of the approach of the third exacerbation, I was
convinced it would be regular, and not attended with too much inflammatory
diathesis; for the patient had still continued to evacuate bile. I then left it
entirely to the forces of nature. It was indeed violent; but its effects
presented regular crises as far as medical rules designate. Infine, I
concluded, that if this last exacerbation could, without bleeding, be attended
with many favorable symptoms, I might continue the treatment without using it
any further. I afterward received the greatest benefit from this reserve; for
it rendered the convalescence of the patient very short. This generally is the
case with those who lose but little blood Mr. Lieutand, physician of the late
king of France, has proved that profuse bleeding causes such a relaxation of
all the blood vessels, as greatly to enlarge their capacities, which, by
admitting more blood than is necessary, creates all the maladies incident to a
plethoric state. It will, consequently, be of the utmost service to our patient
to spare as much blood as possible. The mercurial drastics should be given
immediately after bloodletting, as they will then produce a more efficacious
effect; and, as the exacerbations after the third day till the end of the
fever, are always decreasing, it must be concluded, that, admitting the remedy
indispensable during the three first days, necessity will hardly be found for
more than three or four venesections.
. (Vide case 7.)

The exhibition of the calomel, in the yellow fever, will present to us more
important and unobjectionable grounds of caution, when we retrace the different
modes of the operation of this precious medicine, in order to confine its use
to what absolutely requires it. We have seen that, as a drastic purge, it was
particularly adapted to the excretion of the hepatic and cystic bile. To this
striking circumstance, we cannot help ascribing the repeated success of those
physicians who first recommended the use of this medicine. We are also
acquainted with its effects as a sialogogue or salivating remedy; since many
physicians have thought that this kind of operation could be produced by it
only, and could be depended upon. Infine, the use of mercury, in the form of
ointment, has been applied in many cases of the yellow fever, and I shall
therefore, examine whether it will thus answer some useful purposes or not.
From these preliminaries, gentlemen, I shall derive only one proposition, for
practical caution respecting the use of mercury, including all my own rules.

The calomel, or mercurius dulcis, should never be administered as a salivating
remedy in the yellow fever. It is sufficient to direct its action toward the
bowels by the help of other powerful drastics. It will assist the crisis of the
suppuration of the parotids if it can take place. The external application of
mercury will not effect an evacuation of the bile, and could not answer but for
the depuration of the system if the patient had not exacerbations of fever; but
in this hypothesis the remedy must prove useless and dangerous.

Several important questions arise from the preceding proposition. What are the
objections against the salivating method? Is the crisis of the swelling and
suppuration of the parotids different from common salivation? Can it take place
in the yellow fever without the action of mercury? If it is a successful
crisis, why do we avoid exciting it? And finally, if a mercurial preparation,
taken internally, is allowed to be a good specific, why does another simple
mercurial preparation, applied externally, prove useless or dangerous? Let us
now resume each of these questions, and heartily investigate them, unattended
with a lengthy and scientifical collection of authorities, with which I suppose
my medical reader well acquainted. In every kind of complaint there is not one
of those revolutions or admirable crises in the frame, which are excited by the
combined action of remedies, with a view of obtaining a cessation of the
disorder, that is not an exact imitation of what the natural and spontaneous
laws would accomplish, if they were not obstructed. The best, therefore, we can
do is what nature frequently operates without our assistance, and often before
it can even be obtained. Thus, among all the singular circumstances to be
remarked at the end or resolution of malignant fevers, the swelling and
suppuration of the glands and parotids has been noticed as one of the most
favorable crises, and I have already observed that Pouppe Desportes, in his
description of the malady of Siam, had particularly noticed its final and
successful operation. To his authority I could subjoin that of many
physiological writers. Experience also has exhibited to me several instances of
the most perfect and successful suppuration of the parotids, in the yellow
fever, without much mercury or none at all. (Vide cases No. 8 and 10.) I do not
doubt, gentlemen, but to this crisis, which is not uncommon, we are indebted
for the consistent and bold attempt of the physicians who first discovered the
success of calomel in the yellow fever. They did not perhaps notice, that it
cured by its drastic power, and that a succeeding suppuration of the parotids
was rather a spontaneous crisis, than the effect of the remedy. But if this be
so, there are others also which spontaneously prognosticate a perfect cure in
all malignant fevers, as well as in our epidemic. These are yellowness, profuse
evacuations from the bowels, hemorrhages, transudation of corrupted blood from
the lips This is one of the most singular crises I ever saw; and, as it occurs
but seldom to practitioners, I think it deserves description. The subject was a
poor man, of about thirty years of age. He was in the third day of his fever,
entirely in the hands of nature, and destitute of any proper assistance.
Although he was very ill, the usual medical assistance operated so favorably,
that I desired he might not be sent to the hospital. On the fifth day, some
blood ran from different parts of his lips; where it soon hardened and
thickened so much, that he could hardly received any thing into his mouth. The
least motion or violence would cause a new hemorrhage. On the seventh day, the
yellowness appeared much less than is common; but the size and weight of those
black scabs were so great, that they reached the nostrils, and rendered the
respiration very difficult. The patient was in the greatest torture, and made a
hideous appearance. I ordered the lips to be washed with some warm mucilage. A
few pieces of scab were soon detached, but new beds formed again though much
thinner. They gradually diminished during the convalescence, which was
otherwise rapid and regular.
, etc. All these crises, which are equally good when they take place at a
proper time, appear various in different kinds of malignant fever. Thus, the
yellowness is particularly characteristic of our fever, and the lymphatic
swellings, in the same manner, designate the plague, etc. But, if in both
diseases, the suppuration of the parotids could be excited, by art or nature,
the one would not be attended with a jaundice, nor the other with a swelling;
for there is never more than one crisis peculiarly spontaneous. The most
convincing proof, however, that the suppuration of the parotids ought to be
considered as a spontaneous crisis in this fever, may be derived from the
observation which every practitioner must have made on the progress, stages,
and space of time, through which a salivation is commonly artificially
obtained. Few instances are found, even among delicate patients, in which it
breaks out in less than eight days, and it generally takes two or three weeks.
As much time is afterward necessary to obtain, by it, a cessation of the
existing symptom or disease. Now, it must be remembered, that five or six days
only embrace all the periods and issue of the yellow fever. Consequently, if a
suppuration of the parotids takes place, it will rather be spontaneous, than be
the result of a few doses of calomel; for the course of the disease is too
rapid to depend upon its salivating effects. But if the crises of a swelling
and suppuration of the parotids is to be considered as a spontaneous result,
peculiar to one individual, and not to another; if it be a mere chance to
receive it, as well as to be favored with another as hemorrhage, flux of the
bowels, etc. will it be prudent to administer the calomel as a salivary
medicine only? Will not the safety of so rapid and violent a disorder be
committed to an uncertain effect? And will not the treatment be rendered an
obstacle to such means as nature employs to get rid of the imminent morbid
cause?

To enforce this argument, we must examine what indications, facts, and
theories, have united in support of calomel. This medicine has undoubtedly a
peculiar efficacy in evacuating the bile, and in cleaning the infarcted liver;
and I trust that no systematic practitioner will deny the truth of this fact.
Why then do they prefer an uncertain operation to that which is as easily and
as well produced in all subjects? Why would they endanger the issue of the
malady, by fixing the whole effects of the mercury upon the primae viae, in
order to confine its action on the salivary glands only, and thus render it
useless in the evacuation of the specific contagion, at a time when the most
urging necessity calls for it? Why would they give time to the poisoned bile to
injure its reservoirs, and then, by pouring into the blood, infect the whole
system? Why would they believe that the evacuation of that specific contagion
can be better effected by means of the salivary glands than by the natural
excretory organs, as long as its sources in the viscera are not emptied? Such,
however, would be the effects of adopting exclusively the idea of salivation by
calomel for the cure of the yellow fever.

In dwelling a little longer, upon a subject of so much importance, I do not,
gentlemen, fear to be tedious; and I trust I shall be excused when I attribute
many unsuccessful instances of our treatment of the yellow fever, by calomel
and bleeding, to the neglect of the considerations I shall now submit to your
attention. I have already observed, that when the hepatic and cystic bile are
evacuated, the system remained more or less infected; because the large blood
vessels, which pour into the liver, and receive its blood again, must have
washed off enough of the contagious bile. I also stated, that to repair such
effects, a general depuratory crisis was afterward to take place, within a
certain space of time, and by natural or artificial means. As this
physiological rule cannot be denied, it must be acknowledged, by every
practitioner, that it would be impossible, as well as improper, to excite, in
every patient, the same final and depuratory crisis. They will remember, that,
in a woman, it may, perhaps, take place by a discharge from the uterus, and in
men, by perspiration, hemorrhages I remember seeing, during the late calamity,
a publication in one of the newspapers of Philadelphia, in which the writer
pretended to prove the necessity of bleeding in the yellow fever, by the
frequent hemorrhages of the patient. I differ greatly from this opinion, and
believe it might occasion considerable mistakes in practice. In the highest
turgency of the blood vessels, the small or capillary ones, have, according to
their size, as much to resist as the largest, which are seldom known to burst,
even when the pulse is in the highest state of elevation, except in cases of
appoplexy, when the blood cannot return into the heart. Hemorrhages are always
the effect of a lesion or of the morbid state of the texture of the vessels. In
(...) diseases, they originate from the vascular system; and they never happen
during the exacerbations, but on the contrary during the remissions, and when
the pulse has returned to its greatest calm. At this period, the relaxed
vascular system, pours off a fluid ejected from the circulation, and not
resumed in the veins. It is from this cause that hemorrhages in fevers are
considered as ominous prognostics, according to the time of their appearance.
, evacuations from the bowels, etc. The discovery of what will be the tendency
of the patient, and by what crisis he will be finally assisted, remains
consequently with us. When this is made, we shall be obliged again to
acknowledge, that the calomel, when administered to salivate, will, in many
cases, counteract the march of the disease; and that it will obstruct every
crisis, but that of the mouth. A purge counteracts the salivation, while the
latter has the same effect upon all that can be obtained by hemorrhages,
perspirations, etc. It follows, therefore, that, if the patient has neither
time or a natural tendency to undergo the operation of salivating, this means
would be contrary to the cure of the yellow fever.

The practice of exciting a salivation, for the cure of several diseases, will
better explain its equivocal effects in the yellow fever. By it, the morbid
cause is transported from any part of the body or from the blood, into the
salivary glands, from whence it is insensibly washed out, attended with a most
offensive smell; and the mercury secrets, by these glands, a great quantity of
saliva. Should others give a different explanation of this phenomenon, yet we
must all agree as to the fact, and this is sufficient. It cannot be denied but
that the affection of the mouth varies afterward very much among different
individuals, and although this circumstance cannot be accounted for, the
results may be satisfactory and have the desired effect. There are patients on
whom the greatest quantity of mercury has never been able to affect their
mouths. Some receive an easy affection in the sublinguals and maxillary, but
their spitting is unattended with a swelling of the parotids, and consequently
has no critical good effect. The state of the teeth, their being covered with
earthy scales, or much decayed, and previous maladies of the gums, may, in many
cases, render the action of the mercury so painful and even dangerous, by
hemorrhages, that the course of the medicine must be interrupted, without
fulfilling the adopted intention. Infine, the practice of administering
mercury, without salivation, by the means of certain precautions, recommended
by many physicians as equally successful and safer in the results, are
considerations sufficiently powerful to make us disapprove of the salivating
method in a disorder so rapid, and the malignancy of which, might be conquered
by less equivocal means.

Resuming my former proposition, I recommend, as an important caution, that
calomel should never be administered by itself nor in the method or proportions
intended for salivation; that, on the contrary, it must be but about the third
part of a drastic mixture, by the means of which it will immediately be
diffused into the bowels; and that, if, in spite of jalap, scammonea, or
gamboge, it is retained too long without operation, an oily cathartic, or some
neutral salts, should be given to prevent the mercury from ascending, and to
enforce the bilious evacuations, the importance of which has been sufficiently
proved. This method leaves always time enough for the crisis of the mouth if it
is necessarily intended by nature. It helps it sufficiently, and it even
accelerates its appearance, and gives it all the characters that can render it
perfect and salutary. Such cases have occurred to me in the proportion of one
out of ten In practicing the method of administering calomel, in the proportion
of a third against two-thirds of other drastics, as jalap, scammonea, etc. the
following has been the result of my practice in the worst cases.

Out of seven patients to whom the calomel was carefully administered as a
drastic, I lost only one.

I had one spontaneous suppuration of the parotids out of ten.

One accidental affection of the mouth, with gentle spitting, unavoidably
caused by the calomel, and without consequence, out of four.

One critical resolution by hemorrhage, out of three.

One by eruptions out of twenty.

And, finally, one by transudation of the blood from the lips out of fifty.


.

Few observations remain against the external application of mercurial
ointment. Admitting that it tends to the purification of the blood, what will
be thought if the original cause and the foam of contagion are not destroyed?
The reservoirs of the bile are not emptied by mercurial frictions. This remedy,
therefore, cannot answer any good purpose, except after the first period of the
disease, when previous evacuations have been accomplished. This hypothesis,
however, would still be liable to considerable objections, such as the
exacerbations of the fever, and the turgency of the blood vessels, which never
fail to manifest themselves as soon as the mercury is admitted into the
circulation. The first would be considerably counteracted by mercurial
frictions, while they are necessary to terminate the malady within a certain
space of time; and the other would become precisely one of its most dangerous
symptoms, and would be renewed and settled before we could have time to oppose
it, or to obtain any decisive and good result. I saw, in the last prevalence of
the fever, a robust young man, in the fourth day of his sickness, who had been
regularly rubbed with mercurial ointment. The excretory evacuations had been
neglected; he had not the least affection of the mouth; and he died on the
fifth day.

Some practical cautions respecting emetics also demand our attention. I have
already stated their usefulness in emptying the stomach and duodenum, when, in
the course of the first period, these viscera are sickened, notwithstanding
every other application has been successful. If the mercury, in short, promotes
the secretion of the bile from the liver, this favorable operation is
immediately followed by a sickness of the stomach, and then the emetic is
necessary. (Vide case No. 7.) In many instances, the patients discover a great
aversion to this remedy, and if they are of a delicate nervous constitution
they frequently refuse to take it. In such cases I employ an equivalent remedy,
strongly recommended by the ingenious Mr. Dubois de Rochefort, in his Materia
Medica. He calls it un emetique cathartique en lavage. One grain of tartar
emetic, or one grain and an half at most, is to be dissolved, with half an
ounce, or three drams, of salt of Glaubert, in about two pounds of water. The
patient is to drink it by tumblers full every hour. This medicine is not
nauseous; it seldom excites vomitting; and it is always sure to empty the
stomach and bowels downwards. It is a general observation in practice, that the
patient should, in all acute disorders, be prepared, by various depleting
remedies, for all the subsequent operations. But we must cautiously avoid
giving of pukes in the beginning of the yellow fever, and particularly so if a
profuse bleeding has not immediately preceded it. Indeed, the turgency of the
arterial system is then so great, that the convulsions of the stomach may have
dreadful consequences. I have frequently seen them followed with such fatal
accidents, that I think it my duty to mention the necessity of a cautious
reserve It is a general custom among practitioners, to prescribe blisters in
desperate cases, and I have often been strongly importuned to administer them,
by the nurses and friends of the patients, whose hopes of their efficacy are
sincere, but who are unacquainted with their real consequences. I shall not
here enquire into the nature and extent of their utility, nor the method of
their application. After referring to all that has been discovered and adopted
in the treatment of the yellow fever, it must be allowed that they are
absolutely useless, and cannot answer the least purpose in any period of the
disorder. As, therefore, there are such numerous distressing circumstances
attending an unfortunate issue of the treatment of the yellow fever, humanity
requires us to exclude this excrutiating application.
.

Admitting the above practical cautions to be adopted by those physicians, who,
with great propropriety, have chosen calomel and bleeding for the cure of the
yellow fever, still, gentlemen, if the patient labors under the complaints of
diseased viscera and vitiated constitution, or if he has not made timely
application for medical assistance, they are not sufficient. Under this twofold
consideration, every impartial judge will make due allowances for the medical
art in unfortunate cases of death. It is too true, that, during the prevalence
of a dreadful and contagious epidemic, confusion and despair, seclusion from
intercourse, and erroneous opinions on the first symptoms of complaint, expose
the patient to dissident delays and improper measures; but experience and the
warnings of physicians, ought to teach our fellow citizens the importance of an
early application to medical aid, in the cure of one of the most malignant
disorders that ever was known among nations. In cases where the disease would
have gone through its periods in the short space of three days, one day lost
proved fatal. Those also, in whom the malady was of longer continuance, and who
remained unassisted during the first days, found, alas! a similar fate. Let no
one, therefore, for his own sake, be careless about any slight instance of
complaint which he may experience during the prevalence of an epidemic; for,
although various degrees of bilious or other complaints may appear, and though
their mildness may have nothing common with the rapid and malignant effects of
the former, yet, at the first call, the physican himself feels obliged to
employ all the energy of his practice, notwithstanding he sees but partial and
suspicious symptoms. His severity of judgment and prescription, will not be
attended with dangerous consequences; but will happily prepare the proper
treatment for any unexpected malignant case.

In order to illustrate the importance of an early application to physicians,
during the season which unfortunately creates all degrees of bilious,
remittent, and malignant fevers in these climates, I shall familiarly relate an
instructive instance of errors of judgment, in a case of apparently common and
trifling indisposition, and of the inutility of medical aid when applied for
too late. Toward the close of our late calamity, I was sent for by the wife of
an unfortunate husband. From motives of the most unequivocal tenderness and
affection, she unhappily deprived him of such timely aid as would undoubtedly
have saved his life. "During four nights she had not left his bedside.
Persuaded that she knew, by experience, his indisposition, she continued all
this time to give him such remedies as she thought proper. She refused at first
to admit me into his room; for the frequent visits of physicians to infected
houses alarmed her very much. She said that she had been so secluded from any
kind of intercourse with others, that, thank God, the yellow fever had spared
every one of her family. She observed, that she had called me for some advice
respecting the indisposition of her dear husband; but she was happy to think,
that there would not be much occasion for medical aid; for, since she had sent
her message, he appeared to be on the point of recovery. He was up, walking
about the room; and he intended, next day, to ride out to the country." This
last circumstance, struck me with the apprehension that this was the last day
of the life of the patient; and, that I might be better able to judge, I
requested her to give me an account of his indisposition from the beginning.
"He was taken, she replied, with a slight fever and puking, owing to a little
intemperance on the preceding day; and his head ache and pain in the limbs, she
knew very well, proceeded from a violent cold, which she always cured with
sweating tear. She had afterward given him a few pills, which operated
faithfully, and the pains and fever happily subsided. The patient had, last
night, puked something of a black color; but she did not wonder at it, as she
had previously complied with his wish of giving him some coffee and toasted
bread. He now felt very easy, though a little weak, which was of course; and
she could not expect him to be better. In short, she had attended and nursed so
many sick, among friends and relations, that she was sufficiently acquainted
with the necessary management and cautions!!" I cannot tell, after such a
recital, which struck me most, the innocent confidence of the wife, her
unsuspecting ignorance, the irrevocable fate of her husband, or the painful
task which devolved upon me, of destroying so many erroneous opinions, and
plunging, by one word, the whole family in the most unexpected distress. My
silence was interrupted by the patient, who called us up, expressing some
uneasiness and wishing to lie down again. His pulse was small, tense, and
intermittent; and a black instead of a yellow hue was suffused all over his
body. The confusion of his look, was highly expressive of instant danger; and
being suddenly taken with the most extreme weakness, he could hardly answer to
but few of my questions. His wife was now seized with astonishment; and, taking
advantage of the circumstances of the moment, I retired with her from the
presence of an object who was every moment becoming a more deplorable proof of
her blinded confidence -- a victim of a culpable security -- an object whom she
saw no more! But if this singular case, the error of which cannot be ascribed
to neglect, may appear rare; yet how many others have I seen, and how many
deaths may be attributed to parsimony, indifference, and the want of timely
medical assistance!

The last subject of practical caution, gentlemen, that has occurred to me in
the treatment of the yellow fever, is still more serious than the preceding
ones, and of more certain fatal consequences. In other acute disorders, a
physician may perhaps find out some means of relief, and calculate by them a
successful mode of treatment, notwithstanding the patient may labor under
previous complaints of diseased viscera or injured constitution; but in our
epidemic there is no such prospect, or at least it is very faint. During the
two periods of its prevalence, I never met with an instance of recovery from
it, when the whole frame had been materially injured by certain causes. A
pulmonic affection, however, when not too far advanced, would not, I believe,
readily present an obstacle to the cure, as I have once seen exemplified;
because the proximate cause of our fever lies entirely in the bile and
alimentary channel. But I shall always despair, at the first view, of those who
have considerable obstructions or congestions in the liver, or who have
unfortunately kept in their constitution any scorbutic t^int or remains of
syphillitic contagion. On the dreadful effects of this last, in the malignant
yellow fever, I shall present you a few important reflections; and that they may
be carefully contemplated by my young readers, is the philanthropic wish
dictated by too many fatal instances. It has been evidently remarked, that the
epidemic acted most severely upon young and robust men, and that its victims
were chiefly of that description. This is a positive fact, the elucidation of
which will not appear strange, when it is remembered that it is not easy to get
rid of the poison received in the embraces of prostitution; that many methods
for its cure are truly deceiving; that some noble viscera may, by it, remain
essentially diseased; and that the blood, which contains its particles, will be
sooner and unavoidably contaminated by another contagion. The most favorable
symptoms do not always justify the confidence either of the patient or
physician; for we are unacquainted with all the changes and shapes of a malady
which has been justly termed a Proteus or a Cameleon Vide Astruc on venereal
diseases.
. We are daily taught by experience, that, by the cessation of one of its
symptoms, we are not to judge of a perfect cure. It deceives us and the patient
also; for it often lurks within the body, without diffusing into the blood, or
producing any mark of infection. Since there are external swellings and various
sorts of tumors which we attribute to the venereal lues, why should we doubt
but that they may exist internally, or within some noble glands? How often,
indeed, the prostrate gland remains ulcerated, swelled, and tumefied with
exuberances, after the improper cure of a gonorrhoea, by strong astringents, I
leave those to determine, who are acquainted with the precious enquiries of two
famous surgeons on that subject, Petit of France, and Hunter of England. In
these cases it is very easy to appreciate, without further explanation, what
will be the effects on the secretions of the urine, on the functions of the
kidneys, and on the bowels. To such internal and chronical causes, we must
ascribe the numerous obstinate and long complaints, which baffle medical skill
until their primitive cause is cured. Mania, hypocondria, epilepsy, and the
long list of nervous complaints, may originate from the simple irregularity of
secretion of urine into the kidneys; for a part of that fluid remaining in the
blood, must afterward affect the whole, or at least a part of the frame. But
such circumstances have a decided effect in acute, malignant, and contagious
fevers. The violence of the first symptoms is an additional evil to the
enweakened viscera; for by it they are immediately brought to the brink of
destruction. The struggles, the exertions, and the efforts of nature, are then
soon exhausted; and if there is a scale of the natural degrees of health, of
those which may be depended on above it, and of those under which the phenomena
of life ceases, what proportion remains for medical expectation and skill, when
such complicated causes absorb the whole balance of what is termed excitability
by one, and what is thought to be the whole extent of natural laws by another?
Were it not a point of delicacy, gentlemen, for a practitioner to produce
reflections on complaints, that, according to the opinion of many, would
blemish the memory of the dead, I would support this discussion with the
evidences of many cases. May those who are apprised that youth and robust
constitution have been so cruelly exposed, to the deadly blows of the malignant
scourge, bew^re of the enticements of prostitution, and oppose them by the
dictates of reason, religion, decency, and self-preservation.

CONCLUSIVE REFLECTIONS.
1 st, When the congestion of the blood in the large vessels is diminished, and
when the critical evacuations of the hepatic and cystic bile are obtained,
bleeding is no longer requisite during the subsequent days of the fever; and
this is a caution for the success of the final crises and of the convalescence.
Under a general rule, which physicians only can determine, it may be observed,
that venesection is to be copiously applied, during the three first days, at
each exacerbation, and fifteen or twenty ounces at a time for adults.

2 dly, Salivation attended with a suppuration of the parotids is not to be
proposed exclusively of other crises. If it takes place spontaneously, it
becomes salutary. The effect of mercurial drastics in the bowels is to be
unremittingly pursued; but the external application of mercury is useless and
dangerous.

3 dly, The antimonial emetics and the cathartico-emetic answer the most direct
intentions, provided the turgency of the blood vessels has abated.

4 thly, Previous complaints in the liver, in the bladder, in the urinary
passage, etc.; and scorbutic and venereal affections, are unexceptionable
obstacles to the cure of the yellow fever.

SECTION V. General Means to prevent the Generation and Introduction of the
Yellow Fever.
Two contrary opinions have appeared on the origin of the yellow fever, and
have been officially transmitted to the executive, by medical bodies of
Philadelphia. An attentive public, who know that truth cannot be contradictory,
must doubtless feel deeply concerned; and will regret that, after repeated
calamities, no unanimous improvement should be made among the learned on so
interesting a subject. Under these circumstances it becomes necessary, that,
while measures are adopting to prevent its importation, the probability of its
domestic generation should not be forgotten. The public precautions should not
be founded solely on the particular opinions of either p^rty; and experience
may hereafter afford us sufficient and such unexceptionable proof, as will
leave room but for one opinion upon the subject. I do not, therefore,
gentlemen, disapprove of any measures that may be adopted to prevent the
imp^rtation of the yellow fever; on the contrary you will discover that the
above theory has a sensible advantage over the latter, for it also admits of
all the necessary precautions against the effects of noxious exhalations from
the holds of ships or vessels arriving from tropical countries in the hot
season of the year. If we do not implicitly believe that this contagious
epidemic is imported from one country to another, like the plague or the
leprosy, still we admit that it may possibly originate on board of ships during
a long passage, which contain animal or vegetable substances in a state of
fermentation; that, raging contagiously among crews from tropical islands, when
the remains of them come to mix with our citizens, it may spread its infection
among them, and chiefly during the hot season of the year; and that, infine,
when a contagious distemper is known to rage in any part of the world, our
intercourse with it should be cautions and subject to lawful control. Thus
far, therefore, we coincide in the measures of the implicit believers of local
importation. We desire, however, above every thing they have as yet suggested,
to fix the observation of our fellow citizens on the domestic sources of
contagion to which they are exposed. These are self-evident, and demand our
most pointed attention. Why then are we taught to look upon them with
indifference, and to confine our researches exclusively to the ship^ and men
that arrive in our harbors, from distant countries, which at least h(...)
considerably purified by the (...) of the seas?

In order to proceed regularly from the propositions I have above stated, I
deduce the following means to prevent the introduction and generation of the
yellow fever. "I have already proved, 1 st. that it was generated by putrid
effluvia from vegetable and animal fermentation; and 2 dly, that the opinion of
its importation could not be admitted exclusively to its spontaneous
generation, in every warm country, from the abovementioned causes." It of
course follows, that to oppose the possibility of its importation, and of its
breaking from corrupted cargoes, it would be expedient to remove such ships
from our shores as are loaded with colonial produce, at least during the months
of June, July, August, September, and October. The rule for admitting these
articles should be defined according to their good or corrupted state, a few
days after the ships have been unloaded. No intercourse with their crews should
be permitted during five days after. But if a vessel is supposed to contain
corrupted miasmata, and authenticated cases of any kind of bilious fever should
be found on board, the sick ought to be removed to a distant hospital, and the
ship and company perform a quarantine of ten days.

As the outlines of the rep^^^ of the committee of the legislature of this
state, during the present session, are chiefly founded (...) the belief of the
foreign origin of the yellow fever, there is no doubt but such efficacious
measures will be adopted as will prevent the dangerous effects of corrupted
cargoes and waters in the holds of shipping. I shall, therefore, confine my
observations to an examination of the means which experience will hereafter
dictate to be exclusively adopted against more threatening causes of contagion.

Philadelphia, situated on the west bank of the Delaware, and on the narrowest
space between the Schuylkill and that river, may be wholly designated in the
form of a parallelogram, the squares of which are intersected by wide
cross-streets, which raise very little, in certain points, from the south to
the north, but which are open to all the winds, and to all the emanations of
^^e surrounding fields, ponds, marshes, and swamps. The conveniences of foot
ways, their cleanness, and the uniform practice of the inhabitants in
frequently washing the outside of their houses, give to the city a singular
appearance of regularity and neatness highly admired by foreigners. It
contains, however, some capital defects; and too many unfavourable
circumstances concur to injure its salubrity. Water-street, thirty feet wide,
extending from the northern liberties to Pine-street, parallel with the course
of the Delaware, is in a confined low situation. Though the whole of its
extent, it has but few vacancies, is compactly built, very disagreeable, and is
totally deprived of back yards on the side of Frount-street. The same is to be
observed with respect to Penn-street. It likewise runs along the river from
Pine to Cedar-street; and, in the late cases of epidemic, both have been
particularly marked as the first seat of the disease. The main height of the
ground on which the city stands, is nearly forty feet above the Delaware. Many
streets are, however, lower; and, consequently, the adjacent ground, intended
for the continuation of the original plan, is in many places marshy. Some parts
of it contain large and de(...) and the^e stagnant waters are to be see(...) in
almost all the points of the circumference of the city.

The general convenience of shipping to which Philadelphia is indebted for her
rapid increas^ of wealth and population, has rendered her whatever necessary.
They are composed of made groun^ formed by the means of log casements filled
with earth and stones; and they extend along the front of the city and suburbs
to the distance of about two miles. As I shall, in the course of my
observations, avert more particularly to this circumstance, I shall now observe
that they are elevated above the highest tides, so that at low water, their
vertical sides are exposed, for near five feet, to the rays of the sun. In the
Northern Liberties and the district of Southwark, there are many vacancies on
the banks of the river. Owing to the periodical floods, these form large miry
grounds, which are never dry, but covered either with thick beds of filth from
the adjoining streets or habitations, or with rubbish, old timber, etc. These
sources of exhalation are not of the most indifferent consequence.

Our city is supplied with no running waters or fountains, and but few cisterns
are to be found in private houses. Wells only are dug, in distributive number,
in different parts of the city and suburbs. A pump is placed in each well, and
water is thus easily obtained for all the wants of life. A gutter, formed by
the elevation of the foot way, and by the gradual descent of the street to each
side, seems sufficient to receive and carry down the dropping waters. (...)
declivity of the streets, in some places, however, is worn down; and the waters
stagnate, more or less, in all the gutters. During the heat of summer, they
receive the filth from the houses, and become very noxious for want of being
drained, and more especially so, since they are daily reserved by the pumps.
The inhabitants seem generally indifferent about these waters, because they do
not see but small ponds of black and green water; but, as they are repeated, I
am persuated that they add much (...) the quantity of putrid and (...)
wholesome exhal^^^^.

There are twenty-eight houses for public worship in Philadelphia, and I
believe as many grave-yards within the city and suburbs. It seems yet to be
questioned whether they are really of a noxious nature or not. It is said that,
as the graves are usually dug to the depth of six feet, the health of the
citizens cannot be injured by them. Even admitting this observation to be true,
yet, if dangerous vapors cannot immediately rise from the grave-yards, by the
effect of the heat, they may otherwise be disengaged, by the hydraulick laws of
subterraneous waters. For, supposing a grave-yard in a very elevated part of
the city, as that of the Friends, at the corner of Arch and Fourth-streets,
which is besides near five feet above the street, within a stony enclosure, it
will be granted that the dead are on a level with many different parts of the
city, and in some cases even above it. Now, since it is acknowledged that the
greatest elevation of the city from the river is forty feet, and that many of
the grave-yards are on the highest grounds, it will evidently appear, that the
inhabitants living in a lower part of the city, will receive exhalations from
the earth, of moisture and waters that have been infiltrated through an
elliptic plan and through a vast number of dead bodies. This observation will
be found to agree with the hydraulick laws; for, according to them, in
saturated grounds, evaporation collects the waters by infiltration from higher
surrounding points in the same manner, that, to obtain water from the the
highest parts, we dig for its evacuation at the lower ones. This explanation,
gentlemen, will show how the evaporations in most of the low parts of our city,
are rendered noxious by the putrefaction of thousands of dead bodies, and may
be carried from one point to another, by means of the grave-yards being
intermixed with our dwellings, besides their immediate effect in altering the
waters collected in our wells.

Lastly, we have a more dangerous source of putrid animal exhalations, which is
more sensibly discovered in thickly inhabited places after the heat, and at the
close of summer.

Each dwelling has a privy-house, situated at the farthest end of the yard; and
the houses on the east side of Front-street have them in their cellars. The
ditches upon which they stand, are dug to a considerable depth and built round
with stones or bricks. Many of them are twenty fee^ deep, but this circumstance
removes still further the idea of cleaning them. After many years the
fermentation causes offensive vapors during the summer; and it is very seldom
the case that the ditches are cleaned more than once in ten years, when it is
often considered casier to fill them with stones, and to dig others. The fact
is, gentlemen, that toward the end of the summer, that is to say, after the
action of the heat has sufficiently excited fermentation, mephitic gas ascends
from the ditch. Our inhabitants are so well apprised of this, that they always
provide their little-houses with a vent hole. This is a proof that the depth of
the ditch is not a preservative against its noxious vapors; for the
rarefaction and the heat of our atmosphere could raise them from a much more
distant center. The absorption of the within contained fluids is so slow, in
moist and impregnated grounds, that they wholly remain and serve to accumulate
the mass of fermentating animal substances. If a lighted candle be lowered into
one of these ditches, by means of a line, it will often be put out; and when
the temperature of autumn does not oppose the dilation of the ascending gas, it
is plentifully diffused round the houses, yards, and alleys, where it is often
sensibly smelt, chiefly when the air is calm and sultry.

After the enumeration of so many causes and dangerous sources of putrid
exhalation, will not our minds, gentlemen, be impressed when the reflection of
Dr. Lind, that, "next to infection, the most frequent cause of fevers is
perhaps the offensive and polluted air in unhealthy places;" and that our
calamity, periodically breaking out, at a certain season of the year, was not
merely imported?

There are, in Philadelphia, many other sources of putrid effluvia There are
several sinks in Philadelphia, to receive the waters from the gutters, at those
points where a declivity can no longer be given to their beds. Two very
remarkable ones at the corners of High and Fourth-streets, were, during last
summer and fall, productive of the most offensive exhalations and became a mere
nuisance. It is very probable, that, by some defect or other, the waters in
them were obstructed; and I take the liberty to direct my request to the proper
authorities, to have these sinks examined and repaired. As many cats were
starved, in consequence of the desertion of the city, there was, I am
persuaded, a quantity of carrion in them. Called out frequently during the
night, I could strongly perceive the smell as far as Arch-street on one side,
and Chestnut on the other. I employed some hours in following the current of
exhalation, and was at last satisfied as to its true origin.

There were also several sinks in Pear-street, in Chesnut-street, at the corner
of Dock and Walnut-streets, and in other parts, the canals of which have been,
I believe, destroyed, but the holes left open, and the people of the
neighboring houses still continue to throw their filth in them. I have been
informed, by a very respectable citizen, that he observed, during the two
instances of our calamity, that these vent-holes of putrefaction had been
productive of a great number of death in their neighbourhoods.


, which perhaps are unavoidable, and are common to all other thickly inhabited
places in the world, but which ought to attract the attention of our public
authorities; since they are much more dangerous in a place exposed to the heat
of the tropical countries. For these, as well as for the preceding
observations, I hardly think it necessary, gentlemen, to dwell much upon the
direct measures that should be adopted by the citizens at large, against the
different causes of our epidemic. If they were not kept in a state of
incertitude, with respect to its real origin, their wisdom and prudence would
enable them to make the proper regulations. But alas! those who are induced,
after sufficient contemplation, to predict that the fever will frequently rage
again in Philadelphia, know how many opponents there are to this melancholy
truth, and have very little hopes of obtaining a majority in favor of their
advices. Yet, if I cannot flatter myself with gaining many proselytes to my
opinion, I consider it as a duty and a pleasure to throw my mite of information
and firm belief, into the fluctuating scale of public opinion. Under the
influence of this sentiment, I assert, that the only sure and efficacious means
of preserving Philadelphia from contagious malignant fevers, will be those that
are directly calculated to remove or destroy, if possible, the sources of
putrid exhalation from animal and vegetable substances that are contained
within our precincts. These means, gentlemen, are of such a magnitude, th^^
neither time or great expense would be able to effect them, if religious
prejudices, views of mercantile interest, and opinions of party spirit, are
suffered to thwart their execution. Before I attempt to enumerate them permit
me to make a few reflections more on the chemical principles and results of
putrid exhalations.

First, In whatever light we consider the component parts of vapors and
gasses, either according to the former or new nomenclature of chemistry, this
much will be acknowledged, that life is opposed to the putrid fermentation of
animal or vegetable substances; and that, as soon as they are deprived of it,
they necessarily fall into a complete state of putrefaction, which is more or
less accelerated, according to the quantity of heat or caloric, of air and of
water, in which they are immersed.

2 dly, As soon as the putrid fermentation takes place, a new combination
arises of several substances, which have a peculiar tendency to unite to the
air by the help of the heat, or to the water by their affinity to them; so that
both fluids, being considerably altered in their nature, will present a quite
contrary effect to that they would have exhibited at first, viz. the very air
which was good for life and health, will produce a quite contrary effect, etc.

3 dly, Among the different qualities of the substances disengaged from animal
fermentation, there are two very remarkable and which constitute all the
degrees of noxious exh^^ations. The first is their extreme tendency unite with
air and water, ( Vide Diction. de Chimie, par Macquer, art. GAS); and the other
is a certain degree of their development, which is impossible to account for,
in which whether in a fluid or solid state, their immediate contact with any
living body, suddenly destroys or suspends the phenomenon of life. A traveller
found the body of a drowned man that had been washed on the shore by the flood.
As he perceived no foetor, in examining the corpse, he inadvertantly plunged
his finger into a soft and putrified limb. From the finger the mortification
was so rapid to the vitals, that he had no time to be assisted, and he died.
Anatomical dissection has also proved the truth of this terrible and dangerous
state of putrefaction. Its various degrees must undoubtedly breed different
kinds of disease and contagion.

4 thly, These exhalations are, moreover, subject to other laws and phenomena
of nature, which sometimes occasion them to be harmless when they are most
dreaded, or very noxious and fatal while they are not perceived or even thought
of. Heat, without aqueous particles, raises them, and winds carry them through
immense regions. They seem visibly to be a kind of meteor; their operation on
the body is terrible, and they in some measure destroy the vitals without any
contagious or poisonous effect. Such are those remarkable winds and vapors, so
well known in the deserts of Africa, and which originate in the mountains of
Abyssinia Vide Bruse's Travels through Abyssinia,
. Heat, also, may dilate them to such a degree that they become harmless. This
is the case when it puts an end to the plague in the hottest countries of the
earth. Aqueous vapors, without much heat, can disengage but little of these
exhalations, and it is then very common to perceive much foetor, without
receiving any injury from it. Thus people attending the sick, dissecting of
dead bodies, butchers, tanners, and all those who are frequently among
exhalations from animal fermentation, are not known to be injured at all. Those
exhalations which are suspended above a corpse, within a metallic or wooden
coffin, do not want much heat or moisture, to become fatal as soon as broken
open. A mephitic gas then appears similar to that which we discover in our
chemical experiments. Its effects are sudden against every living body; but it
can be almost destroyed or rendered harmless, by aqueous vapors, and may be
totally absorbed by vegetables. This air or exhalation occasioned the death of
many citizens of Paris, who, in the month of August, 1792, were instantly
killed by its contact, while they were breaking the tombs, to take away the
leaden coffins, for materials of military ammunition.

5 thly, Fevers, produced by exhalations are remarkably various, according to
their places, time, and season. What a striking difference was there between
the elephantiasis of Athens, the plague of Marseilles, the sore-throat of
Italy, and the sweating sickness of England? We could hardly find, in the
present day, any pathological similarity among the dreadful epidemics of Norway
and Holland; the anomolous malignant observed by Hoffman in Germany, during the
years 1727, 1728, and 1729; the intermittent ague of marshy places; the camp
dissenteries; the hospital contagious petechiae; the convulsive malignant
related by Dr. Chisholm, which he thought had been imported from Guinea into
the West Indies; the vomito pietro of the Spaniards in Vera Cruz; and the
yellow fever of the tropical countries, etc.

6 thly and lastly, The concurrence of rains, storms, and heat, are necessary
to develope noxious exhalations from vegetable and animal fermentation. The
conjectures resulting from attentive observations are, that intense heat,
without wind, after heavy rains and southerly storms, is most productive of
noxious exhalations in places containing materials for vegetable and animal
fermentation.

These elementary laws, respecting the nature and effects of exhalations, I
have, gentlemen, endeavored to present, unaccompanied with any scientifical
method, in order that every description of my readers might become better
acquainted with them, and finally apply the following means as the only
preventives against the generation of the yellow fever The committee of the
house of representatives of this state, on the health laws, have, in their
report, expressed themselves in the following terms.

"Although your committee are decidedly of opinion, after the most attentive
investigation, that the disease which ravaged this city and its suburbs, in the
year 1793 and the late autumn, was of foreign origin, they nevertheless believe
that there existed at those periods a certain condition of the atmosphere which
savoured its propagation, and without which it could not have been transmitted
to any a^^^^ing extent. It being a desideratum, that such a state of air should
be counteracted, which affords nourishment to contagion, they cannot too
strongly inculcate the necessity of a supply of pure water to the city, and of
the strictest attention to such regulations as will keep it and its environs
free from putrefactive substances."

I am happy to think that the above certain condition of the atmosphere, to
which the alarming extent of our disease has been ascribed, and which has not
been explained by the rep^^^^^, may be fully understood, by the means of
elementary chemical observation; and those who are decidedly of opinion, that
they yellow fever is of foreign origin, should not forget that, in this age,
there is no certain noxious condition of the atmosphere, but has been submitted
to the most attentive chemical investigation and analysis. This much, however,
may be asserted, that the desideratum to counteract an unhealthy state of the
air, by rendering it free from putrefaction, perfectly coincides with our
theory, observations, and general proposed means of preventing the generation
of the yellow fever.


: --

GENERAL MEANS.
1 st, The removal of all grave-yards to many miles distant from the city and
suburbs.

2 dly, The speedy accomplishment of the advice of Dr. Franklin, to obtain
fresh and running waters in the main parts of the city; and a police law
enacted, ordering all the gutters to be washed once a week, during four months
of the hot season.

3 dly, Stone wharves; and their owners obliged to cover them once a year with
a coat of tar. The vacancies on the banks of the river, within the city and
suburbs, to be overspread with a bead of gravel.

4 thly, A police law for the clearing of privy ditches, once every winter, and
obliging the owners to throw in so many bushels of lime, according to their
diameter, in the beginning of the summer.

5 thly, Gutters, sinks, cellars, market-stalls, tanner's and butcher's yards,
to be ordered under the inspection of commissioners and physicians, during the
six months of summer and autumn.

6 thly, Vessels from the West India islands, and other tropical countries,
subject to an inspection of their cargoes and holds, unloaded at a distance
from the city; kept with their crews, under a quarantine of five days, during
the four months of June, July, August, and September, and a longer time
according to the wholesomeness of the ships and health of the men.

SECTION VI. Particular Preventives against the Yellow Fever.
THIS section, gentlemen, I would consider as the least useful of my essay, if
any of my readers expected to find in it secret receipts or infallible
remedies, and if they believed that I thought my advices, joined to those of
the most eminent physicians, sufficient to render them invulnerable to one of
the most rapid and ferocious disorders. Where is the art that can indubitably
face danger, can always elude its strokes, or resist its efforts, whether in
battles or in any kind of human infirmities? Alas! when the best preventives
have been made use of, and the mode of living rendered scrupulously cautious,
still there are many chances of infection against one of preservation; because
the attendants of the sick, as well as those citizens who are detained in town
by the necessary pursuits of business, are exposed to the fatigue, the anxiety
of mind, and all the other inconveniences attending a general calamity, and,
under such circumstances, it is not always in human power, totally to avoid the
means of infection. Thus we have been seen many of our physicians, who, during
the late calamity, were among the foremost in attending on the sick, become the
victims of its ravages! Their names and memories deserve the tribute of honor
and of gratitude The following are the names of the physicians, who, in
discharging their professional duties, fell victims to the yellow fever.

Doctors WAY, THOMPSON, JONES, PLEASANTS, DOBELL, ANAN, HUNT, and CLARKE,
lately from Ireland.



. To us, gentlemen, they have given a noble example. Let us then shed a tear
upon their tombs; and, like them, pledge ourselves as the friends of humanity.

Physicians and others who first suspected the domestic origin of our fever,
advised their fellow citizens to remove to the country. However efficacious
this measure was to those who could afford the expenses attending it, what
distress did it not produce among the laboring class of our citizens, to the
public functionaries, and to those whom public or private concerns retained at
the theater of the calamity! By desertion, indeed, the last prevalence was
rendered more afflictive than that of 1793, although it was not so extensive in
its ravages; and it will always be my wish, that, during such a period, we may
experience less of that ruinous and unexpected dispersion of our citizens. When
this is the case, there is no kind of distress to which our patients are not
exposed. Instances, likewise, were known of malignant cases and of deaths among
the fugitives. A mortal infection was thus propagated in several surrounding
country places, for how could they escape the necessary communications and
intercourse? In European places exposed to pestilential diseases, it is a
supreme law, that, during their prevalence, the inhabitants are not suffered to
quit their places of abode. Far be it from me to wish for such an inhospitable
measure. It is only mentioned to suggest, that it is a question whether more
good than evil would not arise to the community at large, if, free from terror,
assisted by proper and efficacious measures, encouraged by numerous instances
of preservation in town and recovery among the patients, they could be
persuaded to see the short period of an epidemic spent, unaccompanied with the
tenfold calamities and misfortunes of desertion.

However rapid the effects of an existing contagion may be upon healthy people,
we can derive from our stated principles, three powerful motives of confidence
and security. The first results from the nature and operation of the contagion
on the bile only; the second, from the possible removal of the sick from
numerous families, or an absolute cessation of intercourse with them; and the
last from efficaciously experienced cautions even in cases of the nearest
danger.

I. The yellow fever, we have already said, is merely a bilious one of the most
malignant degree. Its operations and symptoms are wholly upon and from the
bile. Our inhabitants are particularly subject to bilious complaints in a
certain season of the year, and when the last are endemics, the former will
turn out to be an epidemic of the severest kind.

We have seen also that bilious and yellow fevers commonly fell upon those in
whom the bile was of a thick or vitiated nature, and who, by habitual neglect,
intemperance, or other unhealthy mode of living, exposed that secretion to a
state of stagnancy and corruption. Such simple and reasonable given
observations should help us to fix upon a successful method of diet, of
remedies, and of cautions, during the perilous prevalence of the yellow fever.
At such a period, a vegetable diet will be a sure preventive against animal
corruption; and animal food of the lightest kind, being always sufficient for
necessary nutriment, if preferred to heavy and gross meats, will not excite so
great a fermentation of the animal fluids. Simple tonic drinks, measured
according to the wanted digestive power, will preserve us from those
inflammatory and heated motions of circulation which always attend the face and
feelings of drinkers of strong wines and spiritous liquors, which is an
obstacle to the formation and secretion of liquid and pure bile. But it may be
said, that such a plan of diet would not be sufficient, during the exhausting
heat of the weather and the necessary fatigues of life, and particularly so at
a time when the body seems to want more stimulating means to raise the lowness
of our strength and spirits. This, gentlemen, is true, and this feeling is
powerful; but we ought not to suffer our habits or misinformation, to make us
mistake the proper means. I have been frequently more animated and refreshed by
a warm bath, during the heat of summer, by an airing in the country, or by a
cooling medicine, than I could possibly be by the most succulent cordial. In
fact, we may compare our body, charged with so many springy actions, to a bow,
the elastic power of which would be lost if it was stiffened by the effect of a
drying fire, but which would be better preserved if kept in a soft and moist
temperature. Besides, when we feel very weak, it is often because the vis
vitae, elevated to an uncommon degree above the point of health, approaches to
its end, the same as when it is too low; and then relaxing means are proper,
salutary, and successful. It is observed that we never more frequently
experience the effects of weakness, brought on by the heat of our fluids, than
in the summer. At this season, we are peculiarly exposed to obstructions in the
alimententary channel, crudities of the stomach, and cessations of daily
evacuations. This last effect is unavoidable, even among the most regular
constitutions; but evacuating medicines oppose to it an infallible power. A
puke or a drastic never fails in removing those crudities or obstructions; and,
if they are mercurial or antimonial, they will more properly discuss the
reservoirs of the bile, and renew that animal fluid, the fermentation of which
becomes so dangerous. I had frequent opportunities, during the two prevalences
of the yellow fever, to give this advice to people, who appeared to enjoy a
regular degree of health. A slight indisposition, which could hardly call for
their attention, at another time, was then a sufficient motive for applying to
cautious measures. I never hesitated, when the subject could bear it, to
prescribe a puke at first, and a mercurial drastic after. In this manner, and
with much surprise, I timely delivered many of them of a prodigious quantity of
unnatural, black corrupted bile, from which a dangerous fit of sickness would
undoubtedly have originated. (Vide case No. II.) Yet they afterward lived
healthy, notwithstanding the heat of the season and the prevalence of the
contagion. It is, in fine, a necessary caution, repeatedly to have recourse to
such medical assistance; for it is acknowledged, both by physicians and others,
that repeated cases of infection may occur.

Frequent walks and airings, chiefly during the cool moisture of the morning
and evening, taken to some distant places from our sultry dwellings, will be
another salutary practice. It interrupts the action of the existing
exhalations, and refreshes us by the help of a purer and more elastic
atmosphere. It also assists the functions that are the most endangered, and
frequently breaks the course of annual and accidental diseases. In most of the
cities of Europe, where the streets are irregular, a long experience has shown,
that the most essential causes of their salubrity are, pure waters and public
walks ^^and every means, both natural and artificial, has been employed to
render the latter delightful. Fashion, in this point, has been invariably
adhered to; and though public walks may be the theater of a shewy style of
dress and manners, or of idle talks and interviews, yet they notwithstanding
remain a cheap means of exercise, whereby health is preserved and diseases
dispelled. Sedentary life, long sittings in religious meetings, seclusion of
one society from another, protracted clubs for various kinds of entertainment,
for politics, for interest, and numerous and strictly fashionable tea-parties,
are manners and customs particularly observed among the citizens of our
metropolis. Can I then, gentlemen, be blamed, when I affirm, that, medically
speaking, they have a contrary tendency to that of exercise, taken in a pure
air, and a far different effect to those of lively manners and more recreative
life?

II. Another motive of security for the citizens at large, during the
prevalence of a contagious epidemic, would be, I have already said, the removal
of the sick, or an absolute cessation of intercourse with them. This measure,
during the late calamity, was ordered by a proclamation from our governor. He
was blamed by many who thought only of the inconveniences arising, in its
execution, to the sick, who were reluctant to leave their homes and their
chosen attendants; and the frequent instances of mistaken cases was another
cause of their disapprobation of the measure. This opposition prevailed to such
a degree, that many obstinately remained secluded in their own houses, died
there, and their bodies were afterward secretly carried to the distant
graveyard of the Wigwam hospital. These inconveniences cannot be denied, but
the efficacious and vigilant measures of authority might at last conquer them.
The idea that they are a violation of the rights of humanity and of personal
liberty, may be opposed by good argument^ Public safety, and a care for the
health and lives of the community at large, have often commanded still more
severe measures. At this present time, if a person who is performing a
quarantine on board of a ship or in the lazaretto at Marscilles, is detected in
violating the limits of his confinement, the sentinel has orders to kill him
instantly, and yet this measure has been dictated by the voice of humanity.

Another argument will enforce the necessity of restraining personal liberty in
cases of contagion. It is the customary right by which the neighboring states
exclude us from the usual intercourse with them. The time may come, which
heaven forbid, when the contagious power of this epidemic, may suggest to
neighboring districts the necessity of a temporary seclusion, and particularly
so, if severe regulations are not adopted among ourselves. Will it then appear
inhumane, if we ourselves are obliged to forbid any communication with the
sick, their houses, and the streets in which they are situated? The distresses
of this severe measure would, no doubt, be softened, if several hospitals were
fitted up, and a choice left to the patients of their own attendants. They
could be thus supplied with more private accommodations at their own expense,
while the poor and forlorn would be taken into those public houses which have
been already sufficiently well regulated and supplied with every necessary by
the vigilant care, and generous donations of our citizens, during our past
calamities. Infine, if these general measures are never adopted, we should at
least be cautious to suspend any intercourse with the infected houses and
streets, although it will be mostly too late when the contagion has been
suffered to spread. Patriotism and candor, both of physicians and citizens,
would soon ascertain the presence of the scourge. The mistakes of an isolated
judgment may be obviated by previous appointment of many physicians to visit
and consult upon each new case and patient. During the last prevalence, the
public were cautioned that many deaths were ascribed to the yellow fever, some
weeks before they would believe it; but they soon acknowledged that they
received proper and timely information, owing to the attention of well known
physicians. This is an unquestionable result from what we have stated of the
nature and operation of putrid exhalations, that as soon as their first effects
are discovered, in the early stage of the season, we might think it in our
power to be prepared against subsequently created cases, and against the
contagion from bodies. These are known to emit, in cases of death, almost none,
and to become dangerous only in the last periods of the sickness when they
recover.

III. There are other measures which experience has proved extremely successful
for preserving even those who are obliged to remain in infected places. It has
been officially reported to the governor, that, in the hospitals, during the
late prevalence, the contagion had not spread among the attendants. This would
be incredible were we not apprised of the reserves and cautions that are
naturally made use of, invented, and dictated by necessity when it becomes the
supreme law. The origin of the famous vinegar of four thieves, so much
recommended as a preventive against the plague, is a proof of that beneficial
industry, and I never found better or more medical means employed with success,
than among those who do not hesitate to exchange many chances of danger against
a valuable compensation. Yet all their industry is assisted with nothing else
than what is in the power of every one. Resuming, my enquiries, and the effects
of their general method, I found three results from taking various medicines
and from diet. One is, that they reduced the system, and abated, consequently,
any disposition to inflammatory or phlogistic diathesis; the second, that they
kept themselves in a continual state of evacuation, and thus were never
sufficiently acted upon by the contagious miasmata; and the last, that they
renewed the bile and rendered it more pure, more fluid, and of a quite contrary
state to that which constitutes a bilious malignancy. These three rules or
indications are equal to any that the medical art can suggest and prescribe;
and, as far as they could be well understood by individuals, and answered to by
easy means, they would, I believe, mostly render the contagion harmless to
healthy people, and justify a very frequent use of warm baths, previous
bleedings, and the occasional administration of pukes and mercurial drastics,
such as we employ in the treatment of our patients.

Some of my readers would, perhaps, here wish to be informed, as well as in
every other medical work, what peculiar doses, powders, or pills, and the
quantity administered, should be particularly employed as preventives against
the yellow fever. I do not wish to make a secret of the most minute
circumstances for the proper use of bleedings, pukes, and mercurial drastics,
but I have already said enough upon that subject. A still more useful piece of
advice shall here be given, viz. that it is not by saturation or quantity only
that medicines are rendered efficacious, nor without those proportions and
modification, which the various constitutions of different patients require,
and of which physicians can be the only proper judges. I consequently prefer
that preventive medicines should always be prepared according to what is
requisite for each constitution and by the previous indisposition of body. The
most imposing name, affixed to a pill or powder, will ^ make it better, if
given and employed without any necessary restriction whatever, but would, on
the contrary, cover great blunders and mistakes. Such is the case of those
patent medicines, which, in the immense catalogue of their virtual properties,
include all the series of human infirmities, but which are at last given up as
dangerous or equivocal remedies. To their patrons, however, I am willing to
grant, that, if it was possible to ascertain above what point they are
variously noxious, before any obtained success, and under which proportion they
would fail or become useless, they would not be thought a great nuisance among
the credulous, whatever power they may be possessed of.

The attendants of the sick should always be attentive to keep a fire in the
patient's room, although the warm weather might render it uncomfortable. This I
consider as a powerful mean for purifying and renewing the enclosed air, which
is instantly absorbed with any morbid exhalation. The phenomenon of fire,
cannot take place but by an immense consumption of air, and it thus becomes a
drawing ventilator. This measure not only destroys any floating contagion for
the benefit of the attendants, but I have observed it to be very useful to the
patient, whose body should not be immersed in its own infectious emanations,
and who cannot yet bear to be exposed to the variable external temperature.
Infine, by the means of fire, a salutary and fragrant steam can be immediately
procured, in the critical moment of foetid and dangerous evacuations.

Various means have been also recommended as preventives by expanding round
ourselves volatile and chemical substances to neutralise, as it were, the
putrid miasmata. Although this method is very uncertain, yet much benefit may
be obtained when the current of an artificial vapor breaks or alters a
contagious one. These means, however, too often act unfavourably toward the
constitution, and have a tendency to enweaken the nerves, while it is highly
requisite that the body be kept in the very point of health. Every one knows,
in this respect, the effects of camphor and of musk. The aromatics have a
contrary and better effect, because they are equally tonics and antisceptics.
We should, therefore, constantly make use of their essential oils, of their
artificial perfumes, and of the fragrancy of their plants. I have seen also the
strongest vinegar generally used against pestilential emanations, and its
ebullition with sugar upon red hot iron, produces an agreeable and salutary
vapor.

Much has been said upon the subject of destroying or washing with caution the
clothes and beds of the sick. None, I believe, are more infectious than those
of a recovered patient. I have collected, on that score, the most satisfactory
proofs, that a patient may be even reinfected in his own bed and clothes; and
this is undoubtedly the origin of those strange cases, the stages of which run
through a longer course, and repeated recoveries and relaxes, which is quite
contrary to the known periods of a malignant fever. it is perhaps useless and
even inconvenient frequently to trouble a patient by giving him the comfort of
fresh, clean, warm clothes, but it is absolutely necessary to do so as soon as
a profuse perspiration has marked the end or a favorable crisis of the malady.
If the care of the infected linen is left entirely to the nurses and servants,
they must be directed to fold them immediately, and to throw them into cold
water, where they should be kept for twenty-four hours, covered with ashes to
be filtrated into lie, with which they must be washed. The same care should be
extended to the beds. At least they should not be used again but after repeated
night and morning airings. Infine, the attendants should be careful to promote
in themselves a a constant spitting, and to avoid, as much as possible,
swallowing the saliva. But let it be remembered, that, with these general
cautions, and many more too tedious to be related, at the close of the seventh
day, the convalescent patient can no longer transmit any contagion. His
recovering state, is a proof of the purity of his blood. How distressing,
therefore, would it be, under a false idea of danger, still to continue our
intercourse with him with reserve and caution, when it is no longer necessary.
He has been already too long obliged to consider himself as an object of terror
and dereliction. To what a perilous despondency has he not been delivered by
fugitive friends and relations! To what afflictive solitude has he not been
condemned, while excruciated by a devouring poison! The arm of Providence could
alone help him from under the two fold pressure of his body and of his mind!
The former may counteract the laws of life as soon and as irrevocably as the
latter! And ye attendants of the sick, if a liberal and philanthropic mind
ennobles your cares and services to your fellow beings; if you are not
strangers to a moral sympathy -- to the supreme maxim of doing to others as you
would be done by; and if it is your pride not to value your dangerous task by
pecuniary compensations, you deserve protection from heaven and respect from
your fellow citizens. But such a meritorious claim is lost by mere mercenary
services, which become baneful to unfortunate patients whom your expressed
terrors and affected impatience, loudly bespeak as objects of horror in the
creation. Despair, absolute despondency, and depression of spirits, will soon
subdue the small share of organic strength left to them in this ferocious
disorder. Their fate is in your hands, more than in medical skill, if
charitable cares, hopeful words, and apparent confidence, are not continually
and ingeniously offered, as the most sucessful comfort that will help, both the
power of nature, and the wisdom of physicians.

ABSTRACTS.
First, Particular preventives against the yellow fever are deduced from its
nature and characters of highly malignant bilious. Its infection will have but
little power, or none at all, against those whose bile is kept in a pure state,
by vegetable diet, or light nourishment, and often renewed by depleting
remedies, such as have been recommended for the treatment of the disorder.

Secondly, Refreshing exercise in the morning or evening, recreative life, and
free from intense labor; antiphlogistic remedies, and other means as they
occur to proper experience and judgment, are always sufficient to dispel that
inflammatory disposition which aggravates a malignant fever, and to avoid an
immediate effect from their miasmata.

Thirdly, Intercourse with infected people is to be carefully avoided: their
houses should be under a singular guard and exclusion. Attendants of the sick
are to be excepted, if they are particularly addicted to proper care and
cleanness in their persons.

Fourthly, Attendants of the sick should subject themselves to more frequent
use of the above remedies and diet under medical prescription. By keeping
chimney fires in the room of the patient they will not be endangered. They are
recommended to have and take essences or perfumes of an aromatic nature; and to
make frequent fumigations with aromatic herbs and also with vinegar or sugar
burnt on red hot iron.

Fifthly, Infected beds and clothes are objects of great caution, when not
immediately destroyed. They may be safely kept in cold water, covered with
ashes, to be filtrated into lie and washed with.

SECTION VII.
Histories of Cases. -- No. I.
J. W. upwards of forty-five, was corpulent, sanguineo-phlegmatic, robust, and
apt to indulge in the use of spiritous liquors. For some years, he had been
subject, during the winter, to pains in the breast, and to congestion of bile
in the stomach. He was soon relieved by diluting and depleting remedies; but,
after several relapses, I had sufficient reason to think his complaint a
chronical one, originating from some serious cause. He opposed any further
investigation, always depending upon a real cure. He was taken, on the 22d of
July, of the last season, with all the alarming symptoms of the yellow fever,
and was treated accordingly. As his pulse was hectic, in the beginning, I was
not surprised to find him worse on the second and third days. The evacuations
were always colliquative and foetid, his urine suppressed, and copious
bleeding, could never abate the general symptoms. I affirmed, to his friends,
that he would die in two days. I nevertheless endeavored to enquire from his
nearest relation into such circumstances as would lead to a discovery of the
real chronical cause, which was so highly aggravating this acute malady; and it
was at last discovered, that, for nine years past, he had been subject to what
was termed, the gravel. Sufficient inductions could immediately explain my
suspicions, although it was too late to remedy a diseased viscera. It was
interesting to ascertain the case, and I obtained leave from the patient to
introduce a catheter and a bougie into his bladder. With the first I found
insurmountable obstacles; but, with the latter, I penetrated all the meatus ut
^arius, where I felt three strictures. The farthest was formed by the swelling
of the prostrate, and the bougie retained the shape of a screw. A last attempt
with a catheter discovered a large and soft tumor arising from the neck of the
bladder, and from it I drew pure blood and clots of brown matter. The next day,
the fifth, the patient was as yellow as a marigold; he seemed choked with an
infused fluid in his stomach, and he expired in the evening.

OBSERVATIONS.
It would be superfluous to explain the primordial cause of these strictures,
of the swelling of the prostrate, and the tumor projecting within the bladder.
It would rather appear strange that the patient had so long complained of the
gravel, without ever being obliged to apply to more direct and efficacious
measures, if we were unacquainted with the indistinct and confused feelings of
those who have long labored under a chronical complaint. This patient was more
affected by the effect than by the cause. When the secretions from the bladder
and kidneys were totally disordered, the blood retained much of the urine, and
caused the secretion in the liver to be more copious and corrupted. Thus
frequent bilious congestions took place in the stomach, etc. With this previous
complaint, the least degree of malignancy, added to the bile, could not but
agravate the rapid and fatal periods of the yellow fever; for no regular
secretion could be settled again in the liver, or be drawn from the bladder.
Both viscera were vitiated and diseased. To this and to any similar case, the
only prognostic will be an immediate death.

CASE -- No. II.
C. D. was a man of fifty years of age, of a very thin habit, with large and
numerous blood vessels; of a merry disposition; and who had unreservedly used
high food and strong liquors. He was still very cautious, in the month of
October, 1793, and continued to live in a country place in the neighborhood.
The company of a friend induced him to come in town, and he was immediately
taken. His previous complaints were said to be a constant rheumatic affection,
in the thighs and hips. He had also frequently experienced paroxisms of gravel,
and no more could be said on that respect. His fever was very high; his face
red, lurid, and all his frame agitated. A copious bleeding, nitrous drinks, and
mercurial drastics, were administered in the second day. They afforded but a
very short remission. The evacuations contained very little bile; the urine was
very clear; and he felt an uncommon prostration of strength. I had, from the
patient himself, that he did not feel whether he had a stomach and a belly. I
conceived him to be under a very fatal prognosis. Two other bleedings were
ordered in a short interval, with more powerful evacuations, and an emetic.
They had not the least favorable effects. He continued restless, asleep, and
had a violent chill. His despondency grew more alarming. He lost all feeling.
The jaundice came on rapidly, on the third day, tinged with a blackish hue; and
he died on the fourth.

OBSERVATIONS.
If the first mercurial drastics, administered a little after venesection and
when the exacerbation abates, are unattended with a profuse discharge of green
bile, we will probably fail in all the subsequent applications; because there
is not any other combination of remedies to overcome the increasing resistance
of the morbid cause. Prostration of strength is, also, a premature symptom of
death, when it appears without previous critical operations. Infine, the second
exacerbation of this patient came on with a chill, and nothing could be more
ominous. Early on the second day, such were the certain signs of his death, yet
I had drawn a much more positive prognostic of a fatal issue when I was first
informed of his previous pains called rhuematic, and of his affection of the
gravel. Whatever kind of obstruction may happen, in the urinary passages, they
are mostly attended with numb pains in the hips and thighs. These mostly prove
the existence of a diseased vicera in the lumbary region, which aggravates a
malignant fever to death.

CASE -- No. III.
A young gentleman, J. T. of a tender constitution, sanguineo-phlegmatic; of
irritable nerves, sober life, thin habit, and subject to frequent weakness of
the stomach, was seized with a shivering, internal burning heat, retching,
spontaneous puking of bile, and the most tumultuous fever. Headache, pains in
the limbs, with excessive anxiety of mind and body, had increased to an
insupportable degree, when I first saw him; and nothing better could be done
than to open a vein and let out twelve ounces of blood. The usual mercurial
drastics were given after the exacerbation, in very small doses, and their
operation was very inconsiderable and contained very little bile. The urine
appeared turbid and foetid. The second day offered a very gloomy prospect for
the future issue. The countenance and look of the patient were confused,
although he was beautifully red colored, and I discovered retchings and some
convulsions in the muscles of the arm and a general spasmodic state, with a
slight pain in the pit of the stomach. His tongue was covered with a thick
yellowish crust, and his pulse very hard. I thus judged that the smallest
benefit had not been obtained, and that the case was more perilous. With the
intention of oppofing the spasms and irritation, of relaxing them to the
greatest possible degree, and of procuring afterward critical evacuations, he
was ordered to be put into a semiwarm bath, and bled after it. With these
previous means, it was probable that the operation of an antimonial emetic
would be regular. It certainly answered to profuse evacuation of hepatic bile,
but it drew the patient into the most alarming faintness and convulsion. We
were then in the third day! I gave up all my hopes. Other remedies, as
blisters, and drastics, were subsequently administered to gratify the solitude
of friends; but the amiable youth rapidly showed more dangerous symptoms. A
deep orange color suffused all over his body on the fourth day; some black,
yellowish, and foetid stools took place, and his delirium increased to
disparity. In the evening, he got up, could walk, and in many other exertions,
surprised the vigilance of his attendants, until he was seized with agonizing
pains; he expired early on the fifth day.

OBSERVATIONS.
This is another of those melancholy instances in which a superior power
overcomes, all at once, the strength of the body, the skill of the medical art,
and the aid of natural exertions. In it I never experienced the least benefit
from any kind of application, nor could I distinguish any thing but the rapid
destruction of the whole frame. I could not regret that he had not lost more
blood, since two copious bleeding had afforded no means of relief. I could not
accuse the violent operation of a puke, which in its proportions and
circumstances is not known to be of such a dangerous effect. But as I had been
informed that the patient had been previously much subject to sickness of the
stomach, for which he repeatedly applied to medical aid, I more diligently
enquired and remained, at last, satisfied, that he was in the case of a
diseased viscera, and this explained why, early in the first day, his urine was
so highly foetid.

CASE -- No. IV.
The most insidious case was that of B. a robust young man, of twenty-three,
brought up to hard labor, of a bilious temperament, of a middling size and
regular habit, strong nerves and hard fibers. The most particular care was paid
to him, and he went through all the stages of the malady without any very
alarming symptom; for he died on the eigthth day, after a short agony, without
any previous prostration of strength or a moment of delirium. Of the usual
crises of the yellow fever, the jaundice only had been marked since the fifth
day. It is true the urine was very rare, but bleedings, mercurial drastics, and
other remedies, had all produced visible effects, and satisfactory relief.
Every night the patient appeared to be refreshed with a few hours of sleep. If
he had some anxiety, it was rather from his mind than from his body. Sitting
upon his bed, conversing, and directing himself the preparations of medicine,
was his situation more or less, until the last moment of his life, and I
confess that, during four days, he deceived my expectation. My reader will now
recollect some observations made in p. 32, respecting dangerous symptoms, which
it is so difficult to distinguish. I have there stated that want of sufficient
evacuations of bile, loss of painful anxieties of the body, an uncommon degree
of strength and chills preceding the fever, and muscular convulsions, were the
only remaining but fatal symptoms in insidious cases. These were all the
striking signs distinctly marked in this patient; and, in spite of the apparent
mildness of all other symptoms, they always constituted an alarming prognosis,
which the issue justified by a sudden death. It was very interesting to
ascertain what previous disorder in the constitution, or in any viscera, had
aggravated the case of this robust young man; but, if there was any, I could
not discover it, and remained satisfied with that general opinion, that
destruction of life is more frequently caused by unobserved violation of
natural laws, than by effects that strike our senses and our feelings.

CASE -- No. V.
Mr. F. d' E. a foreign gentleman, was taken in the latter end of August. He
was upwards of thirty-six, of a pale complexion, tall and slim in his body,
bilious-choleric in his temperament, of great sensibility, and of a sedentary
life. Recent misfortunes had much undermined a constitution naturally strong.
He had lately been subject to frequent indispositions of the stomach, and
chiefly so fifteen days before his last sickness, during which time he had
entirely lost his appetite. Probably he received the infection in the company
of a friend who fell a victim, a few days before, and it quickly disturbed the
opertion of every function. His first and sontaneous pukings of the bile were
very considerable, as well as his inflammatory diathesis. He lost near forty
ounces of blood, in less than twenty-four hours. On the second day, all
evacuations had been colliquative, foetid, and without cystic bile. In the
exacerbation of the following night, he complained of an internal burning heat,
and his eyes appeared red and inflamed. In vain did I again employ the best of
an antiphlogistic method; and neither antimony or mercury could stimulate the
reservoirs of the bile. On the third day no dejection of the mind was remarked;
but, on the contrary, an incoherent conversation, a stupid and grim look, and a
constant watchfulness prevailed, so that he could not bear the slightest
covering in the way of bed-clothes, and was often indulged in the trial of
several beds, to find a diversion to the anxieties of his body. At such a sight
we gave way to despair, and medical prescriptions were but formalities of
circumstance! The urine was totally suppressed on the fourth day, a stricture
on the breast succeeded, with great difficulty of the deglutition, and with an
earnest desire of drinking, he hardly could swallow a few drops of any liquid.
The jaundice was diffusing rapidly, leaving pale red spots on the joints. His
spontaneous stools were highly foetid, black like foot, and full of white and
red flakes, very similar to parcels of teguments of the bowels. Never, never,
were greater ravages and putrescence seen in the human frame, except in the
plague^ Yet the pulse was regular. On the forenoon of the fifth day, our
unfortunate patient got up and completely dressed himself. With an uncommon
vigor he came down from a bed room, into the yard, to sit and converse with
astonished friends. No longer than half an hour was the delusion of health and
life given to him. Alas! an horrid look a deep yellow color, and a blackish
hue diffused over his face formed a countenance which could no longer deceive a
medical observer. The motions of his body were now answered by pains in the
abdominalia; his pulse became convulsive; a tumultuous delirium marked his
agony; and he died late in the night, when a great quantity of putrid blood
burst and was discharged from the bowels.

OBSERVATIONS.
That the extremely malignant case of this patient had been aggravated by a
previous state of sickness, is unquestionably true. From the best testimonies,
proofs were derived of some obstructions in the liver, or of such atrabilious
affections as are frequent among people of his turn and description. When all
the animal fluids are vitiated, and of course their vital power enweakened, how
great must be the power of a contagious virus on more corruptible juices? This
instance, with such a principle, would then totally contradict the observation
of Dr. Hoffman, upon those who labor under hypochondriacal complaints, whom he
thinks are very rarely seized with epidemic or contagious diseases, or even
with the plague itself. ( Hoffman's Practice of Medicine, chap. vi. art. HYP.)
If such an effect was ever observed to be true, it was surely owing to the use
of those medicines to which such patients have constantly recourse to relieve
themselves. As they promote at least several evacuations, they are, more or
less, preventives against the absorption of dangerous miasmata. Never were the
characters and symptoms of the yellow fever more strikingly marked, except in
the black vomit, which did not take place. But the black matter was plentifully
discharged from the bowels. It excoriated them and no doubt it infused itself
into the abdominalia. The renewal of vigor, which so peculiarly and
insidiously succeeds in the very last stage of the yellow fever, was
extraordinary in this subject and equal to the violence of all other symptoms.
At such a degree of the yellow fever, its medical investigation would not leave
room to the least successful application. Its turbulent and rapid course could
not be suspended by human aid; but let us trust to a more consoling opinion,
which numerous facts will bring now to the most incontrovertible light.

CASE -- No. VI.
A young man, of about twenty-five, of a florid countenance, plethoric habit,
of a laborious and irregular life, was seized with a violent fit of epilepsy in
the street. He was taken up and carried to his bed in that state of stupor
which accompanies such paroxisins. His pulse was depressed and intermittent;
but, as soon as he was copiously bled, he vomited a great quantity of yellow
bile, and an exacerbation of high fever immediately came on, which caused
another bleeding to be prescribed, with an antimonial emetic, a few hours
after. It did not produce the least motion, although he had been bled twice,
which I ascribed to the highest degree of spasmodic and inflammatory diathesis.
In fact, his tongue and face were yet of a red fiery color and his sensibility
was not yet restored. I feared that an immediate bleeding could not bring any
further relaxation, nor procure evacuations of the bile, and that I should soon
loose my patient. In this perilous situation. I could trust only to nature. The
orifice of the bleeding was examined and covered with a greased lint, and the
bandage was relaxed with the view of procuring, during the night, a spontaneous
discharge of blood, lest the next exacerbation should be kept up too high, and
leave again a tonic re-action. NO instructions were left to the attendants, for
fear of dangerous misapprehensions. Nitrous and copious injections were ordered
for every two hours, and a dose of mercurial drastic pills was given before the
fever, and the same after it. All that had been foreseen and wished for
happened. The fever soon became so turbulent on the delirious patient, that the
blood bursted out from the orifice which had been prepared, and continued to
run to more than fourteen ounces, and until the patient was deluged with it.
The fever than abated with a relaxation; as the abdomen had been refreshed by
many injections, the crisis happened to be more complete. The former emetic,
and the mercurial pills, operated all at once, and they caused, in every way,
prodigious discharges of dark green bile, which, by its acrimony, excoriated
the sphincters of the fundament. Early the next day, I saw the patient in this
favorable state. He felt extremely weak, but his pulse, and his skin were
good. I continued and kept up the flux and evacuations from the bowels, until
they appeared of a natural ^^^r; and, on the forenoon of the third day, the
fortunate patient perfectly recovered and could resume his daily labor.

OBSERVATIONS.
It has been frequently seen, during the two last prevalences of the yellow
fever in Philadelphia, that the breaking of the malady was marked by an
epileptical fit, as it often happens in the small pox and several other cases;
for, in whatever pathology epilepsy is understood, it is admitted that it may
originate from strong spasms in the stomach and intestines. That the effect or
action of a highly malignant contagion can at first be entirely directed on the
nervous system, is likewise beyond any doubt. With these previous hints, and
with the certainty that the patient had never been subject to that complaint,
nor particularly to any other, the circumstance alone of the prevailing
epidemic, justified an immediate treatment for the yellow fever. The
continuation of the inflammatory symptoms after two successive bleedings, and
the inefficacy of an antimonial emetic, evinced what has been already stated of
the impossibility of delivering the body of the contaminated bile, or of the
specific contagion, lest an artificial or natural relaxation is timely brought
on. The fact also proved, that I ought not to have hesitated for a third
bleeding, in the first day, although two preceding ones proved inefficacious;
but I yet question whether the effect of the latter had been so well applied as
the spontaneous bleeding, the measure of which I left to the force of the next
exacerbation. Be it as it may, the profuse discharge of dark green bile, was as
sudden as the resistance had appeared obstinate. Another interesting ground of
observation occurs in the above case. What is the reason of its being evolved
in so short a time as three ^^ys^ The most fortunate stage of the yellow fever
do generally run during seven days, and was not the former instance an
ephemeric case to be lodged in a far different manner, and absolute distinct
from the yellow fever?

All these objections will be fa^^ explained, to the reader, if he recollects
the pathological rule abovementioned, concerning the periods and duration of
malignant fevers. They have been observed to be included in four or seven days,
and sometimes in nine, and even in fourteen. Admitting, consequently, that the
illness of this patient had begun several hours before his epileptical fit, we
will find this resolution corresponding exactly to the fourth day. But another
reason strikes us when we consider that the issue of the malady must,
necessarily, depend very much upon the effect or quantity of the specific
contagion that has been diffused from the bile into the blood. When the former
is timely evacuated and renewed, the latter remains to be purified. This
operation we have said, nature may perform, within a certain space of time, and
with the help of artificial or spontaneous means; supposing thus that the
contaminated bile has not had sufficient time to communicate its virus to the
blood, and that it has been speedily all evacuated, nothing will remain to be
done; and with this obtained effect, the disorder will be put to an end; but
if, on the contrary, the blood has been infected, then the fever and all its
symptoms attending the malignancy o^^^s cause, will last, more or less, a
certain time, until a perfect depuration has taken place. Infine, the short
duration of this violent case will still be more justly ascribed to the
preservation of the blood in its natural state, if we recollect the numerous
and familiar cases of those who have certainly received the infection^ ^^dged
its first effects, and speedily counteracted them, yet without any further
consequences of illness.

CASE -- No. VII.
H. L. an aged woman, of a lively disposition, active body, and industrious
life, and remarkably spent thirty years of her life in the most perfect health.
In attending the sick, who had recovered, me took the infection. Although she
had all the usual symptoms and puked much, she thought but little of her case.
She had herself bled copiously, applied a blister to her breast, and hardly
permitted herself to be under medical direction. I saw her late in the evening
of the second day, full of courage and spirits; but, as during the remission of
the fever, her pulse was hard and tense, and as she was in an unnatural
agitation, her case was, at least very serious. The epispastic plaster was
immediately taken of. Diluting drinks, and carminative and nitrous injections
were ordered, with mercurial drastics in pill^ at different times. All these
remedies answered very well, and produced copious evacuations of green bile. On
the fourth day, the pulse was yet a little convulsive, and the exacerbation
brought on a delirium. Thinking it not very necessary to relax the system, by
means of bleeding, for fear of counteracting too much the organic strength of
an aged body, I gave a catharticoemetic, with previous dilutings. One grain of
antimoniated tartar, dissolved with an ounce of salt of glaubert, in a quart of
water, a half a pint of which was to be taken every two hours, caused little
retchings, but produced a prodigious evacuation of yellow, green, brown, and
clammy matters. The resultion of the disorder was presumed, and some opium was
administered. Yet, on the sixth day, we were threatened with a melancholic
disappointment. An eruption of small red petechiae appeared on the breast,
thighs, and arms; the root of the tongue was bordering on the black color; the
pulse was had; the stomach threw up every thing, without much anxiety to the
patient, who seemed reduced to an alarming prostration of strength, and some
black blood had been discharged by the stools. Two circumstances only supported
my hope; the jaundice was yet almost imperceptible, and flatulencies in the
large intestines, with a tendency to local inflammation and tenesmus, promised
a favorable and determined crisis. Formentations were ordered on the abdomen
and mercurial drastics were given again, with alternative doses of castor oil.
At last a purulent and bloody flux settled itself and lasted till the ninth
day, for the preservation of the life and perfect recovery of the patient.

OBSERVATIONS.
In two instances, during this treatment, it seemed uncertain whether it was
justifiable to have omitted more frequently bleedings. Yet this reserve, I
would never neglect in aged people, who are sooner brought to a dangerous
weakness, than to a salutary relaxation, whose fluids besides are never of the
same inflammatory degree as observed among young subjects. The good
constitution of the patient, I own, helped her in these uninterrupted
evacuations during nine days; but from this case what remarkable inductions of
their importance may we not deduce notwithstanding the symptoms are dangerous,
and although the patient should be in momentary but deceiving appearances of
recovery.

CASE -- No. VIII.
A. M. upwards of forty-five, full of juices, of a plethoric temperament and
strong constitution, which had been a little impaired by a deep wound received
in the breast, took the yellow fever, as many people did, by keeping a good
tonic and uncautious life in a distant country place, and then coming
occasionally into town, and exposing themselves to our fultry and impure
atmosphere. Two copious bleedings, a warm bathing, nitrous injections, diluting
drinks, cathartico-emetics, and mercurial drastics, procured sufficient
evacautions of bile, and nothing altered the regularity of the exacerbations.
On the fourth day, a considerable eruption of small red petechiae broke out,
almost all over the body, and the patient informed me of a violent pain felt in
the parotid glands. A cool sweat diffused all over his head, and he was in a
great febrile anxiety. Foreseeing a salutary crisis from the mouth, I rendered
the drastics more mercurial and safely waited for the result. The swelling of
the parotids rapidly came on. It broke out on the seventh day with an
insupportable stench and the most profuse salivation. The patient could not
speak, and large ulcers on the gums and fauces, rendered his deglutition very
difficult. It was a pleasing prospect that this crisis would throw off the
contagious matter from the inmost recesses and happily terminate the yellow
fever without any further necessary application; but the inflammation of the
mouth grew so alarming that it threatened with danger of another kind, whilst
the patient could not swallow any nourishment, and as the internal erosions
gave way to frequent small haemorrhages. Such an irritating cause excited a
symptomatic fever, attended with extreme anxiety of the mind and body. The
infection from the salivary glands was so great that it was insupportably
smelt, even at a great distance from the patient, and in spite of an ardent
chimney fire. It was indeed received by many persons; and upwards of two
gallons of saliva was one day evacuated. Care was taken to relieve the gums, by
cleaning the teeth and scrap^^^ out several thick scales. Gentle antisceptic
and astringent emulsions were used in the way of frequent gargarism. To the
absolute cessation of nourishment I substituted injections, with the liquor of
boiled beef and mutton. It was, in fine, but at the tenth day after the
salivation, and the sixteenth of confinement, that the patient began to recover
from his misery and from the yellow fever.

OBSERVATIONS.
The quantity of calomel, mixed with other drastics, and administered to this
patient before the crisis of the mouth was promoted, could not be more than ten
grains in my own preparations. Yet, agreeably to the intention of evacuating
the bile, it had been all precipitated downwards, by the power of other
drastics, and after very particular observation; so that nothing or very little
of that specific medicine could remain in the primae viae, to promote such a
salivation in a man of strong constitution. It is true, that as soon as its
approach was perceived and determined, more mercury was used; but always with
the caution to direct its effects toward the bowels. It thus remained to be
concluded, that the crisis was altogether spontaneous, and such as may succeed
in every malignant fever, and once out of ten cases in the yellow fever.

A remarkable circumstance also fixes our attention in this subject. Whatever
means of resolution we have seen terminating the yellow fever, I do not
remember of a single instance without jaundice, except when the swelling and
suppuration of the parotids have been spontaneous. If the morbid bile, thrown
into the blood, constitutes the regular duration of the malignant disorder,
within a certain space of time, with the visible effect of jaundice, it is a
fact, that, before this morbid fluid could be confined in the last recesses of
the circulation over the skin, it may be determined by admirable laws, but
almost unknown to us, to fix itself within the salivary glands, from where it
will poured off, like a torrent, in a more diluted state. This happy effect
will, then, suppress the jaundice and evince the necessity of a crisis, to help
the patient in getting rid of so great a quantity of noxious and morbid fluids.
The above case, with one of the following, will also suggest further cautions
to the attendants; for the infectious matter poured off by salivation appeared
to be more intense, and of a more penetrating malignancy than is commonly
produced in other secretions. The operator who had cleaned the teeth of this
patient, was immediately taken with an horrid pain in the arm, and an eruption
on it of a gangrenous nature, of which I shall speak hereafter. As long as the
ptyalsm is kept up, the ensuing discharges, which in these cases are purulent,
and form a sediment, should be received in vessels prepared for the purpose,
and half filled up with lime or any other absorbant earth. The linen likewise,
so often wanted to cover or wipe the mouth, should be frequently changed and
washed with the same care as above described, etc.

CASE -- No. IX.
A girl of twenty, sanguineo-choleric, healthful, and previously indisposed, by
impressions from cold and moisture, was taken with the most violent symptoms of
the prevailing epidemic. The usual applications of copious bleedings, of
mercurial drastics, bathings, etc. answered in the most satisfactory manner,
and nothing very remarkable occurred until the fourth day. The evacuations had
been so profuse and acrid that inflamed excoriations had ensued and formed a
large ulcer on the levator any. She was now in a great despondency, and
sometimes delirious; her tongue was covered with a thick yellow crust.
Happening to take her hand and feel her pulse, she suddenly screamed in a most
violent manner, and she complained that I had broken her arm; being not a
little surprised and thinking such an assertion a delirious one, I freely
retook her hand, but screaming again, she looked at me with horror, etc. When
appeased by proper words, she conversed very sensibly, and absolutely convinced
me that th(...) pressure upon her limbs was answe(...)ruciating pains in her
bone^^ It was ^^quired what were those pains when she moved herself, or her
limbs. She answered that she felt pains every where, that she preferred to be
m^^ionless, and that they were more violent in the extremities. Unobserved
trials were made to ascertain the truth of the whole; and nothing could be be
more certain nor more strange. This stage of the malady was the most critical,
and although she began to be yellow on the breast, and the face, some other
crisis was to be expected, and to its approach I attributed this
incomprehensible diagnostic. It was rather pleasing to reflect that, if the
want of organic sensibility would have been alarming, this extra-ordinary
addition to it could on the contrary be taken as a favorable sign. Having
observed a tendency to some evacuations, of the uterus, emollient fomentations
were ordered on the inguinal regions, and the calomel mixed with emmenagogues
was continued. These strange pains continued four and twenty hours, but
decreased gradually as a critical and abundant discharge of corrupted and very
offensive blood took place. The convalescence was immediate and the recovery
perfect.

OBSERVATIONS.
If the lues venera, the scurvy, the arthritis or any other malady vitiating or
obstructing the lymph, are marked by pains in the bones and in their
articulations, it will not appear impossible, that the virus of this malignant
fever, yet more subtle and infectious to animal fluids, will produce the
related effects, when it has been poured into the circulation. If a slight
touch could exasperate such pains, it was the effect of a nervous mobility,
which is seen of ten productive of more astonishing effects. The whole of these
symptoms were yet of a favorable augur, however bad and alarming this stage of
the malady appeared to be, since nothing could better prove the genuine and
unadultered state of vital laws, than acute sensations in the inmost recesses
of the body.

CASE -- No. X.
M. S. a gentleman upwards of forty, corpulent, robust, and healthful, lately
from the European continent, prone to a sedentary life, but regularly addicted
to a wholesome and light diet, was taken during the fever of 1793. Unacquainted
with all the fatal circumstances of the prevailing epidemic, he applied to some
simple evacuating remedies, until his state grew very alarming, toward the end
of the second day. At this moment, a friend who slept in the same room with
him, and who had been neglected during four days of sickness, was dying. All
these circumstances threw him into dreadful convulsive motions. A vein being
opened, the convulsions increased, and never ceased but by the means of an
antimonial emetic, the operation of which produced much good and gave some
regularity to the course of the malady. At the first appearance of an
exacerbation of fever, having proposed blood letting, the patient, who never
was bled before this attack of sickness, and to whom the last bleeding had not
appeared beneficial, utterly refused to comply with this prescription, and
simple depleting remedies only were used.

On the fourth day he was in a great dullness, dejection, and despondency of
mind; livid and yellowish large petechiae appeared and covered his body: but a
more alarming symptom was that of a violent singultus or hiccough immediately
acceding. The reader must be informed, that the liberty of directing this
treatment was every day checked by the patient. Although little hope was
entertained, the opportunity of his delirium was seized to administer
antisceptic and drastic injections, with blisters. The jaundice, the petechiae,
and the hiccough, seemed to be aggravated, and at last, to our great
astonishment, on the fifteenth day of his sickness, symptoms were seen of a
recovery which proved effectual and perfect.

OBSERVATIONS.
It must be confessed, that medical theory had but little participation to this
unexpected cure. Moreover, this was one of those memorable instances, and not
uncommon indeed, in which particular laws and symptoms being unobserved, we are
especially deceived in our prognostics and mistaken in our fears. It is to be
lamented that, in such cases, the medical art is not in possession of more
decisive rules than those which are commonly observed; for there is no fatal
prognostic, but we may find, although very seldom, its exception for a contrary
issue, and no favorable admitted symptoms but were also succeeded by
unexpected death. No doubt, this limitation of human knowledge devoted, more
than once, victims to a fatal or premature dereliction, and raised opprobious
reproaches against the medical science; yet reason and experience will unite to
justify human errors and ignorance, as long as we will be surrounded by
mysterious laws in nature. But what we can say is that if every age has added
new treasures to our solicitous investigations, why should we despair to
disclose at last all the means that may concur to the safety of our life and
preservation of our health? With this just confidence, practitioners in physic
will never think that task superfluous devolved to them of attaining, by one
way or another, to that philosophical stone of their profession, THE ART OF
CERTAIN PROGNOSTICS. Its elements, it is true, are perhaps as extensive as all
the causes concurring for the phenomenon of life, and as much as the
innumerable combinations that may counteract it; but let us indulge the
consoling hope, that that analysis, which has submitted to our speculations, as
many extensive laws of nature, from the rolling planets and lightenings above,
down to the ambient fluids which are unperceived by our senses; the same
analogies, I say, might sometimes, and with a far more glorious success,
embrace all the laws of nature, round the bed of a patient. This is a theater,
where we only can investigate effects almost unknown, and seldom adverted to in
schools and books; nay, effects unavoidably and often mistaken by the influence
of methods and systems. If I dare to declare it and to appeal to my judgment, I
believe there is not a judicious and experienced physician but whose opinion is
settled safe and free, when conceived rather on the bed side of his patient,
than when aided by any other authority.

By what expression or power, in the countenance of a patient, without any
reference to symptoms and circumstances, are we determined? Is there not
something undefined in the motions, or in the muscles, in the correspondence of
these with the mental faculties, that equally contradicts received opinions,
symptomatic results, and suggests true prognostics? If we can point out
frequent instances where our judgment has been strikingly decided by means,
thoroughly unaccountable, would it be impossible to analyze them, or to direct
our attention to many others? Let us rather fear, that, in fact, we are not
sufficiently acquainted with the laws or effects of life and health. Our
physiological methods seem to have included a series of most striking
circumstances; and a veil has been thrown upon any thing apparently
unattainable by the multitude. We judge of debility and we have no certain
scale of the vital strength applicable to all ages and cases. We remark several
degrees of fever, and we remain absolutely ignorant of its hydraulick and
statick causes. We conceive that life cannot be without motion, and it would be
impossible for us to reconcile its acceleration with health, and its abatement
with death. After long observations we have known, the degree of our animal
heat, when in a state of health, and of its variations necessarily resulting
from cessation of health, we could not exactly apply a single one to any malady
whatever. Infine, the operations of the mind we subordinate to the precepts of
our art, and from those of a patient we hardly could know how to derive some
help for our success. Many other points are bounds and limits of our knowledge,
and will long render it imperfect. But if the few which I have mentioned give a
true, though imperfect idea of what it remains to us to be acquainted with, to
be unexceptionable good judges in human diseases, I have sufficiently justified
unavoidable errors of practitioners in their prognostics, after having
exemplified the spontaneous and natural cure of one of the most fatal disorders.

CASE -- No. XI.
An unmarried woman, of thirty-six, of sanguine complexion, regular habits, and
nimble body, went through the first stages of the yellow fever, without any
alarming symptoms. Our usual applications were faithfully observed except in
one point. She was so extremely prejudiced against the very name of mercury,
that it would have been a very provoking measure to insist on its exhibition,
without disguising it. I therefore diminished considerably the doses, and
involved them with aromatic essences. It was not perceived in the least and
nothing disturbed our harmony; because the known efficacy and stimulating power
of that specific on the salival glands could never take place. On the fourth
day, while she was in every way worse than ever, she complained of a dull pain
in the parotids, without any apparent swelling; emollient fomentations were
ordered round the neck and on the breast. On the sixth day the swelling and
inflammation of the mouth were settled; on the seventh, coming into the room of
the patient, an insupportable stench absolutely similar to fermentation of
foeces struck me, and it could not be discovered to originate but in the
salivation, which continued near eight days, profuse, regular, and successful.
No jaundice appeared on the body of the patient. The presence of the infecting
miasmata could never be entirely covered by fumigations and other ingredients.
Nobody came in the house of this female, until she began to recover, but were
immediately indisposed or effectually took the yellow fever.

OBSERVATIONS.
As the smallest quantity of calomel has been known sufficient to promote a
salivation among delicate and irritable constitutions, I would not deduce much
from this instance, if I had not been obliged to employ means which were to
counteract absolutely such effects. Moreover, it was never observed that the
patient felt any previous and gradual affection in her mouth, as it is so
common and unavoidable to be acted upon by that mineral specific. It was no
longer administered than was necessary for the evacuations of bile, even since
the third day: yet the crisis rapidly attained to the highest degree, with the
perfect cure of the patient. It therefore rested with me to judge this swelling
and suppuration of the parotids, to be merely a spontaneous crisis, such as
occurs in malignant fevers and in the yellow fever, but such as is useless and
dangerous to promote artificially, among those who might be of a different
tendency and cured by a different crisis.

CASE -- No. XII. and last.
I am of a bilious choleric temperament, and irritable nerves. The least
indisposition, and chiefly the presence of infectious exhalations, is so soon
felt, that neither can obtain time enough to agravate itself. As often as I had
perceived the dangerous effluvia, I also experienced a subsequent
indisposition, of which, speedy and proper means always prevented me from
knowing any further consequents. When I thought necessary to scrape the teeth
of the patient of the above case, No. 10, which being covered with thick
scales, exasperated much more the inflammation of the gums, I really put too
much my senses, with my hand, in contact with a very subtle and infectious
emanation. The consequence was, that I soon felt a very numb pain at each side
of the condyles, on the lower extremity of my right os humeri. It is a very
remarkable circumstance, that, from an eminence of those condyles, several
muscles of the hand and fingers take their origin. The pain grew so
insupportable, while it was independent of my motions, that small doses of
opium were requisite for necessary rest. Emollient and resolutive poultices
really exasperated the pain, and my anxiety, was as often renewed, since I
could only form conjectures of its probable cause. A few days brought on a more
serious diagnostic, a violent headache and disordered functions, which speedily
suggested the necessity of an emetic. This was the first means of relief that I
found to my pain; and while I was submitting myself to the operations of
mercurial drastics, I discovered that the infection of the yellow fever was the
cause of my strange indisposition. On one part, copius discharges of dark green
bile, were repeatedly obtained, and on the other, my elbow swelled and
inflammed. Numerous phlictenes, full of sania, formed on it and broke out;
thick teguments turned black and detached in a scab of two inches in diameter,
with the absolute cessation of any pain and a perfect restoration of health.

OBSERVATIONS.
We have already seen, that Pouppe Desportes notices the malady of Siam to be
sometimes remarkably preceded by suppurations of the joints, and dry spots of
mortification on the skin. He accounted for these and other extraordinary
symptoms, by the effects of a poison, which he called pestilential, that
sometimes fixed itself in parts distinct from the viscera. This poison is, most
commonly, inhaled through the mouth, in respiration, whence it diffuses through
the alimentary channel, disturbs, at first, all its functions, and contaminates
all its fluids. The absorbent lymphatic vessels take their rise from the skin,
which may determine such a singular case, whenever they come in contact with
the infection, so immediately as I did when my hand and fingers were introduced
into the mouth of the patient. Whether the subsequent violent illness was
symptomatic of the affection of the arm, or whether I had likewise received the
infection in the bile, I am not able to determine; though, to me, the latter
seems most probable, as the pain remained invariably on the same point, and
never extended further up the os humeri; and yet, the morbid cause in the
viscera was proved both by the illness and the evacuations. The cutaneous
teguments which really mortified and formed a pretty thick eschar, preceded by
phlictenes, were my demonstrative proofs of the virulence of a poison which had
on the skin as much power as a a burn, when seconded by natural exertions, and
emollient poultices, it exuded outwardly. This instance will, above all,
justify my above theories and observations on the greater danger of infection
from recovering patients: the more contagious miasmata they throw off, the more
certain is their recovery.

CONCLUSION.
GENTLEMEN,
I WOULD, perhaps, deserve the reproach of having assumed too great and bold a
confidence, if I now should omit earnestly to solicit your indulgence and that
of the public The subject I have treated, requires undoubtedly longer
investigations and many more of those qualifications which are accessory to a
writer. It is true, the language to which I was obliged to entrust my
observations, which never was that of my youth nor of habitude, could not be
but a rugged and difficult road, where I ought to have feared to entangle my
reader. To such a consideration, I had surely sacrificed my emulation and my
attempt, had I not been much more impressed upon with the duty of joining what
I could of my views to all those from which the whole nation expect to derive
some relief against so great a calamity. Truth could never be attained, if
discussions from various sides and opinions were not alike instituted by free
and liberal communications. The public claims, as it were, that every one
should be listened to who thinks that he can contribute to the common welfare.
It is of no importance if the learned are divided among themselves, it always
is and always will be so, until the truth comes out. There are besides
principles or opinions which are not to be exclusively for the learned,
whatever may be their contest and systems. On the contrary, if these opinions
are good and safe, they spread and propagate among the people at large, because
there is much reason and good sense, and no party spirit among the people. This
is the cause why it has happened so often that the public have adopted sound
and definitive opinions, while the learned had not yet settled their own
variances. J. James Rousseau reports, that a peasant of Silesia had the honor
of settling a great and serious scientifical contest among the learned in
Germany, who could not agree, or explain, in the same way, how a child could be
born with a golden tooth!! He first thought it necessary to establish the fact,
and this he took the trouble upon himself to do, which he proved to be a
falsehood.

Far be it from me, gentlemen, by relating this fact, to throw out any allusion
against physicians of this city, with whom, I am not so happy as to agree in
opinion, on several of the above subjects; it will be sufficient, perhaps, to
declare that I profess the greatest respect for many of them; but there are
many instances to prove, that, in matters of fact and reason, the tribunal of
the public opinion will, at last, be the best judge. It was thus in Marseillies
in the year 1720. While the plague was rapidly spreading and raging, physicians
and surgeons publicly declared, that the prevailing disease was not the plague,
nor even contagious; and the famous Dr. Astruc had to contend against all of
them, until the fact and the public proclaimed the plague. Unfortunately,
Philadelphia will be exposed to the dreadful experience of more facts, and then
the public will decide against all the alleged authorities and systems. Thus
to the public, as a fellow citizen, I thought it my duty, to fulfill this task,
and to you, gentlemen, as a physician, to present my investigations and
experience. Besides, if every man be indebted to the country and community to
which he chooses to belong, it is my peculiar satisfaction in being enabled to
pay this tribute of gratitude to the citzens of Philadelphia. On these motives,
therefore, I ground my claim for the indulgence I solicit for this publication;
and, however imperfect it may appear, in the extent, discernment, and foreign
dress of my observations, if, among the possible sarcasms of criticism, no kind
of merit would be bestowed on my work, still it will remain as a proof of
labor and philanthrophy; the one is the virtue of a citizen, and the other the
character of a physician.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT has been without reference to anotomical or physiological discussions that
I have explained the proximate cause of several symptoms and of the jaundice in
the yellow fever, by the immediate passage of the infected bile into the blood
from the pori biliarii into the vena cava, or at last by the simple and
immediate absorption of the bile into the lymphatic vessels, which exist in
that viscera as numerous as in many others, when it is stopped or obstructed in
its excretory ducts. I was led to that indifference by contemplating that each
theory resuming the same result of the admission of the bile in all our fluids,
it was unnecessary to state by what process it had taken place. Another
argument also struck me in this acute disorder, as well as in many others, in
which the jaundice is frequently an attending symptoms or a crisis, although I
have not mentioned it in any of the above reflections. Each of our secretions
have more than one object of necessary operation to fulfill for the animal
economy. Thus it can be said, that the simple perspiration of the skin, while
evacuating a superfluous fluid, washes and opens the pores. The secretion of
urine not only filtrates and reduces the blood to its proper degree of
fluidity, but it is a vehicle intended to carry off any heterogenous substance
admitted into it. The bile, prepared in the liver, besides being a necessary
liquor in the digestion, will be the means of discharging from the blood those
elementary substances which were created and added to it by the chylification.
But, if the bile originally received its component parts from the blood, we
must suppose that as soon as its secretion is interrupted, the blood will
retain all those component parts; they will then gradually increase to such a
quantity that they will be by another law emitted in the recesses of the
circulation, and there form the jaundice. Therefore, in any theory we may admit
three origins of icterus; one by the infusion of the bile already formed, and
poured from its excretory ducts into the last ramifications of the vena cava;
another by the absorbing lymphatic vessels; and a last, by the biliary
component parts retained and remaining in the blood whenever that secretion
cannot take place. Other circumstances enforce the possibility of this last
means of jaundice, when we consider how many causes may retard the circulation
of the blood in the vena portarum, in consequence of some inflammation or
morbid action within the abdomen, where are situated all the branches that form
its trunk. It is also admitted, that, in warm countries, the powers of
circulation are much enweakened, by which means the large vessels may be
distended, and the bile not sufficiently renewed or diluted. Hence arise
bilious disorders and bilious evacuations, etc. Such are the general grounds by
which I ever thought that several symptoms as well as the jaundice in the
yellow fever, might equally be understood in any of the above theories; but, I
have since had the opportunity of considering a very solid objection against a
presumed cause of the jaundice in the yellow fever, admitting that, by
observation and satisfactory experiments, it has been proved, that, in case of
stoppage or obstruction, the bile is sooner, easier, and even immediately
resumed by the lymphatic vessels, instead of the veins. This absorption, it is
said, cannot originate but with a stoppage of the bile in its excretory ducts,
or with an obstruction in the liver; yet neither are found by dissection or
symptoms, in cases of the yellow fever. Its jaundice, therefore, constitutes no
similarity with any other kind of remittent fever or bilious disorder; and it
is yet a problematic subject and a morbus sui generis. This objection, I must
own, came to me from a respectable quarter, and is connected with so many other
authorities of facts and opinions, that it indispensably demanded a serious
consideration of the subject, in order either to correct my pointed errors, or
to balance the argument by satisfactory reasons. In the mean time, to my
medical reader it will obviously appear, that, my only motive for this
controversy, is from a consistency and adherence to the chief opinions of the
subject upon which I have treated. Thus it will be stated,

First, as a general view, that the formation of jaundice in any case of the
only cessation of proper secretion of bile, acknowledges so many probable
causes, different from any sort of obstruction in the liver, that it could not
be confined to the theory of the absorption of lymphatic vessels. We see the
possibility of an inflammatory and morbid action in the abdomen from the
intestines or the stomach, and from the diaphragm, immediately distending or
obstructing the blood in the numerous branches of the vena porta, and
suspending the circulation in that large vessel, more probably so when we
consider that this heavy column of blood must be assisted in its course, by all
the surrounding motions and vibrations. Now, it will always be safe to
conclude, that, if the blood does not secret in the liver, and particularly so
in acute fevers, the principal character of which is a disturbed circulation,
it will keep the bilious component matter, which it should lose, in the liver,
and from that must arise an accidental icterus. But it is objected, that, even
in this case, bile should be left in the blood, as it finds its elements in the
liver. I deny that however, and very confidently, until it shall be proved that
water could be obtained without oxygen or hydrogen; or that in any of our
glands there is an inexhaustible quantity of the component parts of oils,
acids, salts, water, etc.

Secondly, The possible and immediate infusion of the bile from the pori
biliarii into the minutest ramifications of veins and arteries, is by no means
improbable or impossible, although it is granted that their lymphatic branches
(as they appear to be) do not belong to the absorbent system; for injections
have been made, with success, from the hepatic dact into the vena cava and vena
porta. But nothing could better prove, this immediate infusion of bile into the
blood, than frequent cases of sudden jaundice, by a wound on the head, by too
great haemorrhages and profuse bleedings, by a fit of passion or anger, and
also by the effect of strong and acrid medicines. It occurs very often also in
practice, among ordinary and quite contrary cases to any kind of hepatitis,
when we find, chiefly toward the end, the eyes of our patients very yellow.
This is a certain degree of jaundice; yet it could not take place in
consequence of obstructions, nor by the minute process of all the windings of
the absorbent system Some anatomists contend that nothing is more rapid in the
circulation, than the absorption of the lacteal vessels and lymphatic veins.
This I grant; but what will be said if the fluid exposed to absurption becomes
thick and tough?
. The bile has, therefore, been immediately squeezed and poured into blood
vessels.

Thirdly, Were the absorbent power of the lymphatic veins the only means and
cause of jaundice, it could not certainly proceed but by such stoppages and
obstructions as after a while would force and open the valves of the mouth of
the said lymphatic veins; for, in any other state, the absorption of the bile
could not be affected, as is proved by our usual state of health. But we see
the contrary in the yellow fever; no previous symptoms induced us to suppose
the formation of an obstruction. Spontaneous and profuse evacuations of bile,
and a great quantity of it acrid, always diffused all along the alimentary
channel, seems to prove, that the usual excretory ducts are opened, and that
the only quality of the bile is altered. Let us, then, turn the argument in
another manner. There is no obstruction of the liver nor stoppage of the bile
in the yellow fever, yet the jaundice regularly takes place; this must,
therefore, proceed from some other possible means of jaundice.

Fourthly, Is there no other state in the conglomerate glands, but that of
obstruction, that can disturb the secretions and then expose their fluids to
the effects of the absorbent system? Are they not subject also to a quite
contrary state, to that of atrophy? Although we cannot precisely account for
their mechanical functions, must we not suppose, that, what we call an
obstruction, when we see a hard exuberance, or feel a heavy swelling in some
parts, that this state has been preceded by several degrees of congestion and
infarction which considerably distended the vascular, villous, or
parenchimatous substances, and, of course, much better favored the transudaton
of certain fluids within the absorbent system. It is not indeed when we feel an
obstruction in the liver, or a skirrus, or any other unnatural alteration, that
we should fear that other operation of the lymphatic veins; because in this
state, various fluids have no longer any circulation nor connection among
themselves; but on the contrary, this absorption has more probably taken place
when the obstruction was forming, and when the fluids were yet sufficiently
liquid in their circulation. It is not, therefore, necessary, to have any
visible obstruction in the liver or stoppage in the excretory ducts of the
bile, to have a subsequent jaundice; this without the former happens in the
yellow fever, and it is often seen without obstructions, nor skirrus in several
instances. It may then have originated solely from the enthickening of the bile
in the pori billiarii, etc.

Fifthly, Let us never confine ourselves within narrower bounds, than those
which belong to the admirable laws of nature. Such a large and important
viscera as the liver must have more than one means to discharge the bile which
it cannot empty. That of absorption only would be eventually interrupted or
inconsiderable. The blood may resume it, to a certain quantity and pour it into
the kidneys, or into any other secretion, as known facts have frequently
proved. I also, readily believe, that the lacteal vessels may take it from the
intestines, when there is nothing in them but bile, and discharge it into the
thoracic duct, along with the lymphatic veins. I hope, therefore, that the
above argument, the ground of which I had less the intention to remove than to
explain, leaves principles enough with sufficient means to the above theory on
the yellow fever, and to all the subsequent opinions.

A famous doctrine has been introduced into the medical world, and it is yet
vigorously supported and even improve by numerous partisans. We may call it the
doctrine of direct and indirect debility, or the stimulating system. The
supporters of it say, that it has succeeded to the imperfect doctrine of spasms
and constrictions, the same as this latter had exploded the old and more
imperfect one of viscidity and lentor. It seems that unfortunately that by
those methods of definition, modern and ancient discoveries are equally marked
either with exclusive advantages or with reproachful defects. Thus the
ungracious abuse of words finally will divide learned men, as it evidently
created many heretics, and sectaries during past ages of christendom. Yet
whatever may be the inflexible dogmatism of those who mistake true learning, by
praising only one doctrine, who will deny but every judicious physician
considers it as his duty to examine all doctrines, and all methods, with an
impartial and unbiassed mind to call to his aid all the good results from
observations and principles. It was with the motive of avoiding the abuse of
words and definition that I introduced only the name of Dr. Brown in my note,
p. 29, the author of the doctrine abovementioned; although I ought not to have
omitted to observe that the actual professor of the institutes of medicine, was
not precisely subordinate to the Brownonian system; since, on the contrary, he
has improved on it, by his excellent views on morbid excitement on the
preternatural and convulsive actions of the blood vessels, on the inequality in
fevers, of excitement and excitability, and on the necessity of abstracting
what we should call in other words, spasms, irritation, inflammation, etc. and,
in one word, suggesting the relaxation without which no solutary crisis are
ever obtained.

It has been said, in page 14, that as we have not any publication,
collectively, from that body (the college of physicians) that could exhibit
more, and stronger arguments than merely their opinion of its importation, I
suppose that is unnecessary for me to say any thing either for or against the
opinion. This might be deemed a material inaccuracy if I should not add a
necessary explanation. That body, has, in several circumstances, published the
authentic facts, by which it has appeared that the disorder has been imported
from foreign countries. The reader will remember, that I have not drawn the
least controversy from any of the facts concerning the importation of the fever
nor of of the means which have been alleged to have spread it. Their
authenticity and most striking circumstances never could weaken the contrary
belief, which implies the eventual generation of the fever on board of ships
from tropical countries, and as it is contagious, we do not deny that an
infected seaman might, of course, communicate it to his attendants. If a whole
crew also or a part of it, came from a known infected place to another of very
hot temperature, they surely may be dangerous. These chances are acknowledged
or granted; but, to such chances we will not give up a matter of principles, of
analogy, and an opinion, the arguments of which, in the constitution of the
air, are even employed by the opponent believers. Therefore, if the facts
proving the importation to others, prove to me nothing else than the generation
of the yellow fever on board of ships, it will not be improper to conclude,
that with only such arguments one side has nothing stronger than merely their
opinion.

FINIS.

