

THE HISTORY OF Capt. Thomas Parismas, CONTAINING A PARTICULAR ACCOUNT OF THE
CRUEL And Barbarous Treatment of a YOUNG LADY, Who was the Wife of Mr. JAMES
NEGOTIO, An ENGLISH MERCHANT, in the EAST INDIES.

The History of this (...) and unfortunate Lady, is allowed by all those who
have perused it, to be one of the most striking accounts that ever appeared in
print, and would almost excite tears of blood, (even from the eyes of a NERO)
until every avenue of compassion was shut up.

To WHICH IS ADDED, The Remarkable and Entertaining Story of ALCANDER and
ROSILLA.

MEDFORD, (Massachusetts) Printed and Sold by NATHANIEL COVERLY. 1798. [Price
TWENTY-FIVE CENTS] Great allowance to those who purchase by the dozen.

THE HISTORY OF Capt. Thomas Parismas.
PARISMAS was bred up to the sea, he was of a comely stature, well
proportioned, the most perfect symmetry was i^ his whole construction, his eyes
at the same time they discovered the most tender sensations of mind, exhibited
the strongest features of fortitude and maj^^^y, his countenance was serene as
the un^u^e^ (...), but at the same time displayed the most evident tokens of
greatness, and was a proper index to a mind the most magnanimous, and a temper
the most engaging; he was the pride of (...) acquaintance, and the idle of the
sex.

At the ^g^ of twenty-one, he took the command of a ship in the India trade,
the cargo of which was consigned to an English merchant, at CANTON, by the name
of Negotio, he arrived safe at the Port, and delivered his charge to the
merchant, who in return, shipped on board such goods as he was directed to, by
the owner. While these things were carrying on, Negotio took his country man
Parismas to his house, where he was introduced to his lady. -- Parismas was
struck with astonishment at the sight, beauty's perfections were all displayed,
her eyes out shone the diamond, the ruby was rivaled by her lips, the rose
faded when compared with the vivid color of her cheeks, alabaster lost its
whiteness when compared with her snowy bosom, her hair of a darkish brown hung
in ringling tresses over her shoulders, her shape was the most exquisite that
imagination can paint, she was decorated in her habit in all the magnificence
and pride of the east,

Her mind ^^^^^ited an epitome of all the accomplishment which human nature is
capable of, in short, the famed Dejanira, or Flora the Grecian queen, with all
the goddesses of antiquity were by no means to be compared with this ne plus
^itra of human perfection.

She received Parismas, with all that elegance of speech and gesture, which the
height of female accomplishments and acquirements are capable of inspiring:
Parismas was at first lost in wonder, and was for a while totally incapable of
returning any kind of compliments, at length he recovred in accents scarcely
articulate, made as good a return as his situation was capable of admitting,
but further acquaintance, though it by no means lessened his esteem of her: yet
it gradually dimished the awe with which he was at first confounded, 'till he
could steadfastly behold her without being confussed with her charms.

His business being completed, Parismas took an affectionate farewell of
Negotio, but infinitely more so of the all accomplished lady, who by this time
had unintentionally made herself perfect master of his heart and affections. He
left Canton, and embarked for London; sleepless nights and joyless days were by
turns the melancholy companions of his voyage home, he returned safely, much to
the satisfaction of his employers, who as soon as circumstances would admit,
sent him again to the same place on a similar errand: after a customary course
he arrived safely at Canton again. The sight or the place reanimated every idea
of his lovely lady, for whose sake only he could wish to live, though his ideas
of chasteical honor forbid his expecting or ever desiring to enjoy her.

He landed and directed his course to the House of Negotio, who received him
with that genteel ceremony which the most refined in manners make use of to
those they hold most dear, the same pleased vivacity sparkled in his
countenance, which Parismas had formerly observed seated there, and he
experienced every mark of generosity as well as affability which Negotio had
made use of on former occasions, every thing in his house appeared with the
same grandeur and life as was usual, but to the great mortification of our
Captain, his adorable angel was not to be seen.

He asked no questions, supposing she was absent on a visit to some friend, at
night he retired, but the most dismal forebodings that some dire fatality had
befallen her; at the return of morning, he again pursued the prosecution of his
business, and again waited on Negotio, and for seventeen days successively,
dined at his table, but with the most cutting mortification at not having the
satisfaction of once beholding this admirable lady, or ever once hearing her
name mentioned.

At the expiraton of which time having his cargo all on board, and a favorable
wind presenting, he went to take his leave of Negotio, who, with the warmest
expressions of friendship, was about wishing a pleasant and agreeable passage
home, when Parismas, whose heart suffered the most vexing anxiety to have some
information with regard to Negotio's lady, thus addressed him, Dear Sir, you
appear possessed of the same tranquil disposition which always ornamented you,
and your circumstances in life render you a proper object of envy, yet there is
one inquiry which labors in my swelling bosom, which I am no longer able to
suppress, I hope therefore you will be so good as to pardon me, when I inquire
after your amiable lady, as she has been absent these seventeen days; and I
have not once heard her named: Is she living, or is she dead, or absent? his
emotion of heart was so great that it was plainly perceivable by his uncommon
accents. The undisturbed Negotio calmly replied, she is at home sir. May I be
indulged with taking leave of her? said Parismas. O yes, replied Ngotio, I will
introduce you to her if you desire it, but at the same time, as a friend, I
advise you not to trust your curiosity too far, as the fight of her may not
produce those agreeable sensations as you may now imagine. O Heavens! said he,
with your leave I must see her, my veneration for her is so great, that no
consideration whatever can prevent my seeing her, when in my power. Well, said
Negotio, your wishes shall be gratified, but if you have in consequence thereof
any disagreeable sensations, you will be so good as to blame your own curiosity
therefore, and acquit your friend. But however, I think it would be better for
you not to think any more on the subject, but depart in peace. Parismas whose
anxiety every moment augmented in a geometrical proportion, replied, sir, urge
that matter no further I beseech you -- I am in torment -- distracted, in the
name of friendship, I conjure you delay me no longer. Friendship, replied
Negotio forbids my gratifying you -- I have such a regard for your peace of
mind that I again warmly recommend to give over a design which cannot fail of
putting your mind in such a state, as will be very remote from the smallest
ideas of satisfaction. Parismas replied, the more you endeavor to dissuade me,
the more anxious I am, and I do conjure you, by every principle of friendship,
to hold me in this cruel suspense no longer, your discourse has raised my
curiosity to such a pitch, that I am to be delayed no longer. Well, said
Negotio, you shall be gratified, follow me, so quitting the room, they passed a
back parlour, on the back side of which, he unlocked a door, that introduced
them into a long, narrow, dark and foul room, at the extreme part of which lay
a corpse partly devoured, the sight of which, accompanied with the nauseous
scent which it produced, filled poor Parismas with an horror unknown to him
before. Negotio proceeded to unlock a door in the back side of this hideous
department, from which issued the most wretched object that ever terrified the
eyes of mortals, it was the wife of Negotio, but what a dreadful, horific
metamorphose! not a single trace was left of her former self; instead of those
beautiful charms with which she was formerly possessed, the most frightful
visage that imagination can depict, presented itself -- Her ^esh emaciated loft
her skin forming ^rinkles of the most ghastly aspect, her eyes almost started
from their sockets.

She discovered every evidence of the most extreme anguish, horror and despair,
her distorted looks were the emblem of rage and distress, scarcely containing
any thing human, the whole decorated with a species of nastiness which served
to make the spectacle still more horrid, while a hideous grin completed the
doleful appearance of her face. Round which hung the dishevelled remains of
that hair, which was once an ornament to her head.

No sooner had she entered the room, but regardless both of her husband and
Parismas, she ran with all the haste her enfeebled state of body would admit,
to the place where lay the wasting corpse, which she fell to devouring with all
the eagerness which hunger is capable of inspiring, tearing the putrified flesh
with her teeth from the bones. Negotio ^^^od holding his watch in his hand f^^
(...) of three minutes, when he steped to (...), took her by the hand, and
forcibly dragged her to (...) door, and thrusting h^^ again (...) ^he (...)
abode, turned the key, and confined he^ while her cries for deliverance were
sufficient to have mel^e^^ a heart of adamant. Parismas was nearly transfixed
at the sight, at the same time so singular, so bo^^^d and execrable, and it was
with some degree of difficulty that Negotio could induce Parismas to remove
back out of the doleful place. With blood full of horror he raised his
astonished eyes upon Negotio, and in the accents of grief, cried, "For God's
sak^ Negotio inform me the occasion of thi^ sight, the idea of it congeals my
creeping blood?" Negat^^ i^ (...) c^^eless manner, replied, "My (...)
inconstant, ^e^ favorite died by my ha^^^ and his remai^^ are deposited in the
long dark room, she is confined as you see, and three minutes in each day she
is allowed to ^at of his body, and as long as she can live in that situation
she will live, and no longer; but you will ask me no more questions on this
subject. Sir, I have gratified you curiosity, and I expect no more
interrogatories."

With a heart confounded with amazement, Parismas took leave of Negotio,
repaired to his ship, scarcely realizing were he was, or what he was about. The
dismal figure of the distressed lady, kept continually hovering before his
terrified eyes, and the baleful ^^lea continually harrowing up every tender
sensation of his distressed bosom; he arrived at his cabin just as the sun
began to emerge below the western horizon, he laid himself down, but could no
more compose his mind, than a pennant can hang pendent in a tornado; about ten
o'clock he started from his cabin, called two trusty seamen, order^^^ them to
take twenty fathoms of small (...) and follow him -- they obeyed -- he rep^^ed
to the house of Negotio, resolved to liberate the lady, or perish in the
attempt: -- He found means to ente^ the yard which encompassed the house, and
by going to the back side, found, to the great joy of Parismas, that the back
part of the building, in which was the unfortunate lady, was but one story
high; and by the help of some old casks, which incommoded the yard, they
ascended the roof where they found a chimney which came from the horrid
appartment of the lady. Parismas made the rope fast round his middle, and
giving the end to the seamen, was by them let down into the room where she was
confined, be reached the bottom, groped round in the dark, he at last stumbled
over the wretched object of his research, he fell across her, and his head
struck the floor, the noise of which, with the blow she received awoke her in a
fright; a screech announced to Parismas that she was no longer in a sleep: He
prevented her second outcry by saying, Dear lady, I am come to liberate you
from this wretched place of confinement; submit yourself to my direction, and
you shall once more enjoy that liberty, from which you are now debarred; ask me
no question, but if you desire to gain your freedom, and once more be happy,
let me make this rope fast around you. The lady lost in extacy, at such an
unexpected event, could scarcely signify to her deliverer her consent to his
proposal; but Parismas lost no time in loosing himself from the rope, and
making it fast about the lady, the seamen at a signal made by Parismas, drew
her to the top of the chimney, where they cas^ the rope from her, and then drew
up Parismas.

With all the speed they were capable of, they descended to the ground, passed
out of the yard, and the seamen taking up the lady, conveyed her safely on
board of Parisma's ship, and deposited her safely in the captain's cabin.

Parismas called all hands upon deck, they weighed anchor, hoisted fail, and
having a favorable wind, a fair night, a full unclouded moon, in a few hours
they lost sight of the light, which was erected on the outward point, which
formed the harbor. Parismas then descended the cabin, where, in amazement s^t
the lady, scarcely realizing but she was still in her doleful confinement.

As soon as Parismas descended, she recognized his features, and knew him to be
her favorite Parismas. "Heavens! exclaimed she, with hands and eyes uplifted
-- what do I see? where am I? Is it possible that I have escaped -- escaped
from a doleful place of misery! have I got myself clear from the man, who with
a heart harder than the nether mi^^s^^n^, shut up every avenue of compassion,
and with a cruelty which would have brought tears of blood from the even of a
NER^, condemned a poor unfortunate (though perfectly innocent) women, to a
punishment which the worst of tyrants never thought of inflicting, on the most
abandoned malefactors; who in a single moment transformed himself from the
tenderest of husbands, into a fury, which language is not capable of bestowing
a proper name on.

A flood of tears prevented her from proceeding, and before she could again
articulate, her strength fa^led her, she swooned away, and to appearance was
dead.

Every thing within the power of Parismas was exerted to restore animation to
her, and considerable time was expended, before an idea could be formed,
whether she would ever recover from the li^eless stare in which she then was
involved; but at last, signs of recovery appeared, and by slow gra^ation, she
regained her senses.

Parismas then sat himself down by her, (...) in a ^one half expressing joy and
half ^verwhe^^e^ with gile^, fai^^, -- "Madam, it is with the greatest
sensations of pleasure when I reflect that I have been the happy instrument of
delivering you from a situation, to which none of the human race were ever
reduced: it is no part of my business to enquire what was the cause of that
treatment which I am sure you could not deserve. My regards for you were so
great that I had rather have risked any thing than not have relieved you. You
are now sat at liberty, I will convey you to England, where you shall be
totally secure from your persecutor, and if providence makes it necessary, you
shall want for nothing while I have any property left. I shall order that you
have a suitable assortment of apparel brought you directly, together with
suitable provision, for your disengaging yourself from every thing disagreeable
about you."

By this time the cabin boy had provided some suitable nourishment for her,
which she with due caution swallowed, and then proceeded to divest herself of
her prison apparel, and decked herself in a sumptuous atti^ement, which
Parismas had prepared for her.

After she had washed herself, etc. Parismas's barber dressed her head, and she
once more was ornamented with Jewels, diamonds and rings, and discovered many
of those charms which formerly shone in full luster in her countenance, and
appeared once more in many respects to be an object of admiration.

In the evening, Parismas coming into the cabin, took a seat by the lady, whose
aspect by this time had recovered much of its native serenity, with a look full
of gratitude, she cast her eyes on her deliverer, and with as much complisance
as her state would admit of, thus addressed him, "Most dear and benevolent
sir," it will be forever beyond the reach of my ability to make you any kind of
satisfaction, for the inestimable favor you have done me, and the strongest
language is infinitely too feeble to express the sensations of gratitude, which
occupy my sick heaving bosom: All I can say, is, that all I have, together with
myself, I now dedicate to you, and your service, dispose of me as you think
proper; I am willing -- more than willing -- I wish to be your bond slave while
I have a breath to draw. But, if being your slave is too great a favor to grant
(which I allow is the case) dispose of, and fell me for life, to whom you see
fit. She ended, and Parismas observed a silent tear stealing involuntarily down
her cheek, and he fancied he saw something struggling in her bosom, which her
greatest exertions could not wholly conceal: he stood silent a few moments to
observe the conflict, he then broke silence, and said, "fair lady, I conjure
you, to smother in your breast no longer, what you wish to reveal; your happy
situation is so extraordinary, that my impatience tortures me to know what
those ideas or reflections are, which so agitate your heaving bosom." Dear sir,
replied the lady, it is no easy or pleasant piece of business to relate to you,
the cause of my misfortune, which I know myself only by conjecture -- Nineteen
days ago, my husband and myself rose in the morning as usual, we sat down at
the table, drank our chocolate, and I imagined that an unusual pleasantness was
seated in his countenance, and good nature in his breast, we chatted away an
hour at table, in the most agreeable manner, he then arose, gave me a kind
salute, and with a look of mildness, left me, and repaired to the yard, at the
back of the house, where some affairs demanded his presence. I heard no more of
him, for some time. I waited for his return with impatience for about three
hours, at which time, I heard a severe blow in the back room, watch was
succeeded by two or three of the b^tterest groans which ever^^^^ed my as^^^shed
heart. I (...) ha^^^^ (...) ^^ran toward the place from whence (...)
distressing accents came, and to my ^^^^zement, in the back Parlour I met my
^^^^band, coming out of a long narrow (...), his eyes spakling with rage,
malice (...) depicted in his very features, and the ^^^^^h of infernal spirits
is mildness, when ^^^^pared with the malicious aspect of his ^^^^tenance, he no
sooner fixed his eyes on (...) than his rage instantly became redoub^^^^ and
convulsions of malice distorted ^^^^y feature, and strangly agitated every
(...); with hands trembling with rage, he ^^^^d me; my astonishment at first
prevent^^^^ the organs of speech, from performing (...) functions, and I was
nearly in a sus^^^^sion of thought for a few moments, while (...) the fury of a
Demon, he spit in my (...) tearing my head dress from off me, my (...) in the
next place fell a prey to his (...), he with his merciless hands tearing ^^^^le
handfuls of it by the roots, throwing (...) the floor, and stamping thereon, my
(...) next felt the weight of his displeasure, ^^^^ringing it till the blood
spouted there^^^^, with a violent blow he then struck me (...) ^he ^^^or,
kicking and stamping on me, (...) the most bitter execrations rushed in ^^^^^s
from his mouth. In vain did I cry (...) to inform me the occasion of this
unusual and cruel treatment, after brusing my tend^r body in this cruel manner,
he se^zed me by the remaining hairs of my head, he dragged me almost senseless
into the long narrow room, and there flung me down on a body just expiring with
the wounds he had received from my husband's hands.

Whether the person thus butchered, was a stranger to me, or one of my
acquaintance, his mangled situation and my own direful condition would not
admit of my determining.

Now (said he in a voice of rage) faithless woman, now solace thyself in
criminal pleasure! see if the cold embraces of death, will give you more
satisfaction than innocent enjoyments of nuptial embrances -- He turned pale,
stood a few moments motionless, then drawing his sword, with a tone infernal,
he cried, with this, I would put an instantaneous extinction to your life, but
I owe you not so much good will -- you shall be reserved for a punishment far
more horrid -- you (...) all from this instant never taste of any kind of food,
except that of the rotting carcass before you -- three minutes in each day, you
shall have liberty of solacing yourself on his putrefying remains, the rest of
your time, you shall be contined in the foul apartment on the back side of the
house, and no human face but mine shall you ever behold -- as long as you can
live in that situation you are welcome to life, when that ceases to be the
case, you must go to reap the bitter effects of your disloyalty in the world of
spirits. Saying this, he with violence seized me, and draged me to the door.

Fruitless were all my entreaties for him to explain my crime to me, and the
most solemn declarations that I would evince my innocence if he would admit me
to an opportunity therefore -- He made me no answer but went off in a rage.

In that situation I remained until Heaven sent you to deliver me. This dear
sir, is all that I know of the matter, and I am totally ignorant of what
strange fatality gave rise to the passion of jealousy, which it appeared to me
was the dictator of his conduct.

Parismas listened with the most perfound attention to the Lady's narration,
while the trickling tear stole down his cheek, and the ^^g sign could not be
prevented from forcing itself from his bosom; after consoling the Lady, he
ordered a tankard of wine to be brought on the ^a^le, with which having
refreshed themselves, and business calling Parismas on the deck, he left her in
the (...) to her own reflection.

When he returned, he entered into a very familiar discourse on her situation,
enquiring if she had no idea of any circumstance, which might give rise to
those suspicions in her husband's breast, which induced him to that conduct, in
her answer she informed him she was totally ignorant of any thing more than she
had told him in her relation before, and her sincerity appeared to be such, as
gave Parismas no reason to doubt of her veracity.

Parismas continued to conduct himself toward her with all possible
politeness, and with particular care, and saw that she wanted for nothing that
could conduce to her welfare, and notwithstanding the dreadful situation she
was in, before they reached England she had perfectly recovered whatever she
had lost by the barbarous treatment of her husband; brightness again sparkled
with additional brilliancy in her eyes, the rose again bloomed in her cheeks,
her skin reassumed its fairness, and she was once more an object which could
not be beheld without admiration.

One evening as they sat together in the cabin, after some agreeable discourse,
he interrogated her whether she considered herself under any kind of obligation
to her husband or not, on account of the marriage covenant between them.

The Lady replied, that notwithstanding the solemnity of marriage contracts,
and the great attention with which he had always treated her until the late
unheard of transaction, that though, till that time no woman was ever blessed
with a better, kinder, or more loving husband, ^et she had not the least doubt,
but that such an open and unprovoked violation of the marriage covenant, must
in the nature of things, totally absolve her from every degree of obligation
which she laid herself under, when she entered thereinto. Parismas then
informed her, if she considered herself at her own disposal, and had no
objections for exchanging a single life, for a matrimonial one, if her late
treatment had not discouraged her from again trusting her person in the hands
of one of that sex who had misused her, he would make an offer of his person to
her, and that, if it was agreeable to her, on their arrival at England, they
would join their hands at the altar of Hymen.

The lady, with looks tool of astonishment and sweetness, in accents which
discovered the fur^ rise of her mind, replied, Is it possible that a person of
your nobleness of mind (...) of education, should descend to insult the most
unfortunate woman in the world; for it is impossible you should be in earnest.
-- You, sir, could never brook the idea of ^ooping to marry a person in my
forlorn and distressed circumstances; you will therefore, excuse me, if I view
your proposal as a piece of banter, which had better not have escaped from your
lips. Most admirable goddess of sincere adoration, replied Parismas, you injure
me when you suppose I have a tongue which is capable of speaking a language
foreign from my heart; dissimulation forms no part of my character, and I can
easily acquit you of believing the suggestion which you have manifested, I only
conceive that my proposal does not meet your approbation, and that you have
made choice of this genteel method of signifying your disinclination to comply
therewith; but a person whose heart is undergoing those torments, which now
take full possession of my wretched bosom, is not to be put off by irony or any
oblique pretense. I must have my doom categorically pronounced by your lips
before I give up the object, which is the great pole star of my affections, so
you will proceed to declare me the happiest of mortals, or the most miserable
of any of the human species, according as you wish well or ill. The lady stood
steadfastly looking on his face, till she could read sincerity in every feature
in his anx^ous countenance, when in accents of rapture she exclaimed, "O!
Heavens! is it possible, that the man whom, since first I saw him, I prized
above mortals, and whose benevolence has snatched me from the most loathsome,
distressing and perishing condition, has notwithstanding all my misfortunes,
vouchsafed to offer me the nuptial hand! Dear Sir, I am wholly at your disposal
-- I wish to spend the remainder of life in the service of that man who has
saved my life, but as to having you for a husband, it would have been an idea I
never should have dared to entertain in the most eligible part of my life; so
at this time of my dejection and disgrace: the regard I have for you forbids
every idea of so far imposing on you as to form that connection with you which
you request.

Parismas now found use for all his reasoning powers, in offering her arguments
and entreaties to rescind that resolution which she had formed and which she
was obstinately determined r^v^^ to alter; however, after days spent for that
purpose, she was prevailed on to give her ^^ste^^, by giving him her hand in
massage, when they (...) at England.

Parsimas now thought himself the happiest and most enviable person ex^sting;
and nothing was to be seen in his cabin but joy and festivity; but a horrid
storm arising, drove them one night on a sandy beach, near a small port town,
where their ship received a considerable damage, which took considerable time
to be repaired.

After having sufficiently repaired their vessel, they again put to sea, and
were favored with a pleasant passage, and the tedious days rolled away, and
imperceptibly shortened the time, necessary to transpire before they could
reach the long-wished for British shore; at last arriving in the neighborhood
of the Cape de Verd Islands, where there hove in sight a British privateer,
which had been constructed on a merchant ship, and was of nearly the size of
the ship in which Parismas was.

Parismas was overjoyed at seeing a ship; belonging to his own country: a sight
he had not before beheld for many months, he bore down to her in order to speak
with her, hoping to have some intelligence from his country and friends; he
spoke with her, found she was a privateer from Bristol. Of her he first learned
that a war had then lately broke out between England, Spain and Holland, that
he had been cruising off the cape of Good-Hope, in order to intercept some of
(...) homewar^ abound Dutch East-Indian en^^^th^ Captain of the privateer
politely invited Parismas on board, which he accepted, and went on board with
the lady; ^s they were sitting in the cabin, discoursing on various subjects,
the Captain informed them of a very singular action when he had been enga^ed in
three days before; that in the morning of said day, they found themselves
chafed by a ship of a foreign construction, which, to appearan^^^ was a ship
little in^^^^^ in strength in the privat^^er; she hov^^ too, for her to come
up, and made every preparation for an engagment, which in about ^i^^ty-five
minutes from that, commerced with the greatest fury, and long time fortune
seemed undetermined in whose favor to declare, until ^^ll^d^ected broad side
from the privated, in^se a fatal inroad, ^n the holl of the ass^^lant, which
though it was good to appearance, ye^^, was, vastly in^er^or to a European
built-ship, and in less than thirty minutes went to the bottom; a^o^^ a dozen
of, the men holy, saving themselves ^y swamming, one of w^^ca was the principle
character which belonged to the ship, who was taken up badly wounded, and whose
life was now despaired of; that gentleman was an Englishman, and said he
belonged in Canton, and that he was pursuing an English vessel, which had
plundered him of a considerable property, and which he had mistaken the
privateer for.

Parismas hearing this, desired to see his unfortunate countryman, on which the
Captain gave orders that he should be taken up carefully in a blanket and
brought into the cabin, which was done accordingly; but what was the
astonishment of Parismas and the lady, when in their poor unfortunate
countryman, they found Negotio, the husband of the lady! They both stood in
silent wonder, gazing on the poor unfortunate man; while distressed Negotio's
eyes, recognized both their visages; while his countenance expressed grief,
anger malice, chagrin and shame by turns; a space ensued, when no ideas were
communicated, but by their expressive countenances; at length, Parismas broke
silence and thus addressed him -- Sir, I am at a loss for words to communicate
to you the various, transitions of lensatiens with which my mind is exercised
toward you -- your case is truly pitiful, as well as to all appearance,
remediless -- pity, grief, amazement, horror, resentment, all occupy at the
same time my tempestuous bosom, and which of these passions will break out the
most furious, I can form no conjecture of; however, I feel a kind of strange
satisfaction in seeing you, though my sensations on the occasion are very far
from being in any sense agreeable.

Negotio pale and wan with the loss of blood, and weakened by pain, chagrin,
and reflection of such a change of circumstances, rolled his eyes round, and
begged as a dying man that the cabin might be left alone to him, Parismas, and
the lady, as he wished a dying conferrence with them: this was granted, and as
soon as the cabin was in their sole possession, the lady thus addressed him:
"as you are a dying man, just entering on the eternal world, I demand of you a
full explanation of your barbarous and cruel treatment of me the last seventeen
days I was in Canton; your recollection will furnish you with ideas, which, I
wish not to be pained by mentioning, if it is in your power to satisfy the
greatest object of injured innocence, I wish you would do it before those eyes
which I formerly beheld with raptures, though now with very different
sensations, are closed in eternal night.

Negotio replied with a faul^e^ing voice, I will satisfy your curiosity, never
was the heart of a man so fully wrapped up in the 'complacency of a woman, as
mine in you, till fatal jealousy, a foible of my soul, terminated the
short-connection -- my most tranquil hours were disturbed by some direful
foreboding, that some favorite would be my rival, though I artfully concealed
those bitter goadings from the perception of any one -- but after we had
breakfasted together the last time, and I had repaired to the yard to attend on
some business there, an intimate friend and neighbor came up, and I discovered
discontent, sat lowering on his countanence, and after the usual complements of
meeting, he said, I have something which ^^es with the greatest weight on my
mind, and the respect I have for your character, forbids my any l^^ger
concealing it from you -- I must give you this information, I shall then ^ave
done my duty, and you may conduct your self in such a way on the occasion as
your own ^on shall dict^^^. -- Your (...) is notoriously ^^^^^ue to your be^,
and has bee^ cru^^a^y g^^^^y of a violation of the ma^^^ge contract the forme^
(...) you, ^o my certain knowledge, for two long years.

Your servant Fidelio is the favorite, and he has twice since you have been in
this yard violated your bed. Stung with the most keen resentment, I cried, I Will
be revenged -- In all the terrors of distraction, I ran into the house, where
meeting poor Fidelio, his life fell a sacrifice to my rage; dear madam, you
know the rest -- here his tears and sighs prevented his proceeding.

At length, he recovered, and thus went on, "After you had by some means
effected an escape, I fell in company with this same intimate, who had been
absent from town from the time of giving the fatal information, till then: to
whom I related the whole of the adventure; I read the greatest perplexity of
mind in his visage, while I was repeating the shameful and inhuman part I had
acted; at the close of which, he fell on his knees, and said, "forgive me! ^^R
GOD'S SAKE, forgive me!" Affronted at a smart repartee, I received from your
lady, in company a few evenings before, in which I thought she was too pointed,
and that her observation was too ^^^sely connected with facts, and the
s^^^sfaction which I perceived, or fancied the company took on the
mortification w^^^^ it was out of, my power to prevent them from witnessing
what I endured on the occasion. I mentally swore the most severe revenge
against her, which it was in my power to be instrumental in procuring. My
invention suggested the false and groundless report which I made to you, as I
passed by to go out of town.

Thunderstruck with the unexpected confession of this incendiary, I was in a
suspension of rationality; I drew my sword, and at one stroke reduced him to a
lifeless corpse.

With all the speed which I was master of I fitted out a vessel, for the
purpose of recovering my cruelly injured wife; whom, I took it for granted, you
Parismas had found means to liberate, and had carried off with you: and the
idea I had of her charms forbid my having any hopes of your delivering her to
me, unless compelled by force: I therefore made preparation accordingly; I sat
sail, prosecuted my voyage, un^^ll I fell in with the, ship, on board of which
we now are: this I took to be your ship; I accordingly began a fierce attack,
on her, the issue of which was the sinking of my ship, and being left afloat,
mortally wounded; I was taken on board in a courteous manner, and have
experienced every attention which my situation is capable of admi^^ing.

But the last s^nd of my glass is running, my candle is jost expiring in its
socket, and all that did invigorate has deserted me; and my eyes shall soon be
closed to open no more: I feel a satisfaction in beholding, that most
accomplished of all women, and am happy that she has once more regained
e^^na^ive luster.

I thank you sir, that you have taken so much trouble and care to relieve her,
but above all, ^^nadam, I heartily, on the bended knees of my soul, ask your
pardon and forgiveness of my merciless, cruel and causeless abuse of you; and
may I bid adieu to this world, with the satisfaction of having your
forgiveness: I s^e^ly resign all, and every right of claim that I have or might
be supposed to have to you, and to your illus^^ous deliverer, and may God long
bless you together. Here his effections put a stop to his utterance, while
^ears prevented either Parismas or the lacy for some ^^me from answering. At
length she answering, gave him her ^^ank and ^^ll forgiveness, sealing it with,
a kiss. The unfortunate Negotio, sighed out it is enough! I have once more see^
the woman who has not an equal, and who if is ^ad no^ been for my ^^^unded
jealously, I might st^ll have been happy in her enjoyment, but who by my all
and ^^^perable ill treatment, have forfeited every right of claim to, and am
wholly unworthy of her; but she has forgiven me, and it is but a few moments
more I shall see her, but no doubt she will be happy in the enjoyment of her
deliverer, who doubtless will be her husband when I am no more I and when that
is the case, they have my sincere blessing. Parismas stood holding one of his
hands, and the lady the other, and each strove to conceal from the other the
sensations of their respective hearts, but their countenances spoke a language
not easily misunderstood, while Negotio thus continued, "No tongue can express,
no imagination can depict the heart rending reflections which have been my
constant companions ever since I was informed of your innocence, my eyes would
have wept clear blood to have brought you back to my arms, and freely would I
have parted with every thing except my life, and even that, if it could have
undone what I had so wickedly and precipitately performed, but this is all out
of my power, and a few moments more will introduce me to the world of spirits,
and ah! here his speech failed him, and they perceived his countenance changed,
he strove to speak, but in vain, death the interrupter of all human pursuits,
laid h^s icy benumbing hand upon him, and within five minutes the unfortunate
Negotio was no more.

His remains was taken suitable care of, and safely deposited in a coffin, and
carried to Bristol, and decently in^erred.

Parismas and the lady left the privateer after the corpse was taken care of,
they returned to their own ship, and being favored with a prosperous gale, they
soon arrived at their desired port, where, after the necessary preparations,
their nuptials were celebratd, and peace, joy, and every species of happiness
now crowns their jov^al days.

THE END.
THE Remarkable and Entertaining STORY OF ALCANDER and ROSILLA.
IN the time of Hept^^^by, there lived in the kingdom of Kent, a certain
gentleman, whose property was immense; he had one c^i^ only, an he r^ss, whose
name was Rosilla, whose beauty was in^^^passable, and who^e qualities of ^ind
were (...) no degree i^fe^o^^ t^ her extern^l ^ccomplishments; in short, she
was esteemed as the ^^st fi^^shed piece of perfection, wh^en ^^ature could
boast of being the author of; she was cel^^rated not only through the kingdom
of Kent, but furnished a ^^p^^ of co^e^^at on for all the people, and a subject
for he employment of the genius of all (...) ba^^s through the whole ^even
king^^^^^; ^od every person of quality was striving to recommend themselves to
her favorable notice. When thus situated, ^^r father, who was of a disposition
ambitious in the extreme, had nourished in the bosom a hope of raising her to
the bed of the King of Kent, who was a Prince excestively fond of beauty, and
no effort was ^^^n^ss^yed to recommend her to him; the King himself had a deep
impression made of his mind, by the many concurrent reports he had heard of her
external and me^ta^ accomplishments, and was determined to ^ake (...) to her
father in a tour through the part of his kingdom where he lived, and (...) she
answered the idea he had fo^n^d of (...), ^y reports, to ^a^e her to his ^^d
and throne; of which he informed her father, in a letter sent by express.

The father of ROSILLA, with transport read the contents of the King's letter,
and his eyes spa^^led with joy at anticipating the having his daughter a Queen,
and being father in-law to a King^: his mind formed reveries of future
great^e^, pomp, sp^^ndour, and power; but while he was indulging himself in the
most pleasing any^^pation, which his ambitions mind could inv^n, there entered
his apartment his beloved Idol, his beautiful and accomplished daughter, having
by the hand a beautiful and sprightly young gentleman of about twenty-one,
dressed in a manner the most genteel, and whose aspect bespoke something great
in his soul. Her father's eyes began to kindle into rage at a sight which his
imagination suggested to him was omnious of no good. His daughter's perception
informed her of the sensations which occupied the indignant breast of her
father; she thus accosted him. -- "Dear, honored, and beloved father, I humbly
ask your paternal pardon for thus interrupting your contemplations, but a
matter of the greatest consequence made it my duty. I am the only surviving
c^^ld of four which you have been the father off, and your tender conduct
toward me has been such, as to convince me that my happiness is your great
pole star, and I have the fullest confidence that I need only to inform you of
what would make me completely happy, in order to your reducing the idea to
event, when it is in your power; I am now in a capacity to inform you of what
will make me happy in the highest sense of the word, and that a want thereof
cannot fail of rendering me the most completely unhappy of mortals.

Her father gazing, his eyes being fixed in astonishment while she proceeded;
you see sir, I have by the hand a young gentleman, his person you are no doubt
to^^dy unacquainted with, but his virtues you may depend or are not to be for
possed by any one w^^ch this or any other country can beast of; long have (...)
in private adm^^^^d (...), he has had full possession ^f n^^ (...) and
affections for a long time before ^e was informed thereof; though I often had
(...) opportunity of being a witness to his ^en^^^, his knowledge, and his
virtues, yet ^^ll very lately I had no proper opportunity of letting him
understand the high value I had for him, and of the deep wound he had
unintentionally given, and which no one ^^^ld do any thing which could
contribute ^^its cure but himself.

I have at last had an opportunity to inform him of my passion for him, which I
did in the most engaging manner I was capable of; and though a novice in the
art of wooing, yet such was my pathos, that it fully convinced him that nothing
but the purest s^nsations of uncontaminated affection 01 was the cause of the
over^^ies I made (...); when I had made an end of my address to him, the rose
bl^^^^ed in all (...) in his ^^e^ks, while in accents the most engaging, he
vainly endeavored to persuade me to give over what he was pleased to call so
improper and unsuitable a pursuit, telling me that I was heiress to one of the
most wealthy and consequential characters in the kingdom; and was qualified to
grace the bed of a monarch; that he himself was a most obscure character; that
his birth and parentage were totally unknown even to himself; that when an
infant he was taken out of a box tossing amidst the surf which beat on our
shore, that he had been brought up by the hospitable charity of a gentleman,
and that he had no means of supporting himself, except by the charity of his
benefactor, and the education which he had given him, that such a difference of
quality totally disqualified for a conjugal connection, but that part from
those considerations, the want of my father's approbation would be an
insurmountable obstruction thereto, and therefore desired and begged of me to
banish every idea of him from my mind.

Of little consequence was this harangue; I still continued importunate to the
last degree, nor would I suffer him to leave me, till he had promised at a
certain time and place to meet me again on the subject^ thus ended our first
interview, from ^^^ch time 'till our second meeting, each moment crept off with
the imperceptable motion of an age, and I was a stranger to quietness, peace or
sleep 'till the happy time arrived, but to my mortification he persevered in
his resolution, until he perceived I grew desperate, and an idea that I might
fall into a phrenz^, the efforts of which might prove fatal, occasioned him to
express his resolution in terms less strong, which by degrees softened down to
an implicit ac^^ ^^^ce^ce with my proposal to him.

Three weeks have passed since this event (...) place, in which time we have
spent ^^^^y moment together, which we had any opportunity for, which has served
only to heighten my esteem and regard for him, and has raised his affections
for me to a pitch nearly equal to mine for him, and our happiness is suspended
on your approbation of our mutual love, and on your consent to our being united
in the connubial state. This sir, is the occasion of my thus introducing him to
you, and with the greatest pathos of soul I beseech you sir, if you ^^der the
happiness of your only child, and if my welfare is an object which you put any
value upon, that you grant me this re^^^^.

Her father who could scarcely contain himself while she was addressing him: as
soon as she had ended, broke out in the most bitter invectives against the
young man, and the most severe reprehensions to his daughter for her criminal
overtures she had made him, and in the end by the ringing of a bell called in a
number of servants, when he ordered them to take the young man and convey him
on board of a vessel lying in the harbor, then immediately bound on a voyage
to sea, which command was instantly obeyed, while the poor Rosilla, lay
senseless in a swoon; at the first time seeing her father disapprove of her
conduct, and at the loss of him who was dearer to her th^n life itself.

Every effort was made use of to restore her to her senses, which at last
proved effectual, but the most apparent dejection was seated on her
countenance, and in vain was every method used to erase from her mind the
memory of him; to no purpose, was she informed of the King's intention toward
her, the gaudy tr^pings of royalty had no allurements in them that could induce
her to withdraw her affections from the young man, whom she looked on as the
ornament and glory of human nature.

For a week she remained in an inconsolable state, when her invention suggested
to her a probability of once more meeting with her admired Alcander, (for that
was his name) and she immediately formed a resolution of putting the scheme in
execution. In order to effect which, she procured a suit of Seaman's apparel,
with which she attired herself. With this habit she entered on board a vessel
as a common Seaman, hoping by this means to meet with him whom she prized more
than all the riches in the world.

It is foreign from my present design, to give a particular detail of what the
poor Rosilla passed through on board of the vessel under the name of Evander,
and of what hardships she experienced in a long and fruitless search after her
beloved Alcander, suffice it to say, that she acquitted herself so honorably,
that she became the second commander in the vessel on the death of her
predecessor, in which station she possessed the highest degree of the
confidence of all who were on board the vessel, but what amazement and horror
seized not only Rosilla, but the Captain, and the whole crew; one fair and
pl^^sant morning, when they espied a vessel but a small distance from them,
having a piratical flag hois^ed (...) head; to attempt an escape was in vain,
as they had been long at sea, and very foul, and but a dull s^lor at the best,
and no hopes could rationally be entertained of success in a combat. In this
confused situation they held a consultation, the result of which was, to make
as good a defense as they could, and knowing that fortune favors the brave;
they rested only on this ground, that there was a possibility of avoiding being
captured by this merciless pirate.

By the time this was agreed on, the ship was along side of them, when a
furious attack was begun by the pirate, and an obstinate defense by the other.
Perhaps never was more valor discovered than by this little band of heroes;
'till at length being overpowered, their Captain slain, and above half their
men killed and wounded, they were boarded by the ass^illants, on which a
complete victory soon ensued.

The Prisoners were indiscriminately hurried on board of the Pirate, and
huddled in below the deck, while the captors were busily employed in plundering
their new acquired booty. This business being ended, said the Lieutenant to the
Captain, it is time a council should set to determine the fate of those sturdy
prisoners who have put us to so much cost of time, pains and blood, to conquer
them, not less than one third of their crew being either killed or wounded,
those miscreants ought to be sacrificed to appease the manes, of our fallen
brethren, and to elevate the pains of those who are suffering under their
wounds; what say you Captain?

You are quite right answered the bloody disposed Captain) but I am so
exhausted with fatigue, and the loss of blood, by a large (though not mortal)
wound, that I must substitute you, and place you on the tribunal of
retribution, and your determination shall be fate. Every thing being prepared,
the lieutenant took the seat of judgment, and ordered the prisoners to be
brought out, one by one, safely ironed. The first whose fate it was to be
arraigned. was the tender and delicate Evander, bound in setters, and brought
before the ^^^ch of justice, where the sole arbitor of life and death, with a
countenance, frowning v^ngance, and eyes sparkling rage, and a ^oi^e rendered
the most hor^fie, he thus addressed the prisoner, "poor pitiful miscreant, you
have obstinately refused to (...) to our re^^n^y of the seas, and put us to
much trouble and hazard, and deprived us of a considerable number of our best
men, in consequence of which it has become our incumbent duty to make examples
of you, especially of your person, as you had the chief command devolved on you
after the death of your superior, therefore hold up your guilty head and hear
your sentence, for by the infernal Gods, within half an hour you shall be wrapped
in sheets of liquid sulphur, impregnated with fire: for you in the first place
shall be made fa^t to the deck, with your face upwards, your mouth extended
with a gag in each corner, of an inch thickness, and two quarts of lead melted
and mixed sulphur, shall be poured down your throat, and if this is not
sufficient to satiate your appetite, the dose shall be doubled, and my
impatience is such, that each moment is an age, till I see this decree carried
into effect. The terrified Rosilla, under the name of Evander, raised her
distracted eyes to her judge: but what was her sensations, when in the person
of him who had pronounced this awful sentence against her, she discovered her
long sought for Alcander! The color in her face alternately changed from red
to paleness, and from paleness to the vivid color of the rose, and the highest
degree of confusion, was legible in her countenance, her different emotions of
mind for some time divested her of the power of utterance; at last she
collected her scattering ideas, and thus addressed the Judge. "Dear sir, it is
enough -- I have seen you once more -- You have give the most bloody sentence
which the compass of human ideas is capable of forming against your best
friend, against one who loved you better than every other earthly enjoyment --
against one who despised a diadem and a septre, for the affection she had for
you, against o^e who has left every thing near and dear for the hopes of
finding you -- You have given sentence against one who might have remained
possessed of every human tranquillity, had it not have been for the love of
you; thousands were annually at my command, put I have left every thing for
your sake, and this is the benediction you bestow on the therefore -- Here sir,
is the ring you once gave me, as a pledge of your in violable love to me -- You
must remember that happiest of moments, when you bestowed this on h^^ you
called your adoreable Rosilla -- pray sir then, from whenc^ comes this strange
alteration.

Alcander stood in a maze 'till he heard her mention the name of "Rosilla" at
the naming of which, he burst into a stood of tears -- and ^quiting his seat,
clasped her in his a^^^s, and ^^^^aced her in extacy -- excla^^n, yes! e^^my
Dear Rosilla (...) I recollect! I recollect! you was mine, you are mine still,
and I am yours! the most inviciable -- the most indissoluble bonds bind us
together, a cement that is stronger than that of blood, has ^^^ed us, and
nothing below the power of omnipotence shall or can put an end to that union --
It is sufficient I have found my adorable Rosilla -- I will prove true to my
vows -- I will never more part from her: my bloody sentence I totally reverse
and repeal -- we will share our course for the chalky cliffs of Albion, and
will spend ^^ur days in peace, and no more hazard ourselves o^ the boisterous
billows of the tempestuous ^^ean -- we will u^^^e our hands at the sacred altar
of Hy^^en, and retire to the peaceful enjoyments of domestic life.

The spectators stood astonished at this transaction, and notwithstanding,
their piratical dispositions ^^^^ed pleased at the occurence, till the Captain
interrupted the ple^sing sensations they enjoyed, by addressing the Judge in
the following ^^^^er -- Pray sir, ^ake care (...) mi^^ (...) we do not (...) a
true l^^^^ (...) you had not given (...) you might spare her from death, but as
it is, the sentence should be put in execution if she was a wife of my own." --
A Sergeant, whose affections were much moved on the occasion, stepped to the
Captain, saying, pray sir, let this determination of yours be varied in a small
degree; let the lady be acquitted, and I myself will submit to the sentence
which is pronounced against her; but spare her I pray you -- The Captain
enraged, drew his sword, and sheathed it in the poor fellow's bosom, who dropped
dead at his feet, and then with a voice that bespoke the greatest malignity of
heart, he thus addressed the Lieutenant, whom he had constituted as Judge.
"Vile Repd^^! thou pretend to be a man? -- Thou think to be esteemed not only
worthy the human shape, but also to be capable of enterpr^ze, and to put on the
name of soldier, and inlist under the banner of Mars, and to cross the Ocean in
search of adventures, and at the same time, to have thy femenine heart melted
down by a whimpering woman's tears? No, thou art a disgrace, a scandal, and an
irreparable blemish to our function; thou ^^^st learn to harden thy waxen
heart, or expect to fall a sacrifice to our just indignation: I Will give you a
lesson which shall divest you of these disgraceful tender feelings, under the
sensations of which you have sullied all your former acts of valor, and
forfeited that worthless life which animates that body of (...) ought to be on
a rack; seize that worthless woman, which is the cause of thy unmanning
thyself, take her with thine own hands, as unnerved as they are, bind her fast
to the windlass, then put the lead over the fire, and see you make it boil
instantly -- then, when it has received as great a degree of heat as it is
capable of -- pour it down her throat, but not too fast, that she may take a
true relish of all it is opening qualities: This do instantly; for a refusal, or
even a show of reluctance, will involve yourself in the same malediction.

Alcander was struck with horror at this infernal mandate; but being sensible
of his situation, and knowing that his life depended on a momentary exertion,
he drew his sword, and with one push, pierced the heart of this insuperably
cruel Captain, who with a hedious yell gave up the ghost, and whose body was
instantly committed to the deep, for food to the revenous uncouth animals which
inhabit the caverns thereof.

Alcander now being the sole commander, directed his course for the famed Isle
of Britain, enjoying his incomparable lady, whom he cauled to be decked in the
richest of woman's attire, and Neptune favoring there purpose, soon introduced
them into the harbor from which he at first sa^led, when he was forced away by
her remorseless father; but unhappily for them, the vessel they were in was no
sooner in port, than she was known; and poor Alcander was taken into custody as
a pirate, together with the crew, (Rosilla excepted, who was kept as a witness)

Alcander soon underwent a trial, and received sentence of death, and his death
warrant was instantly made out, in order that it might be put in execution the
next day, when he was taken out of the dungeon, with all the awful formalities
of execution.

He was carried to the fatal spot, where, in the most finished agony, he was
just going to make his ex^t; Rosilla, who was dismissed the d^y before, came up
and demanded a release of the Prisoner; for said she, "There is a law in the
kingdom of Kent, from before the memory of man to the co^^rary, that (...) any
man, sentenced b^ the laws of (...) ^^ngdom to death and brought to the place
of execution, should be demanded by a woman that would marry him then under the
gallows, that her demand should be granted, and the malefactor liberated
accordingly -- I therefore, a woman of one of the fi^^t families in Britain,
demand this malefactor in marriage, and am ready to solemnize the nuptials, in
the manner by law provided." The officers of justice who attended on the
execution, on hearing this, ordered that he be taken from the stage erected for
his execution, and married as the law directs -- which was done accordingly,
and Alcander set at liberty.

Having taken lodgings at an inn for a few days, they made preparations for
repairing to her father's reasonably supposing that the old gentleman would not
fail of properly rewarding any one, who should be the introducer of his
daughter to him (...) of two days brought them (...) his gat^; they entered his
house, where, falling on their knees, they informed him of the whole of their
history, and concluded by h^^^^^y, and in tears asking his blessing.

The father could scarcely contain himself while they we^^ askin^ his blessing,
and no sooner had they finished they petition for his benediction, th^n the old
man knitting his brows, with a countenance full of wrath, thus uttered himself
-- "Shall it be said that my daughter, the heir to my immense fortune, has for
a husband a Pitate, one that has been condemned to a gibbet! No! no! this never
shall be endured -- I Will see him safely imprisoned, and there he shall spend
the remainder of his days in close confinement." -- Dear father (replied
Rosilla) whatever offense has been committed, was done by me, and me alone; my
dear Alcander is entirely innocent -- in justice therefore he should not be a
sufferer -- Whatever revenge you think it proper to be inflicted, let it fall
on me only, and let my husband be clear -- her father in stern accents replied,
do you think Madam, you are so well able to bear the weight of mine anger? I
will assure you, you shall have as much of it as you are able to bear, to the
extent, and he shall have the rest -- I shall shut compassion from my breast,
and pity from my heart, and my eye shall not spare the objects of my
displeasure -- having said this, he sent him well guarded to a prison, and her
he confined to a dark chamber, there to spend the disconsolate hours in heart
^ending anguish -- in which situation they kep^ her until the time of her
travail arrived, and she was delivered of a smiling pretty son -- which by her
father's special order was forced from her; she tenderly kissed the little
innocent, and with melting tears parted with it -- she soon heard the little
thing gave a dreadful screech or two, and was still -- they soon sent the
blanket back (which they had taken away the child in) all covered with blood;
at the sight of which she swooned away, and it was with difficulty they
recovered her to her senses -- she continued to lament the loss of her darling
infant and her dear Husband, while her father continued to conduct toward her
in the severest manner he was capable of inventing -- there was no person
suffered to come within her sight, but an old deformed ill natured Hag, whose
aspect was so dreadful as to be sufficient to inspire any beholder with horror,
who would do any thing in her power to render the situation of the unfortunate
Rosilla more insupportable. -- In this situation, they kept her a year longer
-- When one morning, her father came into her apartment, and said, Daughter, --
notwithstanding your former foolish conduct, I have taken pains to procure you
a suitable husband, whom if you will now consent to marry, you shall be
received to my favor, and shall be made as happy as the enjoyments of life can
render you.

"Dear father, (replied the disconsolate lady) how long will you continue to
add to my distresses, which are altogether intolerable already. -- I have been
married two years to him who has full possession of my effections -- I can
never love another -- it is in vain to urge it upon me, for none in this world
shall ever enjoy me besides my inestimable Alcander -- my body is in your power
-- you will dispose of it as you think proper, but my soul is free from your
disposal, and let you inflict what you will upon me, it will never induce me to
prove false to the man whom I esteem preserable to all others.

Her father, on hearing this, retired from her; finding it was in vain to make
any further attemps to induce her to break her resolution, sent to the prison,
and fetched away Alcander, dressed him in the most elegant attire; caused his
daughter to meet him in his parlour, in all the decorations which dress was
capable of ornamenting her with; recognized her marriage -- presented her son
to her embraces, and joy and gladness ^n^^ more filled the hearts of Alcander
and Rosilla, and nothing but mirth was heard in the house of her father.

FINIS.
THE Fatal effects of SEDUCTION; Exemplified in a letter, from the reformed
EDMUND to his Friend.
By THOMAS BELLAMY.
OUR Fears are completed! my poor brother, after sinking into the deepest
melancholy, is now no more!

Buried in the mazy windings of a gloomy wood, stands an habitation, formed
only for the retreat of those, who in times long past, withdrew from all the
comforts of society, to close the remnant of their days in uninterrupted
retirement, I had heard the unhappy particulars of his conduct, from a
gentleman, who has kindly exerted every power of argument and improved sense,
to restore our lost Charles, to the deserted paths of reason But alas! his
endeavors proved abortive; this worthy friend inf^rms me, that he h^s (...)
^^en witness to a seen of frenzy that must effect us all -- as near as
possible, receive in his own wor^^ the relation: "Defeated in every attempt to
restore your brother to himself, and to the world, I abandoned all hopes, and
had not seen him for three days; on the morning of the fourth, his old servant
^^mes, came to me, and desired I would att^nd his dear master, who, since my
departure, had immered himself in a small building, wherein is placed an im^^^^
that se^^^^^^ represent the injured MARIA, ag^^^ alive.

I immediately flew to my wretched friend, But, O God! what a scene presented
itself? in a spot that seemed to forbid the approach of every social being,
stood, I ^ay say, the monument of the departed saint, who had fallen a victim
to his arts; the awful solemnity of silence reigned around, disturbed at
intervals, by deep and piercing sighs, proceeding from the bleeding heart of
the wretched man within.

I (...) ^^^ched the door, and, unobserved, (...) over the w^xen image of
perfect be^^t^, -- I saw him use, and address that J^^we^, whose afflicting
hand was on him, Then, grasping a small dagger, he pronounced with fallen
firmness, "It I am guilty of an act of desperation, forgive me Heaven! pity my
delusion! for just^ce seems to wispet, Strike the blow! sorrow clouds my days,
society abandons me! I only clo^e a life, painful to myself, and useless to
mankind. -- Rest shade of innocence, in peace! a fain^! where I can never come:
P^^ the last time, faint re^emb^^^^e of w^^t MARIA once was! I again ^ehold
(...) farewell imperfect image of (...) wh^^^ my honor ^n^gn^ have rendered
happy, but whom my villain^ ^^^^royed."

(...) s^^^^, the d^s^^^^t^ve (...) whe^^ (...) I plucked from (...) desperate
^^^d the instrument of dea^ (...) his eyes were sullenly fixed upon me, an^
u^^ering, "is this retreat invaded!" he ^^ll on the ^round ^^^est of life or
motion. (...) ^a^iened to the house, and ^^nt James for every assistance; the
^^^l^cted f^^^nful old man soon ^e^^^^ed with the worthy D^^^^, -- but all was
over? -- (...) to unit^ his tears with mine: they fell, and bedewed the
departed victim of despair.

And, now, oh! my friend! let not the sad relation fail to make that impression
on a heart, which I knew to be susceptible of those feelings which do honor to
human nature. Let not our beloved friend die in vain! -- I invite you to my
peaceful cot, where, with my loved Amanda, I pass a life of innocence and
simplicity. Heaven's blessed light is ushered in with prayers to that Being,
who bestows it. Our two dear infants join, nor does the evening descend without
repeating the grateful task. Moderate and unbroken slumbers succeed, sweetened
by health and peace, while religion presents the happy prospect of future and
un^^llied felicity. Friendship without go^le; friendship that feels for your
^^ern^l welfare, entreats you to come and join our train. -- Think of poor
C^a^les, and then, if you hesitate a moment, in quitting the destructive path
you walk in, I give you up forever! -- but you have a heart to feel, and I
nourish every hope. O^! may this unhappy man, with whom we have in^^dered many
a guilty hour, prove an awful lesson! Consider, what he might have been, what
he was! and, -- alas, what he is! -- think of mysterious Providence, and
reform! -- Expecting your presence in a few days, I remain.

Your affectionale EDMOND.

THE END.

